 = = = Utah = = = 
 Once in Utah , US 491 gradually ascends to the Abajo Mountains . Still visible are large farming regions . Upon reaching an elevation of 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) , the highway arrives at a weigh station and reaches the town of Monticello . US 491 enters the town on Central Street and terminates near the city park at an intersection with US 191 , which runs along Main Street . All highways in Utah are codified into law ; US 491 is defined at Utah Code Annotated § 72 @-@ 4 @-@ 137 ( 11 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 1926 = = = 
 Before the Mexican – American War , when this area was ceded to the United States , the main trade route through this part of Mexico was the Old Spanish Trail . This trail extended from Santa Fe , New Mexico to Los Angeles . The trail had multiple routes ; however , the main route proceeded north towards Moab , Utah , one of the few places where the Colorado River can be crossed without having to traverse steep cliffs . The modern US 491 roughly correlates with the main route of the Old Spanish Trail between Cortez , Colorado and its northern terminus . 
 Before 1926 , all of modern US 491 existed as state routes . In New Mexico , US 666 absorbed a portion of State Road 32 ( NM 32 ) from Gallup to Shiprock , and completely replaced NM 121 from Shiprock to the Colorado state line . The portion in Colorado was numbered State Highway 108 ( SH 108 ) from the New Mexico state line to Cortez , and SH 10 from Cortez to Utah . At the time , SH 10 traversed the southern portion of Colorado . While most of this route was absorbed by the U.S. Highway System , a portion of it still exists . In Utah , the route was originally numbered State Route 9 ( SR 9 ) , which also included what is now US 191 from Monticello to Crescent Junction . Utah has since re @-@ used the SR 9 designation for a different road . 
 = = = U.S. Route 666 = = = 
 The route was upgraded to a U.S. Highway in 1926 , as U.S. Route 666 . This number was appropriate and in accordance with the road numbering guidelines for U.S. Highways , being the sixth spur along the highway 's parent highway , the famed cross @-@ continental highway U.S. Route 66 , from which US 491 breaks around Gallup , New Mexico . This number was assigned by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) , a coordinating body that created the U.S. Highway System . At that time , the northern terminus of the route was in Cortez , at an intersection with then US 450 ( modern US 160 ) . 
 Over time the route became known as the " Devil 's Highway " , a reference to the Number of the Beast . This nickname and association made some visitors uncomfortable , as well as making the signs targets for theft . Because of the highway 's number , accidents and other phenomena became repeated as legend . These legends convinced some people the highway was cursed . One unnamed highway patrol officer was quoted in USA Today as stating a drunk @-@ driving suspect told him , " Triple 6 is evil . Everyone dies on that highway . " Skeptics point out that the highway has a lower than average fatality rate in Utah and Colorado ; only the New Mexico portion is statistically a dangerous highway . Skeptics further state the high fatality rate in New Mexico can be explained by an inadequate design for the traffic loads at the time . Several people suggested that the highway improvements , started at the same time as the renumbering , have done more to reduce fatalities than the renumbering itself . 
 The curse of US 666 is briefly discussed in Jonathan D. Rosenblum 's book , Copper Crucible , which investigates the Arizona Copper Mine Strike of 1983 . This strike occurred along the highway near Morenci , Arizona . The highway was used as a plot element in films and television , including Route 666 , Natural Born Killers , and Repo Man , as well as a two @-@ part episode of the series Married With Children , titled " Route 666 " . These pieces are not accurate in portraying the route ; for example , one depicts the route in Nevada . 
 = = = Extensions into Arizona and Utah = = = 
 By 1942 , the southern terminus of the route was extended to Douglas , Arizona , at the Mexican border . It ran concurrent with US 66 for 30 miles ( 48 @.@ 3 km ) before the turn south . The Arizona portion of the highway is known as the Coronado Trail Scenic Byway , as it approximated the path of the Spanish explorer , Francisco Vásquez de Coronado . This portion is noted for mountainous terrain , with hairpin turns and steep grades , that reaches an altitude of over 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . The curves force a speed limit of 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) in spots . 
 In 1970 , several U.S. Highways in the Four Corners region were re @-@ aligned . As part of this change , US 160 was rerouted west of Cortez to serve the Four Corners Monument and enter Arizona instead of Utah . US 666 was extended up part of the old route of US 160 to Monticello , Utah , at an intersection with then US 163 ( now US 191 ) . 
 In 1985 , the Utah Department of Transportation petitioned to extend US 666 northwest to Richfield , but the proposal was rejected . The proposed extension followed SR 95 , SR 24 , and SR 119 . A concurrency with US 191 would have been routed through Blanding and Monticello to connect to the rest of the route . One of the reasons cited for rejecting the proposal was that portions of SR 24 were not built to standards desired for additions to the U.S. Highway System . 
 = = = Elimination and renumbering of US 666 = = = 
 In 1985 , the US 66 designation was eliminated , leaving US 666 ( and other routes ) as " orphans " . This fact would be used as a supporting factor in later petitions to renumber the highway . In 1992 , the part in Arizona was renumbered as an extension of US 191 . This truncated US 666 again at Gallup , New Mexico , now at I @-@ 40 . 
 The route in the other three states became U.S. Route 491 in 2003 , mainly through efforts of New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson . He requested the change due to the " infamy brought by the inopportune naming of the road " . While campaigning for governor , Richardson promised to renumber the highway as part of a larger plan to improve the highway and build relations between New Mexico and the Navajo Nation . Although traditional Navajo culture does not share the belief of 666 being an evil number , some Navajos had attempted for years to change the number as a way to raise awareness about the dangerous highway . The highway had largely been ignored , with few improvements made since it was first paved . By 1997 , US 666 was named one of the 20 most dangerous highways in the United States . Some Navajo leaders were concerned that efforts to reduce poverty on Navajo lands , via promoting tourism and outside investment , were being hampered by the Christian aversion to the number . 
 In New Mexico 's motion to renumber the highway , they selected U.S. Route 393 . Since the route came nowhere near US 93 , AASHTO instead suggested US 491 , noting it as a branch of US 191 at Monticello , Utah . Although the next three @-@ digit child of US 91 would have been U.S. Route 291 , both the 291 and 391 designations were already in use as state route numbers in at least one of the affected states . At the news that the motion had passed , a New Mexico spokesperson stated , " The devil 's out of here , and we say goodbye and good riddance . " Referring to the motion passing with a different number from what New Mexico requested , another spokesperson responded , " As long as it 's not 666 and it 's nothing satanic , that 's OK . " US 666 officially ceased to exist on May 31 , 2003 , although temporary " New 491 – Old 666 " signs were posted after the change to aid travelers using old maps . 
 Although sign theft has always been a problem along this highway , thefts reached epidemic proportions when the pending number change was announced . Within days of the announcement , virtually every US 666 sign had been stolen , some for sale on eBay . Officials in Utah reported that five entire sign assemblies had been cut down with a chainsaw and stolen , while New Mexico officials reported that even signs welded to metal posts , as a theft deterrent , had been stolen . Officials speculated from one scene that someone had intentionally crashed a car into the sign post to break the welds . 
 The dedication of the " new " highway was postponed until July 30 , 2003 , to coincide with the start of construction projects to improve safety on the highway . At the dedication George Blue Horse , a Navajo medicine man , performed a ceremony to remove the curse from the highway . In the Navajo language he stated , " The road itself never ends . It goes on generation to generation . The new number is a good one . The new road will be a medicine . " 
 Newspapers and television stations interviewed people along the route about their opinions on the changing of the highway 's number . Even some people who believed in the 666 curse disagreed with the change . One went on record as stating highway officials , " are messing with the wrong guy . They 're making the devil mad . They should have left the 666 alone . " Others were more sarcastic . One Monticello resident stated , " We 'll really miss all the potheads stopping and taking pictures of the Route 666 sign . " Most residents took pride in living along the Devil 's Highway and opposed the change . Some commented that no matter the number they would still call the road the Devil 's Highway . 
 = = = Post @-@ renumbering = = = 
 Since the renumbering in 2003 , portions of US 491 in New Mexico have been upgraded to a four @-@ lane divided highway , with grade separations at the busiest interchanges . The New Mexico Department of Transportation has noted that , as sections are upgraded , fatality rates improve on the four @-@ lane portions , but remain high on the two @-@ lane portions . As construction has proceeded , the most dangerous portions of the highway have moved to points where the four @-@ lane portion ends , and traffic merges to two lanes . This has caused the department to coordinate the phases of the upgrades to minimize the number of two @-@ lane / four @-@ lane transitions . Construction on the final phase was originally scheduled to begin January 2008 , however the state applied for American Recovery and Reinvestment Act funds to finish the project and completion was delayed until 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Note : The Utah mileposts are posted in a north @-@ to @-@ south direction , while Colorado 's and New Mexico 's mileposts are posted in a south @-@ to @-@ north direction . 
 = United States Battleship Division Nine ( World War I ) = 
 United States Battleship Division Nine was a division of four , later five , dreadnought battleships of the United States Navy 's Atlantic Fleet that constituted the American contribution to the British Grand Fleet during World War I. Although the U.S. entered the war on 6 April 1917 , hesitation among senior officers of the U.S. Navy as to the wisdom of dividing the American battle fleet prevented the immediate dispatch of any capital ships for service in the war zone . Following a direct request from the British Admiralty and a series of high level staff meetings , American opinion changed , and Battleship Division Nine joined the Grand Fleet on 7 December 1917 . Within that organization , the Division served as the Sixth Battle Squadron . 
 While serving with the Grand Fleet , Battleship Division Nine was forced to adapt quickly to unfamiliar British methods and standards . New signals and maneuvers were adopted relatively smoothly , while more stringent gunnery standards proved more difficult to achieve . On a personal level , relations between American and British officers and men were notably cordial . 
 Throughout 1918 , the Division participated in all major Grand Fleet exercises and deployments , as well as conducting several detached convoy missions in the North Sea . Following the signing of the Armistice on November 11 , 1918 , Battleship Division Nine was present for the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet on November 21 , 1918 . On December 1 , 1918 , the Division departed from the Grand Fleet to return to the U.S. 
 Although Battleship Division Nine 's service was limited mainly to convoy duty and the maintenance of the blockade of the German coast , its presence greatly augmented the strength of the Grand Fleet , thus making major combat between the British and German fleets even more unlikely in 1918 . By helping to keep the High Seas Fleet effectively blockaded in port , Battleship Division Nine played a role in ensuring Allied control of the oceans . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the U.S. entered World War I on the side of the Allies on 6 April 1917 , the war at sea was hanging in the balance . Having resumed unrestricted submarine warfare in February 1917 , Germany had quickly inflicted staggering losses on the British merchant marine to an extent completely unknown to the American government , or indeed to anyone but a select few at the British Admiralty . At the first meeting between representatives of the two navies in April 1917 , the British First Sea Lord — Admiral Sir John Jellicoe — had astonished the new American naval envoy — Rear Admiral William S. Sims — by informing him that Allied shipping loses had recently surpassed 600 @,@ 000 long tons ( 610 @,@ 000 t ) per month , and that the Admiralty did not see any immediate solution to the problem . 
 Jellicoe announced that at present loss rates , Britain would be effectively starved into submission by November 1917 . After a meeting at Scapa Flow later in July between Sims , Jellicoe , and Admiral David Beatty ( commander of the Grand Fleet ) , the Admiralty requested that the U.S. Navy send four dreadnoughts and six destroyers to join the Grand Fleet . The Admiralty intended that the arrival of the American dreadnoughts would allow it to decommission five ships of the pre @-@ dreadnought King Edward VII class , freeing up four thousand officers and ratings to serve on new light cruisers , destroyers , and submarines then under construction . 
 Despite the endorsement of Admiral Sims , the Navy Department initially rejected the British request . Like other navies of the late @-@ 19th and early @-@ 20th centuries , the U.S. Navy rigidly adhered to the doctrine of Alfred Thayer Mahan , whose first tenet was that under no circumstances should a battle fleet be divided . U.S. Chief of Naval Operations Admiral William S. Benson and Admiral Henry T. Mayo — Commander of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet — were particularly worried that if Britain fell , as developments at sea suggested it might , the U.S. Navy would be left to face the German High Seas Fleet completely on its own . 
 Having already released precious destroyers for convoy duty , they were unwilling to further weaken the ability of the U.S. to defend itself through the scattering of the all @-@ important battle fleet . Furthermore , Admiral Benson was uneasy about the prospect , ever @-@ present in the early 20th century , of a second war breaking out with Japan . For the moment , the U.S. Navy would send destroyers to Europe , but no battleships . 
 A series of high level meetings in London , beginning with Admiral Mayo 's visit in August 1917 and culminating in a naval mission led by Admiral Benson in November , proved decisive in changing the viewpoint of the Navy Department . Despite Admiral Sims 's frequent warnings of the severity of British losses to the U @-@ boat campaign , it was not until both men had seen things with their own eyes that they truly understood the <unk> of the situation . On 10 November 1917 , Admiral Benson cabled Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels , recommending the dispatch of four dreadnoughts for service with the Grand Fleet , noting " If , in any encounter , it should be indicated that the outcome would have been more favorable or more decisive had more Allied forces been available , it would be difficult to satisfactorily explain the absence of our ships . " On the advice of his trusted aide , Secretary Daniels agreed to dispatch the ships . 
 The question now came down to which battleships to send . The Admiralty requested that the Americans send coal @-@ burning dreadnoughts , as , due to the submarine blockade , the British were extremely short of the oil needed to fuel the latest classes of American dreadnoughts , the oil @-@ burning Nevada @-@ class and Pennsylvania @-@ class ships . As a result , Secretary Daniels decided to send Battleship Division Nine , made up of the coal @-@ burners New York , Wyoming , Florida , and Delaware . 
 Though they were not the newest American ships , they were still formidable ; each was capable of a 21 kn ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) maximum speed and armed with ten or twelve 14 in ( 360 mm ) or 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns . Furthermore , they were commanded by an experienced and highly capable officer in Rear Admiral Hugh Rodman , a 37 @-@ year veteran who had been commended for valor at the Battle of Manila Bay , and was known both as an expert seaman and an extremely affable man . Both of these characteristics would serve him in good stead in his new role as joint admiral and diplomat . After nearly five months of hesitation , the departure of the division was finally set for the last week of November . 
 = = Crossing the Atlantic = = 
 The four ships of Battleship Division Nine — accompanied by the destroyer Manley — got underway from Lynnhaven Roads , Virginia on 25 November 1917 , bound for the anchorage of the Grand Fleet at Scapa Flow in the Orkney Islands . What should have been an uneventful transit was complicated by weather that began bad and only got worse as the voyage progressed . After battling a vicious <unk> that brought sleet , hail , and snow , the division was further buffeted by a severe gale off the Grand Banks that began on 29 November . Captain Henry Wiley of Wyoming would later recall of that storm , " At the height of the gale , it blew as hard as I have ever seen it , and the seas were the worst I could recollect . " 
 Severe storm damage allowed over 250 long tons ( 250 t ) of seawater to flood the forward compartments of New York , lowering her bow to the point where she was in danger of foundering in the heavy seas . Three days of continuous bailing were required to help keep her afloat . To make matters worse , the high winds — reportedly gusting to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) — carried away the topmasts on all four battleships , rendering radio communication impossible . 
 The sheer force of the gale drove Delaware , Florida , and Manley off station in the night of 30 November . Though Florida eventually rejoined the flagship when the storm blew itself out , Delaware sailed on alone to the scheduled rendezvous with the British light cruiser Caroline off Cape Wrath , Scotland , where the division would reassemble in the early hours of 7 December . Manley — short of fuel after her fight with the sea — could not rejoin the rest of the force and proceeded directly to her ultimate destination , the naval base at Queenstown , Ireland . 
 Battered , Battleship Division Nine steamed into the anchorage of the Grand Fleet later that day to the tremendous cheering of the men on the assembled British warships . Wasting no time , Admiral Rodman called upon the commander of the Grand Fleet — Admiral Sir David Beatty — to offer the services of himself , his men , and his ships to the Allied cause . With Beatty 's acceptance , the American battleships , while retaining their American designation of Battleship Division Nine , officially became the Sixth Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet . 
 = = New standards = = 
 From the beginning , the battleships of Division Nine faced a hard task in adapting to the new methods and practices they encountered in the Grand Fleet . Any difficulties , however , that might have arisen from this transition based on national pride or rivalry were dissipated in large part by the professional example set by Admiral Rodman himself . As he would later note of his squadron 's assimilation : " I realized that the British fleet had had three years of actual warfare and knew the game from the ground floor up ; that while we might know it theoretically , there would be a great deal to learn practically . There could not be two independent commands in one force if our work was to be harmonious , and the only logical course was to amalgamate our ships and serve under the command of the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief . " This cooperative attitude trickled down through the division , and elicited the admiration and appreciation of the British . 
 The first task facing the Americans was the adoption of an entirely new set of signals , radio codes , and cipher methods . Although the Americans had studied the general British code while crossing the Atlantic , it was some time before they could use it with anything like the proficiency of other ships in the Grand Fleet . To help in the transition , signalmen and radio operators from the Royal Navy were posted to the American battleships to aid their U.S. Navy counterparts . Though learning an entirely new system of signals was , as Admiral Rodman put it , " almost the same as if in reading we had substituted a new set of letters , " within three days of their arrival , the ships of Battleship Division Nine were able to take part in fleet maneuvers in the North Sea with no apparent difficulty . 
 Less successful at first were the efforts of the American battleships to match their British counterparts in excellence of gunnery . Having provided numerous veteran gun @-@ crews to serve aboard armed merchantmen in the previous months , the gunnery complements of Division Nine were badly depleted and filled with inexperienced officers and recent recruits . The inevitable effect of this loss of talent became apparent when , on December 17 , 1917 , Battleship Division Nine conducted its first full @-@ caliber target practice in nearby Pentland Firth . 
 The results were relatively poor . Where British battleships by the end of 1917 generally managed a rate of fire per salvo of 40 seconds or less , and an average spread ( that is , the distance measured between the closest and furthest shots in a salvo ) of 300 – 500 yd ( 270 – 460 m ) , the four ships of the American squadron proved both slow and inaccurate . The rate of fire of Delaware ( with an acceptable spread of 475 yd ( 434 m ) ) was 108 seconds , and Wyoming ' and Florida 's average spreads were 956 and 1 @,@ 131 yd ( 874 and 1 @,@ 034 m ) , respectively . 
 Only the flagship New York managed to match British practice in both categories . In Admiral Beatty 's words , the results were " distinctly poor and disappointing " , and led him to the initial conclusion that he could not consider the American division the equivalent of a British one . The Americans worked to catch up , however , and with every target practice registered improved results . By the end of June 1918 , Admiral Rodman was able to report that " the firing was exceptionally fine , most encouraging and much better than we have ever done previously " . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Within days of their arrival at Scapa Flow , Battleship Division Nine began participating in the frequent maneuvers and drills that typified the day to day existence of the Grand Fleet . Because of the good condition and high speed of the American battleships , Admiral Beatty assigned them to be one of the two divisions of " fast battleships " that operated at either ends of the Grand Fleet when it was steaming in battle line formation . As stipulated by the Grand Fleet Battle Orders , the Sixth Battle Squadron was to take station at the rear of the line , where its duty was to engage the rear division of German battleships . However , should the fleet execute a sudden turnaround maneuver , the American ships would become the van squadron , meaning they would lead into battle . The position was an important one , and the Americans were particularly proud of it . 
 Tasked with this assignment , the Americans got their first true practice in their new role at the end of January 1918 , when the entire Grand Fleet went to sea for four days of war games . Under Admiral Beatty 's direction , the fleet divided into two opposing forces , with " Blue Fleet " representing the German High Seas Fleet , and the " Red Fleet " including the Sixth Battle Squadron , playing the role of the Royal Navy . At a prearranged point in the middle of the North Sea , the two sides converged for " battle " . During one of these exercises , the American sailors were treated to their first encounter with an enemy warship when a German U @-@ boat 's conning tower was sighted by the two British battleships directly ahead of New York . Although one of the British battleships attempted to ram it and destroyers rushed to drop depth charges , the U @-@ boat managed to escape . 
 Though the maneuvers were otherwise unremarkable , they proved a valuable learning tool for the Americans , who got a chance not only to experience British methods , but the violent conditions of the North Sea , as well . As Admiral Rodman noted upon returning from the exercise , " I have seen the largest battleships apparently sucked under until only the superstructures on the upper deck were visible when they would slowly rise from their submergence and the water pour off their decks as it might from some huge turtle ... [ coming ] to the surface . " 
 = = = Convoy duty = = = 
 Hard as the Americans worked to incorporate themselves into the Grand Fleet , they had yet to shake a belief among the veteran British that they were amateurs merely playing at war . In writing to his American @-@ born wife following the maneuvers , Admiral Beatty noted that , " The American Squadron enjoyed themselves greatly while we were out , and did well , and will do better next time . I am sending old Rodman out on an operation of his own , which pleases him and gives them an idea that they are really taking part in the war . I trust they will come to no harm . " 
 Despite the qualified nature of this comment , the operation Beatty had in mind was both important and potentially dangerous . On 6 February 1918 , Battleship Division Nine stood out of Scapa Flow to guard the high value Scandinavian Convoy to and from Norway . Twice in the previous year , this convoy — with its essential cargos of iron ore , nitrates , and other chemicals — had been raided by German cruisers and destroyers , with the loss of 15 allied freighters . To avoid a repeat of these attacks , the British had taken to escorting the convoys with dreadnought squadrons . Still , the possibility existed that the Germans would send out their entire fleet to cut off and annihilate the overmatched battleship squadron , with severe strategic effect . 
 With this possibility in mind , the American battleships set out , accompanied by the ships of the British Third Light Cruiser Squadron and two flotillas of destroyers , all under the command of Admiral Rodman . This marked the first time in history that British warships had ever served under the command of a sea @-@ going American admiral . Although the outbound trip to Norway was uneventful , things began to heat up for the escort force on 8 February , as they waited just outside Norwegian territorial waters for the return convoy to assemble . Shortly before 14 : 00 , both Florida and Delaware reported sighting numerous torpedoes running in the water , and began maneuvering sharply to avoid being struck . 
 Delaware also fired a 3 in ( 76 mm ) shell at what appeared to be a conning tower about 2 @,@ 000 yd ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) distant , and the escorting destroyers dropped depth charges , with no apparent success . After the convoy returned to Scapa Flow on 10 February , Rodman officially reported to Admiral Beatty that two torpedoes had been fired at Florida , and two at Delaware , and that only the skillful handling of both ships had saved them from harm . 
 However , post @-@ war examination of German war records revealed that no German submarines had made any attacks that day . It is likely the two ships had instead seen the wakes of porpoises frolicking in the waves . As Captain Wiley of Wyoming noted , such misidentifications were common for inexperienced ships : " new ships arriving in the war zone usually did a good deal of shooting at submarines which were not submarines . With experience , they saw fewer . " 
 Less than a week after their return , Battleship Division Nine was once again called upon to protect the Scandinavian Convoy as part of a general Grand Fleet response to intelligence reports suggesting German battlecruisers were loose in the North Sea . The mission took place in a strong gale that caused damage to ships throughout the Fleet . Delaware suffered damage to her ventilators that caused the generators to stop working , cutting electrical power throughout the ship and forcing a reduction in speed to 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) for nearly an hour . On New York , the strong seas carried a man overboard who could not be rescued , one of the 12 or more men lost throughout the Fleet that day . To make matters worse , the Grand Fleet failed to find the German battlecruisers , and was forced to return to Scapa Flow empty @-@ handed . 
 In March – April 1918 , Battleship Division Nine escorted the Scandinavian Convoy two more times . Both missions were hampered by storms that made the going particularly slow , but were otherwise uneventful . Still , confidence in the wisdom of using battleships as an escort was fading at the Admiralty , and Admiral Beatty in particular was opposed to it . When the American ships returned to the new Grand Fleet base at Rosyth at the end of the second mission on 20 April , it was the last time they were used to escort the Scandinavian Convoy . 
 Just days later , however , on 24 April 1918 , Battleship Division Nine joined the Grand Fleet in one last attempt to bring the High Seas Fleet to battle . German Admiral Reinhard Scheer , aware of the strategic potential of destroying a squadron of British battleships , had finally decided to make an attempt on the Scandinavian Convoy , using the overwhelming force of his entire fleet . Under strict radio silence , the High Seas Fleet sailed on the morning of 23 April to attempt an intercept , leaving the British completely unaware that they had left their base . 
 It was not until an engine malfunction aboard the German battlecruiser SMS Moltke forced it to break radio silence to ask for assistance that the British became aware of the presence of the Germans in the North Sea . A recent change in the sailing schedule of the Scandinavian Convoy , however , meant there was no exposed squadron of battleships in danger of being overwhelmed that day . Alerted by the enemy wireless transmissions , the entire Grand Fleet sortied to find the High Seas Fleet , offering the prospect of the decisive battle of the war . 
 However , with Moltke crippled , Admiral Scheer decided to return to base . Though scouting units of the Grand Fleet made brief contact with the Germans on the morning of 25 April , no action followed , and the High Seas Fleet made it home without incident . At one point in the chase , however , a reversal of course by the Germans meant that the entire Grand Fleet was forced to reorient itself in the opposite direction , placing Battleship Division Nine in the van . The result was that , if an encounter between the two fleets had occurred , American battleships would have led the British fleet into what could have been the largest naval battle of the war . 
 Years later , Admiral Rodman wrote in his memoir that he " often thought what a glorious day it would have been for the ships of our country to have led the Grand Fleet into action . " It was not to be , however , nor would another chance present itself : the German fleet did not sail as a unit again in World War I. 
 = = = New arrivals = = = 
 Through the first months of 1918 , the composition of Battleship Division Nine changed to reflect the lessons learned from operating in a war zone with the Grand Fleet . It soon became apparent that with only four ships , the division could not maintain the level of preparedness required by the constant need to be ready to sail at limited notice . The inevitable result was machinery breakdowns that reduced the squadron to three ships , a development considered unacceptable given the Division 's important position at the tail end of the battle line . The British — faced with the same problem — responded by allocating a spare battleship to each of their squadrons . In this way , each squadron always remained at full strength even when a ship was being repaired . 
 Recognizing the practicality of this solution , Admiral Rodman requested that the Navy Department send another battleship to operate with his division . Specifically , Rodman requested the ship be New York 's sister ship Texas , to better match Grand Fleet policy , which encouraged the use of matched pairs to aid in rangefinding . Although there was some grumbling at the Navy Department that a five ship division was counter to U.S. Navy policy , they eventually agreed , and on 11 February 1918 , Texas arrived at Scapa Flow . 
 This arrangement , however , left Wyoming — the third @-@ most powerful ship of the division — as the spare ship because she lacked a matched pair . As a result , Rodman requested that Delaware — the oldest ship in the division — be replaced with Wyoming 's sister ship Arkansas , leaving Florida as the spare . Arkansas , however , did not join Battleship Division Nine until 29 July 1918 . Delaware sailed from Scapa Flow for the United States the next day . 
 = = = Northern Mine Barrage = = = 
 In late June 1918 , Battleship Division Nine began escorting American mine laying craft participating in the setting of the Northern Mine Barrage , a gargantuan project spearheaded by the U.S. Navy designed to close the North Sea passage between Scotland and Norway to U @-@ boat traffic . A novel attempt to end the submarine menace relying heavily on American industrial capacity , the Barrage called for more than 70 @,@ 000 mines to be placed across a stretch of water 250 nmi ( 290 mi ; 460 km ) wide . 
 Because the minelayers were operating within range of German surface raiders , the American battleships were detailed to provide an escort for them , along with other units of the Grand Fleet . For the most part , these expeditions proved uneventful , but on two occasions , on 30 June and again on 8 August , lookouts on the battleships reported seeing U @-@ boats or torpedoes in the water , forcing the Division to maneuver accordingly . Like the previous sightings made while escorting the Scandinavian Convoy , subsequent review of German war records revealed that both cases were false alarms . 
 Just days after the second incident , however , Battleship Division Nine was called to more serious action . Having received intelligence that German vessels were loose in the North Sea , the Division sortied from Scapa Flow on 12 October , in company with the British Second Battlecruiser Squadron and the Third Light Cruiser Squadron in the hope of engaging the enemy raiders . From the beginning , the autumn weather was particularly rough , impeding progress and making any chance of sighting the German ships unlikely . 
 On the evening of 14 October , as New York led the force back into Pentland Firth , she was rocked by a violent underwater collision on her starboard side , followed shortly after by another to the stern that broke off two of her propeller blades , reducing the ship to one engine and a speed of 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) . It was immediately clear to the men on board that she had struck an underwater object , but the depth of the channel meant it could not have been a shipwreck . Both Admirals Rodman and Beatty concluded that New York must have accidentally collided with a submerged German U @-@ boat . They agreed that the submarine had rammed its bow into the ship 's side , then been struck moments later by the ship 's propeller . In their opinion , the damage would have been fatal to the German craft . 
 Postwar examination of German records revealed that the submarine lost may have been UB @-@ 113 or UB @-@ 123 . This strange — and accidental — encounter marked the only time in all of Battleship Division Nine 's service with the Grand Fleet that one of its ships sank a German vessel . 
 New York 's ordeal was not over , however . Badly damaged by the loss of a propeller , the ship sailed to Rosyth under heavy escort for repairs on 15 October . At 01 : 00 the next morning , a U @-@ boat launched three torpedoes at the damaged vessel , all of which passed ahead of her . Unlike in previous cases , sufficient evidence existed to suppose that this torpedo attack was not a false alarm — a number of officers and men aboard New York clearly saw the wakes of the torpedoes in the full moonlight , and a submarine was spotted in the immediate vicinity by a patrol shortly after the attack . 
 The battleship 's wounded condition is possibly what saved her : although standard procedure was to steam at 16 kn ( 18 mph ; 30 km / h ) , New York could make only 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) on her one operable propeller . Due to this , historian Jerry Jones believes that the German U @-@ boat captain misjudged the ship 's speed . With no further damage , however , the battleship was able to safely arrive at drydock in Rosyth . As the water dropped in the drydock , a large dent commensurate with a submarine bow was found in her hull . 
 As the war began to draw to a close , the ships of Battleship Division Nine remained busy . With frequent gunnery drill , the ships showed marked improvement in performance compared to the early days with the Fleet . The average spread for the whole division , including the newcomers Texas and Arkansas , was now less than 600 yd ( 550 m ) , which was much better than previously , if still not as good as the British average . 
 Maneuvers and war games continued , as well . During exercises in late September 1918 , the Grand Fleet , once again divided into Red and Blue Fleets , " engaged " each other at ranges as extreme as 23 @,@ 000 yd ( 21 @,@ 000 m ) , a battle @-@ distance unimagined prior to World War I. The rest of the Division 's time was spent in escorting <unk> on the Northern Barrage . Though a monumental endeavor , the barrage proved largely ineffective . After an investment of 70 @,@ 263 mines and more than $ 40 million ( the equivalent of $ 572 million in 2009 ) , only six submarines were confirmed as sunk by the barrage . 
 = = Life in the Grand Fleet = = 
 Throughout Battleship Division Nine 's time with the Grand Fleet , combating boredom was a constant difficulty . Located at the northeastern tip of Scotland , the islands surrounding Scapa Flow were little more than barren , cold , windswept specks of land devoid of the trappings of civilization . Due to the efforts of the officers to keep their men entertained , however , morale remained high throughout the war . The British worked hard to turn the anchorage into a more inviting place . Central to these efforts were sporting events . The Fleet held numerous inter @-@ ship competitions , including soccer , rugby , rowing , track , and boxing , which were followed with intense interest by the men of the respective ships . 
 When the Americans arrived , the British made every effort to include them in the athletics . Space was allotted on the sports fields to provide a football field and a baseball diamond . In short order , the division developed a baseball league that played 17 games during the summer of 1918 . Texas won the division championship , but lost to a visiting team from American naval headquarters in London . Football games occurred throughout the fall . 
 The American sailors participated in Fleet sporting events , as well , giving excellent account of themselves . At the Fleet track meet , Battleship Division Nine finished second , and did even better at the annual boxing championships , the pinnacle of the Grand Fleet sporting year . An <unk> from Florida won the lightweight title , a chief carpenter 's mate from New York won the middleweight title , and a fireman from the same ship reached the heavyweight finals . 
 The men found other ways to keep busy besides sports . Throughout the year , every ship in the squadron produced theater productions , and motion pictures were shown whenever possible . Furthermore , leave was granted to the men on a frequent basis whenever the ships were in Rosyth for repairs . On 4 July 1918 , Admiral Beatty provided a special treat for the men of Battleship Division Nine by granting them a few days off from all drills and maneuvers in order to celebrate what he termed " this greatest of Liberty Days " . 
 On 22 July , the ships of the Grand Fleet received a visit from King George V. After inspecting the Fleet from the decks of the destroyer HMS Oak , the king presided over an investiture ceremony on board Admiral Beatty 's flagship HMS Queen Elizabeth . King George presented numerous decorations , but the first recipient was Admiral Rodman himself . Invested as a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath , Rodman received the highest honor awarded that day . 
 After lunch aboard Queen Elizabeth , the king visited Admiral Rodman 's flagship New York , where he inspected the ship . King George visited her engine and fire @-@ rooms , remarking with admiration to Rodman , " Admiral , your fire @-@ room is as clean as a dining room . " After the inspection , the pair retreated to Rodman 's cabin for coffee , a smoke , and casual conversation , something Rodman noted the king seemed to particularly enjoy . 
 Following his departure from the Grand Fleet , the king had a message sent to the officers and men of the ships he had just left . It began with a warm reference to the American squadron : " I am happy to have found myself once more with the Grand Fleet , and this pleasure has been increased by the opportunity I have had of seeing the splendid ships of the United States in line with our own , and of meeting Admiral Rodman together with the officers and men under him . We value their comradeship and are proud of their achievements . " 
 To this , Admiral Beatty replied : " We are glad that Your Majesty should have been able personally to observe our complete accord with the United States Squadron and the firm friendship which binds their officers and men to Your own . " These expressions accurately reflected the goodwill that existed between the officers and men of the two organizations . Admiral Rodman , for instance , later wrote that he came away from his service in the Grand Fleet as probably the most anglophile officer in the U.S. Navy , and many a relationship was forged among the junior officers that served both nations well in World War II . 
 Despite being located in remote Scapa Flow , Battleship Division Nine was unable to avoid a global killer that struck just as World War I was coming to a close . Spanish Influenza — which killed millions worldwide in 1918 @-@ 1919 — did not spare the Grand Fleet . By late fall , an average of seven men per day were dying of the virus throughout the Fleet , and some ships were so badly affected that they were practically unmanageable . Though they were not as badly hit as some of the British vessels , the American battleships were not immune . By early November , only Florida was not in quarantine , and Arkansas had 259 cases , with 11 deaths . 
 = = Armistice = = 
 Though the situation in the North Sea in late 1918 remained much as it had been for the previous four years — with the Grand Fleet maintaining its endless watch over the High Seas Fleet — the war on the Western Front was rapidly drawing to a close . Operation Michael , the last German offensive , had been stopped in late summer , and with the aid of hundreds of thousands of American doughboys , the Allies had begun to overwhelm the German Army . On 3 October , Prince Max of Baden replaced Georg von Hertling as Chancellor of Germany , and immediately asked President Woodrow Wilson to arrange an armistice . 
 To the naval leaders of the High Seas Fleet , however , there appeared to be no reason for an armistice . In their eyes , the German Imperial Navy remained unbeaten . Determined not to go down without a fight , Admiral Scheer , by this time head of the German Admiralty , ordered the new commander of the High Seas Fleet , Admiral Franz Hipper , to prepare for a final sortie against the Grand Fleet " even if it should become a death struggle " . Accordingly , Hipper developed Plan 19 , which called for destroyer strikes against the Thames Estuary and Flanders to draw the Grand Fleet south , where a waiting line of U @-@ boats would attempt to even the odds . At this point , the High Seas Fleet would emerge to engage its opponent in one last titanic encounter . 
 The admirals , however , were reckoning without their sailors . The enlisted men of the High Seas Fleet , aware that Germany had lost the war , had no interest in dying for the sake of the Navy 's honor . When the details of Plan 19 were leaked to the fleet , a mutiny almost instantly broke out , with sailors raising the red flag of revolution and refusing to obey their officers . Faced with a complete breakdown of discipline within his fleet , Admiral Hipper had no choice but to disperse his ships to their <unk> in early November . Days later , on November 11 , 1918 , World War I came to an end . 
 With the defeat of Germany , the question became what to do with the ships of the High Seas Fleet . Because no neutral nation wanted to host the rebellious sailors of the mutinous armada , the Allies eventually decided to have the force interned at Scapa Flow , with the guns of the Grand Fleet 's ships nearby in case of any attempt at a break @-@ out . On November 15 , Beatty met with Hipper 's representative , Rear Admiral Hugo Meurer , to arrange the surrender of the German ships . Meurer agreed to surrender to Beatty in the Firth of Forth . From there , the German vessels would proceed to Scapa Flow , until their ultimate fate was decided by the Paris Peace Conference . 
 = = = The surrender of the German fleet = = = 
 On November 21 , the ships of Battleship Division Nine joined the rest of the Grand Fleet to witness Operation ZZ — the surrender of the German fleet . The Grand Fleet — composed of 370 ships and 90 @,@ 000 men — formed two columns through which the defeated German ships passed . Despite the magnitude of the occasion , it was a bittersweet moment for the men of the Grand Fleet . For four years , the British — later joined by the Americans of Battleship Division Nine — had tried constantly to bring the High Seas Fleet to a decisive battle . To see them coming to surrender , as Admiral Beatty put it , " like sheep being herded by dogs to their folds " , left many feeling cheated . 
 After the ceremony had concluded , Beatty declared , " The Fleet , my Fleet , is brokenhearted . " In a similar vein , Admiral Rodman wrote , " It was hard to realize that the ships which we had expected and hoped to engage , would all be given up without a struggle or fleet action , and surrender without a fight . " Though such statements reflected the fact that the Grand Fleet had not won the great battle its officers had sought , the peaceful surrender of the High Seas Fleet served as testimony to the strength the Grand Fleet had maintained continuously through four years of war . 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 With the war over , the ships of Battleship Division Nine departed from the Grand Fleet on December 1 , almost exactly one year after joining it . Though the fact that the American battleships never had the opportunity to confront their German opposites dampened the sense of their achievements , they nonetheless played an important part in the winning of the War at Sea . The presence of the American squadron augmented the strength of the Grand Fleet to the point where any confrontation attempted by the Germans would likely have been futile . Admiral Beatty put it best in his farewell speech to the American sailors , on December 1 : 
 I had always had certain misgivings [ that the German fleet would not come out to fight ] , and when the Sixth Battle Squadron became part of the Grand Fleet those misgivings were doubly strengthened , and I knew then they would throw up their hands . Apparently , the Sixth Battle Squadron was the straw that broke the camel 's back . " 
 = Mayan languages = 
 The Mayan languages form a language family spoken in Mesoamerica and northern Central America . Mayan languages are spoken by at least 6 million Maya peoples , primarily in Guatemala , Mexico , Belize and Honduras . In 1996 , Guatemala formally recognized 21 Mayan languages by name , and Mexico recognizes eight more within their territory . 
 The Mayan language family is one of the best @-@ documented and most studied in the Americas . Modern Mayan languages descend from the Proto @-@ Mayan language , thought to have been spoken at least 5 @,@ 000 years ago ; it has been partially reconstructed using the comparative method . The proto @-@ Mayan language diversified into at least 6 different branches , the Huastecan , Quichean , Yucatecan , <unk> , Mamean and Ch 'olan @-@ Tzeltalan branches . 
 Mayan languages form part of the Mesoamerican language area , an area of linguistic convergence developed throughout millennia of interaction between the peoples of Mesoamerica . All Mayan languages display the basic diagnostic traits of this linguistic area . For example , all use relational nouns instead of prepositions to indicate spatial relationships . They also possess grammatical and typological features that set them apart from other languages of Mesoamerica , such as the use of <unk> in the grammatical treatment of verbs and their subjects and objects , specific inflectional categories on verbs , and a special word class of " positionals " which is typical of all Mayan languages . 
 During the pre @-@ Columbian era of Mesoamerican history , some Mayan languages were written in the logo @-@ syllabic Maya script . Its use was particularly widespread during the Classic period of Maya civilization ( c . 250 – 900 ) . The surviving corpus of over 10 @,@ 000 known individual Maya inscriptions on buildings , monuments , pottery and bark @-@ paper codices , combined with the rich postcolonial literature in Mayan languages written in the Latin script , provides a basis for the modern understanding of pre @-@ Columbian history unparalleled in the Americas . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Proto @-@ Mayan = = = 
 Mayan languages are the descendants of a proto @-@ language called Proto @-@ Mayan or , in K 'iche ' Maya , <unk> <unk> Maya ' <unk> ( " the old Maya Language " ) . The Proto @-@ Mayan language is believed to have been spoken in the Cuchumatanes highlands of central Guatemala in an area corresponding roughly to where Q 'anjobalan is spoken today . The earliest proposal was that of Sapper ( 1912 ) which identified the Chiapas @-@ Guatemalan highlands as the likely " cradle " of Mayan languages was published by the German antiquarian and scholar Karl Sapper . Terrence Kaufman and John <unk> have reconstructed more than 3000 lexical items for the proto @-@ Mayan language . 
 According to the prevailing classification scheme by Lyle Campbell and Terrence Kaufman , the first division occurred around 2200 BCE , when Huastecan split away from Mayan proper after its speakers moved northwest along the Gulf Coast of Mexico . Proto @-@ Yucatecan and Proto @-@ Ch 'olan speakers subsequently split off from the main group and moved north into the Yucatán Peninsula . Speakers of the western branch moved south into the areas now inhabited by Mamean and Quichean people . When speakers of proto @-@ Tzeltalan later separated from the Ch 'olan group and moved south into the Chiapas highlands , they came into contact with speakers of Mixe – Zoque languages . According to an alternative theory by Robertson and Houston , Huastecan stayed in the Guatemalan highlands with speakers of Ch 'olan @-@ Tzeltalan , separating from that branch at a much later date than proposed by Kaufman . 
 In the Archaic period ( before 2000 BCE ) , a number of loanwords from Mixe – Zoquean languages seem to have entered the proto @-@ Mayan language . This has led to hypotheses that the early Maya were dominated by speakers of Mixe – Zoquean languages , possibly the Olmec . In the case of the <unk> and Lencan languages , on the other hand , Mayan languages are more often the source than the receiver of loanwords . Mayan language specialists such as Campbell believe this suggests a period of intense contact between Maya and the Lencan and Xinca people , possibly during the Classic period ( 250 – 900 ) . 
 = = = Classic Period = = = 
 During the Classic period the major branches began diversifying into separate languages . The split between Proto @-@ Yucatecan ( in the north , that is , the Yucatán Peninsula ) and Proto @-@ Ch 'olan ( in the south , that is , the Chiapas highlands and Petén Basin ) had already occurred by the Classic period , when most extant Maya inscriptions were written . Both variants are attested in hieroglyphic inscriptions at the Maya sites of the time , and both are commonly referred to as " Classic Maya language " . Although a single prestige language was by far the most frequently recorded on extant hieroglyphic texts , evidence for at least five different varieties of Mayan have been discovered within the hieroglyphic corpus — an Eastern Ch 'olan variety found in texts written in the southern Maya area and the highlands , a Western Ch 'olan variety diffused from the Usumacinta region from the mid @-@ 7th century on , a <unk> variety found in the texts from the Yucatán Peninsula , a Tzeltalan variety found in the Western Lowlands ( i.e. Toniná , Pomona ) , and possibly a highland Maya language belonging to K 'ichean major within texts painted on Nebaj ceramics . The reason why only few linguistic varieties are found in the glyphic texts is probably that these served as prestige dialects throughout the Maya region ; hieroglyphic texts would have been composed in the language of the elite . 
 Stephen Houston , John Robertson and David Stuart have suggested that the specific variety of Ch 'olan found in the majority of Southern Lowland glyphic texts was a language they dub " Classic Ch 'olti 'an " , the ancestor language of the modern Ch 'orti ' and Ch ’ <unk> ’ languages . They propose that it originated in western and south @-@ central Petén Basin , and that it was used in the inscriptions and perhaps also spoken by elites and priests . However , Mora @-@ Marín has argued that traits shared by Classic Lowland Maya and the Ch 'olti 'an languages are <unk> rather than innovations , and that the diversification of Ch 'olan in fact post @-@ dates the classic period . The language of the classical lowland <unk> then would have been proto @-@ Ch 'olan . 
 = = = Colonial period = = = 
 During the Spanish colonization of Central America , all indigenous languages were eclipsed by Spanish , which became the new prestige language . The use of Mayan languages in many important domains of society , including administration , religion and literature , came to an end . Yet the Maya area was more resistant to outside influence than others , and perhaps for this reason , many Maya communities still retain a high proportion of monolingual speakers . The Maya area is now dominated by the Spanish language . While a number of Mayan languages are moribund or are considered endangered , others remain quite viable , with speakers across all age groups and native language use in all domains of society . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 As Maya archaeology advanced during the 20th century and nationalist and ethnic @-@ pride @-@ based ideologies spread , the Mayan @-@ speaking peoples began to develop a shared ethnic identity as Maya , the heirs of the Maya civilization . 
 The word " Maya " was likely derived from the <unk> Yucatán city of Mayapan ; its more restricted meaning in pre @-@ colonial and colonial times points to an origin in a particular region of the Yucatán Peninsula . The broader meaning of " Maya " now current , while defined by linguistic relationships , is also used to refer to ethnic or cultural traits . Most Mayans identify first and foremost with a particular ethnic group , e.g. as " Yucatec " or " K 'iche ' " ; but they also recognize a shared Maya kinship . Language has been fundamental in defining the boundaries of that kinship . Fabri writes : " The term Maya is problematic because Maya peoples do not constitute a homogenous identity . Maya , rather , has become a strategy of self @-@ representation for the Maya movements and its followers . The Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala ( ALMG ) finds twenty @-@ one distinct Mayan languages . " This pride in unity has led to an insistence on the distinctions of different Mayan languages , some of which are so closely related that they could easily be referred to as dialects of a single language . But , given that the term " dialect " has been used by some with racialist overtones in the past , as scholars made a spurious distinction between Amerindian " dialects " and European " languages " , the preferred usage in Mesoamerica in recent years has been to designate the linguistic varieties spoken by different ethnic group as separate languages . 
 In Guatemala , matters such as developing standardized orthographies for the Mayan languages are governed by the Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala ( ALMG ; Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages ) , which was founded by Maya organisations in 1986 . Following the 1996 peace accords , it has been gaining a growing recognition as the regulatory authority on Mayan languages both among Mayan scholars and the Maya peoples . 
 = = Genealogy and classification = = 
 = = = Relations with other families = = = 
 The Mayan language family has no demonstrated genetic relationship to other language families . Similarities with some languages of Mesoamerica are understood to be due to diffusion of linguistic traits from neighboring languages into Mayan and not to common ancestry . Mesoamerica has been proven to be an area of substantial linguistic diffusion . 
 A wide range of proposals have tried to link the Mayan family to other language families or isolates , but none is generally supported by linguists . Examples include linking Mayan with the Uru – <unk> languages , Mapuche , the Lencan languages , Purépecha and Huave . Mayan has also been included in various Hokan and Penutian hypotheses . The linguist Joseph Greenberg included Mayan in his highly controversial <unk> hypothesis , which is rejected by most historical linguists as unsupported by available evidence . 
 Writing in 1997 Lyle Campbell , an expert in Mayan languages and historical linguistics , argued that the most promising proposal is the " Macro @-@ Mayan " hypothesis , which posits links between Mayan , the Mixe – Zoque languages and the <unk> languages , but more research is needed to support or disprove this hypothesis . In 2015 , Campbell noted that recent , yet unpublished , evidence uncovered by David Mora @-@ Marin strengthened the case for a relationship between Mayan and Mixe @-@ Zoquean languages , although he did not yet consider it conclusive . 
 = = = Subdivisions = = = 
 The Mayan family consists of thirty languages . Typically , these languages are grouped into 5 @-@ 6 major subgroups ( <unk> , Huastecan , Ch 'olan @-@ <unk> , Q 'anjob <unk> , Mamean , and K 'ichean ) . The Mayan language family is extremely well documented , and its internal genealogical classification scheme is widely accepted and established , except for some minor unresolved differences . 
 One point still at issue is the position of Ch 'olan and Q 'anjobalan – Chujean . Some scholars think these form a separate Western branch ( as in the diagram below ) . Other linguists do not support the positing of an especially close relationship between Ch 'olan and Q 'anjobalan – Chujean ; consequently they classify these as two distinct branches emanating directly from the proto @-@ language . An alternative proposed classification groups the Huastecan branch as springing from the Ch 'olan @-@ Tzeltalan node , rather than as an outlying branch springing directly from the proto @-@ Mayan node . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Studies estimate that Mayan languages are spoken by more than 6 million people . Most of them the speakers live in Guatemala where depending on estimates 40 % <unk> % of the population speaks a Mayan language . In Mexico the Mayan speaking population was estimated at 2 @,@ 5 million people in 2010 , whereas the Belizean speaker population figures around 30 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Western branch = = = 
 The Ch 'olan languages were formerly widespread throughout the Maya area , but today the language with most speakers is Ch 'ol , spoken by 130 @,@ 000 in Chiapas . Its closest relative , the Chontal Maya language , is spoken by 55 @,@ 000 in the state of Tabasco . Another related language , now endangered , is Ch 'orti ' , which is spoken by 30 @,@ 000 in Guatemala . It was previously also spoken in extreme west of Honduras and El Salvador , but the Salvadorian variant is now extinct and the Honduran one is considered moribund . Ch 'olti ' , a sister language of Ch 'orti ' , is also extinct . Ch 'olan languages are believed to be the most conservative in vocabulary and phonology , and are closely related to the language of the Classic @-@ era inscriptions found in the Central Lowlands . They may have served as prestige languages , coexisting with other dialects in some areas . This assumption provides a plausible explanation for the geographical distance between the Ch 'orti ' zone and the areas where Ch 'ol and Chontal are spoken . 
 The closest relatives of the Ch 'olan languages are the languages of the Tzeltalan branch , Tzotzil and Tzeltal , both spoken in Chiapas by large and stable or growing populations ( 265 @,@ 000 for Tzotzil and 215 @,@ 000 for Tzeltal ) . Tzeltal has tens of thousands of monolingual speakers . 
 Q 'anjob 'al is spoken by 77 @,@ 700 in Guatemala 's Huehuetenango department , with small populations elsewhere . The region of Q 'anjobalan speakers in Guatemala , due to genocidal policies during the Civil War and its close proximity to the Mexican border , was the source of a number of refugees . Thus there are now small Q 'anjob 'al , Jakaltek , and <unk> populations in various locations in Mexico , the United States ( such as <unk> County , Ohio and Los Angeles , California ) , and , through postwar resettlement , other parts of Guatemala . Jakaltek ( also known as <unk> ' ) is spoken by almost 100 @,@ 000 in several municipalities of Huehuetenango . Another member of this branch is <unk> , with over 50 @,@ 000 speakers in San Miguel <unk> and San Rafael La Independencia . 
 Chuj is spoken by 40 @,@ 000 people in Huehuetenango , and by 9 @,@ 500 people , primarily refugees , over the border in Mexico , in the municipality of La <unk> , Chiapas , and the villages of <unk> and Cuauhtémoc . Tojolab 'al is spoken in eastern Chiapas by 36 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = Eastern branch = = = 
 The Quichean – Mamean languages and dialects , with two sub @-@ branches and three subfamilies , are spoken in the Guatemalan highlands . 
 Q 'eqchi ' ( sometimes spelled <unk> ) , which constitutes its own sub @-@ branch within Quichean – Mamean , is spoken by about 400 @,@ 000 people in the southern Petén , Izabal and Alta Verapaz departments of Guatemala , and also in Belize by 9 @,@ 000 speakers . In El Salvador it is spoken by 12 @,@ 000 as a result of recent migrations . 
 The Uspantek language , which also springs directly from the Quichean – Mamean node , is native only to the Uspantán <unk> in the department of El Quiché , and has 3 @,@ 000 speakers . 
 Within the Quichean sub @-@ branch K 'iche ' ( Quiché ) , the Mayan language with the largest number of speakers , is spoken by around 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K 'iche ' Maya in the Guatemalan highlands , around the towns of Chichicastenango and Quetzaltenango and in the <unk> mountains , as well as by urban emigrants in Guatemala City . The famous Maya mythological document , Popol Vuh , is written in an antiquated K 'iche ' often called Classical K 'iche ' ( or Quiché ) . The K 'iche ' culture was at its pinnacle at the time of the Spanish conquest . Q 'umarkaj , near the present @-@ day city of Santa Cruz del Quiché , was its economic and ceremonial center . Achi is spoken by 85 @,@ 000 people in <unk> and Rabinal , two <unk> of Baja Verapaz . In some classifications , e.g. the one by Campbell , Achi is counted as a form of K 'iche ' . However , owing to a historical division between the two ethnic groups , the Achi Maya do not regard themselves as K 'iche ' . The Kaqchikel language is spoken by about 400 @,@ 000 people in an area stretching from Guatemala City westward to the northern shore of Lake Atitlán . Tz 'utujil has about 90 @,@ 000 speakers in the vicinity of Lake Atitlán . Other members of the K 'ichean branch are <unk> , spoken by about 15 @,@ 000 people mostly in El Quiché department , and <unk> , which is spoken by 8 @,@ 000 people in <unk> , San Marcos . 
 The largest language in the Mamean sub @-@ branch is Mam , spoken by 478 @,@ 000 people in the departments of San Marcos and Huehuetenango . <unk> is the language of 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants of central <unk> , another municipality of Huehuetenango . Ixil ( possibly three different languages ) is spoken by 70 @,@ 000 in the " Ixil Triangle " region of the department of El Quiché . <unk> ( or <unk> ) is spoken by over 6 @,@ 000 people in the municipality of <unk> , and 1 @,@ 000 refugees in Mexico . According to the Ethnologue the number of speakers of <unk> is growing . 
 The <unk> languages are closely related to Core Quichean , with which they constitute a <unk> @-@ K 'ichean sub @-@ branch on the Quichean – Mamean node . <unk> ' is spoken by 90 @,@ 000 people in <unk> , Baja Verapaz , and in the following municipalities of Alta Verapaz : Santa Cruz Verapaz , San Cristóbal Verapaz , Tactic , <unk> and <unk> . Poqomam is spoken by around 49 @,@ 000 people in several small pockets in Guatemala . 
 = = = Yucatecan branch = = = 
 Yucatec Maya ( known simply as " Maya " to its speakers ) is the most commonly spoken Mayan language in Mexico . It is currently spoken by approximately 800 @,@ 000 people , the vast majority of whom are to be found on the Yucatán Peninsula . It remains common in Yucatán and in the adjacent states of Quintana Roo and Campeche . 
 The other three Yucatecan languages are Mopan , spoken by around 10 @,@ 000 speakers primarily in Belize ; Itza ' , an extinct or moribund language from Guatemala 's Petén Basin ; and Lacandón or <unk> , also severely endangered with about 1 @,@ 000 speakers in a few villages on the outskirts of the Selva <unk> , in Chiapas . 
 = = = Huastecan branch = = = 
 <unk> ( also spelled <unk> and <unk> ) is spoken in the Mexican states of Veracruz and San Luis Potosí by around 110 @,@ 000 people . It is the most divergent of modern Mayan languages . <unk> was a language related to <unk> and spoken in Chiapas that became extinct some time before 1982 . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 = = = Proto @-@ Mayan sound system = = = 
 Proto @-@ Mayan ( the common ancestor of the Mayan languages as reconstructed using the comparative method ) has a predominant CVC syllable structure , only allowing consonant clusters across syllable boundaries . Campbell & Kaufman ( 1985 ) Most Proto @-@ Mayan roots were monosyllabic except for a few disyllabic nominal roots . Due to subsequent vowel loss many Mayan languages now show complex consonant clusters at both ends of syllables . Following the reconstruction of Lyle Campbell and Terrence Kaufman , the Proto @-@ Mayan language had the following sounds . It has been suggested that proto @-@ Mayan was a tonal language , based on the fact that four different contemporary Mayan languages have tone ( Yucatec , Uspantek , San Bartolo Tzotzil and Mocho ' ) , but since these languages each can be shown to have innovated tone in different ways , Campbell considers this unlikely . 
 = = = Phonological evolution of Proto @-@ Mayan = = = 
 The classification of Mayan languages is based on changes shared between groups of languages . For example , languages of the western group ( such as Huastecan , Yucatecan and Ch 'olan ) all changed the Proto @-@ Mayan phoneme * / r / into [ j ] , some languages of the eastern branch retained [ r ] ( K 'ichean ) , and others changed it into [ tʃ ] or , word @-@ finally , [ t ] ( Mamean ) . The shared innovations between Huastecan , Yucatecan and Ch 'olan show that they separated from the other Mayan languages before the changes found in other branches had taken place . 
 The palatalized plosives [ <unk> ] and [ tʲ ] are not found in any of the modern families . Instead they are reflected differently in different branches , allowing a reconstruction of these phonemes as palatalized plosives . In the eastern branch ( Chujean @-@ Q 'anjobalan and Ch 'olan ) they are reflected as [ t ] and [ <unk> ] . In Mamean they are reflected as [ ts ] and [ tsʼ ] and in Quichean as [ tʃ ] and [ <unk> ] . Yucatec stands out from other western languages in that its palatalized plosives are sometimes changed into [ tʃ ] and sometimes [ t ] . 
 The Proto @-@ Mayan velar nasal * [ ŋ ] is reflected as [ x ] in the eastern branches ( Quichean – Mamean ) , [ n ] in Q 'anjobalan , Ch 'olan and Yucatecan , [ h ] in Huastecan , and only conserved as [ ŋ ] in Chuj and Jakaltek . 
 = = = Diphthongs = = = 
 Vowel quality is typically classified as having <unk> vowels . In traditionally diphthongized contexts , Mayan languages will realize the V @-@ V sequence by inserting a hiatus @-@ breaking glottal stop or glide insertion between the vowels . Some K 'ichean @-@ branch languages have exhibited developed diphthongs from historical long vowels , by breaking / e : / and / o : / . 
 = = Grammar = = 
 The morphology of Mayan languages is simpler than that of other Mesoamerican languages , yet its morphology is still considered <unk> and polysynthetic . Verbs are marked for aspect or tense , the person of the subject , the person of the object ( in the case of transitive verbs ) , and for plurality of person . Possessed nouns are marked for person of possessor . There are no cases or genders in Mayan languages . 
 = = = Word order = = = 
 Proto @-@ Mayan is thought to have had a basic verb – object – subject word order with possibilities of switching to VSO in certain circumstances , such as complex sentences , sentences where object and subject were of equal animacy and when the subject was definite . Today Yucatecan , Tzotzil and Tojolab 'al have a basic fixed VOS word order . Mamean , Q 'anjob 'al , Jakaltek and one dialect of Chuj have a fixed VSO one . Only Ch 'orti ' has a basic SVO word order . Other Mayan languages allow both VSO and VOS word orders . 
 = = = Numeral classifiers = = = 
 When counting it is , in many Mayan languages , necessary to use numeral classifiers which specify the class of items being counted ; the numeral cannot appear without an accompanying classifier . Some Mayan languages , such as Kaqchikel , do not use numeral classifiers . Class is usually assigned according to whether the object is animate or inanimate or according to an object 's general shape . Thus when counting " flat " objects , a different form of numeral classifier is used than when counting round things , oblong items or people . In some Mayan languages such as Chontal , classifiers take the form of affixes attached to the numeral ; in others such as Tzeltal , they are free forms . Jakaltek has both numeral classifiers and noun classifiers , and the noun classifiers can also be used as pronouns . 
 The meaning denoted by a noun may be altered significantly by changing the accompanying classifier . In Chontal , for example , when the classifier <unk> is used with names of plants it is understood that the objects being enumerated are whole trees . If in this expression a different classifier , <unk> 'it ( for counting long , slender objects ) is substituted for <unk> , this conveys the meaning that only sticks or branches of the tree are being counted : 
 = = = Possession = = = 
 The morphology of Mayan nouns is fairly simple : they inflect for number ( plural or singular ) , and , when possessed , for person and number of their possessor . Pronominal possession is expressed by a set of possessive prefixes attached to the noun , as in Kaqchikel ru @-@ kej " his / her horse " . Nouns may furthermore adopt a special form marking them as possessed . For nominal possessors , the possessed noun is inflected as possessed by a third @-@ person possessor , and followed by the possessor noun , e.g. Kaqchikel ru @-@ kej ri <unk> " the man 's horse " ( literally " his horse the man " ) . This type of formation is a main diagnostic trait of the Mesoamerican Linguistic Area and recurs throughout Mesoamerica . 
 Mayan languages often contrast alienable and inalienable possession by varying the way the noun is ( or is not ) marked as possessed . Jakaltek , for example , contrasts <unk> possessed <unk> " my photo ( in which I am depicted ) " with <unk> possessed <unk> " my photo ( taken by me ) " . The prefix <unk> marks the first person singular possessor in both , but the absence of the -e possessive suffix in the first form marks inalienable possession . 
 = = = Relational nouns = = = 
 Mayan languages which have prepositions at all normally have only one . To express location and other relations between entities , use is made of a special class of " relational nouns " . This pattern is also recurrent throughout Mesoamerica and is another diagnostic trait of the Mesoamerican Linguistic Area . In Mayan most relational nouns are metaphorically derived from body parts so that " on top of " , for example , is expressed by the word for head . 
 Relational nouns are possessed by the constituent that is the reference point of the relation , and the relational noun names the relation . Thus in Mayan one would say " the mountain 's head " ( literally " its head the mountain " ) to mean " on ( top of ) the mountain " . Thus in the Classical Quiché of the Popol Vuh we read u @-@ <unk> <unk> " on the earth " ( literally " its face the earth " ) . 
 = = = Subjects and objects = = = 
 Mayan languages are ergative in their alignment . This means that the subject of an intransitive verb is treated similarly to the object of a transitive verb , but differently from the subject of a transitive verb . 
 Mayan languages have two sets of affixes that are attached to a verb to indicate the person of its arguments . One set ( often referred to in Mayan grammars as set A ) indicates the person of subjects of intransitive verbs , and of objects of transitive verbs . They can also be used with adjective or noun predicates to indicate the subject . 
 Another set ( set B ) is used to indicate the person of subjects of transitive verbs ( and in some languages , such as Yucatec , also the subjects of intransitive verbs , but only in the <unk> aspects ) , and also the possessors of nouns ( including relational nouns ) . 
 = = = Verbs = = = 
 In addition to subject and object ( agent and patient ) , the Mayan verb has affixes signalling aspect , tense , and mood as in the following example : 
 Tense systems in Mayan languages are generally simple . Jakaltek , for example , contrasts only past and non @-@ past , while Mam has only future and non @-@ future . Aspect systems are normally more prominent . Mood does not normally form a separate system in Mayan , but is instead intertwined with the tense / aspect system . Kaufman has reconstructed a tense / aspect / mood system for proto @-@ Mayan that includes seven aspects : <unk> , progressive , completive / punctual , imperative , potential / future , optative , and perfective . 
 Mayan languages tend to have a rich set of grammatical voices . Proto @-@ Mayan had at least one passive construction as well as an antipassive rule for downplaying the importance of the agent in relation to the patient . Modern K 'iche ' has two <unk> : one which ascribes focus to the object and another that emphasizes the verbal action . Other voice @-@ related constructions occurring in Mayan languages are the following : <unk> , <unk> ( incorporating a direct object into the verb ) , instrumental ( promoting the instrument to object position ) and referential ( a kind of <unk> promoting an indirect argument such as a <unk> or recipient to the object position ) . 
 = = = Statives and positionals = = = 
 In Mayan languages , words are usually viewed as belonging to one of four classes : verbs , <unk> , adjectives , and nouns . 
 Statives are a class of predicative words expressing a quality or state , whose syntactic properties fall in between those of verbs and adjectives in Indo @-@ European languages . Like verbs , <unk> can sometimes be inflected for person but normally lack inflections for tense , aspect and other purely verbal categories . Statives can be adjectives , positionals or numerals . 
 <unk> , a class of roots characteristic of , if not unique to , the Mayan languages , form <unk> adjectives and verbs ( usually with the help of suffixes ) with meanings related to the position or shape of an object or person . Mayan languages have between 250 and 500 distinct positional roots : 
 <unk> ay jun <unk> <unk> <unk> b 'e . 
 There is a man lying down fallen on the road . 
 <unk> hin k 'al ay max ek <unk> . 
 I spent the entire day sitting down . 
 Yet <unk> <unk> ay jun lob 'aj <unk> . 
 Yesterday there was a snake lying curled up in the entrance of the house . 
 In these three Q 'anjob 'al sentences , the positionals are <unk> ( " something large or cylindrical lying down as if having fallen " ) , <unk> ( " person sitting on a <unk> object " ) , and <unk> ( " curled up like a rope or snake " ) . 
 = = = Word formation = = = 
 Compounding of noun roots to form new nouns is commonplace ; there are also many morphological processes to derive nouns from verbs . Verbs also admit highly productive derivational affixes of several kinds , most of which specify transitivity or voice . 
 Some Mayan languages allow incorporation of noun stems into verbs , either as direct objects or in other functions . However , there are few affixes with adverbial or modal meanings . 
 As in other Mesoamerican languages , there is widespread metaphorical use of roots denoting body parts , particularly to form <unk> and relational nouns such as Tzeltal / Tzotzil ti ' na " door " ( lit . " mouth of house " ) , or Kaqchikel chi ru @-@ pam " inside " ( lit . " mouth its @-@ stomach " ) . 
 = = Mayan loanwords = = 
 A number of loanwords of Mayan or potentially Mayan origins are found in other languages , principally Spanish , English , and some neighboring Mesoamerican languages . In addition , there are words in Mayan languages that are known or suspected to ultimately derive from non @-@ Mayan languages , especially Spanish . 
 According to Mayan language scholars , the English word " shark " comes directly from the Yucatec Maya <unk> for " fish " . The OED print edition describes the origin of shark as " uncertain " , noting that it " seems to have been introduced by the sailors of Captain ( afterwards Sir John ) Hawkins 's expedition , who brought home a specimen which was exhibited in London in 1569 " . 
 Another Mayan loanword is " cigar " . " Sic " is Mayan for " tobacco " and " <unk> " means " to smoke tobacco leaves " . This is the most likely origin for cigar and thus cigarette . 
 The English word " hurricane " , which is a borrowing from the Spanish word <unk> is considered to be related to the name of Maya storm deity Jun <unk> . However , it is probable that the word passed into European languages from a <unk> language or Taino . 
 = = Writing systems = = 
 The complex script used to write Mayan languages in pre @-@ Columbian times and known today from engravings at several Maya archaeological sites has been deciphered almost completely . The script is a mix between a logographic and a syllabic system . 
 In colonial times Mayan languages came to be written in a script derived from the Latin alphabet ; orthographies were developed mostly by missionary grammarians . Not all modern Mayan languages have standardized orthographies , but the Mayan languages of Guatemala use a standardized , Latin @-@ based phonemic spelling system developed by the Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala ( ALMG ) . <unk> for the languages of Mexico are currently being developed by the Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = <unk> writing = = = 
 The pre @-@ Columbian Maya civilization developed and used an intricate and fully functional writing system , which is the only Mesoamerican script that can be said to be almost fully deciphered . Earlier @-@ established civilizations to the west and north of the Maya homelands that also had scripts recorded in surviving inscriptions include the Zapotec , Olmec , and the Zoque @-@ speaking peoples of the southern Veracruz and western Chiapas area — but their scripts are as yet largely undeciphered . It is generally agreed that the Maya writing system was adapted from one or more of these earlier systems . A number of references identify the undeciphered Olmec script as its most likely precursor . 
 In the course of the deciphering of the Maya hieroglyphic script , scholars have come to understand that it was a fully functioning writing system in which it was possible to express unambiguously any sentence of the spoken language . The system is of a type best classified as logosyllabic , in which symbols ( glyphs or graphemes ) can be used as either logograms or syllables . The script has a complete syllabary ( although not all possible syllables have yet been identified ) , and a Maya scribe would have been able to write anything phonetically , syllable by syllable , using these symbols . 
 At least two major Mayan languages have been confidently identified in hieroglyphic texts , with at least one other language probably identified . An archaic language variety known as Classic Maya predominates in these texts , particularly in the Classic @-@ era inscriptions of the southern and central lowland areas . This language is most closely related to the Ch 'olan branch of the language family , modern descendants of which include Ch 'ol , Ch 'orti ' and Chontal . Inscriptions in an early Yucatecan language ( the ancestor of the main surviving Yucatec language ) have also been recognised or proposed , mainly in the Yucatán Peninsula region and from a later period . Three of the four extant Maya codices are based on Yucatec . It has also been surmised that some inscriptions found in the Chiapas highlands region may be in a Tzeltalan language whose modern descendants are Tzeltal and Tzotzil . Other regional varieties and dialects are also presumed to have been used , but have not yet been identified with certainty . 
 Use and knowledge of the Maya script continued until the 16th century Spanish conquest at least . Bishop Diego de Landa Calderón of the Catholic Archdiocese of Yucatán prohibited the use of the written language , effectively ending the Mesoamerican tradition of literacy in the native script . He worked with the Spanish colonizers to destroy the bulk of Mayan texts as part of his efforts to convert the locals to Christianity and away from what he perceived as pagan idolatry . Later he described the use of hieroglyphic writing in the religious practices of Yucatecan Maya in his Relación de las <unk> de Yucatán . 
 = = = Colonial orthography = = = 
 Colonial orthography is marked by the use of c for / k / ( always hard , as in <unk> / <unk> / ) , k for / q / in Guatemala or for / k ’ / in the Yucatán , h for / x / , and tz for / ts / ; the absence of glottal stop or vowel length ( apart sometimes for a double vowel letter for a long glottalized vowel , as in <unk> / u ’ uk / ) , the use of u for / w / , as in <unk> / <unk> / , and the variable use of z , ç , s for / s / . The greatest difference from modern orthography , however , is in the various attempts to transcribe the ejective consonants . 
 In ca . 1550 , Francisco de la Parra invented distinctive letters for ejectives in the Mayan languages of Guatemala , the <unk> and <unk> ( and derivatives ) . These were used in all subsequent Franciscan writing , and are occasionally seen even today . In 1605 , Alonso Urbano doubled consonants for ejectives in Otomi ( pp , tt , <unk> , cc / <unk> ) , and similar systems were adapted to Mayan . Another approach , in Yucatec , was to add a bar to the letter , or to double the stem . 
 * Only the stem of <unk> is doubled , but that is not supported by Unicode . 
 A ligature <unk> for tz is used alongside <unk> and <unk> . The Yucatec convention of dz for / tsʼ / is retained in Maya family names such as <unk> . 
 = = = Modern orthography = = = 
 Since the colonial period , practically all Maya writing has used a Latin alphabet . Formerly these were based largely on the Spanish alphabet and varied between authors , and it is only recently that standardized alphabets have been established . The first widely accepted alphabet was created for Yucatec Maya by the authors and contributors of the <unk> Maya Cordemex , a project directed by Alfredo Barrera Vásquez and first published in 1980 . Subsequently , the Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages ( known by its Spanish acronym ALMG ) , founded in 1986 , adapted these standards to 22 Mayan languages ( primarily in Guatemala ) . The script is largely phonemic , but abandoned the distinction between the apostrophe for ejective consonants and the glottal stop , so that ejective / <unk> / and the non @-@ ejective sequence / <unk> / ( previously t ' and <unk> ) are both written t ' . Other major Maya languages , primarily in the Mexican state of Chiapas , such as Tzotzil , Tzeltal , Ch 'ol , and Tojolab 'al , are not generally included in this reformation , and are sometimes written with the conventions standardized by the Chiapan " State Center for Indigenous Language , Art , and Literature " ( <unk> ) , which for instance writes " ts " rather than " tz " ( thus <unk> and <unk> ) . In Mexico , names of archaeological sites and other items of historical record retain the colonial spellings , rather than the revised orthography . 
 One element of the revised orthographies that is not widely accepted , especially outside the Guatemalan context , is the conversion of proper nouns ( such as names of archaeological sites , modern settlements , and cultures ) . Thus , the Cordemex continues to use the term " Yucatán " ( rather than " <unk> " ) in its preface , despite the fact that its orthography does not utilize a " c " , and most scholarly archaeological texts continue to print the original spellings for archaeological sites and cultures that have been canonized in the literature over the centuries . 
 = = Literature = = 
 From the classic language to the present day , a body of literature has been written in Mayan languages . The earliest texts to have been preserved are largely monumental inscriptions documenting rulership , succession , and ascension , conquest and calendrical and astronomical events . It is likely that other kinds of literature were written in perishable media such as codices made of bark , only four of which have survived the ravages of time and the campaign of destruction by Spanish missionaries . 
 Shortly after the Spanish conquest , the Mayan languages began to be written with Latin letters . Colonial @-@ era literature in Mayan languages include the famous Popol Vuh , a <unk> @-@ historical narrative written in 17th century Classical Quiché but believed to be based on an earlier work written in the 1550s , now lost . The Título de Totonicapán and the 17th century theatrical work the Rabinal <unk> are other notable early works in K 'iche ' , the latter in the <unk> dialect . The Annals of the <unk> from the late 16th century , which provides a historical narrative of the Kaqchikel , contains elements paralleling some of the accounts appearing in the Popol Vuh . The historical and prophetical accounts in the several variations known collectively as the books of Chilam Balam are primary sources of early Yucatec Maya traditions . The only surviving book of early lyric poetry , the Songs of <unk> by Ah Bam , comes from this same period . 
 In addition to these singular works , many early grammars of indigenous languages , called " artes " , were written by priests and friars . Languages covered by these early grammars include Kaqchikel , Classical Quiché , Tzeltal , Tzotzil and Yucatec . Some of these came with indigenous @-@ language translations of the Catholic catechism . 
 While Mayan peoples continued to produce a rich oral literature in the postcolonial period ( after 1821 ) which has been collected by linguists and ethnologists gathering oral literature , very little written literature was produced in this period . 
 Because indigenous languages were excluded from the education systems of Mexico and Guatemala after independence , Mayan peoples remained largely illiterate in their native languages , learning to read and write in Spanish , if at all . However , since the establishment of the Cordemex and the Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages ( 1986 ) , native language literacy has begun to spread and a number of indigenous writers have started a new tradition of writing in Mayan languages . Notable among this new generation is the K 'iche ' poet Humberto Ak 'ab 'al , whose works are often published in dual @-@ language Spanish / K 'iche ' editions , as well as K 'iche ' scholar Luis Enrique Sam <unk> ( 1955 – 2011 ) whose translations of the Popol Vuh into both Spanish and modern K 'iche ' achieved high acclaim . 
 = The Boat Race 1883 = 
 The 40th Boat Race , an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames , took place on 15 March 1883 . Following confusion at the start of the race and a snow storm during the event , Oxford won by a margin of three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 18 seconds . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by seven lengths , and held the overall lead , with 21 victories to Cambridge 's 17 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge 's coaches were John Goldie ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times in the 1869 , 1870 , 1871 and 1872 races ) and Herbert Edward Rhodes ( who was also a four @-@ time Blue , rowing in each race between 1873 and 1876 ) . Oxford were coached by William Grenfell ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1877 and 1878 races ) and Walter Bradford Woodgate ( who represented Oxford in the 1862 and 1863 races ) . Woodgate also briefly coached the Light Blues the same year . The umpire for the race was Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1856 and 1859 ) and the starter was Edward Searle , who had fulfilled that position since the 1840 race . 
 Oxford chose to discard their old boat which they had used since the 1878 race in favour of one built by Harry Clasper . The Cambridge crew was subject to several late changes to the stroke seat ; three times in quick succession the occupant was replaced as a result of illness and tactical decisions . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 2 @.@ 75 lb ( 77 @.@ 3 kg ) , 4 @.@ 75 pounds ( 2 @.@ 2 kg ) more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained six former Blues , including A. R. Paterson , L. R. West and cox E. H. Lyon , all of whom were making their third appearance in the event . Cambridge saw five participants return , including the Cambridge University Boat Club president Charles William Moore and Peter Wilson Atkin who were rowing in their third Boat Race . The race featured two non @-@ British participants : Cambridge 's Steve Fairbairn ( whose brother Charles had competed in the 1879 race ) was born in Victoria in Australia , while Oxford 's George Quinlan Roberts hailed from Tasmania . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge were pre @-@ race favourites although former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater noted that the public had been unaware of the significant improvements from Oxford following their transition to the Clasper vessel . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The race started at 5 : 39 p.m. and quickly descended into chaos : darkness was falling and it became quickly apparent that the Cambridge crew had not heard the command to " go " from the starter Searle . By now , according to Oxford 's bow G. C. Bourne , he was " old with a feeble voice " , and although the Oxford stroke L. R. West saw Searle drop his handkerchief , and set off , the Cambridge boat did not move . 
 West seized the initiative and took the Dark Blue crew off to an immediate lead which , despite a " blinding snowstorm " , they extended to three lengths by Hammersmith Bridge . They went on to win by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 18 seconds . It was Oxford 's fourth consecutive victory and took the overall record to 22 – 17 in their favour . 
 = Djaoeh Dimata = 
 Djaoeh Dimata ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : <unk> Dimata ; Indonesian for Out of Sight ) is a 1948 film from what is now Indonesia written and directed by Andjar Asmara for the South Pacific Film Corporation ( SPFC ) . Starring Ratna Asmara and Ali Joego , it follows a woman who goes to Jakarta to find work after her husband is blinded in an accident . SPFC 's first production , Djaoeh Dimata took two to three months to film and cost almost 130 @,@ 000 gulden . 
 The first domestically produced feature film to be released in five years , Djaoeh Dimata received favourable reviews , although financially it was outperformed by Roestam Sutan Palindih 's Air Mata Mengalir di Tjitarum ( released soon after ) . The film 's cast remained active in the Indonesian film industry , some for another thirty years , and SPFC produced six more works before closing in 1949 . A copy of the film is stored at Sinematek Indonesia . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A poor villager , Asrad ( Ali Joego ) , is blinded following a traffic accident and thus unable to work . As a result , his wife Soelastri ( Ratna Asmara ) travels to the capital , Jakarta , to find a job . As Asrad does not trust his wife and fears she may be unfaithful , he writes her a letter telling her to not come back . Soelastri becomes a singer , and – unknown to Asrad – soon achieves wide acclaim . Her most popular song , " Djaoeh Dimata " , receives heavy airplay on the radio and soon becomes one of Asrad 's favourites . Ultimately Soelastri is brought home by <unk> ( Iskandar <unk> ) , who attempts to pass her off as a maid for Asrad . When Asrad recognises his wife 's voice , they are reconciled . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first two years of the 1940s saw a growth in the cinema of the Dutch East Indies , with over forty domestic productions released . Following the Japanese occupation in February 1942 , production slowed greatly and nearly all film studios were closed . The last studio , the ethnic Chinese @-@ owned Multi Film , was confiscated by the Japanese to establish the film production company Nippon Eigasha in Jakarta , the colony 's capital . This included Multi Film 's equipment , with which Nippon Eigasha produced one feature film – Rd Ariffien 's Berdjoang ( Struggle ; 1943 ) – six short films , and several newsreels . All were pro @-@ Japanese propaganda . 
 After the Japanese surrender in August 1945 , a number of native Indonesian employees of Nippon Eigasha formed Berita Film Indonesia , which first made use of the studios . This company was allied with the newly proclaimed Indonesian government . During the ensuing revolution , allied Dutch and British forces occupied Jakarta in November 1945 . The Dutch took over the studio , and production of newsreels at Multi Film 's studios began in 1947 under the banner <unk> Film Bedrijf . The following year the Dutch established a subsidiary company to produce fictional films . This new company , the South Pacific Film Corporation ( SPFC ) , was subsidised in part by the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration , a continuation of the former Dutch colonial government of the Indies . 
 = = Production = = 
 SPFC hired Andjar Asmara , a former journalist and <unk> who had been active with The Teng Chun 's Java Industrial Film before the Japanese occupation , to direct Djaoeh Dimata ; he based the screenplay on his stageplay of the same name . However , as with his pre @-@ war ventures , the native Indonesian Andjar was more of an acting and dialogue coach ; the Dutch cinematographer , A.A. Denninghoff @-@ Stelling , held more creative power over the final product . Max Tera served as assistant cinematographer on this black @-@ and @-@ white film . 
 The film starred Ratna Asmara ( wife of Andjar ) , Ali Yugo , Iskandar <unk> , and Djauhari Effendi , all of whom had previous theatrical experience . Ratna and Ali , together with Andjar , had been members of the travelling troupe Dardanella in the early 1930s and entered the film industry together in 1940 with Kartinah . Iskandar and Djauhari , meanwhile , had been active in the theatre during the occupation ; both made their feature film debuts with Djaoeh Dimata . 
 Principal photography was conducted on sets constructed by artistic director <unk> Bajo Angin in <unk> 's studio in Jakarta . The company 's equipment was of good quality , but conditions were detrimental to filming ; a contemporary report notes that one take , done inside the studio , was ruined by the sound of a passing car . Filming , which took two to three months , was completed on 10 November 1948 . Production costs were almost 130 @,@ 000 gulden , which was partially obtained from ethnic Chinese backers . The film included multiple songs , including Gesang <unk> 's 1940 hit " Bengawan Solo " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Djaoeh Dimata was released in late 1948 , the first domestic feature film since Berdjoang . Despite this five @-@ year gap , film critic Usmar Ismail writes that it did not stray from the formula which had been proven before the war , one which Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran notes focused on songs , beautiful scenery and romance . Roestam Sutan Palindih 's Air Mata Mengalir di Tjitarum ( Tears Flow in Citarum ) , which had similar themes , was released shortly after Djaoeh Dimata by the rival Tan & Wong Bros. ; it proved the greater financial success . Only three domestic productions were released in 1948 ; the last was another SPFC production , entitled Anggrek Bulan ( Moon Orchid ) , which was also directed by Andjar . 
 Reviews of the film , which was rated for all ages , were mixed . One in the Jakarta @-@ based Het Dagblad found the film to have many ( unspecified ) weak moments as well as strong ones . It particularly praised Ali 's acting as a blind man , as well as Denninghoff @-@ Stelling 's camerawork . Another reviewer , in the magazine <unk> , described Ratna as an " unprecedented <unk> " capable of making viewers cry " unrestrained tears of emotion " . After Djaoeh Dimata was released in Singapore in June 1949 , a reviewer for The Straits Times praised the film 's " fine photography and almost perfect sound " . 
 Andjar directed two further films for South Pacific , Anggrek Bulan and Gadis Desa ( Maiden from the Village ; 1949 ) . Ratna had no further acting roles , although in 1950 she became Indonesia 's first female director with Sedap Malam ( Sweetness of the Night ) , for Djamaluddin Malik 's company Persari . Ali , Iskandar , and Djauhari remained active as actors , Ali and Iskandar through the 1960s and Djauhari until the 1970s . SPFC made another six films before shutting down at the end of the Indonesian National Revolution in 1949 . A 35 mm copy of Djaoeh Dimata is stored at Sinematek Indonesia in Jakarta . 
 = George S. Patton 's speech to the Third Army = 
 Patton 's Speech to the Third Army , alternatively known simply as " Patton 's Speech " or " The Speech " , was a series of speeches given by General George S. Patton to troops of the United States Third Army in 1944 , prior to the Allied invasion of France . Patton , already established as a highly effective and charismatic leader , sought to motivate the inexperienced Third Army for its pending combat duty . In the oration , Patton implored his soldiers to do their duty regardless of personal fear , imploring them to aggressiveness and constant offensive action . Patton 's profanity @-@ laced speaking was viewed as unprofessional by some other officers but the speech resounded well with his men . Some historians have acclaimed the oration as Patton 's greatest speaking as well as one of the greatest motivational speeches of all time . 
 An abbreviated and less profane version of the speech became iconic after the 1970 movie Patton , as performed by actor George C. Scott before an enormous American flag . The performance was instrumental in bringing Patton into popular culture and transforming him into a folk hero . 
 = = Background = = 
 In January 1944 , Lieutenant General George S. Patton was given command of the Third United States Army , a field army which was newly arrived in the United Kingdom and which was composed largely of inexperienced troops . Patton 's job had been to train the Third Army to prepare it for the upcoming Allied invasion of France , where it would join in the Operation Cobra breakout into Brittany seven weeks after the Operation Overlord amphibious invasion at Normandy . 
 By 1944 , Patton had been established as a highly effective and successful leader , noted for his ability to inspire his men with charismatic speeches , which he delivered from memory because of a lifelong trouble with reading . Patton deliberately cultivated a flashy , distinctive image in the belief that this would inspire his troops . He carried a trademark ivory @-@ handled , Smith & Wesson Model 27 .357 Magnum . He was usually seen wearing a highly polished helmet , riding pants , and high cavalry boots . His jeep bore oversized rank placards on the front and back , as well as a klaxon horn which would loudly announce his approach from afar . Patton was an effective combat commander , having rehabilitated the U.S. II Corps during the North African Campaign and then led the Seventh United States Army through the Invasion of Sicily during 1943 , at times personally appearing to his troops in the middle of battle in hopes of inspiring them . Patton 's army had beaten British general Bernard Law Montgomery to Messina which gained him considerable fame , though a " slapping incident " sidelined his career for several months thereafter . 
 At the time of the speeches , Patton was attempting to keep a low profile among the press , as he had been ordered to by General Dwight Eisenhower . Patton was made a central figure in an elaborate phantom army deception scheme , and the Germans believed he was in Dover preparing the First United States Army Group for an invasion of Pas de Calais . On each occasion , he would wear his polished helmet , full dress uniform , and gleaming riding boots , and carry a riding crop to snap for effect . Patton frequently kept his face in a scowl he referred to as his " war face " . He would arrive in a Mercedes and deliver his remarks on a raised platform surrounded by a very large audience seated around the platform and on surrounding hills . Each address was delivered to a division @-@ sized force of 15 @,@ 000 or more men . 
 = = The speech = = 
 Patton began delivering speeches to his troops in the United Kingdom in February 1944 . The extent of his giving the particular speech that became famous is unclear , with different sources saying it had taken this form by March , or around early May , or in late May . The number of speeches given is also not clear , with one source saying four to six , and others suggesting that every unit in the Third Army heard an instance . The most famous and well known of the speeches occurred on 5 June 1944 , the day before D @-@ Day . Though he was unaware of the actual date for the beginning of the invasion of Europe ( as the Third Army was not part of the initial landing force ) , Patton used the speech as a motivational device to excite the men under his command and prevent them from losing their nerve . Patton delivered the speech extemporaneously , without notes of his own , and so though it was substantially the same at each occurrence , the order of some of its parts varied . One notable difference occurred in the speech he delivered on 31 May 1944 , while addressing the U.S. 6th Armored Division , when he began with a remark that would later be among his most famous : 
 No bastard ever won a war by dying for his country . You won it by making the other poor dumb bastard die for his country . 
 Patton 's words were later written down by a number of troops who witnessed his remarks , and so a number of iterations exist with differences in wording . Historian Terry Brighton constructed a full speech from a number of soldiers who recounted the speech in their memoirs , including Gilbert R. Cook , Hobart R. Gay , and a number of other junior soldiers . Patton only wrote briefly of his orations in his diary , noting , " as in all of my talks , I stressed fighting and killing . " The speech later became so popular that it was called simply " Patton 's speech " or " The speech " when referencing the general . 
 Be seated . 
 Men , all this stuff you hear about America not wanting to fight , wanting to stay out of the war , is a lot of bullshit . Americans love to fight . All real Americans love the sting and clash of battle . When you were kids , you all admired the champion marble shooter , the fastest runner , the big @-@ league ball players and the toughest boxers . Americans love a winner and will not tolerate a loser . Americans play to win all the time . That 's why Americans have never lost and will never lose a war . The very thought of losing is hateful to Americans . Battle is the most significant competition in which a man can indulge . It brings out all that is best and it removes all that is base . 
 You are not all going to die . Only two percent of you right here today would be killed in a major battle . Every man is scared in his first action . If he says he 's not , he 's a goddamn liar . But the real hero is the man who fights even though he 's scared . Some men will get over their fright in a minute under fire , some take an hour , and for some it takes days . But the real man never lets his fear of death overpower his honor , his sense of duty to his country , and his innate manhood . 
 All through your army career you men have bitched about what you call ' this chicken @-@ shit drilling . ' That is all for a purpose — to ensure instant obedience to orders and to create constant alertness . This must be bred into every soldier . I don 't give a fuck for a man who is not always on his toes . But the drilling has made veterans of all you men . You are ready ! A man has to be alert all the time if he expects to keep on breathing . If not , some German son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch will sneak up behind him and beat him to death with a sock full of shit . There are four hundred neatly marked graves in Sicily , all because one man went to sleep on the job — but they are German graves , because we caught the bastard asleep before his officer did . 
 An army is a team . It lives , eats , sleeps , and fights as a team . This individual hero stuff is bullshit . The bilious bastards who write that stuff for the Saturday Evening Post don 't know any more about real battle than they do about fucking . And we have the best team — we have the finest food and equipment , the best spirit and the best men in the world . Why , by God , I actually pity these poor bastards we 're going up against . 
 All the real heroes are not storybook combat fighters . Every single man in the army plays a vital role . So don 't ever let up . Don 't ever think that your job is unimportant . What if every truck driver decided that he didn 't like the whine of the shells and turned yellow and jumped headlong into a ditch ? That cowardly bastard could say to himself , ' Hell , they won 't miss me , just one man in thousands . ' What if every man said that ? Where in the hell would we be then ? No , thank God , Americans don 't say that . Every man does his job . Every man is important . The ordnance men are needed to supply the guns , the quartermaster is needed to bring up the food and clothes for us because where we are going there isn 't a hell of a lot to steal . Every last damn man in the mess hall , even the one who boils the water to keep us from getting the GI shits , has a job to do . 
 Each man must think not only of himself , but think of his buddy fighting alongside him . We don 't want yellow cowards in the army . They should be killed off like flies . If not , they will go back home after the war , goddamn cowards , and breed more cowards . The brave men will breed more brave men . Kill off the goddamn cowards and we 'll have a nation of brave men . 
 One of the bravest men I saw in the African campaign was on a telegraph pole in the midst of furious fire while we were moving toward Tunis . I stopped and asked him what the hell he was doing up there . He answered , ' Fixing the wire , sir . ' ' Isn 't it a little unhealthy up there right now ? ' I asked . ' Yes sir , but this goddamn wire has got to be fixed . ' I asked , ' Don 't those planes strafing the road bother you ? ' And he answered , ' No sir , but you sure as hell do . ' Now , there was a real soldier . A real man . A man who devoted all he had to his duty , no matter how great the odds , no matter how seemingly insignificant his duty appeared at the time . 
 And you should have seen the trucks on the road to Gabès . Those drivers were magnificent . All day and all night they crawled along those son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch roads , never stopping , never deviating from their course with shells bursting all around them . Many of the men drove over 40 consecutive hours . We got through on good old American guts . These were not combat men . But they were soldiers with a job to do . They were part of a team . Without them the fight would have been lost . 
 Sure , we all want to go home . We want to get this war over with . But you can 't win a war lying down . The quickest way to get it over with is to get the bastards who started it . We want to get the hell over there and clean the goddamn thing up , and then get at those purple @-@ pissing Japs . The quicker they are whipped , the quicker we go home . The shortest way home is through Berlin and Tokyo . So keep moving . And when we get to Berlin , I am personally going to shoot that paper @-@ hanging son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch Hitler . 
 When a man is lying in a shell hole , if he just stays there all day , a Boche will get him eventually . The hell with that . My men don 't dig foxholes . <unk> only slow up an offensive . Keep moving . We 'll win this war , but we 'll win it only by fighting and showing the Germans that we 've got more guts than they have or ever will have . We 're not just going to shoot the bastards , we 're going to rip out their living goddamned guts and use them to grease the treads of our tanks . We 're going to murder those lousy Hun cocksuckers by the bushel @-@ fucking @-@ basket . 
 Some of you men are wondering whether or not you 'll chicken out under fire . Don 't worry about it . I can assure you that you 'll all do your duty . War is a bloody business , a killing business . The Nazis are the enemy . Wade into them , spill their blood or they will spill yours . Shoot them in the guts . Rip open their belly . When shells are hitting all around you and you wipe the dirt from your face and you realize that it 's not dirt , it 's the blood and gut of what was once your best friend , you 'll know what to do . 
 I don 't want any messages saying ' I 'm holding my position . ' We 're not holding a goddamned thing . We 're advancing constantly and we 're not interested in holding anything except the enemy 's balls . We 're going to hold him by his balls and we 're going to kick him in the ass ; twist his balls and kick the living shit out of him all the time . Our plan of operation is to advance and keep on advancing . We 're going to go through the enemy like shit through a <unk> . 
 There will be some complaints that we 're pushing our people too hard . I don 't give a damn about such complaints . I believe that an ounce of sweat will save a gallon of blood . The harder we push , the more Germans we kill . The more Germans we kill , the fewer of our men will be killed . Pushing harder means fewer casualties . I want you all to remember that . My men don 't surrender . I don 't want to hear of any soldier under my command being captured unless he is hit . Even if you are hit , you can still fight . That 's not just bullshit either . I want men like the lieutenant in Libya who , with a Luger against his chest , swept aside the gun with his hand , jerked his helmet off with the other and busted the hell out of the Boche with the helmet . Then he picked up the gun and he killed another German . All this time the man had a bullet through his lung . That 's a man for you ! 
 Don 't forget , you don 't know I 'm here at all . No word of that fact is to be mentioned in any letters . The world is not supposed to know what the hell they did with me . I 'm not supposed to be commanding this army . I 'm not even supposed to be in England . Let the first bastards to find out be the goddamned Germans . Some day , I want them to rise up on their piss @-@ soaked hind legs and howl ' Ach ! It 's the goddamned Third Army and that son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch Patton again ! ' 
 Then there 's one thing you men will be able to say when this war is over and you get back home . Thirty years from now when you 're sitting by your fireside with your grandson on your knee and he asks , ' What did you do in the great World War Two ? ' You won 't have to cough and say , ' Well , your granddaddy shoveled shit in Louisiana . ' No sir , you can look him straight in the eye and say ' Son , your granddaddy rode with the great Third Army and a son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ goddamned @-@ bitch named George Patton ! ' 
 All right , you sons of bitches . You know how I feel . I 'll be proud to lead you wonderful guys in battle anytime , anywhere . That 's all . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The troops under Patton 's command received the speech well . The general 's strong reputation caused considerable excitement among his men , and they listened intently , in absolute silence , as he spoke . A majority indicated they enjoyed Patton 's speaking style . As one officer recounted of the end of the speech , " the men instinctively sensed the fact and the telling mark that they themselves would play in world history because of it , for they were being told as much right now . Deep sincerity and seriousness lay behind the General 's colorful words , and the men well knew it , but they loved the way he put it as only he could do it . " Patton gave a humorous tone to the speech , as he intentionally sought to make his men laugh with his colorful delivery . Observers later noted the troops seemed to find the speeches very funny . In particular , Patton 's use of obscene humor was well received by the enlisted men , as it was " the language of the barracks " . 
 A notable minority of Patton 's officers were unimpressed or displeased with their commander 's use of obscenities , viewing it as unprofessional conduct for a military officer . Among some officers ' later recounting of the speech , " bullshit " would be replaced by " baloney " and " fucking " by " fornicating " . At least one account replaced " we 're going to hold the enemy by the balls " to " we 're going to hold the enemy by the nose . " Among the critics of Patton 's frequent use of vulgarities was General Omar Bradley , Patton 's former subordinate . It was well known that the two men were polar opposites in personality , and there is considerable evidence that Bradley disliked Patton both personally and professionally . In response to criticisms of his coarse language , Patton wrote to a family member , " When I want my men to remember something important , to really make it stick , I give it to them double dirty . It may not sound nice to a bunch of little old ladies , at an afternoon tea party , but it helps my soldiers to remember . You can 't run an army without profanity , and it has to be eloquent profanity . An army without profanity couldn 't fight its way out of a piss @-@ soaked paper bag . " 
 Under Patton , the Third Army landed in Normandy during July 1944 and would go on to play an integral role in the last months of the war in Europe , closing the Falaise Pocket in mid @-@ August , and playing the key role in relieving the siege of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge in December , a feat regarded as one of the most notable achievements in the war . The rapid offensive action and speed that Patton called for in the speech became actions which brought the Third Army wide acclaim in the campaign . 
 Historians acclaim the speech as one of Patton 's best works . Author Terry Brighton called it " the greatest motivational speech of the war and perhaps of all time , exceeding ( in its morale boosting effect if not as literature ) the words Shakespeare gave King Henry V at Agincourt . " Alan Axelrod contended it was the most famous of his many memorable quotes . 
 The speech became an icon of popular culture after the 1970 film Patton , which was about the general 's wartime exploits . The opening of the movie saw actor George C. Scott , as Patton , delivering a toned @-@ down version of the speech before an enormous American flag . It began with a version of Patton 's " No bastard ever won a war by dying for his country ... " quote . Scott 's iteration omitted much of the middle of the speech relating to Patton 's anecdotes about Sicily and Libya , as well as his remarks about the importance of every soldier to the war effort . In contrast to Patton 's humorous approach , Scott delivered the speech in an entirely serious , low and gruff tone . Still , Scott 's depiction of Patton in this scene is an iconic depiction of the General which earned Scott an Academy Award for Best Actor , and was instrumental in bringing Patton into popular culture as a folk hero . 
 In the 8th episode of Ken Burns ' PBS documentary The Civil War , Southern writer and historian , Shelby Foote makes reference to the opening scene in the film Patton , in particular to Patton 's quote , " Americans have never lost a war . " Foote states , " That ’ s a rather amazing statement for him to make as Patton because Patton ’ s grandfather was in Lee ’ s Army of Northern Virginia and he certainly lost a war . " 
 = Hilston Park = 
 Hilston Park is a country house and estate located between the villages of Newcastle and Skenfrith , in Monmouthshire , Wales , close to the border with Herefordshire , England . The house and park are situated in the Monnow valley , beside the B4347 road , 7 @.@ 9 miles ( 12 @.@ 7 km ) by road northwest of Monmouth and just over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) southwest of Skenfrith . 
 The Palladian mansion , built in 1838 for Bristolian banker George Cave , is a Grade II * listed building and the park 's flower meadow is a Site of Special Scientific Interest . The park includes two early 20th century lodges at both entrance gates , a ruined coach house , a lake and boathouse , a pond , and several streams , several gardens and areas of woodland , and Hilston Tower , a late 18th @-@ century folly made of red sandstone in the northeastern corner of the grounds . The house now serves as a residential outdoor education centre run by Gwent Outdoor Centres , an organisation jointly supported by the local authorities of Newport , Torfaen , Blaenau Gwent and Monmouthshire . 
 = = History = = 
 Hilston House was for many years the principal estate and mansion in the parish of St. <unk> . In the 17th and 18th centuries it was the residence of the Needham family , although Henry Milbourne , an important 17th century magistrate of the county , is also reported to have lived here at one time . Sebastian Needham is said to have been buried at Skenfrith , on 26 March 1723 , having fathered nine children . The house remained in the family , who were Catholic , for four generations . Following this stable period of ownership , accounting for about a century , the estate then changed hands a considerable number of times within the next 70 years . It was eventually sold by John Needham , a barrister of Grays Inn , to Sir William Pilkington when Needham moved to Somerset . Pilkington sold it to James Jones of the Graig , who sold it to Sir Robert Brownrigg , <unk> a distinguished officer in the Peninsula War . He died on 27 May 1833 , aged 76 years and his monument may be seen on the south wall of St. Maughan 's Church . After his death the house was sold to Thomas Coates of Lancashire . Shortly afterwards , on 12 September 1838 , the house was destroyed by fire . 
 It was then sold to George Cave , a banker of Bristol , who was responsible for building a new Palladian mansion which remains today . He sold it to Alfred Crawshay , who sold it to John Hamilton who finally completed the building . His son , Captain Pryce Hamilton , brother to Alice Mary Sinclair , seems to have added considerably to the Hilston Estate and it appears that he also purchased Norton Court from Henry Somerset , 8th Duke of Beaufort , and bought Skenfrith Mill and Lower Duffryn around 1870 . 
 Pryce Hamilton sold Hilston House in about 1873 to James Graham , High Sheriff of Monmouthshire in 1881 , who passed the house on to Douglas William Graham , who was living at Hilston in 1902 , when the hall was panelled with the oak from the hall of the Lower Duffryn . Graham was also responsible for other improvements , the stone and brick buildings at Home Farm , the Lodges , New Cottages and the reservoir . It was then owned for some time by the Lawley family , who had made their fortune in shipping and cotton in Manchester . In the 1930s , Hilston Park was the residence of Edmund Henry Bevan ( High Sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1912 ) , whose riches were by inheritance from the Portland cement made at Bevan Works in Northfleet , Kent . He married Joan Mary Conyers Norton , the eldest daughter of the 5th Baron Grantley , in the 1930s . 
 It was purchased by T. E. Davies in the 1940s , who sold the house and estate on 17 October 1947 . In the 1950s , the house was converted to a school . It became an outdoor education centre in 1971 . It continues today as a residential centre , operated since 1996 by Gwent Outdoor Education Service , a joint service supported by the four local authorities of Blaenau Gwent , Monmouthshire , Newport and Torfaen . It caters mainly for school and college students on organised visits , and hosts activities such as orienteering and archery , with other activities such as canoeing and caving at nearby sites . 
 = = Architecture and layout = = 
 = = = Grounds = = = 
 = = = = Gardens and lodges = = = = 
 Hilston House , which is situated in the western half of the park , has two entrances . The south drive " skirts the forecourt to the N and sweeps round southwards past the lake and straight to the B4347 " , and the main drive in tarmac , from the northwest , " drive winds through a wooded area to a level forecourt of grass with a rectangular tarmac area in front of the main entrance to the house . " Two early 20th century lodges are contained on the estate , one at the northern end of the front drive and the other to the south , on the B4347 . One of these , Lower Dyffryn , is an E @-@ shaped building of Early Tudor style , with a slate roof , three gables , and a projecting chimney @-@ breast . The coach @-@ house on the northeastern side of the drive was largely demolished in 1972 ; all that remains is its rear and side walls . 
 In the early 1920s , the estate was described as being 1 @,@ 050 acres ( 420 ha ) , and that there were 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of fishing along the River Monnow . The park 's flower meadow is a Site of Special Scientific Interest . Cadw cites the reason for it being listed as an SSSI in 1990 as " 19th @-@ century park and garden , with some well preserved features , including ornamental lake and folly tower " . Much of the park is under agricultural cultivation , and several streams arising from springs , mainly in the western side of the park flow through and enter the River Monnow . To the southeast of the house is an Italian rose garden which contains a circular stone pool and fountain . To the northeast of the house is a large walled kitchen garden , rectangular in shape , and framed by red brick walls , mostly 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in height , but 2 @.@ 2 metres ( 7 ft 3 in ) on the eastern side and 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) to the east of the door on the southern side . The kitchen garden is orientated in a southwest @-@ northeast direction , with a buttressed northern wall , two entrances on the western side , and one on each of the northern , eastern and southern walls . In the summer months it is used as a caravan park . The area to the north of the kitchen garden contains mainly ruined sheds and glasshouses and was wildly overgrown at the time of its surveying in December 1990 . 
 = = = = Lake = = = = 
 A lake and silted artificial pond is situated to the southwest of the house , separated by a belt of woodland consisting of mainly deciduous , coniferous trees and shrubs , and also pines , cypresses , monkey puzzle trees , copper beeches , yews and laurel trees . The lake , roughly 100 metres ( 330 ft ) at longest from north to south and roughly 60 metres ( 200 ft ) at its widest point , is cited by Cadw to be " fed by a spring at its [ north ] end , and dammed at its [ south ] end by a massive earthen dam across the valley floor . " The lake contains a " kidney @-@ shaped island " , framed by a sloping stone revetment wall , and a similar smaller island nearer the eastern shore . On the eastern side of the lake is a boathouse and grotto . The grotto is situated in the middle of a revetment wall of about 2 metres high built of large irregularly placed stones , and is characterised as a semi @-@ circular alcove , 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) in height , 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) in depth and 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) in width . 
 = = = = Hilston Tower = = = = 
 There is also a woodland , a former Forestry Commission plantation , planted around 1960 in the north @-@ eastern corner of the park on a small hill , which contains a circular folly tower , of three storeys , in the centre . The tower , built from red sandstone , is believed to date to the late 18th century . The northern side is considerably more eroded by the weather than the southern side . The tower is marginally wider at the base and has no internal floor structure , but contains holes for floor joists and stair treads . There are four windows on the ground floors and narrower windows higher up . 
 = = = House = = = 
 Much work was done on the house in the expectation of a visit by George IV , which never happened . The main building has been described as " a major early Victorian stuccoed classical mansion , about which little is known " . The two @-@ storeyed north front features nine bays , the outermost ones slightly recessed , with a central pedimented porte @-@ cochère of four massive Ionic columns . The southeast front has a single @-@ storey portico running the length of the front , which leads to a conservatory at the northeast end of the house . The architect is not known . The building was extended on its eastern side and its interior remodelled , around 1912 , when a large ballroom in the Arts and Crafts style , designed by Arthur Grove was added . This features elaborate plasterwork and decoration in the form of signs of the zodiac . It became a Grade II * listed building on 5 January 1952 . 
 = Gol Transportes Aéreos Flight 1907 = 
 Gol Transportes Aéreos Flight 1907 ( ICAO : GLO 1907 ) was a Boeing 737 @-@ <unk> , registration PR @-@ GTD , on a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Manaus , Brazil , to Rio de Janeiro . On 29 September 2006 , Local time 16 : 48 BRT , it collided in midair with an Embraer Legacy 600 business jet over the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso . All 154 passengers and crew aboard the Boeing 737 died when the aircraft broke up in midair and crashed into an area of dense jungle , while the Embraer Legacy , despite sustaining serious damage to its left wing and tail , landed safely with its seven occupants uninjured . 
 The accident , which triggered a crisis in Brazilian civil aviation , was the deadliest in that country 's aviation history at the time , surpassing <unk> Flight 168 , which crashed in 1982 with 137 fatalities near Fortaleza . It was subsequently surpassed by TAM Airlines Flight 3054 , which crashed on 17 July 2007 with 199 fatalities . It was also the first crash of a Boeing 737 @-@ 800 , and the deadliest aviation accident involving a Boeing 737 ( all series ) aircraft at that time , eventually surpassed by Air India Express Flight 812 , which crashed at Mangalore , India , on 22 May 2010 with 158 fatalities . 
 The accident was investigated by both the Brazilian Air Force 's Aeronautical Accidents Investigation and Prevention Center ( Portuguese : Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos ( CENIPA ) ) and the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) , with a final report issued on 10 December 2008 . CENIPA concluded that the accident was caused by errors committed both by air traffic controllers and by the American pilots on the delivery flight of the Embraer Legacy , while the NTSB determined that all pilots acted properly and were placed on a collision course by a variety of " individual and institutional " air traffic control errors . 
 = = Boeing aircraft and crew = = 
 The Gol Transportes Aéreos twin turbofan Boeing 737 @-@ <unk> aircraft , was a new Short Field Performance variant . It had made its first flight on August 22 , 2006 and been delivered to Gol on 12 September 2006 , less than 3 weeks before the accident , with 186 seats ( 36 Economy Plus and 150 Economy seats ) . Gol Flight 1907 ( ICAO code " GLO 1907 " ) departed Eduardo Gomes International Airport in Manaus on 29 September 2006 , at 15 : 35 Brazil Standard Time ( BST ) ( 18 : 35 UTC ) , en route to Rio de Janeiro @-@ Galeão International Airport , with a planned intermediate stop at Brasília International Airport . 
 There were 148 passengers and six crew members on board the Boeing airliner . The crew consisted of Captain <unk> Chaves Jr . , 44 , First Officer Thiago Jordão <unk> , 29 , and four flight attendants . The captain , who had also been serving as a Boeing 737 flight instructor for Gol , had 15 @,@ 498 total flight hours , with 13 @,@ 521 in Boeing 737 aircraft . The first officer had 3 @,@ 981 total flight hours , with 3 @,@ 081 in Boeing 737 aircraft . 
 There were 6 American , 3 Colombian , 4 French , 10 Argentine , 3 Australian , 2 South African , 5 Mexican , 4 Venezuelan , 1 Japanese , 2 Portuguese and 3 Canadian passengers on board . The remaining 111 occupants , including the 6 crew members , were Brazilian . 
 = = Embraer aircraft and crew = = 
 The twin turbofan Embraer Legacy 600 business jet , serial number 965 and registration N600XL , newly built by Embraer and purchased by ExcelAire Service Inc. of Ronkonkoma , New York , was on a delivery flight by ExcelAire from the Embraer factory to the U.S. It departed from São José dos Campos @-@ Professor Urbano Ernesto Stumpf Airport ( SJK ) , near São Paulo , at 14 : 51 BST , and was on its way to Eduardo Gomes International Airport ( MAO ) in Manaus as a planned en route stop . 
 The ExcelAire flight crew consisted of Captain Joseph Lepore , 42 , and First Officer Jan Paul Paladino , 34 , both U.S. citizens . Lepore had been a commercial pilot for more than 20 years and had logged 9 @,@ 388 total flight hours , with 5 @.@ 5 hours in the Legacy 600 . Paladino had been a commercial pilot for a decade and had accumulated more than 6 @,@ 400 flight hours , including 317 hours flying as captain of Embraer ERJ @-@ 145 and ERJ @-@ 135 jet aircraft for American Eagle Airlines . ( The ERJ @-@ 145 and ERJ @-@ 135 aircraft are regional jets of the same family as the Legacy . ) Paladino had also served as first officer for American Airlines , flying MD @-@ 82 , MD @-@ 83 and Boeing 737 @-@ 800 aircraft between the U.S. and Canada . Both pilots were legally qualified to fly the Embraer Legacy as captain . 
 The five passengers consisted of two Embraer employees , two ExcelAire executives , and The New York Times business travel columnist Joe Sharkey , who was writing a special report for Business Jet Traveler . 
 = = Collision = = 
 Just before 17 : 00 BST , the Boeing airliner and the Embraer business jet collided almost head @-@ on at 37 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , approximately midway between Brasilia and Manaus , near the town of <unk> , 750 kilometers ( 470 mi ) southeast of Manaus . The left winglet of the Embraer cut off about half of the Gol plane 's left wing . This caused the Boeing to nosedive and enter an uncontrollable spin , which quickly led to an in @-@ flight breakup and crash into an area of dense rainforest , 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) east of the municipality of Peixoto de Azevedo . All 154 passengers and crew on board died and the aircraft was destroyed , with the wreckage scattered in pieces around the crash site . 
 The Embraer jet , despite serious damage to the left horizontal stabilizer and left winglet , was able to continue flying , though its autopilot disengaged and it required an unusual amount of force on the yoke to keep the wings level . 
 With radio relay assistance from Polar Air Cargo Flight 71 , a Boeing 747 cargo aircraft flying in the area at the time , the Embraer 's crew successfully landed the crippled jet at Cachimbo Airport , part of Campo de <unk> <unk> <unk> , a large military complex of the Brazilian Air Force at about 160 kilometers ( 100 mi ) from the collision point . 
 Passenger and journalist Joe Sharkey described his experience aboard the Embraer in an article for The New York Times , titled " Colliding With Death at 37 @,@ 000 Feet , and Living " , filed on 1 October 2006 : 
 And it had been a nice ride . Minutes before we were hit , I had wandered up to the cockpit to chat with the pilots , who said the plane was flying beautifully . I saw the readout that showed our altitude : 37 @,@ 000 feet . I returned to my seat . Minutes later came the strike ( it sheared off part of the plane 's tail , too , we later learned ) . 
 = = Detention and charging of Embraer crew = = 
 Immediately after the Embraer 's emergency landing at the Cachimbo Airport , BAF and <unk> Nacional de <unk> Civil ( ANAC ) officials detained and interviewed its flight crew . The officials also removed the two " black boxes " — Cockpit Voice Recorder ( CVR ) and Flight Data Recorder ( FDR ) — from the Embraer , and sent them to São José dos Campos , São Paulo , and from there to Ottawa , Canada , for analysis . 
 In an initial deposition , the Embraer flight crew testified that they were cleared to flight level 370 , approximately 37 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) above mean sea level , by Brasilia ATC , and were level at that assigned altitude when the collision occurred . They also asserted that at the time of the collision they had lost contact with Brasilia ATC , and their anti @-@ collision system did not alert them to any oncoming traffic . 
 On 2 October 2006 , the Embraer 's captain and first officer were ordered by the Mato Grosso Justice Tribunal to surrender their passports pending further investigation . The request , made by the Peixoto de Azevedo prosecutor , was granted by judge Tiago Sousa Nogueira e Abreu , who stated that the possibility of pilot error on the part of the Embraer crew could not be ruled out . The Embraer crew were forced to remain in Brazil until their passports were released to them on 5 December 2006 , more than two months after the accident , after federal judge Candido Ribeiro ruled there were no legal grounds for " restricting the freedom of motion of the foreigners . " 
 Prior to their scheduled departure to the United States , the crew were formally charged by Brazilian Federal Police with " endangering an aircraft " , which carries a penalty of up to twelve years in prison . The pilots had to explain why they did not turn on the transponder . The two pilots were allowed to leave the country after signing a document promising to return to Brazil for their trial or when required by Brazilian authorities . They picked up their passports and flew back to the United States . 
 = = Search and recovery operation = = 
 The Brazilian Air Force sent five fixed @-@ wing aircraft and three helicopters to the region for an extensive search and rescue ( SAR ) operation . As many as 200 personnel were reported to be involved in the operation , among them a group of Kayapo people familiar with the forest . The crash site of Gol Flight 1907 was spotted on 30 September by the BAF , at coordinates 10 ° 29 ′ S 53 ° 15 ′ W , 200 km ( 120 mi ) east of Peixoto de Azevedo , near Fazenda <unk> , a cattle ranch . It was reported that rescue personnel had difficulty reaching the crash site due to the dense forest . The Brazilian airport administrator <unk> at first indicated the possibility of five survivors , but a later statement from the Brazilian Air Force , based on data collected by BAF personnel who rappelled ( abseiled ) to the crash site and local police who assisted in the SAR effort , confirmed that there were no survivors . Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva declared three days of national mourning . 
 The Flight Data Recorder and a non @-@ data part of the Cockpit Voice Recorder from the Boeing 737 were found on 2 October 2006 and handed over to the investigators , who sent them to the Transportation Safety Board of Canada ( TSB ) in Gatineau , Quebec , Canada , for analysis . On 25 October 2006 , after nearly four weeks of intensive searching in the jungle by about 200 Brazilian Army troops equipped with metal detectors , the memory module of the Boeing 's Cockpit Voice Recorder was finally found . The module was discovered intact , separated from other wreckage pieces , embedded in about 20 centimetres ( 8 in ) of soil , and was also sent for analysis by the TSB in Canada . 
 On 4 October , the recovery crews began moving the bodies to the temporary base established at the nearby <unk> ranch . The BAF deployed a C @-@ 115 Buffalo aircraft to transport the bodies to Brasília for identification . 
 The recovery teams worked intensively for nearly seven weeks in a dense jungle environment , searching for and identifying the victims ' remains . The final victim was recovered and identified by DNA testing by 22 November 2006 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The accident was investigated by the Brazilian Air Force Aeronautical Accidents Investigation and Prevention Center ( CENIPA ) and the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) . The NTSB , in accordance with the provisions of ICAO Annex 13 , participated in the investigation representing the state of manufacture of the Boeing , state of registry and operator of the Embraer , and state of manufacture of the Honeywell avionics equipment installed in both planes . 
 Once the black boxes and communication transcripts were obtained , the investigators interviewed the ExcelAire 's flight crew and the air traffic controllers , trying to piece together the scenario which allowed two modern jet aircraft , equipped with the latest anti @-@ collision gear , to collide with each other while on instrument flights in positive control airspace . 
 The Embraer 's flight plan consisted of flying at FL370 up to Brasilia , on airway <unk> , followed by a planned descent at Brasilia to <unk> , proceeding outbound from Brasilia northwest @-@ bound along airway UZ6 to the Teres fix , an aeronautical waypoint located 282 nmi ( 324 mi , 522 km ) northwest of Brasilia , where a climb to <unk> was planned . According to the filed flight plan , the Embraer was scheduled to have been level at <unk> , proceeding towards Manaus , while passing the eventual collision point , which was about 307 kilometres ( 191 mi ) northwest of Teres . 
 The ExcelAire 's crew asserted in their depositions and subsequent interviews that they were cleared by air traffic control ( ATC ) to FL370 for the entire trip , all the way to Manaus . The actual transcript of the clearance given to the Embraer 's crew prior to takeoff at São José dos Campos at 14 : 41 : 57 BST , as later released by CENIPA , was : 
 November Six Zero Zero X @-@ ray Lima , ATC clearance to Eduardo Gomes , flight level three seven zero direct <unk> de Caldas , squawk transponder code four five seven four , after take @-@ off perform Oren departure . 
 The Embraer 's crew 's altitude clearance to FL370 was further confirmed after their handoff to Brasilia , during which they had the following radio exchange with ATC at 15 : 51 BST : 
 This was the last two @-@ way radio communication between the Embraer 's crew and ATC prior to the collision . 
 = = = Embraer flight and communication sequence = = = 
 The Embraer took off from São José dos Campos at 14 : 51 , reaching FL370 at 15 : 33 , 42 minutes later , where it remained until the collision . 
 ATC maintained normal two @-@ way radio contact with the Embraer up until 15 : 51 , when the last successful radio exchange with the Embraer was made on VHF frequency 125 @.@ 05 MHz with Brasilia Center . At that point the Embraer was just approaching the Brasilia VOR . The Embraer overflew the Brasilia VOR at 15 : 55 , four minutes later , and proceeded northwest @-@ bound along UZ6 . At 16 : 02 , seven minutes after crossing the Brasilia VOR , secondary radar contact was lost with the Embraer , thus stopping the display of the Embraer 's reported altitude ( Mode C ) on the controller 's radar screen . 
 No attempt was made by either the Embraer or Brasilia Center to contact each other from 15 : 51 until 16 : 26 when , 24 minutes after the loss of secondary radar contact , Brasilia Center called the Embraer and received no reply . 
 Brasilia Center then unsuccessfully attempted to contact the Embraer six more times , between 16 : 30 and 16 : 34 . At 16 : 30 the Embraer 's primary radar target became intermittent , and disappeared completely from the radar screen by 16 : 38 , eight minutes later . Brasilia Center unsuccessfully attempted to effect a handoff of the Embraer to Amazonic Center at 16 : 53 , by calling the Embraer in the blind . 
 The Embraer , on the other hand , started calling Brasilia Center , also unsuccessfully , from 16 : 48 and continued with twelve more unsuccessful attempts until 16 : 53 . Some limited contact was made at that point , but the Embraer was unable to copy the Amazonic Center frequencies . The Embraer then continued its attempts to reach Brasilia Center , seven more times until the collision . 
 The collision occurred at 16 : 56 : 54 BST at FL370 , and it was confirmed that neither Traffic Collision Avoidance System ( TCAS ) system had activated or alerted its respective crew , nor did any crew see the oncoming traffic visually or initiate any evasive action prior to the collision . While both planes were equipped with TCAS , it was later determined that the Embraer 's transponder had ceased operating almost an hour earlier , at 16 : 02 , rendering both planes unable to automatically detect each other . 
 At 16 : 59 : 50 , about three minutes after the collision , Amazonic Center started to receive the Embraer 's secondary radar reply , with its correct altitude and last assigned code . At 17 : 00 : 30 Amazonic Center unsuccessfully attempted to contact the Embraer by radio . 
 The Embraer started calling on the emergency frequency , 121 @.@ 5 MHz , immediately after the collision , but as it was later determined in the CENIPA report , the emergency transceivers in the area were not operational and thus the crew was unable to reach ATC on that frequency . 
 At 17 : 01 : 06 the Embraer established contact on the emergency frequency with a Boeing 747 cargo aircraft , Polar 71 , which attempted to relay to ATC their request for an emergency landing , and continued to provide relay and translation assistance to the Embraer until its eventual landing . 
 At 17 : 18 : 03 the Embraer contacted the Cachimbo Airport ( <unk> ) tower directly to coordinate its emergency landing there , and landed safely at Cachimbo at 17 : 23 : 00 . 
 = = = Gol 1907 flight and communication sequence = = = 
 Gol 1907 took off from Manaus at 15 : 35 , flying southeast @-@ bound along UZ6 and reaching FL370 at 15 : 58 , 23 minutes later , where it remained until the collision . There were no radio or radar contact problems with the flight until its handoff to Brasilia Center . There were no known attempts by ATC to warn Flight 1907 of the conflicting traffic . 
 = = = NTSB Safety Recommendation = = = 
 On 2 May 2007 , the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) issued a Safety Recommendation document that included an interim summary of the investigation to date , as well as some immediate safety recommendations that the NTSB believes should be implemented by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) to enhance flight safety . The NTSB reported that the Embraer apparently experienced a Traffic Collision Avoidance System ( TCAS ) outage , unknown to its flight crew prior to the collision , according to the Cockpit Voice Recorder ( CVR ) : 
 Preliminary findings in the ongoing investigation indicate that , for reasons yet to be determined , the collision avoidance system in the Legacy airplane was not functioning at the time of the accident , thereby disabling the system 's ability to detect and be detected by conflicting traffic . In addition , CVR data indicate that the flight crew was unaware that the collision avoidance system was not functioning until after the accident . 
 The NTSB added that the design of the Embraer 's avionics is such that the non @-@ functioning of the TCAS that apparently occurred is shown by a small static white text message , which may not be noticeable by the flight crew . The NTSB noted : 
 Using only static text messages to indicate a loss of collision avoidance system functionality is not a reliable means to capture pilots ' attention because these visual warnings can be easily overlooked if their attention is directed elsewhere in the flight environment . 
 Based on its observations , the NTSB recommended to the FAA that design changes be implemented to improve the <unk> of TCAS annunciation , and that the FAA advise pilots of all aircraft to become more familiar with the details of this accident , potential loss of transponder and / or TCAS function , and how to recognize them . 
 = = Final reports = = 
 = = = CENIPA = = = 
 On 10 December 2008 , more than two years after the accident , the Aeronautical Accidents Investigation and Prevention Center ( CENIPA ) issued its final report , describing its investigation , findings , conclusions and recommendations . The CENIPA report includes a " Conclusions " section that summarizes the known facts and lists a variety of contributing factors relating to both air traffic controllers and the ExcelAire 's flight crew . According to CENIPA , the air traffic controllers contributed to the accident by originally issuing an improper clearance to the Embraer , and not catching or correcting the mistake during the subsequent handoff to Brasilia Center or later on . CENIPA also found errors in the way the controllers handled the loss of radar and radio contact with the Embraer . 
 CENIPA concluded that the ExcelAire pilots also contributed to the accident with , among others , their failure to recognize that their transponder was inadvertently switched off , thereby disabling the collision avoidance system on both aircraft , as well as their overall insufficient training and preparation . 
 = = = NTSB = = = 
 The U.S. NTSB issued its own report on the accident , which was also appended to the CENIPA report with the following Probable Cause statement : 
 The evidence collected during this investigation strongly supports the conclusion that this accident was caused by N600XL and <unk> following ATC clearances which directed them to operate in opposite directions on the same airway at the same altitude resulting in a midair collision . The loss of effective air traffic control was not the result of a single error , but of a combination of numerous individual and institutional ATC factors , which reflected systemic shortcomings in emphasis on positive air traffic control concepts . 
 The NTSB further added the following contributing factors : 
 Contributing to this accident was the undetected loss of functionality of the airborne collision avoidance system technology as a result of the inadvertent inactivation of the transponder on board N600XL . Further contributing to the accident was inadequate communication between ATC and the N600XL flight crew . 
 = = = Conflicting CENIPA and NTSB conclusions = = = 
 While agreeing on most basic facts and findings , CENIPA and NTSB , which collaborated in the accident investigation , arrived at disagreeing interpretations and conclusions . The CENIPA report concludes the accident was caused by mistakes made both by air traffic controllers and by the ExcelAire pilots , whereas the NTSB focuses on the controllers and the ATC system , concluding that both flight crews acted properly but were placed on a collision course by the air traffic controllers . 
 According to Aviation Week , " the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) strongly disagreed with the Brazilian conclusions regarding the Legacy pilots ' actions as a causal factor , noting , ' The crew flew the route precisely as cleared and complied with all ATC instructions , ' as did the <unk> airlines crew . " Aviation Week adds that " the Brazilian military operates that country 's air traffic control system , conducted the investigation and authored the report . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Aviation crisis = = = 
 The crash of Flight 1907 precipitated a major crisis in Brazil 's civil aviation system , which included massive flight delays and cancellations , air traffic controller work @-@ to @-@ rule slowdowns and strikes , and public safety concerns about Brazil 's airport and air traffic infrastructure . 
 Historically , Brazil was ruled by its armed forces from 1964 until 1985 . Since then , a civilian government has taken over , but the country 's airways ( as of 2009 ) continued to be controlled and operated by the Brazilian Air Force ( BAF ) and run by generals , overseen by a civilian defense minister . Most of Brazil 's air traffic controllers are military non @-@ commissioned officers , and all Area Control Centers are run by the BAF . 
 In October 2006 , as details surrounding the crash of Flight 1907 began to emerge , the investigation seemed to be at least partly focused on possible air traffic control errors . This led to increasing resentment by the controllers and exacerbated their already poor labor relations with their military superiors . The controllers complained about being overworked , underpaid , overstressed , and forced to work with outdated equipment . Many have poor English skills , limiting their ability to communicate with foreign pilots , which played a role in crash of Flight 1907 . In addition , the military 's complete control of the country 's aviation was criticized for its lack of public accountability . 
 Amid rising tensions , the air traffic controllers began staging a series of work actions , including slowdowns , walkouts , and even a hunger strike . This led to chaos in Brazil 's aviation industry : major delays and disruptions in domestic and international air service , stranded passengers , canceled flights , and public demonstrations . Those who blamed various civilian and military officials for the growing crisis called for their resignation . 
 On 26 July 2007 , after an even deadlier crash in Brazil ( TAM Airlines Flight 3054 on 17 July 2007 ) claimed the lives of 199 people , President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva fired his defense minister , <unk> Pires , who had been in charge of the country 's aviation infrastructure and safety since March 2006 , and was widely criticized for their failures . On the same day , Lula appointed former Supreme Court president Nelson Jobim to replace Pires , and vowed to improve Brazil 's air traffic control system . 
 = = = Legal action = = = 
 = = = = Civil litigation = = = = 
 On 6 November 2006 , the families of ten of the deceased filed a lawsuit for negligence against ExcelAire and Honeywell , alleging that the ExcelAire pilots were flying at an " incorrect altitude " and that the Honeywell transponder was not functioning at the time of the collision . Other suits were subsequently filed on behalf of other victims , with similar allegations against ExcelAire and Honeywell . The victims ' families also filed suits against other U.S. based defendants , including the two Embraer pilots , as well as Raytheon , Lockheed Martin and Amazon Tech ( manufacturers of Brazil 's air traffic control equipment ) , and <unk> ( manufacturer of the Embraer 's TCAS ) . 
 The attorney representing the Embraer crew , Miami @-@ based Robert <unk> , responded to the allegation that the crew was flying at an " incorrect altitude " by stating that according to international regulations , clearances and directives issued by ATC supersede a previously filed flight plan , and in this case : 
 ... the flight plan cleared by air traffic control at the time of departure required the Embraer to fly all the way to Manaus at 37 @,@ 000 feet and , absent contrary directives from air traffic control , the Embraer was obligated to follow its cleared flight plan . As the findings of the investigation are made public , we are confident that ExcelAire 's pilots will be exonerated . 
 A Honeywell spokesperson stated that " Honeywell is not aware of any evidence that indicates that its transponder on the Embraer Legacy was not functioning as designed or that Honeywell was responsible for the accident . " 
 On 2 July 2008 , U.S. District Court judge Brian Cogan of the Eastern District of New York dismissed the families ' suits against all the U.S. based defendants under the premise of forum non @-@ <unk> . Without ruling on the merits of the cases , and while allowing discovery to continue , Cogan recommended the Brazilian court system as a more appropriate jurisdiction for the dispute . 
 = = = = Criminal proceedings = = = = 
 On 1 June 2007 , Murilo Mendes , a Brazilian federal judge in the small city of Sinop , Mato Grosso , near the crash site of the Boeing , indicted the two Embraer pilots and four Brasilia @-@ based air traffic controllers for " exposing an aircraft to danger . " On 8 December 2008 , he dismissed charges of negligence against the pilots , but left in place a charge of " imprudence " . He also dismissed all charges against two of the four Brasilia @-@ based controllers and reduced the charges against the other two , but supported bringing new charges against a fifth controller , based in São José dos Campos , the Embraer 's departure point . On 12 January 2010 , his ruling was overturned by Judge Candido Ribeiro in a federal court in Brasilia , reinstating the negligence charges against the pilots . 
 On 26 October 2010 , a military court convicted air traffic controller Sgt. <unk> Fernandes dos Santos , sentencing him to 14 months in jail for failing to take action when he saw that the Embraer 's anti @-@ collision system had been turned off . Santos will remain free pending the outcome of the appeal process . Four other controllers were acquitted for lack of proof . On 17 May 2011 , Judge Mendes sentenced air traffic controller <unk> Tiburcio de Alencar to a term of up to three years and four months but ruled he is eligible to do community service in Brazil instead and acquitted Santos on charges of harming Brazil 's air transport safety . 
 On 16 May 2011 , Judge Mendes sentenced the two pilots to four years and four months of prison in a " semi @-@ open " facility for their role in the collision , but he commuted the sentences to community service to be served in the United States . Brazilian authorities accused the pilots of turning off the Legacy 's transponder moments before the accident and turning it on again only after the crash , but it was denied by the crew in a deposition via videoconference . Mendes said in his sentence that pilots had failed to verify the functioning of equipment for more than an hour , a length of time he called " an eternity " in aviation . On 9 October 2012 , Brazilian federal prosecutors announced that they had successfully appealed the sentence of the pilots , asking to increase their sentences by 17 months ( a total of 5 years and 9 months ) . The new trial was scheduled for 15 October , with the pilots again facing trial in absentia . On that date , the court upheld the prior convictions , but modified the sentences to 37 months for each , requiring that the pilots " report regularly to authorities and stay home at night . " 
 = = = Survivor aircraft = = = 
 N600XL remained impounded at Cachimbo for almost three years , but in mid @-@ 2009 American company General Aviation Services agreed to buy the aircraft . The company partnered with Gantt Aviation and Constant Aviation to check and prepare it for its ferry to the US . Constant completed the work and finally on 19 November 2010 ( more than 4 years after the accident ) the aircraft , now with the new registration of <unk> , arrived at Cleveland International Airport to be refurbished and put up for sale . 
 The plane was reported to be on sale in March 2011 , even though repairs to the left wingtip and stabilizer were still being completed in August 2011 . The plane was then sold to a private owner in 2013 registered XA @-@ MHA . 
 = = = Dramatization = = = 
 In 2007 Discovery Channel Brazil aired A <unk> do <unk> 1907 ( " The Tragedy of Flight 1907 " ) , a documentary about the disaster . The Association Family and Friends of Victims in Flight 1907 stated that the documentary exhibited bias on behalf of the Legacy pilots . 
 The crash was the subject of a Season 5 episode of Mayday ( also known as Air Crash Investigation ) entitled Phantom Strike ( also titled Death Over the Amazon and Radio Silence ) . 
 The Smithsonian Channel 's " Air Disasters " documentary series , featured this accident in the second season 's third episode titled " System Breakdown " , released in 2011 . Available on Netflix as of Oct. 2015 . 
 = Love Ballad ( Tove Lo song ) = 
 " Love Ballad " is a song by Swedish recording artist and songwriter Tove Lo . It was co @-@ written by Lo , Ludvig Söderberg and Jakob Jerlström , and was produced by her co @-@ writers under their production name The Struts . In 2012 , after signing a publishing deal with Warner / Chappell Music and co @-@ writing songs for artists including Girls Aloud and Icona Pop , Lo decided to become an independent singer to keep her most personal songs for herself . She eventually released her debut single " Love Ballad " to Swedish radio stations on 15 October 2012 . It was digitally released on 5 November 2012 . The track was later included on Lo 's debut extended play Truth Serum and her debut studio album Queen of the Clouds , both of which were released in 2014 . 
 " Love Ballad " is a pop song with drum instrumentation ; its lyrics detail the protagonist 's exaggerated ways to show affection to a romantic partner . Critics described it as an " ode to falling dangerously in love with someone " and a parody of love songs . The song drew the attention of music blogs and received positive reviews from some critics but failed to chart anywhere . A music video for the song , which was directed by <unk> Film and Lo , was released on 5 October 2012 . It shows the singer covered in black paint and performing acrobatics in the middle of a road and on a football field . Lo performed the track several times , including on the Swedish campaign Musikhjälpen and at Notting Hill Arts Club in London , United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After the dissolution of her band <unk> , Tove Lo focused on writing songs and she signed a publishing deal with Warner / Chappell Music in 2011 . In the following year , she co @-@ wrote " Something New " for Girls Aloud , and " We Got the World " and " Ready for the Weekend " for Icona Pop . After she signed the publishing deal , she felt " lost " and unsure of her identity . She was also going through a difficult time during a relationship , which led her to write songs that were not related to her life . However , at one point , she " couldn 't handle it anymore " and needed to write a personal song . Lo then co @-@ wrote " Love Ballad " with Ludvig Söderberg and Jakob Jerlström ; it was their first collaboration . Söderberg and Jerlström also produced the track under their production name The Struts . According to Lo , an artist became interested in recording the song but considered it " too brutal " and wanted to change some of the lyrics . Because of this , Lo kept the song for herself . She said that after co @-@ writing " Love Ballad " , she started to write songs " that I felt I needed to get out of me " . 
 Lo eventually self @-@ released " Love Ballad " as her first single . It was sent to Swedish radio station P3 on 15 October 2012 . It was digitally released on 5 November 2012 . The song drew the attention of music blogs , which led Lo to start a career as a independent singer so she could record her most personal songs . " Love Ballad " was later featured on the Nordic edition of Lo 's debut extended play Truth Serum ( 2014 ) and as a bonus track on the Noth American version of her debut studio album Queen of the Clouds ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Inspiration and composition = = 
 " Love Ballad " is an uptempo pop song featuring drum instrumentation . According to Lo , the songs on her extended play Truth Serum are about her " most intense " failed relationship . She stated , " In its entirety , [ Truth Serum tells ] a love story from beginning to end . The song ' Love Ballad ' is about the moment you decide to give everything to another person , while ' Habits ' shows what happens when everything is screwed up and you just want to freak out . ' Out of Mind ' deals with the stage after that , when your broken heart has mended , but the scars are still there " . In an interview with Klap Magazine , Lo said , " ' Love Ballad ' is actually supposed to be a way of telling the one I love I 'd do anything for him . He 's worth the pain . A bit exaggerated but that 's what it feels like when you 're so into someone " . According to Rich Thane of The Line of Best Fit , the track details the " carefree beginnings of a new romance " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian described the song as an " ode to falling dangerously in love with someone " . Cragg also said the singer is " willing to share her drugs " with her lover in the verse " Jump off a cliff / I 'd give you my last spliff / I 'd do it for you / Ain 't love sweet ? " . According to Mark Savage of BBC News , the track " parodies the preposterous promises " made by musicians in love songs ; he cited the line " Chop off my hands / Chop off my feet / I 'd do it for you / Ain 't love sweet ? " as an example . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Love Ballad " received positive reviews by some critics . Doron Davidson @-@ <unk> of The Line of Best Fit called it an " infectious debut single " , while a reviewer from <unk> wrote that the song is " rousingly melodic in both its production and its topline " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian said Lo had started her career " in fine style " with the song . A reviewer for Nu Wave Pony described it as a " lyrically obsessive and heart @-@ wrenching pop song " and said that " it plays like a catchy summer song " . Richard S. Chang of <unk> ranked it at number four on his top 5 of the Best Tove Lo songs . Writing for Discopop , Mark Savage said that " Love Ballad " is superior to " Stay High " , the remixed version of " Habits ( Stay High ) " . 
 Despite the positive reviews and its popularity among music blogs , " Love Ballad " failed to chart anywhere . In an interview with Gulf Times , Lo said she thought the song 's poor commercial reception was due to her change of stage name . She stated , " [ ' Love Ballad ' ] didn 't sell particularly well . I 'd used my real name , Tove Nilsson , when I was in <unk> so perhaps no @-@ one knew who I was " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Love Ballad " was co @-@ directed by Tove Lo and <unk> Film . Lo also wrote the video 's script ; she said : " Imagine sitting on a football field in the dark , freezing , after seven hours , covered only in black house paint , trying to put on fake eyelashes ! " . MTV Sweden premiered the video on 5 October 2012 , and Lo released it on her YouTube channel on 8 October 2012 . The video begins with Lo covered in black paint and walking in the middle of a road . In the next scene , she covers four men , who go to play rugby on a football field , in paint . Later , Lo is shown walking upside @-@ down and performing other acrobatics on the road and the football field . Then , she appears wearing a hibiscus dress while singing the song in a rubbish dump . In the next scenes , Lo is walking topless through a field of flowers . Near the end , she is standing on the football field while the four men run up to her and cover her in paint . The video is interspersed with scenes of Lo performing the song with images of cities and explosions projected onto her . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On 10 December 2012 , Lo performed " Love Ballad " and " Paradise " on the Swedish campaign Musikhjälpen . On 10 April 2013 , she performed " Love Ballad " , " Habits ( Stay High ) " , " Out of Mind " and " Not Made For This World " at Swedish radio station P3 . Lo performed " Love Ballad " alongside other songs from Truth Serum and " Run On Love " during her first UK show at Notting Hill Arts Club , London , on 2 April 2014 . For the performance , she was accompanied by two drummers . A reviewer from Discopop said he was " blown away " and that it was " so refreshing to be at a pop show that engages the heart as well as the senses " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian rated the show with four stars out of five and deemed it as " a punchy UK debut " . Lo performed the same set list at her Hoxton Square Bar & Kitchen show on 6 May 2014 . 
 On 1 October 2014 , Lo performed " Love Ballad " and other songs at Webster Hall in Manhattan , New York City . On 30 March 2015 , she held a concert at <unk> in London , UK , and performed the track among others from Truth Serum and Queen of the Clouds . Amelia Maher of London In Stereo wrote , " With the opening bars to ' Over ' and ' Love Ballad ' there is something different in [ Lo 's ] tone as she carelessly lays her soul bare for all to see and reveals that she isn 't just a raunchy one trick pony " . On 14 August 2015 , Lo performed the song at the Way Out West festival in Gothenburg , Sweden . On 11 September 2015 , she held a concert at the Deutsches Theater in Berlin , Germany , and performed " Love Ballad " and tracks from Truth Serum and Queen of the Clouds . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Truth Serum . 
 Locations 
 Recorded at Warner / Chappell Studios , Stockholm 
 Mastered at Cutting Room , Stockholm 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Tove Lo , Jakob Jerlström , Ludvig Söderberg 
 Production – The Struts 
 Lead vocals – Tove Lo 
 Mixing – Lars <unk> 
 Programming – The Struts 
 Mastering – Björn Engelmann 
 Instrumentation – The Struts 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Everything That Happens Will Happen Today = 
 Everything That Happens Will Happen Today is the second album made in collaboration between David Byrne and Brian Eno , released on August 18 , 2008 , by Todo Mundo . The album explores themes of humanity versus technology and optimism in spite of bleak circumstance through the blending of electronic and gospel music . Critical reception was largely positive and the album received awards for both the musical content as well as the packaging and technical production . 
 This album is the first joint effort between the two musicians since 1981 's My Life in the Bush of Ghosts and Eno 's work producing and co @-@ writing with Talking Heads . Byrne and Eno worked on the tracks in their home studios throughout 2007 and early 2008 and sent digital copies of the recordings to one another over e @-@ mail . The single " Strange Overtones " was released for free to promote the album and Byrne toured through 2008 and 2009 , performing songs from this release as well as the duo 's previous collaborations . This tour was later documented with the live extended play Everything That Happens Will Happen on This Tour – David Byrne on Tour : Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno and the concert film Ride , Rise , Roar . 
 Everything That Happens Will Happen Today was released with a marketing strategy that involved Byrne creating the vanity label Todo Mundo and hiring Internet startup company Topspin Media to promote the album online using word @-@ of @-@ mouth and Internet sales to market the music . Several formats were created to allow users to have options on how to listen to the music — from free streaming audio to a deluxe package housed in a tin . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 2007 , David Byrne announced on the BBC Radio music show The Weekender that he was working with former collaborator Brian Eno on a brand new album of " proper songs , " describing it as a " completely different thing " from the experimental My Life in the Bush of Ghosts . While the two were discussing the 2006 re @-@ release of that album at a dinner party , Eno suggested adding lyrics and vocals to some of his unfinished songs , some of which were eight years old . The duo did not initially plan on making an entire album , but eventually felt confident enough to finish a full collection of songs . Although the two had discussed making an album together for several years , this was their first sincere effort since the early 1980s . 
 Byrne visited Eno 's London studio to listen to the demos and the two decided to collaborate to finish writing the songs , leaving Eno and Peter Chilvers to convert a variety of digital music formats into MIDI , thereby stripping out extraneous information and making them suitable for Byrne to embellish . ( Chilvers would be thanked in the liner notes for " Digital Archaeology " . ) The two continued to work on this and other musical projects for several months and agreed that if the project was not enjoyable , they would abandon it . The duo decided to not announce their new collaboration for fear that they may not complete an album 's worth of new material , or that they would end up re @-@ treading their previous collaborations and decide against releasing the new songs . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Eno had several musical compositions , but could not write lyrics to accompany them , whereas Byrne had several lyrics with no accompaniment . Eno wanted to make the vocals the " central event " of the music by pairing gospel singing with unexpected electronic music that also included elements of West African music . The songwriting 's emphasis on vocals was partially inspired by Phillip <unk> . In late 2007 , Byrne took a Compact Disc of stereo mixes of the demos from Eno and spent a year trying to write lyrics to finish the songs , attempting to balance the simple chords that Eno had written with the more complex ones Byrne prefers . Although it was uncharacteristic for Eno , many of the songs were written on acoustic guitar , with the help of Steinberg Cubase . The musicians exchanged Eno 's demos with the lyrics and vocal melodies completed by Byrne over e @-@ mail and by June 2008 , 14 songs had been recorded . Eno initially gave positive feedback , which encouraged Byrne to continue writing and only became critical as the project was finishing . Toward the end of the recording , Eno sent increasingly challenging tracks to see if Byrne could complete them — the final two ended up on the album as " I Feel My Stuff " and " Poor Boy " . 
 At the outset , Byrne was hesitant to add lyrics to the tracks because they sounded too much like folk music . He characterized the process as very slow and full of trepidation , in part because of expectations from their previous collaboration and also due to the strict division of labor they had between writing instrumentation and vocalization . Eno only provided a few vocal demos and suggested simple changes like adding an extra verse . Byrne made minimal changes to the instrumentation on several tracks and avoided changing chords in the melody to suit his singing style . The duo only worked in the studio together on two occasions , including one full week and a weekend on another occasion and neither partner got a veto in the process of track selection or production . According to Byrne , the main challenge in this writing technique " was more emotional than technical : to write simple heartfelt tunes without drawing on cliché . " 
 He later explained , " In a nutshell , Brian wrote most of the music , and I composed most of the vocal melodies and lyrics , and then sang them . " If Byrne 's vocal harmonies were radical enough , Eno would revise the instrumentation to accompany it , but Byrne avoided writing instrumentation and chose to adapt to the instrumentals as written . Using a style similar to the Talking Heads album Speaking in Tongues , Byrne <unk> and murmured some lyrics before they were completed , due to Byrne 's preference for the sonic quality of lyrics rather than their literal meaning and his method of writing lyrics using free association . In composing lyrics for the album , Byrne attempted to write keeping in mind what would please Eno as his collaborator . He also attempted to write harmonies for Eno , who decided against singing any lead vocals on the album . Eno does perform backing vocals throughout the album , which he credits on one track as " inhuman piano " 
 Both musicians continued to work on their own projects during the composition of Everything That Happens Will Happen Today . Byrne conducted the second season of Big Love and completed his collaborations with Fatboy Slim on the album and musical Here Lies Love and the single " Toe Jam " . Eno produced Coldplay 's Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends and U2 's No Line on the Horizon . Byrne and Eno discussed the former 's collaboration with Fatboy Slim and Chris Martin of Coldplay wrote lyrics to the instrumental track for " One Fine Day " , but acquiesced when he heard Byrne 's version ( the band would also adapt another one of Eno 's instrumental compositions that Byrne did not finish into a track on Viva la Vida ) . Once Byrne 's version of " One Fine Day " was finished , the two began in earnest writing the rest of the tracks . Byrne initially had a long delay in writing material , but as the project progressed , he got to working several hours a day on the album and put his collaboration with Fatboy Slim on hold to finish the songs in the early part of 2008 . Since the two did not work together face @-@ to @-@ face as they had in the past , it was harder for them to complete material quickly , and they had to rush to complete two of the tracks were finished at the end of the sessions . He later described the process as easy once details were sort out and summed up this method as " pure joy " and declared writing collaboratively to be easier than writing solo . He even credited the time between their last collaboration and the transatlantic distance as a strength , since it allowed the two to keep their own schedules . Eno agreed , as it gave him time to focus on a small piece of music without holding up Byrne 's progress . Byrne later used a similar approach through 2010 and 2011 in collaborations with St. Vincent ( Love This Giant ) and Will Oldham ( the soundtrack to This Must Be the Place ) . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 The two were inspired by gospel music and both have described their music as " electronic gospel " — in particular the tracks " Life Is Long " and " One Fine Day " . In addition to subtle Biblical themes in the lyrics , Eno was influenced by gospel musicality , which he initially discovered through Talking Heads while working on More Songs About Buildings and Food by listening to " Surrender to His Will " by Reverend Maceo Woods and The Christian Tabernacle Choir . For several years leading up to this project , Eno had primarily listened to gospel music — even joining a gospel choir — and was attracted to the music 's unrestrained vocals and lack of pessimism as well as its inclusive nature . Eno had been thinking about gospel for several years , but could not write lyrics to hopeful songs . 
 While Byrne considers the music " [ un ] like any contemporary gospel record that you would hear out there , " it is " informed by that feeling and those kind of lyrics , which allude to hope in the face of despair . " Eno also considers the album " something that combines something very human and fallible and personal , with something very electronic and mathematical sometimes . " The music combines electronic and gospel influences to " make that picture of the human still trying to survive in an increasingly complicated digital world ... It 's quite easy to make just digital music and it 's quite easy to make just human music , but to try and make a combination is sort of , exciting , I think . " Tracks such as " My Big Nurse " combine apocalypticism and comfort , blending hopefulness and despair . 
 The instrumental demos were primarily written in major chords , which Byrne considered slightly " ominous " and surprising from Eno . In spite of this , Byrne 's lyrics ended up being hopeful and spiritual , with themes of redemption — what he considers " optimism in spite of the dread . " The tension between optimism and pessimism and the spiritual themes quickly emerged over the course of a year in which Byrne was writing lyrics , which he has speculated might be an antidote to being " completely pessimistic and cynical about politics and the state of the world ; " for instance , " The River " is about the effects of Hurricane Katrina . He has also cited the political climate of the Iraq War , the beginning of the late @-@ 2000s recession , the policies of the George W. Bush administration , and his 2004 divorce from Adelle Lutz as factors that inspired him to create uplifting music . As he explained , " I was surprised that 's what came out ... The tracks are very different from what I would have done myself . I lean toward things that are more complicated . " Eno also thinks the album is much better than the songs he imagined when composing them solo . 
 Eno has also said the album is about " paint [ ing ] a picture of the human trying to survive in an increasingly digital world " and Byrne considered his job as lyricist to " bring more humanity " to Eno 's instrumentals , which can be " cold and academic . " Themes of humanity struggling with technology are apparent on several tracks and Byrne has characterized the " overall vibe " of the album as " We 're going to get through this . Humanity will prevail . " The lyrical content includes " a sinister inflection " but " many songs feel fairly uplifting and the overall tone is hopeful . " Byrne focused on mundane events and attempted to write in a style that was " simple but not corny , basic but heartfelt . " His inspiration in writing lyrics for " One Fine Day " was the story of Valentino <unk> Deng as told in Dave Eggers ' What Is the What — the two are thanked in the liner notes and Byrne had previously performed at a fundraiser for Eggers ' 826 Valencia . The story of the Lost Boys of Sudan is emblematic of the spiritual themes of the album as they go through " all kinds of unrelenting horrors , but [ are ] eternally hopeful and even cheerful , in a way that defies all logic . " The music on this album also expresses homesickness — a lyrical trend that is apparent in Byrne 's work with Talking Heads . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 By March 2008 , the duo had recruited Seb Rochford to play drums with Byrne in New York City . Later that month , multi @-@ instrumentalist and previous Eno collaborator Leo Abrahams was enlisted to perform guitar , percussion instruments , and piano in his London home studio . Abrahams and Rochford would continue working on the tracks in Abrahams ' studio through May and their work was e @-@ mailed to other collaborators — Byrne attended one session to play guitar . Other musicians worked with Byrne in New York City and Eno in London , such as frequent Byrne collaborator Mauro <unk> , Eno 's daughters Darla and <unk> , and Jarvis Cocker of Pulp , who added uncredited guitar in London . The duo attempted to record as much of the music from home studios as possible and played almost all instrumentation themselves , saving the drums and percussion for the studio . In addition to the tracks that were released , the musicians had some other instrumentals that Byrne did not complete . 
 Speaking at an April 2008 event in New York , Byrne confirmed the release of a new album , calling it a " record of sung songs " in contrast to the experimental music from My Life in the Bush of Ghosts and later told the New York Daily News that " Brian had written a lot of music , but needed some words , which I know how to do . What 's it sound like ? Electronic gospel . That 's all I 'm saying . " Eno also explained the differences between this album and their previous one saying , " [ T ] his is quite different from My Life in that the intention of that album was to not use our voices at all , but instead to find voices and stick them on to the music . This new one is different — these are songs written and sung by David ... They go from electronic folk gospel to quite indefinable areas of music . " 
 Throughout the middle of the year , Abrahams recorded drums at his home studio and <unk> <unk> recorded more at Cafe Music Studios , while Robert Harder at Harder Sound recorded the drums on " My Big Nurse " , " Never Thought " , " The Painting " , and " Life Is Long " . Abrahams collected all of the recordings to have them mixed and Byrne booked tour dates in anticipation of completing the album . Mixing continued through June 2008 in New York by previous Byrne collaborator Patrick <unk> at <unk> Studios , who recorded brass and percussion . They e @-@ mailed the mixes to Eno for final approval and sent the finalized audio to Greg Calbi at Sterling Sound for mastering . On July 28 , 2008 , details of the album became public knowledge when Byrne posted on his blog that he and Eno had finished the new album and it would be released on August 18 . The album website was launched on the same day , with a promotional video of Byrne introducing the new album . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The physical releases of the album came with graphics and packaging designed by Stefan Sagmeister with Richard The , Joe <unk> , and Jared Stone ; illustration by Stephan Walter ; and production by Gamil Design . Sagmeister had earlier received a Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package Grammy in 2005 for art direction on the Talking Heads ' Once in a Lifetime box set and also designed the cover to Byrne 's Feelings . This album would also win a Grammy in 2010 for Best Record Packaging and was additionally recognized by Creative Review . 
 His inspiration for the packaging was based on the song " Home " and the artwork reflects an urban scene of a house by a roadside ; the liner notes provide closeups on the home and the artwork on the Compact Disc is the grass from the lawn . Sagmeister proceeded to create not only an image for the cover , but an entire three @-@ dimensional model for the house , which was later released as the deluxe edition packaging . Upon repeated listenings to the album , he became convinced that there was a sinister element to the setting and provided clues to the " dark edge " of the scene , such as a discarded condom wrapper in the gutter , a man looking out the window with binoculars , and a gasoline canteen in the kitchen . 
 The deluxe package comes in a tin with a microchip that plays a sound of someone walking down a hallway in the house and slamming a door when the package is opened . The urban themes of the packaging are expanded in this edition , with the album entitled " Stick " and the bonus content " Rock " ; discs are designed to look like they are covered in grass . This design of a pixelated , <unk> projection domestic scene has been compared to The Sims . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was self @-@ released on August 18 , 2008 , exclusively through the album 's website . It was made available there free for streaming and for purchase as a download of DRM @-@ free MP3s . The duo released the album from other online digital music services starting the following month , including 7digital , Amazon MP3 , eMusic , the iTunes Store , Napster , and the Zune Marketplace . No record label was involved in releasing the digital format and independent distributors were allowed to handle the physical product , which was released on November 25 as an enhanced CD and a deluxe @-@ packaged CD in a tin . 
 = = = Formats and release history = = = 
 Initially , three distinct versions of the album were released : 
 Digital only – as 320 kbit / s MP3s , with a 17 @-@ page PDF digital booklet designed by Stefan Sagmeister . 
 Digital album with CD – everything included above as well as an Enhanced CD ; initial orders were mailed to customers by November 30 , 2008 . 
 Deluxe CD – everything from both packages above as well as a bonus disc with four exclusive songs , a short film about the album directed by Hillman Curtis , and a screensaver . The discs were housed in a three @-@ dimensional version of the packaging that also contained expanded liner notes , a die with obscure phrases such as " A Dirty Bird " and " The Human Brain " printed on it , and a red and white capsule fit for human consumption . Delays caused this version to be shipped in December 2008 . 
 In addition , customers are entitled to lossless FLAC versions of the album at no extra cost . By mid @-@ December 2008 , 12 percent of customers chose to download the FLAC option . 
 This album is catalogued as the second release from Byrne 's vanity label Todo Mundo after Big Love : Hymnal ; copies of the CD were marked CD @-@ <unk> @-@ 002 . The CD was released in Japan with a bonus track — " Poor Boy " ( Eno & Leo Abrahams Remix ) — and obi strip in November 2008 through Beat Records with catalogue number BRC @-@ 218 . On February 17 , 2009 , the album was released on 180 @-@ gram vinyl LP as LP @-@ <unk> @-@ 002 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The first single off the album — " Strange Overtones " — was released on August 4 , 2008 , as a free digital download available only through the album 's website . The track has been described as " a song about writing a song " and features thematic elements of humanity versus technology that are explored throughout the album . It was downloaded over 40 @,@ 000 times within the first three days it was available . In September 2008 , Jon Yeo created a music video for the track featuring the paintings of Brian Eno . In May 2009 , the song was replaced by " One Fine Day " as a free download to promote the EP Everything That Happens Will Happen on This Tour – David Byrne on Tour : Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reception was mostly positive ; the album has an average score of 75 percent based on 24 reviews aggregated by Metacritic . Positive reviews have emphasized the pop songcraft on the album , calling it " exceedingly pleasant " ( Billboard ) and " vibrant " ( Tucson Weekly ) . Writing for the BBC , Chris Jones summed up the album by saying that it would not break any musical boundaries , but listeners will find music that was " intriguingly and , sometimes , maddeningly infectious . " 
 The music has been compared to the tone of alternative rock bands Radiohead , The Flaming Lips , and R.E.M. ' s 1998 album Up . Furthermore , Barry Walters of Spin has compared the music to former Eno collaborators U2 and several reviewers have compared the musicality to Paul Simon — especially his 2006 Eno collaboration Surprise . The vocals have been declared similar to Neil Young ; and the arrangement has been compared to The Beach Boys . Although the music was informed by gospel and digital music , comparisons have been made with genres as diverse as country due to the vocal delivery and old school hip hop . One weakness addressed by several reviewers is the unoriginality of the music , especially in comparison to the duo 's previous collaborations . 
 Contrasting Everything That Happens Will Happen Today with My Life in the Bush of Ghosts , some have found a connection between the two . Reviewers have found similarities in Eno 's solo album Another Green World and the Eno @-@ produced Talking Heads albums Fear of Music and Remain in Light , as well as Little Creatures , which was produced by the band . This is partly due to the unique use of technology in the creation of all of the albums associated with Eno . Other commentators have emphasized the differences between the two projects . For instance , The Age 's Bernard Zuel considers these expectations built by the earlier work to be " unfair ... and inaccurate . " The Observer review by Kitty Empire labels this album " conservative " and John Doran of The Quietus calls it " less exciting " — Erie Times @-@ News reviewer Dr. Rock goes as far as to call it an " antithesis " to Bush of Ghosts . In particular , the experimental nature of the former has been contrasted with the pop music style of this album and the lack of African beats and world music . Audra Schroeder of The Austin Chronicle noted " Thirty years after first collaborating on the Talking Heads , these two don 't have to mine the past since there 's nothing that remarkable about Everything . " Francis Jones summed up his review for Hot Press by concluding " No boundaries were harmed in its making but <unk> is an album of unquestionably great songs " and Louise Gray of New Internationalist declared that , " it 's not got the edgy , funky bricolage that characterized the earlier album and nor does it seek that . " At the same time , other reviewers have found the break with the experimental nature of My Life in the Bush of Ghosts to be positive . Jim DeRogatis from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times observed : 
 " [ E ] ven 27 years ago , there was nothing all that original or appealing about an <unk> @-@ minded mix of various world rhythms and random vocal snippets captured via shortwave radio . Anyone who claims these boys invented sampling clearly never heard Can or musique concrete . Right off the bat , Everything That Happens Will Happen Today is a much more accessible , enjoyable and arguably better album than My Life in the Bush of <unk> least if you care about conventional pop / rock songcraft . " 
 Reviews have emphasized the contrast between optimism and foreboding on the album , as well as the struggle of humanity against technology . In addition , several reviewers have noted parallels between this album and Byrne 's Big Love : Hymnal , particularly their common spiritual themes and atmospheric moods . Resident Advisor 's review also notes the shift in Eno 's recordings toward more gospel vocals . Steve Matteo of Crawdaddy ! wrote that Eno 's production dominates the album , whereas Filter 's Ken <unk> considers the album primarily a David Byrne venture . Consequence of Sound 's review notes continuity between this album and Byrne 's 2004 release Grown Backwards , while The Village Voice has declared this album " more expansive and adventurous " than anything else Byrne has released in decades and Greg Kot of The Chicago Tribune wrote that the album features " one of the strongest vocal performances of Byrne 's career . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The album was nominated for three Grammy Awards — Best Alternative Music Album , Best Recording Package , and Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package — on December 2 , 2008 . On February 8 , 2009 , designer Stefan Sagmeister won the award for Best Recording Package at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards . The deluxe edition packaging was given a bronze medal by the Art Directors Club of New York . The album was nominated for a Technical Excellence & Creativity Award in the Record Production / Album category . 
 Several year @-@ end lists included the album amongst the best releases of 2008 : 
 DeRogatis ' and Kot 's reviews were featured on Sound Opinions and the album was also placed on two individual writers ' lists for No Ripcord 's best of the year . Two contributors to No Depression included the album on their best @-@ of lists for 2008 . The A.V. Club commissioned celebrities to give their picks for album of the year and Tim Heidecker chose this album , describing it as " the most interesting and listenable pop record of the year , in my book . " The Fader 's 2008 year in review named this one of the " Top Twelve Albums That We Thought Would Have a Bigger Impact On Our Lives " , but later declared the album " career @-@ defining . " The publication dedicated their annual icon issue to Byrne in 2009 in part due to the success of this album . 
 Several songs from this album appeared on The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop singles poll for 2008 — " Strange Overtones " came in at 60 , " Life Is Long " placed 337 , " My Big Nurse " was 350 , " Everything That Happens " ended up at 748 , and " I Feel My Stuff " reached 942 . In addition , a vote was cast for " Strange Undertones " . 
 = = = Sales figures and chart performance = = = 
 Although the artists have not released sales figures , they have indicated that the album was purchased across the globe during the first 24 hours it was available and that the servers hosting the album delivered " several terabytes " by September 6 . A report in late December asserted that they had sold " nearly 20 @,@ 000 downloads . " In March 2009 , Ian C. Rogers of Topspin Media explained that 20 percent of those who listened to the album streaming chose to purchase it and 30 percent of them included a physical copy of the CD ; trends that would hold through September of that year . By October 2008 , Byrne explained that they had recouped their losses on the album and that sales had " paid back the recording costs and costs for building the Web site . " He would later explain that this business model worked well for established acts as well as smaller bands , due to minimal production and distribution costs . Their business model also allowed them to self @-@ release and plan a tour immediately after finishing the music production , rather than wait months for record label advancement . 
 The album did not chart until it was physically released — a development which surprised Byrne . In the first week of December , Everything That Happens Will Happen Today reached the top spot on the College Music Journal AAA charts and third on the CMJ Radio 200 . The album entered the Billboard 200 for the week of January 17 , 2009 , debuting at 182 with 4 @,@ 008 copies sold . It peaked the following week at 174 before dropping off the charts . It was on the Independent Albums chart for 10 weeks , reaching 18 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 While Byrne and Eno did a few interviews for the album and subsequent tour , the two attempted to market the album via word @-@ of @-@ mouth and Internet hype rather than a traditional marketing scheme . Eno was convinced in part because of his own preferences for digital music from the iTunes Store rather than CDs as well as the success of Radiohead 's 2007 album In Rainbows and the self @-@ promotional strategies of Nine Inch Nails for the albums Year Zero , Ghosts I – IV , and The Slip . Byrne was also impressed by Radiohead 's release strategy as a means of valuing music . The duo carefully avoided Internet leaks by not giving out promotional copies of the album to journalists , but Byrne did preview the song " One Fine Day " prior to the release by performing it with a choir of senior citizens and Eno invited Mark Coles for the BBC World Service program The Beat to his home to listen to the songs on Eno 's laptop . 
 In 2010 , several of the songs from this album — " Home " , " I Feel My Stuff " , " Life Is Long " , " My Big Nurse " , and " Strange Overtones " — were included in the Todo Mundo soundtrack album to the film Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps along with other David Byrne songs . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Byrne and Eno have both expressed their displeasure with the music industry and traditional models of marketing music , with Eno calling the music business an " exciting mess " and saying : 
 " The music industry ... were selling [ physical products , such as CDs ] quite expensively actually , that fostered a generally quite lazy attitude within record companies ... Suddenly now we have a quite different situation which it seems to me , artists understand much better than record companies do ... [ Y ] <unk> artists are very comfortable with starting their careers on Facebook or MySpace or something like that — and they 're way ahead of the record companies in some respects . " 
 Byrne has written for Wired , outlining the relative merits of different distribution models with this one reflecting his " self @-@ distribution model " in which " the artist stands to receive the largest percentage of income from sales per unit — sales of anything . A larger percentage of fewer sales , most likely , but not always . Artists doing it for themselves can actually make more money than the massive pop star , even though the sales numbers may seem minuscule by comparison . " The motivation for creating and marketing this album directly came in part from the very article Byrne wrote as well as Eno 's belief that music fans want more than just the music on an album and prefer collectible deluxe editions as well as the live performances that promote them . A month after releasing the album , Byrne was skeptical of market saturation claiming " I sense that a lot of people don 't know we have a record out " and hoped to counterbalance that ignorance with his tour . He also described the digital music market as " so infinite [ that ] it 's easy for music to get lost out there " and has noted that this business model would not work for performers who are not already established . 
 The duo enlisted a music marketing startup company — Topspin Media — to design their site , delivery options for the digital music , and promotional web widgets . Like the entirety of the recording process , the marketing was self @-@ financed and controlled by the artists , with Topspin taking a portion of the money made from digital sales . This allowed the artists to control creative aspects of producing music as well as the overhead costs associated with marketing an album . The company used viral marketing techniques to collect potential customers ' e @-@ mail addresses and encourage them to post the album streaming on their blogs . By early November , the collected e @-@ mail addresses amounted to 37 percent of the album sales . Topspin has also created a Flickr pool encouraging users to upload screenshots of the widget posted to web sites . No advertisements were taken out for the album . 
 Byrne and Eno were praised by Fast Company for their innovative use of Internet marketing and distribution for this album as well as several other releases and the promotion of this album has been lauded as a way of undermining copyright infringement . Key to their success was the software that Topspin Media developed and later commercially released as a bundle for other companies and artists to use , explaining that " In the first eight weeks following the launch of the David Byrne and Brian Eno self @-@ released record , Everything That Happens Will Happen Today , the Topspin platform helped us generate Direct @-@ to @-@ Fan revenue at the very least the equivalent to what we would have expected from a label advance , " that went directly to Byrne and Eno . Based in part on the success of marketing this album , representatives of Topspin were invited to teach a course on music marketing at Berklee College of Music in September 2009 and Ian C. Rogers led a panel discussion at South by Southwest on options for independent music artists . The album 's multiple formats have been praised as a method of incentivizing buying physical copies of albums . 
 = = = Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno Tour = = = 
 Byrne assembled a band to tour for the album , performing music throughout the latter half of 2008 and early 2009 across North America , Europe , and Australasia . He hired more singers than he had on previous tours to reproduce the complex vocal harmonies of the album and was inspired to bring along dancers after seeing Sufjan Stevens promote the album Illinois as well as the Japanese films Funky Forest and The Taste of Tea . Byrne was initially uninvolved in the choreography , but made more suggestions as the tour went on and after he saw a live performance by <unk> that incorporated dancing with instruments . He began booking tour dates before the album was completed and continued writing his book The Bicycle Diaries throughout the tour . 
 In planning the set lists for the tour , Byrne initially considered only promoting this album but decided to include songs from his previous collaborations with Eno as well , including the Talking Heads albums More Songs About Buildings and Food , Fear of Music , and Remain in Light and Byrne 's The Catherine Wheel soundtrack . By playing music from all of their collaborations , Byrne hoped to " draw a line linking this new material with what we did 30 years ago " with the goal of clarifying the connection between all of the duo 's previous work . In reviewing their past music , he found that " [ t ] here might be more continuity than I imagined , which I hope is going to work in my favor . " Although Eno was invited to participate and early reports indicated that he would , Eno ultimately chose not to tour with Byrne , letting Byrne decide how to present this music live . 
 = = = Everything That Happens Will Happen on This Tour = = = 
 On May 11 , 2009 , the live EP Everything That Happens Will Happen on This Tour – David Byrne on Tour : Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno was released digitally through Todo Mundo to benefit Amnesty International . The album features four songs recorded in December 2008 on the tour . Topspin Media offered the same digital download options to purchase the EP and the company created a second embeddable media player to promote the album . 
 = = = Ride , Rise , Roar = = = 
 On February 11 , 2010 , it was announced that a documentary film entitled Ride , Rise , Roar chronicling the tour would be released to the 2010 film festival circuit . The debut was at South by Southwest on March 15 , 2010 , where it was screened in all three media categories — film , interactive , and music . Byrne attended some British screenings for question and answer sessions . 
 Ride , Rise , Roar is the feature @-@ length directorial debut by Hillman Curtis — Byrne approached him after his satisfaction with the short film that accompanies the deluxe edition of Everything That Happens Will Happen Today . The documentary includes concert footage , film of the planning and rehearsals for the tour , and exclusive interviews with Byrne , Eno , and the supporting musicians and dancers . Curtis was initially contacted to document the tour with no clear objective for the film and decided to focus on the collaboration between Byrne and his tour mates as well as the unique challenge of combining popular music with modern dance . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by David Byrne ; all music by Byrne ( vocals ) and Brian Eno ( instrumentation ) , except " Strange Overtones " co @-@ written by Leo Abrahams . 
 " Home " – 5 : 06 
 " My Big Nurse " – 3 : 21 
 " I Feel My Stuff " – 6 : 25 
 " Everything That Happens " – 3 : 46 
 " Life Is Long " – 3 : 45 
 " The River " – 2 : 30 
 " Strange Overtones " – 4 : 17 
 " Wanted for Life " – 5 : 06 
 " One Fine Day " – 4 : 55 
 " Poor Boy " – 4 : 19 
 " The Lighthouse " – 3 : 46 
 Japanese release 
 " Poor Boy " ( Eno & Leo Abrahams Remix ) – 3 : 51 
 Deluxe Edition bonus tracks 
 " Never Thought " – 4 : 08 
 " Walking Along the River " – 4 : 38 
 " The Eyes " – 3 : 29 
 " The Painting " – 4 : 33 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = HMS Hood = 
 HMS Hood ( pennant number 51 ) was the last battlecruiser built for the Royal Navy . Commissioned in 1920 , she was named after the 18th @-@ century Admiral Samuel Hood . One of four Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers ordered in mid @-@ 1916 , Hood had serious design limitations , though her design was drastically revised after the Battle of Jutland and improved while she was under construction . For this reason she was the only ship of her class to be completed . As one of the largest and , ostensibly , the most powerful warships in the world , Hood was the pride of the Royal Navy and , carrying immense prestige , was known as ‘ The Mighty Hood ’ . 
 Hood was involved in several showing the flag exercises between her commissioning in 1920 and the outbreak of war in 1939 , including training exercises in the Mediterranean Sea and a circumnavigation of the globe with the Special Service Squadron in 1923 and 1924 . She was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet following the outbreak of the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War . When the Spanish Civil War broke out , Hood was officially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet until she had to return to Britain in 1939 for an overhaul . By this time , advances in naval gunnery had reduced Hood 's usefulness . She was scheduled to undergo a major rebuild in 1941 to correct these issues , but the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 forced the ship into service without the upgrades . 
 When war with Germany was declared , Hood was operating in the area around Iceland , and she spent the next several months hunting between Iceland and the Norwegian Sea for German commerce raiders and blockade runners . After a brief overhaul of her propulsion system , she sailed as the flagship of Force H , and participated in the destruction of the French Fleet at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kebir . Relieved as flagship of Force H , Hood was dispatched to Scapa Flow , and operated in the area as a convoy escort and later as a defence against a potential German invasion fleet . 
 In May 1941 , she and the battleship Prince of Wales were ordered to intercept the German battleship Bismarck and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , which were en route to the Atlantic where they were to attack convoys . On 24 May 1941 , early in the Battle of the Denmark Strait , Hood was struck by several German shells , exploded and sank . Due to her perceived invincibility , the loss had a profound effect on the British people . 
 The Royal Navy conducted two inquiries into the reasons for the ship 's quick demise . The first , held very quickly after the ship 's loss , concluded that Hood 's aft magazine had exploded after one of Bismarck 's shells penetrated the ship 's armour . A second inquiry was held after complaints that the first board had failed to consider alternative explanations , such as an explosion of the ship 's torpedoes . It was more thorough than the first board and concurred with the first board 's conclusion . 
 Despite the official explanation , some historians continued to believe that the torpedoes caused the ship 's loss , while others proposed an accidental explosion inside one of the ship 's gun turrets that reached down into the magazine . Other historians have concentrated on the cause of the magazine explosion . The discovery of the ship 's wreck in 2001 confirmed the conclusion of both boards , although the exact reason the magazines detonated will always be a mystery since that area of the ship was entirely destroyed in the explosion . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers were designed in response to the German Mackensen @-@ class battlecruisers , which were reported to be more heavily armed and armoured than the latest British battlecruisers of the Renown and the Courageous classes . The design was revised after the Battle of Jutland to incorporate heavier armour and all four ships were laid down . Only Hood was completed , because the ships were very expensive and required labour and material that could be put to better use building merchant ships needed to replace those lost to the German U @-@ boat campaign . 
 Hood was significantly larger than her predecessors of the Renown class . As completed , she had an overall length of 860 feet 7 inches ( 262 @.@ 3 m ) , a maximum beam of 104 feet 2 inches ( 31 @.@ 8 m ) , and a draught of 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) at deep load . This was 110 feet ( 33 @.@ 5 m ) longer and 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wider than the older ships . She displaced 42 @,@ 670 long tons ( 43 @,@ 350 t ) at load and 46 @,@ 680 long tons ( 47 @,@ 430 t ) at deep load , over 13 @,@ 000 long tons ( 13 @,@ 210 t ) more than the older ships . The ship had a complete double bottom . Hood had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 2 feet ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) at deep load , which minimised her roll and made her a steady gun platform . 
 The additional armour added during construction increased her draught by about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) at deep load , which reduced her freeboard and made her very wet . At full speed , or in heavy seas , water would flow over the ship 's quarterdeck and often entered the <unk> and living quarters through ventilation shafts . This characteristic earned her the nickname of " the largest submarine in the Navy " . The persistent dampness , coupled with the ship 's poor ventilation , was blamed for the high incidence of tuberculosis aboard . The ship 's complement varied widely over her career ; in 1919 , she was authorised 1433 men as a squadron flagship ; in 1934 , she had 81 officers and 1244 men aboard . 
 The propulsion system consisted of 24 Yarrow boilers , connected to Brown @-@ Curtis geared steam turbines driving four propellers . The battlecruiser 's turbines were designed to produce 144 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 107 @,@ 000 kW ) , which would propel the ship at 31 knots ( 57 km / h ; 36 mph ) , but during sea trials in 1920 , Hood 's turbines provided 151 @,@ 280 shp ( 112 @,@ 810 kW ) , which allowed her to reach 32 @.@ 07 knots ( 59 @.@ 39 km / h ; 36 @.@ 91 mph ) . She carried approximately 3 @,@ 895 long tons ( 3 @,@ 958 t ) of fuel oil , which gave an estimated range of 7 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 900 km ; 8 @,@ 600 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Hood carried eight 42 @-@ calibre BL 15 @-@ inch Mk I guns in hydraulically powered twin gun turrets . The guns could depress to − 5 ° and elevate to + 30 ° . At maximum elevation , they fired a 1 @,@ 920 @-@ pound ( 870 kg ) shell to a maximum range of 30 @,@ 180 yards ( 27 @,@ 600 m ) . The turrets were designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' and ' Y ' from front to rear . 120 shells were carried for each gun . 
 Hood 's secondary armament was a dozen 50 @-@ calibre BL 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk I guns , each with 200 rounds . They were shipped on shielded single pivot mounts fitted along the upper deck and the forward shelter deck . This high position allowed them to be worked during heavy weather as they were less affected by waves and spray compared with the casemate mounts of earlier British capital ships . Two of these guns on the shelter deck were temporarily replaced by QF 4 @-@ inch Mk V anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns between 1938 and 1939 . All the 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns were removed during another refit in 1940 . The gun fired a 82 @-@ pound ( 37 kg ) shell to a maximum range of 17 @,@ 770 yards ( 16 @,@ 250 m ) . 
 The original anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four QF 4 @-@ inch Mk V guns on single mounts . These were joined in early 1939 by four twin mounts for the 45 @-@ calibre QF 4 @-@ inch Mark XVI dual purpose gun . The single guns were removed in mid @-@ 1939 and a further three twin Mark XIX mounts were added in early 1940 . This mounting could elevate from − 10 to + 80 ° . The Mk XVI gun fired about twelve 35 @-@ pound ( 16 kg ) high @-@ explosive shells per minute at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 660 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) . Against surface targets , it had a range of 19 @,@ 850 yards ( 18 @,@ 150 m ) and a maximum ceiling of 39 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) , but an effective anti @-@ aircraft range of much less . 
 In 1931 , a pair of octuple mountings for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk VIII gun were added on the shelter deck , abreast the funnels , and a third mount was added in 1937 . These gun mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 80 ° . The Mk VIII 2 @-@ pounder gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 0 @.@ 91 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 41 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . 
 Two quadruple mountings for the 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mk III machine gun were added in 1933 with two more mountings added in 1937 . These mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 70 ° . The machine guns fired a 1 @.@ 326 @-@ ounce ( 37 @.@ 6 g ) bullet at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 520 ft / s ( 770 m / s ) . This gave the gun a maximum range of about 5 @,@ 000 yd ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , although its effective range was only 800 yd ( 730 m ) . To these were added five Unrotated Projectile ( UP ) launchers in 1940 , each launcher carrying twenty 7 @-@ inch ( 180 mm ) rockets . When they detonated , the rockets shot out lengths of cable that were kept aloft by parachutes ; the cable was intended to snag aircraft and draw up the small aerial mine which would destroy the aircraft . 
 Six fixed 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes were mounted on Hood , three on each broadside . Two of these were submerged forward of ' A ' turret 's magazine and the other four were above water , abaft the rear funnel . The Mk IV torpedoes had a warhead of 515 pounds ( 234 kg ) of TNT . They had two speed and range settings : 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) with a maximum range of 13 @,@ 500 yards ( 12 @,@ 300 m ) or 40 knots ( 74 km / h ; 46 mph ) to 5 @,@ 000 yards ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . Approximately 28 torpedoes were carried . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 Hood was completed with two fire @-@ control directors . One was mounted above the conning tower , protected by an armoured hood , and was fitted with a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder . The other was fitted in the spotting top above the tripod foremast and equipped with a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinder . Each turret was also fitted with a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder . 
 The secondary armament was primarily controlled by directors mounted on each side of the bridge . They were supplemented by two additional control positions in the fore @-@ top , which were provided with 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinders , fitted in 1924 – 25 . The anti @-@ aircraft guns were controlled by a simple high @-@ angle 2 @-@ metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) rangefinder mounted on the aft control position , fitted in 1926 – 27 . Three torpedo @-@ control towers were fitted , each with a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinder . One was on each side of the amidships control tower and the third was on the centreline abaft the aft control position . 
 During the 1929 – 31 refit , a High @-@ Angle Control System ( HACS ) Mark I director was added on the rear searchlight platform and two positions for 2 @-@ pounder " pom @-@ pom " anti @-@ aircraft directors were added at the rear of the spotting top , although only one director was initially fitted . The 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch control positions and their rangefinders on the spotting top were removed during the 1932 refit . In 1934 , the " pom @-@ pom " directors were moved to the former locations of the 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch control positions on the spotting top and the 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinders for the 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch control positions were reinstalled on the signal platform . Two years later , the " pom @-@ pom " directors were moved to the rear corners of the bridge to get them out of the funnel gases . Another " pom @-@ pom " director was added on the rear superstructure , abaft the HACS director in 1938 . Two HACS Mark III directors were added to the aft end of the signal platform the following year , and the Mark I director aft was replaced by a Mark III . During Hood 's last refit in 1941 , a Type 279 air warning radar and a Type 284 gunnery radar were installed , although the Type 279 radar lacked its receiving aerial and was inoperable . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Hood 's armour scheme was originally based on that of the battlecruiser Tiger with an 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) waterline belt . Unlike on Tiger , the armour was angled outwards 12 ° from the waterline to increase its relative thickness in relation to flat @-@ trajectory shells . This change increased the ship 's vulnerability to plunging ( high @-@ trajectory ) shells as it exposed more of the vulnerable deck armour . 5 @,@ 000 long tons ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) of armour was added to the design in late 1916 , based on British experiences at the Battle of Jutland , at the cost of deeper draught and slightly decreased speed . To save construction time , this was accomplished by thickening the existing armour , rather than redesigning the entire ship . Hood 's protection accounted for 33 % of her displacement , a high proportion by British standards , but less than was usual in contemporary German designs ( for example , 36 % for the battlecruiser SMS Hindenburg ) . 
 The armoured belt consisted of face @-@ hardened Krupp cemented armour ( KC ) , arranged in three strakes . The main waterline belt was 12 inches ( 305 mm ) thick between ' A ' and ' Y ' barbettes and thinned to 5 to 6 inches ( 127 to 152 mm ) towards the ship 's ends , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . The middle armour belt had a maximum thickness of 7 inches ( 178 mm ) over the same length as the thickest part of the waterline armour and thinned to five inches abreast ' A ' barbette . The upper belt was 5 inches thick amidships and extended forward to ' A ' barbette , with a short 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) extension aft . 
 The gun turrets and barbettes were protected by 11 to 15 inches ( 279 to 381 mm ) of KC armour , except for the turret roofs which were five inches thick . The decks were made of high @-@ tensile steel . The forecastle deck ranged from 1 @.@ 75 to 2 inches ( 44 to 51 mm ) in thickness while the upper deck was 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick over the magazines and 0 @.@ 75 inches ( 19 mm ) elsewhere . The main deck was 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick over the magazines and 1 inch ( 25 mm ) elsewhere , except for the 2 @-@ inch @-@ thick slope that met the bottom of the main belt . The lower deck was 3 inches thick over the propeller shafts , 2 inches thick over the magazines and 1 inch elsewhere . 
 The 3 @-@ inch plating on the main deck was added at a very late stage of construction and the four aftermost 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns and their ammunition hoists were removed in partial compensation . Live firing trials with the new 15 @-@ inch APC ( armour @-@ piercing , capped ) shell against a mock @-@ up of Hood showed that this shell could penetrate the ship 's vitals via the 7 @-@ inch middle belt and the 2 @-@ inch slope of the main deck . A proposal was made to increase the armour over the forward magazines to 5 inches and 6 inches over the rear magazines in July 1919 in response to these trials . To compensate for the additional weight , the two submerged torpedo tubes and the armour for the rear torpedo warheads were removed , and the armour for the aft torpedo @-@ control tower was reduced in thickness from 6 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . However , the additional armour was never fitted pending further trials . As completed , Hood remained susceptible to plunging shells and bombs . The torpedo warhead armour was reinstated during the ship 's 1929 – 31 refit . 
 For protection against torpedoes , she was given a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) deep anti @-@ torpedo bulge that ran the length of the ship between the fore and aft barbettes . It was divided into an empty outer compartment and an inner compartment filled with five rows of water @-@ tight " crushing tubes " intended to absorb and distribute the force of an explosion . The bulge was backed by a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch @-@ thick torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 Hood was initially fitted with flying @-@ off platforms mounted on top of ' B ' and ' X ' turrets , from which Fairey Flycatchers could launch . During her 1929 – 31 refit , the platform was removed from ' X ' turret and a trainable , folding catapult was installed on her quarterdeck , along with a crane to recover a seaplane . She embarked a Fairey IIIF from No. 444 Flight of the Royal Air Force . During the 1932 West Indies cruise , the catapult proved to be difficult to operate in anything but a calm sea , as it was frequently awash in bad weather . The catapult and crane were removed in 1932 , along with the flying @-@ off platform on ' B ' turret . 
 = = = Battlecruiser or fast battleship = = = 
 Although the Royal Navy always designated Hood as a battlecruiser , some modern writers such as Anthony Preston have classified her as a fast battleship , since Hood appeared to have improvements over the fast Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships . On paper , Hood retained the same armament and level of protection , while being significantly faster . Around 1918 , American commanders , including Vice @-@ Admiral William Sims , commander of US naval forces in Europe , and Admiral Henry T. Mayo , commander of the Atlantic Fleet , became extremely impressed by Hood which they described as a " fast battleship " , and they advocated that the US Navy develop a fast battleship of its own . However , the US continued with their established design direction , the slower but well @-@ protected South Dakota @-@ class battleship and the fast and lightly armoured Lexington @-@ class battlecruiser , both of which were later cancelled in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . 
 Influences from Hood showed on subsequent Lexington designs , with the reduction of the main armour belt , the change to " sloped armour " , and the addition of four above @-@ water torpedo tubes to the four underwater tubes of the original design . To add to the confusion , Royal Navy documents of the period often describe any battleship with a maximum speed over 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) as a battlecruiser , regardless of the amount of protective armour . For instance , the never @-@ built G3 battlecruiser was classified as such , although it would have been more of a fast battleship than Hood . 
 The scale of Hood 's protection , though adequate for the Jutland era , was at best marginal against the new generation of 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) gunned capital ships that emerged soon after her completion in 1920 , typified by the American Colorado @-@ class and the Japanese Nagato @-@ class battleships . The Royal Navy were fully aware that the ship 's protection flaws still remained , even in her revised design , so Hood was intended for the duties of a battlecruiser and she served in the battlecruiser squadrons through most of her career . Late in her career , Hood was outclassed by the armour and protective arrangement of World War II @-@ era fast battleships , but few available " big gun " vessels could match Bismarck 's speed , and in 1941 the Admiralty included Hood among the ships sent to engage the German battleship . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction of Hood began at the John Brown & Company shipyards in Clydebank , Scotland , on 1 September 1916 . Following the loss of three British battlecruisers at the Battle of Jutland , 5 @,@ 000 tons of extra armour and bracing were added to Hood 's design . Most seriously , the deck protection was flawed — spread over three decks , it was designed to detonate an incoming shell on impact with the top deck , with much of the energy being absorbed as the exploding shell had to penetrate the armour of the next two decks . The development of effective time @-@ delay shells at the end of World War I made this scheme much less effective , as the intact shell would penetrate layers of weak armour and explode deep inside the ship . In addition , she was grossly overweight compared to her original design , making her a wet ship with a highly stressed structure . 
 She was launched on 22 August 1918 by the widow of Rear Admiral Sir Horace Hood , a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Admiral Samuel Hood , for whom the ship was named . Sir Horace Hood had been killed while commanding the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron and flying his flag in Invincible — one of the three battlecruisers which blew up at the Battle of Jutland . In order to make room in John Brown 's shipyard for merchant construction , Hood sailed for Rosyth to complete her fitting @-@ out on 9 January 1920 . After sea trials , she was commissioned on 15 May 1920 , under Captain Wilfred Tompkinson . She had cost £ 6 @,@ 025 @,@ 000 to build ( roughly equivalent to £ 217 million today ) . With her conspicuous twin funnels and lean profile , Hood was widely regarded one of the finest @-@ looking warships ever built . She was also the largest warship afloat when she was commissioned and retained that distinction for the next 20 years . Her size and powerful armament earned her the nickname of " Mighty Hood " and she came to symbolise the might of the British Empire itself . 
 = = Inter @-@ war service = = 
 Shortly after commissioning on 15 May 1920 , Hood became the flagship of the Battlecruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Sir Roger Keyes . After a cruise to Scandinavian waters that year , Captain Geoffrey Mackworth assumed command . Hood visited the Mediterranean in 1921 and 1922 to show the flag and to train with the Mediterranean Fleet , before sailing on a cruise to Brazil and the West Indies in company with the Battlecruiser Squadron . 
 Captain John im Thurn was in command when Hood , accompanied by the battlecruiser Repulse and Danae @-@ class cruisers of the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron , set out on a world cruise from west to east via the Panama Canal in November 1923 . The objective of the cruise was to remind the Dominions of their dependence on British sea power and encourage them to support it with money , ships and facilities . They returned home ten months later in September 1924 having visited South Africa , India , Australia , New Zealand , Canada and the United States and some smaller colonies and dependencies en route . 
 While in Australia in April 1924 , the squadron escorted the battlecruiser HMAS Australia out to sea where she was scuttled in compliance with the Washington Naval Treaty . The Battlecruiser Squadron visited Lisbon in January 1925 to participate in the Vasco da Gama celebrations before continuing on to the Mediterranean for exercises . Hood continued this pattern of a winter training visit to the Mediterranean for the rest of the decade . Captain Harold <unk> relieved Captain im Thurn on 30 April 1925 and was relieved in turn by Captain Wilfred French on 21 May 1927 . 
 Hood was given a major refit from 1 May 1929 to 10 March 1931 , and afterwards resumed her role as flagship of the Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of Captain Julian Patterson . Later that year , her crew participated in the Invergordon Mutiny over pay cuts for the sailors . It ended peacefully and Hood returned to her home port afterwards . The Battlecruiser Squadron made a Caribbean cruise in early 1932 , and Hood was given another brief refit between 31 March and 10 May at Portsmouth . Captain Thomas Binney assumed command on 15 August 1932 and the ship resumed her previous practice of a winter cruise in the Mediterranean the next year . Captain Thomas Tower replaced Captain Binney on 30 August 1933 . Her secondary and anti @-@ aircraft fire @-@ control directors were rearranged during another quick refit between 1 August and 5 September 1934 . 
 While en route to Gibraltar for a Mediterranean cruise , Hood was rammed in the port side quarterdeck by the battlecruiser Renown on 23 January 1935 . The damage to Hood was limited to her left outer propeller and an 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) dent , although some hull plates were knocked loose from the impact . Temporary repairs were made at Gibraltar before the ship sailed to Portsmouth for permanent repairs between February and May 1935 . The captains of both ships were court @-@ martialled , as was the squadron commander , Rear Admiral Sidney Bailey . Tower and Bailey were acquitted , but Renown 's Captain Sawbridge was relieved of command . The Admiralty dissented from the verdict , reinstated Sawbridge , and criticised Bailey for ambiguous signals during the manoeuvre . 
 The ship participated in King George V 's Silver Jubilee Fleet Review at Spithead the following August . She was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet shortly afterwards and stationed at Gibraltar at the outbreak of the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War in October . Captain Arthur Pridham assumed command on 1 February 1936 and Hood returned to Portsmouth for a brief refit between 26 June and 10 October 1936 . She formally transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet on 20 October , shortly after the beginning of the Spanish Civil War . On 23 April 1937 , the ship escorted three British merchantmen into Bilbao harbour despite the presence of the Nationalist cruiser Almirante Cervera that attempted to blockade the port . Hood was refitted at Malta in November and December 1937 and had her submerged torpedo tubes removed . Captain Pridham was relieved by Captain Harold Walker on 20 May 1938 and he in turn was relieved when the ship returned to Portsmouth in January 1939 for an overhaul that lasted until 12 August . 
 Hood was due to be modernised in 1941 to bring her up to a standard similar to that of other modernised World War I @-@ era capital ships . She would have received new , lighter turbines and boilers , a secondary armament of eight twin 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch gun turrets and six octuple 2 @-@ pounder pom @-@ poms . Her 5 @-@ inch upper armour strake would have been removed and her deck armour reinforced . A catapult would have been fitted across the deck and the remaining torpedo tubes removed . In addition the conning tower would have been removed and her bridge rebuilt . The ship 's near @-@ constant active service , resulting from her status as the Royal Navy 's most battle @-@ worthy fast capital ship , meant that her material condition gradually deteriorated , and by the mid @-@ 1930s she was in need of a lengthy overhaul . 
 The outbreak of World War II made it impossible to remove her from service , and as a consequence she never received the scheduled modernisation afforded to other capital ships such as the battlecruiser Renown and several of the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships . The ship 's condensers were in such bad condition by this time that much of the output from the fresh @-@ water evaporators was required to replenish the boiler feed water and could not be used by the crew to wash and bathe or even to heat the mess decks during cold weather as the steam pipes were too leaky . These problems also reduced her steam output so that she was unable to attain her designed speed . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Captain Irvine Glennie assumed command in May 1939 and Hood was assigned to the Home Fleet 's Battlecruiser Squadron while still refitting ; when war broke out later that year , she was employed principally in patrolling the vicinity of Iceland and the Faroe Islands to protect convoys and intercept German merchant raiders and blockade runners attempting to break out into the Atlantic . On 25 September 1939 , the Home Fleet sortied into the central North Sea to cover the return of the damaged submarine Spearfish . The fleet was spotted by the Germans and attacked by aircraft from the KG 26 and KG 30 bomber wings . Hood was hit by a 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bomb from a Junkers Ju 88 bomber that damaged her port torpedo bulge and her condensers . By early 1940 , Hood 's machinery was in dire shape and limited her best speed to 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) ; she was refitted between 4 April and 12 June . 
 = = = Operation Catapult = = = 
 Hood and the aircraft carrier Ark Royal were ordered to Gibraltar to join Force H on 18 June where Hood became the flagship . Force H took part in the destruction of the French fleet at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir in July 1940 . Just eight days after the French surrender , the British Admiralty issued an ultimatum that the French fleet at Oran intern its ships in a British or neutral port to ensure they would not fall into Axis hands . The terms were rejected and the Royal Navy opened fire on the French ships berthed there . The results of Hood 's fire are not known exactly , but she damaged the French battleship Dunkerque , which was hit by four fifteen @-@ inch shells and was forced to beach herself . Hood was straddled during the engagement by Dunkerque ; shell splinters wounded two men . Dunkerque 's sister ship , Strasbourg , managed to escape from the harbour . Hood and several light cruisers gave chase , but gave up after two hours : Hood had dodged a salvo of torpedoes from a French sloop and had stripped a turbine reaching 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . 
 = = = Return to home waters = = = 
 Hood was relieved as flagship of Force H by Renown on 10 August , after returning to Scapa Flow . On 13 September , after a short refit , she was sent to Rosyth along with the battleships Nelson and Rodney and other ships , to be in a better position to intercept a German invasion fleet . When the threat of an invasion diminished , the ship resumed her previous roles in convoy escort and patrolling against German commerce raiders . Twice , Hood was dispatched against enemy warships . On 28 October she sailed to intercept the " pocket battleship " Admiral Scheer , and again on 24 December to locate the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , but Hood failed to find either ship . 
 In January 1941 , the ship began a refit that lasted until March ; even after the refit she was still in poor condition , but the threat from the German capital ships was such that she could not be taken into dock for a major overhaul until more of the King George V @-@ class battleships came into service . Captain Ralph Kerr assumed command during the refit , and Hood was ordered to sea in an attempt to intercept the German battleships Gneisenau and Scharnhorst upon the refit 's completion in mid @-@ March . Unsuccessful , she was ordered to patrol the Bay of Biscay against any breakout attempt by the German ships from Brest . Hood was ordered to the Norwegian Sea on 19 April when the Admiralty received a false report that the German battleship Bismarck had sailed from Germany . Afterwards , she patrolled the North Atlantic before putting into Scapa Flow on 6 May . 
 = = = Battle of the Denmark Strait = = = 
 When Bismarck sailed for the Atlantic in May 1941 , Hood , together with the newly commissioned battleship Prince of Wales , was sent out in pursuit along with several other groups of British capital ships to intercept the German ships before they could break into the Atlantic and attack Allied convoys . Hood was commanded by Captain Ralph Kerr and was flying the flag of Vice @-@ Admiral Lancelot Holland . The German ships were spotted by two British heavy cruisers ( Norfolk & Suffolk ) on 23 May , and Holland 's ships intercepted Bismarck and her consort , the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , in the Denmark Strait between Greenland and Iceland on 24 May . 
 The British squadron spotted the Germans at 05 : 37 ( ship 's clocks were set four hours ahead of local time – the engagement commenced shortly after dawn ) , but the Germans were already aware of their presence , Prinz Eugen 's hydrophones having previously detected the sounds of high @-@ speed propellers to their south @-@ east . The British opened fire at 05 : 52 with Hood engaging Prinz Eugen , the lead ship in the German formation , and the Germans returned fire at 05 : 55 , both ships concentrating on Hood . Prinz Eugen was probably the first ship to score when a shell hit Hood 's boat deck , between her funnels , and started a large fire among the ready @-@ use ammunition for the anti @-@ aircraft guns and rockets of the UP mounts . 
 Just before 06 : 00 , while Hood was turning 20 ° to port to unmask her rear turrets , she was hit again on the boat deck by one or more shells from Bismarck 's fifth salvo , fired from a range of approximately 16 @,@ 650 metres ( 18 @,@ 210 yd ) . A shell from this salvo appears to have hit the spotting top , as the boat deck was showered with body parts and debris . A huge jet of flame burst out of Hood from the vicinity of the mainmast , followed by a devastating magazine explosion that destroyed the aft part of the ship . This explosion broke the back of Hood , and the last sight of the ship , which sank in only three minutes , was her bow , nearly vertical in the water . A note on a survivor 's sketch in the British RN Historical Branch Archives gives 63 ° 20 ′ N 31 ° 50 ′ W as the position of the sinking . 
 Hood sank with 1418 men aboard . Only three survived : Ordinary Signalman Ted Briggs , Able Seaman Robert <unk> , and Midshipman William John Dundas . The three were rescued about two hours after the sinking by the destroyer Electra , which spotted substantial debris but no bodies . 
 = = = Aftermath of the sinking = = = 
 Prince of Wales was forced to disengage by a combination of damage from German hits and mechanical failures in her guns and turrets after Hood was sunk . Despite these problems , she had hit Bismarck three times . One of these hits contaminated a good portion of the ship 's fuel supply and subsequently caused her to steer for safety in occupied France where she could be repaired . Bismarck was temporarily able to evade detection , but was later spotted and sunk by the British on 27 May . 
 The official Admiralty communiqué on the loss , broadcast on the day of the sinking , reported that : " during the ... action , HMS Hood ... received an unlucky hit in a magazine and blew up . " The first formal board of enquiry into the loss , presided over by Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Geoffrey Blake , reported on 2 June , less than a fortnight after the loss . It endorsed this opinion , stating that : 
 ( c ) ( The ) probable cause of the loss of HMS Hood was direct penetration of the protection by one or more 15 @-@ inch shells at a range of 16 @,@ 500 yards [ 15 @,@ 100 m ] , resulting in the explosion of one or more of the aft magazines . 
 The conduct of the inquiry became subject to criticism , largely because no verbatim record of witnesses ' testimony had been kept . Moreover , Sir Stanley V. Goodall , Director of Naval Construction came forward with an alternative theory , that the Hood had been destroyed by the explosion of her own torpedoes . As a result , a second Board was convened under Rear Admiral Sir Harold Walker and reported in September 1941 . This investigation was " much more thorough than was the first , taking evidence from a total of 176 eyewitnesses to the disaster " , and examined both Goodall 's theory and others ( see below ) . The Board came to a conclusion almost identical to that of the first board , expressed as follows : 
 That the sinking of Hood was due to a hit from Bismarck 's 15 @-@ inch shell in or adjacent to Hood 's 4 @-@ inch or 15 @-@ inch magazines , causing them all to explode and wreck the after part of the ship . The probability is that the 4 @-@ inch magazines exploded first . 
 Both boards of enquiry exonerated Vice @-@ Admiral Holland from any blame regarding the loss of Hood . 
 Memorials to those who died are spread widely around the UK , and some of the crew are commemorated in different locations . One casualty , George David Spinner , is remembered on the Portsmouth Naval memorial , the Hood Chapel at the Church of St John the Baptist , in <unk> , Hampshire , and also on the gravestone of his brother , who died while serving in the Royal Air Force in 1942 , in the Hamilton Road Cemetery , Deal , Kent . 
 = = Modern theories on the sinking = = 
 The exact cause of the loss of Hood remains a subject of debate . The principal theories include the following causes : 
 A direct hit from a shell penetrated to a magazine aft . Such a shell could only have come from Bismarck , since Prinz Eugen was no longer firing at Hood at the time of the explosion . As noted above , this version of events was almost taken for granted at the time of the sinking . Doubt first arose as a result of eyewitness testimony that the explosion that destroyed Hood originated near the mainmast , well forward of the aft magazines ( for example , the sketch shown prepared for the second board of enquiry by Captain Leach of Prince of Wales ) . At the second board , expert witnesses suggested that what was observed was the venting , through the engine @-@ room ventilators , of a violent — but not instantaneous — explosion or deflagration in the 4 @-@ inch magazines . The same deflagration would have collapsed the bulkhead separating the 4 @-@ inch and 15 @-@ inch magazines , resulting very quickly in a catastrophic explosion similar to those previously witnessed at Jutland . This theory was ultimately adopted by the board . 
 A shell , falling short and travelling underwater , struck below the armoured belt and penetrated to a magazine . During the same action , Prince of Wales received a hit of this type from a 15 @-@ inch shell , which travelled underwater for about 80 feet ( 25 m ) , struck about 28 feet ( 8 m ) below the waterline , penetrated several light bulkheads and fetched up , without exploding , against the torpedo bulkhead . The second board considered this theory improbable , arguing that the fuse , had it worked at all , would have detonated the shell before it reached the ship . According to Jurens 's calculations , one of Bismarck 's shells that fell approximately 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) short of Hood could have penetrated the side of the ship beneath the armour belt and would have detonated in the vicinity of the ship 's magazines if the fuse worked . 
 The ship was destroyed by the explosion of her own torpedoes . According to Goodall 's theory , the ship 's torpedoes could have been detonated either by the fire raging on the boat deck or , more probably , by a direct hit from Bismarck . This would have blown out the side of the ship , destroying the girder strength of the hull ; the force of water entering the hole , at a speed of nearly 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) , would then shear the stern section from the rest of the hull . 
 The fire on the boat deck penetrated to a magazine . Evidence given to the second board indicated that the doors for the 4 @-@ inch ammunition supply trunks were closed throughout the action . It remains possible that a door or trunk could have been opened up by an enemy shell , admitting flames to the magazine . Alternative routes for admission of flame could have been the ventilation or venting arrangements of the magazines or , as Ted Briggs suggested , through the floor of a 15 @-@ inch <unk> . 
 The explosion was initiated by 4 @-@ inch ammunition stored outside the magazines . Writing in 1979 , the naval historian Antony Preston claimed that the aft magazines of Hood were " surrounded by additional 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft shells outside the armoured barbettes . Such unprotected stowage could have been detonated either by the boat @-@ deck fire or by a shell from Bismarck . " 
 The ship was blown up by her own guns . At the second board , eyewitnesses reported unusual types of discharge from the 15 @-@ inch guns of Hood , suggesting that a shell could have detonated within the gun , causing an explosion within the <unk> . It is possible that , under the stress of combat , the safety measures , introduced after the disasters at Jutland to prevent such an explosion reaching the magazines , could have failed . 
 An extensive review of these theories ( excepting that of Preston ) is given in Jurens 's 1987 article . Its main conclusion is that the loss was almost certainly precipitated by the explosion of a 4 @-@ inch magazine , but that there are several ways this could have been initiated , although he rules out the boat deck fire or the detonation of her torpedoes as probable causes . In Jurens 's opinion , the popular image of plunging shells penetrating Hood 's deck armour is inaccurate , as by his estimation the angle of fall of Bismarck 's 15 @-@ inch shells at the moment of the loss would not have exceeded about 14 ° , an angle so unfavourable to penetration of horizontal armour that it is actually off the scale of contemporaneous German penetration charts . Moreover , computer @-@ generated profiles of Hood show that a shell falling at this angle could not have reached an aft magazine without first passing through some part of the belt armour . On the other hand , the 12 @-@ inch belt could have been penetrated , if Hood had progressed sufficiently far into her final turn . 
 A more recent development is the discovery of Hood 's wreck . Inspection of the wreck has confirmed that the aft magazines did indeed explode . The stern of the Hood was located , with the rudder still in place , and it was found that this was set to port at the time of the explosion . Furthermore , a section of the bow immediately forward of ' A ' turret is missing , which has led historian and former Dartmouth lecturer Eric J. Grove and expedition leader David Mearns to believe that " either just before or just after leaving the surface , the bow suffered massive internal damage from an internal explosion " , possibly a partial detonation of the forward 15 @-@ inch magazines . It has been suggested that the fatal fire spread from the aft end of the ship through the starboard fuel tanks , since the starboard side of Hood " appears to be missing most , if not all of its torpedo bulge plating " . 
 The evidence of the wreck refutes Goodall 's theory of a torpedo explosion , while the eyewitness evidence of venting from the 4 @-@ inch magazine prior to the main explosion conflicts with the theory that the Hood was blown up by her own guns . The other theories listed above remain valid possibilities . 
 = = Wreck = = 
 In 2001 , British broadcaster Channel 4 commissioned shipwreck hunter David Mearns and his company , Blue Water <unk> , to locate the wreck of Hood , and if possible , produce underwater footage of both the battlecruiser and her attacker , Bismarck . This was to be used for a major event documentary to be aired on the 60th anniversary of the ships ' battle . This was the first time anyone had attempted to locate Hood 's resting place . Mearns had spent the previous six years privately researching the fate of Hood with the goal of finding the battlecruiser , and had acquired the support of the Royal Navy , the HMS Hood Association and other veterans groups , and the last living survivor , Ted Briggs . 
 The search team and equipment had to be organised within four months , to take advantage of a narrow window of calm conditions in the North Atlantic . Organisation of the search was complicated by the presence on board of a documentary team and their film equipment , along with a television journalist who made live news reports via satellite during the search . The search team also planned to stream video from the remotely operated underwater vehicle ( ROV ) directly to Channel 4 's website . 
 After footage of Bismarck was collected , Mearns and the search team began scanning a 600 @-@ square @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 2 @,@ 100 km2 ) search box for Hood ; completely covering the area was estimated to take six days . Areas that Mearns felt were more likely to hold the wreck were prioritised , and the side @-@ scan sonar located the battlecruiser in the 39th hour of the search . 
 Hood 's wreck lies on the seabed in pieces among two debris fields at a depth of about 2 @,@ 800 metres ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) . The eastern field includes the small piece of the stern that survived the magazine explosion , as well as the surviving section of the bow and some smaller remains such as the propellers . The 4 @-@ inch fire @-@ control director lies in the western debris field . The heavily armoured conning tower is located by itself a distance from the main wreck . The amidships section , the biggest part of the wreck to survive the explosions , lies inverted south of the eastern debris field in a large impact crater . The starboard side of the amidships section is missing down to the inner wall of the fuel tanks and the plates of the hull are curling outward ; this has been interpreted as indicating the path of the explosion through the starboard fuel tanks . It is further supposed that the small debris fields are the fragments from the aft hull where the magazines and turrets were located , since that section of the hull was totally destroyed in the explosion . The fact that the bow section separated just forward of ' A ' turret is suggestive that a secondary explosion might have occurred in this area . Other researchers have claimed that the final salvo fired by Hood was not a salvo at all , but flame from the forward magazine explosion , which gave the illusion of Hood firing for the last time . This damage , ahead of the armoured bulkhead , could have been implosion damage suffered while Hood sank , as a torpedo room that had been removed during one of her last refits approximates the site of the break . It was the opinion of Mearns and White who investigated the wreck that this was unlikely as the damage was far too limited in scale , nor could it account for the outwardly splayed plates also observed in that area . Bill Jurens points out that there was no magazine of any kind at the location of the break and that the location of the break just forward of the forward transverse armoured bulkhead suggests that the ship 's structure failed there as a result of stresses inflicted when the bow was lifted into the vertical position by the sinking stern section . Furthermore , the current position of the plates at the edge of the break only reflects their last position , not the direction that they first moved . 
 The forward section lies on its port side , with the amidships section keel up . The stern section rises from the seabed at an angle . This position shows the rudder locked into a 20 ° port turn , confirming that orders had been given ( just prior to the aft magazines detonating ) to change the ship 's heading and bring the aft turrets ' X ' and ' Y ' to bear on the German ships . 
 In 2002 , the site was officially designated a war grave by the British government . As such , it remains a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act of 1986 . 
 = = = Expeditions to retrieve ship 's bell = = = 
 In 2012 , the British Government gave permission for Mearns to return to the site of Hood 's final resting place to retrieve one of her two ship 's bells which were lying in a small open debris field some way from the wreck herself . With the backing of the HMS Hood Association , Mearns planned to return the bell to Portsmouth where it would form part of the first official and permanent memorial to the sacrifice of her last crew at the newly refitted National Museum of the Royal Navy . The expedition also took the opportunity to re @-@ film the wreck and survey her using techniques unavailable in 2001 . As before , with the exception of the attempted retrieval of the ship 's bell , a strict look @-@ but @-@ don 't @-@ touch policy was adhered to . 
 The original attempt , sponsored by Paul Allen and using his yacht Octopus , was abandoned after ten days in September 2012 due to unfavourable weather conditions . In 2015 , the same team attempted a second recovery operation and the Hood 's bell was finally retrieved on 7 August 2015 . It is expected to undergo conservation work before being put on display . 
 = = = Surviving relics = = = 
 Some relics from the time of Hood 's sinking still exist . A large fragment of the wooden transom from one of Hood 's boats was washed up in Norway after her loss and is preserved in the National Maritime Museum in London . A metal container holding administrative papers was discovered washed ashore on the Norwegian island of <unk> in April 1942 , almost a year after the Battle of the Denmark Strait . The container and its contents were subsequently lost , but its lid survived and was eventually presented to the Royal Navy shore establishment HMS Centurion in 1981 . 
 Other surviving relics are items that were removed from the ship prior to her sinking : 
 = = = = 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns = = = = 
 Two of Hood 's 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns were removed and replaced during a refit in 1935 , and subsequently shipped to Ascension Island , where they were installed as a shore battery in 1941 , sited on a hill above the port and main settlement , Georgetown , where they remain . The guns were restored by the Royal Air Force in 1984 . 
 The Ascension Island guns saw action only once , on 9 December 1941 , when they fired on the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 124 , as it approached Georgetown on the surface to shell the cable station or sink any ships at anchor . No hits were scored , but the submarine crash @-@ dived . 
 = = = = Fragments of propeller from a collision with HMS Renown = = = = 
 As a result of a collision off the coast of Spain on 23 January 1935 , one of Hood 's propellers struck the bow of Renown . While dry @-@ docked for repairs , Renown had fragments of this propeller removed from her bilge section . The pieces of the propeller were kept by dockyard workers : " Hood " v " Renown " Jan. 23rd . 1935 was stamped on one surviving example , and " Hood V Renown off Arosa 23 – 1 – 35 " on another . Of the known surviving pieces , one is privately held and another was given by the Hood family to the Hood Association in 2006 . Recently a third piece has come to light in Glasgow , where the Hood was built . It is held by a private collector and stamped HMS <unk> v HMS <unk> 23 1 35 . 
 = Surb Karapet Monastery = 
 Surb Karapet Monastery ( Armenian : Մշո Սուրբ Կարապետ վանք , <unk> Surb Karapet vank ' , also known by other names ) was an Armenian monastery in the historic province of Taron , about 30 km ( 19 mi ) northwest of Mush ( Muş ) , in present @-@ day eastern Turkey . 
 Surb Karapet translates to " Holy Precursor " and refers to John the Baptist , whose remains are believed to have been stored at the site by Gregory the Illuminator in the early fourth century . The monastery subsequently served as a stronghold of the <unk> — the princely house of Taron , who claimed to be the holy warriors of John the Baptist , their patron saint . It was expanded and renovated many times in later centuries . By the 20th century it was a large fort @-@ like enclosure with four chapels . 
 Historically , the monastery was the religious center of Taron and was a prominent pilgrimage site . It was considered the most important monastery in Turkish ( Western ) Armenia and the second most important of all Armenian monasteries after Etchmiadzin . From the 12th century the monastery was the seat of the diocese of Taron , which had an Armenian population of 90 @,@ 000 in the early 20th century . It attracted pilgrims on several occasions annually and host large celebrations . The monastery was burned and robbed during the Armenian Genocide of 1915 and later abandoned . Its stones have since been used by the local Kurds for building purposes . 
 = = Names = = 
 Throughout history the monastery has been known by several names . One of the common names was <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " Monastery of Glak " after its first father superior , <unk> Glak . It is also spelled <unk> vank ( classical spelling : <unk> վանք ; reformed spelling : <unk> վանք ) or <unk> vank ( from Western Armenian ) . Due to its location it was also called <unk> vank ( <unk> վանք in classical spelling , and <unk> վանք in reformed ) , translating to " Monastery of the Nine Springs " . 
 Turkish sources refer to it as <unk> Kilise ( Turkish : " Church with Bell Towers " ) , or <unk> Kilise ( meaning " Church with Bells " in Kurdish , also the name of the village in which it is located ) . They sometimes provide a version of its Armenian name : <unk> <unk> . Turkish sources and travel guides generally omit the fact that it was an Armenian monastery . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation to the Middle Ages = = = 
 According to tradition , the site was founded in the early fourth century by Gregory the Illuminator , who went to Taron to spread Christianity , following the conversion of King Tiridates III of Armenia . At the time , there were two Hindu temples and brass statues established by two Indian princes dedicated to the gods <unk> and Demeter on the site of the cloister . They were razed to the ground by Gregory the Illuminator , who erected a <unk> to house the remains of Saints <unk> and John the Baptist which he had brought from Caesarea . According to other sources the pagan temples were dedicated to Vahagn and <unk> . James R. Russell suggests that in Armenia some of the qualities of the pagan god Vahagn were passed down to John the Baptist . Folk belief held that <unk> ( demons ) were kept underneath the monastery ; they would be released during the Second Coming by John the Baptist ( Surb Karapet ) . Christina <unk> suggested that the foundation of the monastery is " most probably connected with the rise of the monastic movement " in Bagratuni Armenia in the 940s . 
 <unk> Glak , a Syriac archbishop , became its first father superior . He is sometimes mentioned as the author of History of Taron ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , although the work is generally attributed to the otherwise unknown John <unk> and " scholars are convinced that the work is an original composition of a later period ( post @-@ eighth century ) , written as a deliberate forgery . " Its main purpose seems to be asserting the monastery 's preeminence . A relatively short " historical " romance , it tells the story of the five members of the <unk> , Taron 's princely house : <unk> , Vahan , Smbat , his son Vahan <unk> , and the latter 's son Tiran , who were known as the Holy Warriors of John the Baptist , their patron saint . They defended the monastery and other churches in the district . 
 The sixth century chronicler Atanas <unk> ( <unk> of Taron ) served as its father superior . He is best remembered for collocation of the Armenian calendar . The monastery 's possessions were expanded in the seventh century , but the building was reduced to ruins by an earthquake in the same century . It was subsequently rebuilt and the chapel of Surb Stepanos ( St. Stephen ) was founded . 
 In the late ninth century , following the establishment of Bagratid Armenia , a school was founded at the monastery . In the 11th century Grigor <unk> built a palace within the monastery , but it was destroyed by fire in 1058 along with St. Gregory ( Grigor ) Church which had a wooden roof . Following the death of the <unk> II Shah Armen in 1185 the monastery was attacked by Muslims . Archbishop Stepanos was killed and the monks abandoned the monastery for a year . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 16th century the Surb Karapet chapel was built . According to the 17th @-@ century traveler Evliya Çelebi the leadership of the monastery made large gifts to Turkish pashas in order to secure the monastic properties . From the 16th to the 18th centuries the monastery often sheltered Armenians fleeing the Ottoman – Persian Wars . In the 1750s , the Surb Karapet church was destroyed by Persian troops . In the 18th century , several earthquakes hit the monastery . The one in 1784 being especially devastating ; destroyed the main church , the refectory , part of the bell tower and the southern wall . In 1788 the monastic complex underwent complete reconstruction — its gavit ( a square or quadrangular chamber placed in front of the church and on the same axis , destined for both civil and religious use ) was enlarged , and renovation was carried out in its belfry , the monks ' cells , scriptorium , ramparts and other sections . 
 = = = = 19th century = = = = 
 In 1827 Kurdish gangs seized and robbed the monastery , destroying the furniture and manuscripts . However , the monastery prospered at the beginning in 1862 when Mkrtich Khrimian became its father superior and , simultaneously , prelate of Taron . Khrimian sought to reform the way donations were handled by establishing a council which would finance community projects . Before him , most of the money went to the monks and affluent Armenians of the region who offered fierce opposition to him , including two attempts on his life . In his first year he founded a largely secular school at the monastery , called <unk> . Among others , the fedayi Kevork <unk> and Hrayr <unk> , the singer Armenak <unk> , and the writer <unk> Ter @-@ <unk> ( Msho <unk> ) studied there . From April 1 , 1863 until June 1 , 1865 Khrimian published the journal The Eaglet of Taron ( <unk> <unk> , « <unk> <unk> » ) at the monastery . It was written in modern Armenian , rendered to be easily readable for the ordinary people . The journal sought to raise the national consciousness of the Armenians . Edited by Garegin <unk> , a total of 43 issues were published . Khrimian left the monastery in 1868 when he became the Armenian Patriarch of Constantinople . 
 The monastery , according to two French travelers in 1890 , possessed large areas of land and it took several hours to get from one end to another . The estate was covered by forests , arable fields and had three farms with around a thousand goats and sheep , a hundred oxen and cattle , sixty horses , twenty donkeys and four mules , which were taken care of by 156 servants . In 1896 an orphanage was founded next to the monastery . It housed a school for 45 children and a library . 
 According to British traveler H. F. B. Lynch , who visited the monastery in 1893 , with the presence of the Kurdish threat and the suspicions of the Turkish government " this once flourishing monastery has been stripped of much of its glamour ; indeed the monks are little better than prisoners of State . " The monastery was robbed in 1895 during the Hamidian massacres . By the early 20th century the monastery 's structure was deteriorating . The decline continued until the start of World War I. 
 = = = Destruction and current state = = = 
 During the Armenian Genocide of 1915 the monastery housed a large number of Armenians escaping the deportations and massacres . Turkish forces and Kurdish irregulars sieged it , but the Armenians within resisted for more than two months . According to contemporary reports , around five thousand Armenians were massacred " near the wall of the monastery " , while the monastery itself was " sacked and robbed " . According to the American missionaries Clarence Ussher and Grace Knapp , the Turks slaughtered " three thousand men , women , and children " gathered at the courtyard of the monastery on command of a German officer . 
 In 1916 the Russian troops and Armenian volunteers temporarily took control of the area and transferred around 1 @,@ 750 manuscripts to Etchmiadzin . Among them is an 18th @-@ century reliquary of the right hand of John the Baptist made of silver repoussé . The area was recaptured by the Turks in 1918 and , subsequently , ceased to exist not only as a spiritual center , but also as an architectural monument . It remained abandoned until the 1960s when Kurdish families settled on the site . 
 Many buildings in the village include stones from the monastery and khachkars ( cross stones ) , which are embedded in the walls . The remaining stones are " being systematically carried off by the local Kurds for their own building purposes . " According to historian Robert H. Hewsen , as of 2001 , only traces of two chambers of the chapel of Surb Stepanos remain , while the rest of the monastery 's remains consist of " foundations and ruined walls " , which are used as barns . 
 Reconstruction efforts 
 In May 2015 Aziz <unk> , the President of the NGO " Union of Social Solidarity and Culture for Bitlis , Batman , Van , Mush and Sasun Armenians " , made a formal appeal to the Turkish Ministries of Culture and Interior requesting the reconstruction of the monastery and the removal of all 48 houses and 6 barns on its former location . <unk> stated that according to the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne the Turkish government obliged to preserve the religious institutions and structures of ethno @-@ religious minorities , including those of the Armenian community . He added that he first forwarded a letter to government agencies in 2012 who promised to clean the site within six months . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The monastery was surrounded by strong walls and was similar to a fortress . Historian <unk> <unk> called it " a vast walled hermitage " . Lynch , who visited it in 1893 , described the monastery as follows : " A walled enclosure , like that of a fortress , a massive door on grating hinges — such is your first impression of this lonely fane . [ ... ] You enter a spacious court , and face a handsome belfry and porch , the façade inlaid with slabs of white marble with bas @-@ reliefs . " A decade earlier , English traveler Henry Fanshawe Tozer wrote of the monastery : " The buildings ... are of stone , very massive and very irregular , rising one above another at various angles . There was hardly any pretence of architecture , and none of the picturesque appearance which is so characteristic of Greek monasteries . " 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The monastery complex was composed of the main church , dedicated to the Holy Cross ( Surb Khach ) and four chapels to the east : Surb Astvatsatsin ( Holy Mother of God ) , Surb Stepanos ( Saint Stephen ) , Surb Karapet ( Holy Precursor ) and Surb Gevorg ( Saint George ) . The main church was not a typical Armenian church but was a large hall and is believed to have originally functioned as a <unk> ( chamber ) . It was built of mostly gray stones and was supported by 16 columns . The chapels of Surb Karapet and Surb Stepanos had domes , with " high cylindrical drums and conical roofs " . The chapel of Surb Astvatsatsin was provided to Syriac ( Assyrian ) monks on the feast of St. John . 
 The three @-@ storey bell tower was built in the 18th century . There were also monk cells , a refectory , accommodations for pilgrims , the 19th @-@ century <unk> building and a monastic school . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The monastery was historically the religious center of Taron . From the 12th century the monastery was the seat of the diocese of Taron , which had an Armenian population of 90 @,@ 000 ( circa 1911 ) . It was considered the largest and most eminent shrine in Western ( Turkish ) Armenia . It was the second most important Armenian monastery after Etchmiadzin . It remained a prominent pilgrimage site until the First World War . People from every corner of Armenia made pilgrimages to the monastery . They usually held festivities at the monastery 's yard . It was considered by believers to be " almighty " and was renowned for its perceived ability to heal the physically and mentally ill . 
 The monastery was popularly known as Մշո <unk> Սուրբ Կարապետ Msho sultan Surb Karapet , literally translating to " Sultan Surb Karapet of Mush " . The epithet " Sultan " was bestowed as a reference to its high status as the " lord and master " of Taron . 
 The monastery housed tombs of several Mamikonian princes , " for whom the shrine served as a sepulchral abbey . " According to Lynch , the tombs of <unk> , Vahan the Wolf , Smbat and Vahan <unk> could have been found near the southern wall of the monastery . 
 = = = Annual events = = = 
 The monastery was a center of large annual celebrations . Various secular events took place in the surroundings , such as horse races , tightrope walking and gusan competitions during the festivals of Vardavar and Assumption of Mary . Horse racing competitions were held on Vardavar and involved a large number of people . Tightrope walking , widely practiced by the Armenians of Taron , was historically related to the worship of the monastery . 
 = = = <unk> tradition = = = 
 The monastery was a traditional pilgrimage site for Armenian <unk> ( folk musicians ) . It has been compared to Mount Parnassus in Greece , which was the home of the Muses . The prominent 18th @-@ century <unk> <unk> @-@ Nova is recorded to have made a trip to the monastery to seek divine grace . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Numerous songs were dedicated to the monastery . 
 In the 1866 novel <unk> ( <unk> ) Raffi mentions the monastery and describes its perceived <unk> . 
 Hovhannes Tumanyan describes the monastery in the 1890 poem " The morning of Taron " ( <unk> <unk> ) as " magnificently ornamented " . 
 In the seven @-@ thousand @-@ line long poem " Ever @-@ Tolling Bell Tower " ( « <unk> <unk> » ) Paruyr Sevak mentions the monastery and its well @-@ known bells . The poem , published in 1959 , is dedicated to Komitas , who was among those intellectuals who were deported on April 24 , 1915 during the genocide . It is recognized as " one of the most powerful literary responses to the Armenian Genocide . " 
 In the historical novel The Call of <unk> ( « <unk> <unk> » , published in 1979 ) , <unk> <unk> describes a winter scene at the monastery . 
 In October 2010 during the discussion of a bill in the Armenian Parliament that would formally recognize the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Republic , opposition MP Raffi Hovannisian ended his speech saying " Let us be guided by Msho Sultan Surb Karapet " ( Մշո <unk> Սուրբ Կարապետ <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Silver cross = = 
 In August 2013 an Armenian @-@ style silver cross attributed by the seller to the Surb Karapet Monastery appeared on the Russian auction website <unk> and was valued at $ 70 @,@ 000 . The Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin said that they were trying " to verify the details regarding the news reports about the auction . " Art historian Levon <unk> noted the seller did not provide much information . He added that " All we can see is that it is delicate silver work and nothing else is known [ about it ] . " 
 = Makoto Yuki ( Persona ) = 
 Makoto Yuki ( <unk> <unk> , Yūki Makoto ) is a fictional character introduced in the Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 3 role @-@ playing video game developed by Atlus . In the game , Makoto is an orphan who transfers to Gekkoukan High School in Iwatodai City and discovers a phenomenon called the Dark Hour during which supernatural entities called Shadows roam freely . After awakening an ability within himself called Persona , Makoto finds himself intertwined in the ongoing struggle against the Shadows with his new schoolmates . 
 He was designed by Shigenori Soejima , who aimed to create an ordinary youth who the player could relate to . In the manga adaptation , he goes by the name Minato Arisato ( <unk> <unk> , Arisato Minato ) . His character was reworked for the animated film adaptation where director Noriaki Akitaya explained pressure in giving the silent character his own personality . He was then given the name Makoto Yuki to further distinguish him from his previous portrayals . Makoto later appeared the spin @-@ off game : Persona Q : Shadow of the Labyrinth as well . Critical reception to Makoto 's character has been generally positive for both his role in the games for how he handles his social life . His development in the film gathered similar responses . He is voiced by Akira Ishida in Japanese and by Yuri Lowenthal in English . 
 = = Design and characterization = = 
 The Persona 3 protagonist was the first character Shigenori Soejima designed for the game . Early designs of the character made him look mature and collected since the artist viewed him as a " cliche [ ed ] cool guy . " Soejima took longer to design the protagonist than any other character as the game 's other characters would be made to complement his design . In Art of Persona 3 , Soejima remarked that " Initially , he looked more honest , like an ordinary , handsome young man . But , I worked to achieve greater ambiguity in his expression . " He further noted that the character managed to have a " hidden coolness . " In retrospect , he found that the character was not ambiguous enough and thus when creating the Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 4 protagonist , Soejima made Yu Narukami with the idea that his entire personality be decided and portrayed by the player 's in @-@ game actions and decisions . 
 Director Noriaki Akitaya had faced a similar dilemma for his animated film version . He explained that one of his biggest challenges was , " .. getting the protagonist , who is the player in the game , and making him into a character named Makoto Yuki for the film , then figuring out how to integrate him [ Makoto ] into the story . " This led Akitaya to be extremely careful about how he went about constructing the character in terms of his speech , gestures and behavior all the while staying true to what was already established in the game . Akitaya admitted that he would not have been able to meet the expectations of the individual fans of the game since they were able to choose their own unique name and personality for the Protagonist . Instead Akitaya took the route of incorporating the most general traits of fan reactions to the Protagonist to form Yuki 's character . 
 Akitaya stated that his favorite scene in the film occurred when Makoto summoned his Persona for the first time . He elaborated that Makoto 's maniacal laugh and heavy breathing helped bring depth to the scene and establish animation director Keisuke Watabe 's character designs as being one of the main attractions of the film . Akitaya had joked that during initial pre @-@ production the Protagonist 's name was still not determined and instead proposed the placeholder " Tsukitarō Yamada " ( <unk> <unk> , Yamada Tsukitarō ) until the first draft was developed . However even as Jun Kumagai began working on the screenplay , the placeholder went unchanged for the next four to five months and Akitaya found himself growing attached to it despite eventually changing it . 
 Akira Ishida voiced Makoto in this Japanese adaptation . He noted that since he was presented with the roles of both Pharos and Makoto , recording the scene of Makoto 's initial meeting with Pharos was something he enjoyed . In the English version of Persona 3 the role of both Makoto and Ryoji is taken by Yuri Lowenthal . As with his previous role as protagonist of the Digital Devil Saga games , <unk> did not have extensive dialogue lines . His main task was shouting out the names of Personas : localization editor Yu Namba was initially worried about his performance , but <unk> managed to pronounce the names correctly . He attributed this to his love for Dungeons & Dragons . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Persona 3 = = = 
 Makoto Yuki is the Protagonist ( <unk> , <unk> , lit . " protagonist " or " hero " ) of Persona 3 . He moves into the Iwatodai dorm , learning of his ability to summon the Personas Orpheus ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Thanatos ( <unk> , <unk> ) of The Death Arcana when the dorm is attacked by Shadows during the Dark Hour . Mitsuru asks him to join SEES and he is later elected the team 's leader in combat . The Protagonist is unique among his cohorts in that he has the Wild Card ability which enables him to wield multiple Personas and switch between them during battle . Over the course of the game , he also gains Messiah ( <unk> , <unk> ) of The Judgement Arcana and Orpheus Telos ( <unk> ･ <unk> , <unk> Kai ) of The Fool Arcana in Persona 3 FES . With the power of the Wild Card he has access to over 150 different Personas . He is also the only character with access to the Velvet Room , in which the player is able to fuse together multiple Personas together to create a new and more powerful one . Over the course of the game , the player is challenged to manage the Protagonist 's day @-@ to @-@ day schedule as he attends school , takes part in extracurricular activities , and spends time with classmates and other characters . Igor , the proprietor of the Velvet Room , encourages the Protagonist to form Social Links with people , as they will determine his potential in combat . Social Links with characters in @-@ game are represented by one of the Major Arcana and grants various bonuses during Persona fusion , increasing the player 's proficiency in battle . 
 As he works with SEES , the Protagonist builds up the Social Link for the Fool Arcana ( <unk> , Gusha ) , which symbolizes beginning and infinite possibilities of the journey ahead . When the Protagonist decides to spare Ryoji Mochizuki , the Social Link of the Fool Arcana changes into the Judgement Arcana ( <unk> , <unk> ) , which symbolizes the end of his journey and looking back at what has transpired this far . The final Social Link the Protagonist attains is the Universe Arcana ( <unk> , Uchū ) , a card from the Thoth tarot that replaces World Arcana ( <unk> , Sekai ) , symbolizing the full awareness of the protagonist 's place in the world . 
 The Protagonist is an orphan ; his parents died ten years prior to the events of Persona 3 , which sees him returning to the city he grew up in . In December , the player learns that a Shadow known as " Death " ( <unk> ) was sealed in the Protagonist as a child by Aigis , who was unable to defeat it herself . The Death Shadow was able to lead the Protagonist to twelve other greater Shadows ; by defeating them , The Appriser was created , a being which summons Nyx to the world to bring about its destruction . SEES battles The Appriser on the roof of Tartarus , but are not able to stop Nyx 's descent to Earth . The Protagonist enters Nyx and using the power of his accumulated Social Links , seals it away with the " Great Seal " — at the cost of his own self . 
