 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Persona 3 FES extends upon the original game with the introduction of an epilogue called The Answer . These events reveal that the protagonist died after becoming the Great Seal used to seal Nyx away . After being led to the Great Seal , SEES discovers it to be under attack by a creature called Erebus . Although Makoto does not appear in Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 4 and the sequel Persona 4 Arena , it is revealed in those games Igor 's assistant Elizabeth left her position to find a way to rescue the Protagonist from his fate as the Great Seal . 
 In the PlayStation Portable port Persona 3 Portable , an option was added to control a female protagonist , voiced by Marina Inoue in the Japanese adaptation , and Laura Bailey in the English adaptation . He is also featured in several radio dramas that tell new stories related to games . In the manga , the Protagonist is named Minato Arisato ( <unk> <unk> , Arisato Minato ) . There , he is portrayed as a quiet teenager who often tired or drowsy , who likes to eat and cook food . The character also appears in Persona Q : Shadow of the Labyrinth , where he joins forces with the Persona 4 cast to defeat the Shadows . In the stage adaption , Persona 3 : The Weird Masquerade , the male Protagonist is named Sakuya Shiomi ( <unk> <unk> , Shiomi Sakuya ) while the female version is named <unk> Shiomi ( <unk> <unk> , Shiomi <unk> ) . 
 In the anime film series , Persona 3 The Movie , he takes the name of Makoto Yuki . Makoto is portrayed as an ambivalent individual with an initial neutral viewpoint on the film 's theme of life and death , making his growth via new found experiences the focus of the movie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception to Makoto Yuki 's character has been positive . GameSpy 's Patrick Joynt praised the character 's social life in Persona 3 as it allowed the player to interact with several other characters and learn about their interesting stories . GamesRadar commented that while Makoto is a " Japanese RPG stereotype " it was refreshing to see him dealing with his social life . Damian Thomas from RPGFan saw the interactions between the main character and his dorm mates as one of the game 's best parts due to the character growth in each social link . 
 Reaction to the character 's portrayal in the animated film Persona 3 The Movie : No. 1 , Spring of Birth was also met with praise . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku described Makoto Yuki as being an initially " ambivalent , broken character .. " whose growth takes center stage and gave the film " a suitable sense of completion . " Elliot Gay from Japanator saw Makoto 's growth from a " empty , aloof , and distant young man " who " lacks any kind of real determination to do anything " to his growth as a person as one of the film 's main focus . His relationship with Aigis and his comical actions have also been <unk> by Gay during a review for the second film . 
 = 18 Miles Out = 
 " 18 Miles Out " is the tenth episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on February 26 , 2012 . The episode was written by Scott M. Gimple and series showrunner Glen Mazzara and directed by Ernest Dickerson . In the episode , Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) debate Randall ( Michael Zegen ) ' s fate , leading to a physical battle between the two . Meanwhile , the survivors at the Greene farm deal with Beth Greene ( Emily Kinney ) ' s suicidal behavior . 
 Gimple added Rick and Shane 's climactic fight scene into the episode 's script , while Dickerson collaborated with stunt coordinator Lonnie Smith , Jr. on the choreography . An 800 @-@ pound motorcycle was used in the sequence , which was lightened by emptying the gas tank . " 18 Miles Out " features recurring appearances from several actors and actresses including Lauren Cohan ( Maggie ) , Emily Kinney ( Beth Greene ) , and Michael Zegen . 
 " 18 Miles Out " was well received by a number of television commentators , who praised the storyline and character development . Upon airing , it attained 7 @.@ 04 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode became the second most @-@ viewed cable telecast of the day , as well as the second most @-@ watched cable television program of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Randall ( Michael Zegen ) , the teenager who Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) rescued , has fully recovered from his leg injury . Rick and Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) tie him up , blindfold , gag him with duct tape , and put him in the back of their SUV , with plans to drop him at a school 18 miles out from Hershel 's farm . During their journey , Rick confronts Shane about what happened with Otis at the high school and his attraction to his wife Lori ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) , all which Shane admits and eventually apologizes for . At the same time , Shane suggests that Rick would not have made the same decision he did with Otis in order to protect his family . Rick angrily responds that he would do anything to protect his wife , son , and unborn child . 
 After Rick explains his suggestions about the upcoming winter and using knives more to save ammunition , the three eventually find a seemingly secure building and leave Randall there , armed with a knife . Randall pleads for his life , until he blurts out that he went to school with Maggie Greene ( Lauren Cohan ) and knows her father ( Scott Wilson ) , leading them to suspect that he knows the farm 's location . Shane eventually attempts to kill him but is stopped when Rick tackles him . They eventually argue about what they will do with Randall , escalating into a physical battle . The fight ends when Shane throws a wrench at Rick , which misses and smashes open a window , which releases a large group of walkers trapped inside a building . The three men fend off the walkers ; Rick rescues Randall and leaves Shane trapped in a school bus . Rick then changes his mind and rescues Shane from the school bus . Since he is too dangerous to let go free , Randall is once again bound , gagged , and blindfolded in the back of the SUV as Rick contemplates killing him , although he needs time to think . Rick returns Shane 's pistol and tells Shane he needs to follow Rick 's command from then on if he wants to remain part of the group . Shane reluctantly agrees . 
 At the farmhouse , Lori , Maggie , and Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) are taking care of Maggie 's younger sister Beth ( Emily Kinney ) , who is now conscious . Maggie confides that Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) has lost confidence because he feels their relationship made him lose focus at the shootout in the bar , hence Lori advises her to make Glenn " man up " . The women eventually realize Beth has become suicidal and place her under suicide watch . Lori and Andrea argue ; Andrea believes the decision to stay alive should be Beth 's alone , while Lori strongly disagrees ; Andrea and Lori criticize each other in the process . 
 Andrea then proceeds to take over responsibility for Beth , after convincing Maggie to take a break . She locks Beth inside the room , opens the bathroom door , and leaves Beth alone to make her own choice . She advises the pain will never subside , " but you make room for it " . Beth attempts suicide by using a shard of broken mirror to cut her wrist , but Maggie and Lori manage to pry the bathroom door open in time to save Beth , who is bleeding profusely but relatively okay . Andrea returns to the house to check on Beth and is confronted by a furious Maggie . Andrea reasons that she allowed Beth to explore her choices , and Beth is now more convinced than ever that suicide is not an option . Maggie condemns Andrea 's actions and forbids her from ever again setting foot inside the house . 
 = = Production = = 
 " 18 Miles Out " was directed by Ernest Dickerson and co @-@ written by Scott M. Gimple and showrunner Glen Mazzara . The storyline between Rick Grimes and Shane Walsh reaches a climax in " 18 Miles Out " , in which the two men get into a heated argument , ultimately engaging in a physical confrontation . Gimple conceived and wrote the scene into the episode 's script . In the fight scene , the moves were choreographed . Dickerson collaborated with Lonnie Smith , Jr. who served as the stunt coordinator . Smith cast two stuntmen to demonstrate and act out the scene for Lincoln and Bernthal so they could duplicate the choreography . Jeremy Connors portrayed Rick , while Trent Bry played the role of Shane . In the fight sequence , Shane topples a motorcycle onto Rick 's legs , temporarily immobilizing him . The motorcycle weighed an estimated 800 pounds ; in order to decrease the weight of the vehicle , Dickerson and his team emptied the gas tank . This was rehearsed at the series ' production studios . <unk> Backus , The Walking Dead 's special effects technician , rigged the vehicle 's <unk> to prevent it from sliding and making contact with the actors ' legs . Backus also added a rod with a secure stable so it would give further clearance to the actors and increase the motorcycle 's height from the ground . The cameramen filmed the shots at an angle , creating the illusion that the vehicle did hit the actors ' legs . Writer Robert Kirkman summated on the aftermath of the confrontation : 
 At the end of this week 's episode , Rick is of the mind that they 're square ; they 've got everything out in the open , they 've each said their piece and they both know where each other stands , they 've had their big blowout and they 're riding back in that car and Rick thinks he 's handled it . He doesn 't necessarily think he 's got his friend back , but he thinks the matters are settled . From the look of Shane in that car , I don 't know that he 's necessarily thinking that . For the most part , this conflict may be put on the back burner for the time being . It definitely seems like Shane still has a bone to pick . 
 While returning to Hershel 's farm , Shane stares at a walker in an abandoned field . Kirkman stated the walker symbolizes the growing scope of the zombie virus . " We 're really just trying to show that that kind of thing is inescapable , " he said . " You 're just driving down the street , you look over and , ' Oh , there you go , there ’ s a zombie . ' We 're trying to show that this world is becoming more and more populated by zombies . Our thinking is that large population centers like Atlanta are really where the heart of this began and as [ Rick and crew ] moved out to Hershel ’ s farm they didn ’ t really encounter very many walkers because they are moving out of the city center at a faster rate than the zombie population . And that zombie population is starting to catch up with them . The area is starting to become more and more dense with walkers . " 
 Lori Grimes accuses Andrea of participating very little in household tasks . Kirkman avouched that since the initiation of the zombie apocalypse , many of the characters have reverted to traditional gender roles ; " Lori is really just aggravated over a lot of things and she 's lashing out . She was serious and she wants Andrea to pull her weight ; certain people are stuck with certain tasks and to a certain extent people are retreating back into traditional gender roles because of how this survival @-@ crazy world seems to work . Lori has a lot of things going on so she 's definitely going to be behaving somewhat irrationally at times as she tries to cope with the pregnancy and the conflict between Rick and Shane as well as dealing with the fact that Rick was out on the road again . She 's going through a lot of stuff . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " 18 Miles Out " features several references to music , film , media , and other pop culture phenomena . The episode is structured similarly to the Breaking Bad episode " 4 Days Out " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote : " ' 18 Miles Out ' has a title that 's very similar to ' 4 Days Out ' , one of the most memorable episodes of Breaking Bad , and a structure that 's relatively similar : our two leads go on a long drive together for what should be a routine bit of business , have a lot of conversations about where they are at this point , and then hit a major obstacle that might keep them from driving home alive . " While driving in his car , Rick tells Shane of an incident with a close relative , who was sitting in blizzard @-@ like conditions while listening to a narrative of Lord of the Rings . A scene towards the end of the episode contains the song Driver 's Seat by rock band Sniff ' n ' the Tears . In the concluding scene of " 18 Miles Out " , the song " Civilian " by indie folk band Wye Oak can be heard playing in the background . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " 18 Miles Out " was originally broadcast on February 26 , 2012 in the United States on AMC . Upon airing , the episode attained 7 @.@ 04 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . Although it obtained the highest @-@ rating in the 18 – 49 demographic out of any cable telecast of the day , " 18 Miles Out " was the second most @-@ viewed cable television program of the week . Its total viewership was slightly below that of the 2012 NBA All @-@ Star Game , which garnered 7 @.@ 07 million viewers . The episode became the second highest @-@ rated cable program of the week dated February 26 . Ratings and total viewership increased moderately from the previous episode , " <unk> " , which received 6 @.@ 89 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " 18 Miles Out " was critically acclaimed by television commentators . Bex Schwartz of Rolling Stone opined that the installment was an excellent and well @-@ written episode , proclaiming that it " balanced zombie action with human drama " . In his B grade review for the episode , Zack Halden of The A.V. Club felt that " 18 Miles Out " was one of the second season 's more solid attempts ; " While there 's no question this is still serialized , the story here had a clear beginning , middle , and end , and we stay focused the whole time on two plot arcs : Rick and Shane deciding what to do with Randall [ ... ] while Lori , Maggie , and Andrea deal in their own individual ways with Beth ’ s desire to kill herself . " Halden resumed that it made him hopeful of future installments of The Walking Dead . Matt Barone of Complex , Andrew Conrad of The Baltimore Sun , and IGN 's Eric Goldman asserted that " 18 Miles Out " was one of the series ' best episodes , while The Star @-@ Ledger 's Mark Mauer thought that it was redundant , ultimately concluding that " it indulged in another subplot centered on a petty argument " . Goldman professed that the episodic direction was more focused than previous installments . Concluding his review , he gave the episode a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , signifying an " amazing " rating . SFX journalist Ian Berriman echoed analogous sentiments , inevitably issuing " 18 Miles Out " a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating . He called it the season 's best episode , and wrote that it was filled with " action , explosive arguments , [ and ] difficult decisions " . 
 Aaron Rutkoff of Wall Street Journal touted the installment ; " The writers ' oratorical impulses were mostly kept in check , giving us instead an action @-@ filled A plot in the field and a suspenseful B plot on the farm , and both have serious stakes . The motif connecting the two plots : knives . This episode was all about knives . " Gary <unk> of The Huffington Post stated that " 18 Miles Out " was a nice transition from what he thought was the typical development of the show . Sepinwall asserted that the episode was the strongest telecast since the second season premiere , " What Lies Ahead " . While CraveOnline writer Blair Marnell felt that it was a good telecast , he declared that " 18 Miles Out " was slightly inferior to its predecessor . New York 's Starlee Kine was critical of the flashbacks in the episode , who described the process as baffling . She wrote , " It was done in the oddest way , though , where the flashbacks didn ’ t add any additional information than that which we already knew . It was as though the writers thought a flashback could be used in place of their characters having backstories , instead of as a vehicle to convey them . " 
 Critics lauded the development of the storyline between Shane and Rick . Writing for Best Week Ever , Dan Hopper stated that it presented a cold and eerie outlook on the future of the two men . Nate Rawlings of Time evaluated their physical confrontation as " darn good " , and Alex Crumb of The Faster Times called it " wholly satisfying " . Entertainment Weekly writer Darren Franich commended the fight scene ; " The Shane / Rick fight was great , a brilliantly extended scuffle that started out with an air of boys @-@ will @-@ be @-@ boys pettiness but quickly escalated into something genuinely homicidal . " Goldman summated on the scene : " Of course , it was also gratifying to finally see that conflict turn physical , with a fight we 've been waiting to see for a long time . Rick vs. Shane was appropriately brutal and did a very good job of representing the two men 's different tactics — Rick was no doubt a formidable and dangerous guy in a fight , wailing on Shane with a series of punches . But Shane was going for the kill , using anything he could grab as a weapon , as he shoved a motorcycle onto Rick at one point and then threw a massive wrench at him in an effective , ' Holy S * * t ! ' moment . " 
 = 2008 Monaco Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Monaco Grand Prix ( formally the <unk> Grand Prix de Monaco ) was a Formula One motor race held on 25 May 2008 at the Circuit de Monaco ; contested over 76 laps , it was the sixth race of the 2008 Formula One season . The race was won by the season 's eventual Drivers ' Champion , Lewis Hamilton , for the McLaren team . BMW Sauber driver Robert Kubica finished second , and Felipe Massa , who started from pole position , was third in a Ferrari . 
 Conditions were wet at the start of the race . Massa maintained his lead into the first corner , but his teammate Kimi Räikkönen was passed for second by Hamilton , who had started in third position on the grid . Hamilton suffered a punctured tyre on lap six , forcing him to make a pit stop from which he re @-@ entered the race in fifth place . As the track dried and his rivals made their own pit stops Hamilton became the race leader , a position he held until the end of the race . Kubica 's strategy allowed him to pass Massa during their second pit stops , after the latter 's Ferrari was forced to change from wet to dry tyres . Räikkönen dropped back from fifth position to ninth after colliding with Adrian Sutil 's Force India late in the race . Sutil had started from 18th on the grid and was in fourth position before the incident , which allowed Red Bull driver Mark Webber to finish fourth , ahead of Toro Rosso driver Sebastian Vettel in fifth . 
 The race was Hamilton 's second win of the season , his first in Monaco , and the result meant that he led the Drivers ' Championship , three points ahead of Räikkönen and four ahead of Massa . Ferrari maintained their lead in the Constructors ' Championship , 16 points ahead of McLaren and 17 ahead of BMW Sauber , with 12 races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers , in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , Honda , Force India @-@ Ferrari , BMW Sauber , Toyota , Red Bull @-@ Renault , Williams @-@ Toyota and Toro Rosso @-@ Ferrari . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought four different tyre types to the race : two dry @-@ weather tyre compounds , the softer marked by a single white stripe down one of the grooves , and two wet @-@ weather compounds , the extreme wet also marked by a single white stripe . 
 Before the race , Ferrari driver Kimi Räikkönen led the Drivers ' Championship with 35 points , and his teammate Felipe Massa was second with 28 points . McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton was third , also on 28 points , with one win fewer than Massa ; BMW driver Robert Kubica was fourth on 24 points , ahead of his teammate Nick Heidfeld on 20 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 63 points , 19 points ahead of BMW Sauber , and 21 points ahead of McLaren @-@ Mercedes . 
 Ferrari had responded to Hamilton 's win in the opening round of the season in Australia by winning each of the subsequent four races , giving them a commanding lead in the Constructors ' Championship . Ferrari 's dominance had been highlighted by two one @-@ two finishes : Massa ahead of Räikkönen in Bahrain and Räikkönen 's win over Massa at the following round in Spain . A strong drive despite an unfavourable strategy had helped Hamilton to split the Ferrari drivers on the podium in Turkey , coming second , behind Massa but ahead of Räikkönen . Ferrari had not won in Monaco since 2001 , and had been unable to match McLaren 's pace in 2007 . After tests at the Circuit Paul Ricard in mid @-@ May , Räikkönen said his team had developed a strong car for the tight , low @-@ speed Monaco circuit , but they still expected a challenge from McLaren and BMW Sauber . Hamilton claimed that McLaren would be competitive at Monaco , but Kubica played down his team 's chances , saying " I think a win will be very difficult . " 
 Toro Rosso 's main 2008 car , the STR3 , was also introduced that weekend ; the team had used a modified version of their 2007 car , the STR2 , for the opening five races . Originally due to be introduced at the previous race in Turkey , a crash in testing had left the team short of spare parts , delaying the car 's race debut . As the STR3 used a different transmission than that used in the STR2 , Toro Rosso driver Sebastian Vettel was forced to take a five @-@ place penalty on the grid for an unscheduled change of gearbox . His teammate Sébastien Bourdais escaped a similar penalty because he had failed to finish the race in Turkey , allowing him a free gearbox change . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race – two on Thursday , and one on Saturday . The Thursday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes ; the third session , on Saturday morning , lasted for an hour . One hour into the first session , officials noticed a loose drain cover in the run through Beau <unk> , and suspended practice . Ferrari and McLaren took the top four spots after the resumption – Räikkönen ahead of Hamilton , McLaren driver Heikki Kovalainen , and Massa . Behind Williams driver Nico Rosberg , Kubica was the best of the BMW Saubers in sixth ; his teammate Heidfeld was forced to retire because of an engine failure , and stopped his car in Casino Square after just 13 laps . Despite further delays during the second session – both Renaults crashed in separate incidents at Sainte Devote , requiring the marshals to sweep the track of debris – Hamilton again proved strong , fastest ahead of Rosberg , Räikkönen , Massa , Kovalainen and Kubica . Apart from the Renaults , two more cars struck the barriers : Toyota driver Jarno Trulli scraped the wall out of Piscine ; Adrian Sutil 's Force India lost its front wing after tagging the barrier at Rascasse . While light rain fell on Saturday morning , Kovalainen set the fastest time in the final session , before losing control at Piscine and damaging the rear of his car . The rain increased as the marshals cleared the debris , and in the ensuing poor track conditions Kovalainen 's time remained unbeaten . Hamilton managed second fastest , ahead of Räikkönen , Rosberg , Kubica and Massa . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session was divided into three parts . In the first 20 @-@ minute period , cars finishing 16th or lower were eliminated . The second qualifying period lasted for 15 minutes , at the end of which the fastest ten cars went into the final period , to determine their grid positions for the race . Cars failing to make the final period were allowed to be refuelled before the race but those competing in it were not , and so carried more fuel than they had done in the earlier qualifying sessions . 
 Massa clinched his third pole position of the season with a time of 1 : 15 @.@ 787 , and was joined on the front row by teammate Räikkönen . Hamilton took third place on the grid , with a qualifying time just 0 @.@ 052 seconds slower than Massa 's . Kovalainen edged out Kubica to take fourth , the latter struggling to get heat into his tyres for his final run . Rosberg 's attacking style took him to sixth ; Renault driver Fernando Alonso , Trulli and Red Bull driver Mark Webber occupied the next three places . Webber 's teammate David Coulthard ended his second session in the barriers after the tunnel , after his car jerked sideways at the crest under braking . Although Coulthard was unhurt , the position of his stricken car and the subsequent caution flags surrounding it denied many drivers the opportunity to make their final flying laps in the session . Honda driver Jenson Button , who took 12th behind Timo Glock of Toyota , blamed the disruption for his performance , having prepared his car specifically for the final run . Heidfeld suffered from similar tyre problems to his teammate and managed 13th ; Williams driver Kazuki Nakajima and Honda driver Rubens Barrichello took the next two places ahead of Bourdais in the new STR3 . Renault driver Nelson Piquet lined up from 17th and Vettel managed 18th before his gearbox penalty demoted him to 19th . The Force Indias of Sutil and Giancarlo Fisichella qualified slowest ; Fisichella 's penalty for a change of gearbox after morning practice meant he started from 20th on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 On Sunday morning Coulthard became the third driver to incur a gearbox penalty , after changing his transmission following his crash during qualifying . The penalty moved him from 10th to 15th on the grid . In contrast to Saturday 's dry qualifying session , frequent showers soaked the track on Sunday morning , making racing slippery and potentially hazardous . Although the showers subsided by early afternoon , they resumed 20 minutes before the start , the changeable conditions forcing teams to delay tyre choices for as long as possible . By the time of the three @-@ minute warning most drivers had opted for the standard wet tyre ; only Piquet started the race on the extreme wet . Kovalainen 's engine stalled as the cars set off on their formation lap ; his car was pushed back to the pit lane by his mechanics , where it was restarted and a new steering wheel fitted to solve the problem . 
 Massa held his lead into the first corner at Sainte Devote , while behind him Hamilton used the pit lane exit to pass Räikkönen down the inside . Kovalainen 's vacated fourth position was filled by Kubica , as Alonso moved into fifth , passing Rosberg . The latter pitted soon after for a new front wing after making contact with Alonso at the hairpin , promoting Trulli to sixth . These positions were maintained for several laps , but the distances between the cars increased , in part because the spray thrown up by their wheels made close racing difficult . The conditions proved to be crucial when Hamilton made contact with barriers on the outside of Tabac on lap six , necessitating his return to the pits for a new set of tyres . The McLaren mechanics fuelled the car for a longer second stint and Hamilton emerged in fifth , the distances between his competitors ' cars resulting in him losing only three places during the pit stop . Alonso had a similar accident to Hamilton 's at Massenet two laps later , and emerged in seventh after pitting and taking on extreme wets . 
 Massa 's lead – 12 seconds over the second @-@ placed Räikkönen by lap six – was reduced to nothing when the safety car was deployed on the eighth lap . Coulthard and Bourdais had crashed into the barriers at Massenet just seconds apart , requiring the marshals to separate the cars and lift them off the track . When the safety car pulled off after three laps , Massa consolidated his lead over his teammate . Räikkönen , however , was called into the pit lane for a drive @-@ through penalty after to failing to have his tyres attached by the three @-@ minute warning before the race , dropping him back to fourth . Kubica , now second , took the lead when Massa slid off down the escape road at Sainte Devote , the undamaged Ferrari rejoining in second as the rain eased . The two swapped positions again after their pit stops – Kubica on lap 26 and Massa on lap 33 – but Hamilton , carrying more fuel than his rivals , took the lead . 
 As a dry line appeared on the track , Hamilton extended his lead over Massa , from 13 to 37 seconds , by the time he pitted for the second time on lap 54 . His timing proved fortunate , as he changed to dry tyres just as such a strategy emerged as the strongest , and he emerged 13 seconds ahead of Massa . The Ferrari 's own pit stop two laps later dropped Massa behind Kubica . Hamilton 's lead was reduced when the safety car once again deployed on lap 62 after Rosberg crashed at Piscine , hitting both sides of the track and scattering debris . Rosberg was unhurt . 
 Of the 20 cars which started the race , Sutil had gained the most places by the second safety car period . The Force India started from 18th , rose one place after Kovalainen was pushed back to the pits , passed Piquet on the second lap and Bourdais a lap later . Sutil benefited as Button , Rosberg , Glock and Trulli pitted for repairs over the following laps , to sit in 11th by lap 14 . Alonso , on extreme wet tyres behind Heidfeld , attempted to pass the BMW at the hairpin , but succeeded only in damaging his front wing and forming a stationary queue behind him . He also benefitted by overtaking three cars under yellow flags and would have been penalised if he had finished the race . Sutil took advantage of the situation and passed four cars to take seventh , behind Heidfeld and Webber . Running a long first stint until lap 53 , he moved to fourth as the cars ahead of him pitted . Vettel gained 12 places from the start , battling with Barrichello and Nakajima early on before jumping several places on his first stint as his rivals pitted , eventually switching to dry tyres when he stopped on lap 52 . Webber improved three places from the start to sit in sixth , ahead of Vettel , Barrichello and Nakajima . 
 The safety car was withdrawn on lap 68 . Later on the same lap , Räikkönen lost control of his car under braking out of the tunnel , and by the time he regained control his speed was too great to avoid a collision with Sutil . The Ferrari damaged its front wing and pitted for a replacement before resuming , but the damage to Sutil 's rear suspension led to his retirement . Webber benefited from the incident and moved to fourth place , while Räikkönen dropped back to ninth . 
 The slow pace during the opening laps meant the race ended after two hours , or 76 laps , rather than the 78 laps originally scheduled . Hamilton , despite suffering a slow puncture on the final lap , crossed the finish line to take his first win in Monaco . Kubica followed in second , ahead of Massa and Webber . Vettel took the STR3 to its first points in its maiden race , coming fifth , ahead of Barrichello and Nakajima . Kovalainen recovered from his stall to finish eighth , one place ahead of Räikkönen , who set the fastest lap of the race on lap 74 , a 1 : 16 @.@ 689 . He was followed by Alonso , Button , Glock and Trulli . Heidfeld was the last of the classified finishers , in 14th position , four laps behind Hamilton . Fisichella retired with a gearbox failure after 36 laps ; Piquet – two laps after he switched to dry tyres on lap 46 – finished his race in the barriers at Sainte Devote . Sutil , Rosberg , Coulthard and Bourdais were the four other retirements . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three finishers appeared in Prince Albert II of Monaco 's Royal box to collect their trophies . In the subsequent press conference Hamilton said that conditions early in the race made driving difficult : " When the weather is like this , when it starts to rain and we had an idea it was going to start to dry , the important thing is to keep it on the track but I can 't explain how difficult it was for all of us . You were aquaplaning all the time and you were tip @-@ toeing almost . " Hamilton also said that his crash at Tabac had been the result of a stream of water running over the track , causing his car to oversteer and resulting in a puncture to his right rear tyre . Nevertheless , he praised his team and strategy for helping him take the victory . Kubica said that tyre problems in his middle stint meant he was unable to overtake Massa , who was driving a heavier car . Noticing Glock 's success on dry tyres , Kubica asked his team to make a similar change , resulting in his pass on Massa . During the post @-@ race interview Massa said that although he was fuelled to the end of the race after his first pit stop , the drying track forced him to pit again for new tyres : " It was a shame that we made a little mistake on the strategy but it is good to be on the podium . " 
 Sutil expressed his disappointment after being knocked out of the race when he was on course to record his team 's first points : 
 I can 't believe it , it was so close . It feels like a pain in my heart . It is like a dream gone to a nightmare – suddenly you are in the car and it looks all fantastic , then you have to accept it is not going to happen ... It was after the restart after the final safety car that Kimi had a problem under braking and crashed into the back of my car . The race was over and it was a real shock . A few tears came out as the adrenaline was high – I just can 't explain it . 
 Räikkönen apologised to Sutil for their collision , blaming cold brakes for his loss of control . Mike Gascoyne , Force India 's technical chief , called for the stewards to investigate the incident , but after deliberation no action was taken . " The frustration is that if that was a Force India driver hitting a world champion we 'd expect to get a one or two @-@ race ban , but the other way round nothing ever seems to happen " said Gascoyne . Sutil was called to the stewards ' room and reprimanded for passing three cars under yellow flags on lap 13 . Because he had retired , he was issued with merely a warning , but had he finished the race he would have been given a 25 @-@ second time penalty , which would have dropped him out of the point @-@ scoring positions . 
 Hamilton 's win was praised by Jackie Stewart , a three @-@ time winner of the Monaco Grand Prix . " At his age , Lewis can win this race many times , " he said . " This is the first , I hope , of many victories for him in Monaco so that he can join the greats of Formula One . " Damon Hill , the 1996 World Champion , said Hamilton " did very well indeed . I was most impressed , and the race as a whole was also a great advertisement for what F1 should be about . " The race result left Hamilton leading the Drivers ' Championship with 38 points . Räikkönen , who failed to score in Monaco , was second on 35 points , one point ahead of Massa and three ahead of Kubica . Heidfeld was sixth on 20 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari maintained their lead with 69 points , McLaren jumped to second on 53 points , and BMW Sauber dropped to third on 52 points , with 12 races of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Row hammer = 
 Row hammer ( also written as <unk> ) is an unintended side effect in dynamic random @-@ access memory ( DRAM ) that causes memory cells to leak their charges and interact electrically between themselves , possibly altering the contents of nearby memory rows that were not addressed in the original memory access . This circumvention of the isolation between DRAM memory cells results from the high cell density in modern DRAM , and can be triggered by specially crafted memory access patterns that rapidly activate the same memory rows numerous times . 
 The row hammer effect has been used in some privilege escalation computer security exploits . Different hardware @-@ based techniques exist to prevent the row hammer effect from occurring , including required support in some processors and types of DRAM memory modules . 
 = = Background = = 
 In dynamic RAM ( DRAM ) , each bit of stored data occupies a separate memory cell that is electrically implemented with one capacitor and one transistor . The charge state of a capacitor ( charged or discharged ) is what determines whether a DRAM cell stores " 1 " or " 0 " as a binary value . Huge numbers of DRAM memory cells are packed into integrated circuits , together with some additional logic that organizes the cells for the purposes of reading , writing and refreshing the data . 
 Memory cells ( blue squares in the illustration provided in this section ) are further organized into matrices and addressed through rows and columns . A memory address applied to a matrix is broken into the row address and column address , which are processed by the row and column address decoders ( in the illustration , vertical and horizontal green rectangles , respectively ) . After a row address selects the row for a read operation ( the selection is also known as row activation ) , bits from all cells in the row are transferred into the sense amplifiers that form the row buffer ( red squares in the illustration ) , from which the exact bit is selected using the column address . Consequently , read operations are of a destructive nature because the design of DRAM requires memory cells to be rewritten after their values have been read by transferring the cell charges into the row buffer . Write operations decode the addresses in a similar way , but as a result of the design entire rows must be rewritten for the value of a single bit to be changed . 
 As a result of storing data bits using capacitors that have a natural discharge rate , DRAM memory cells lose their state over time and require periodic rewriting of all memory cells , which is a process known as refreshing . As another result of the design , DRAM memory is susceptible to random changes in stored data , which are known as soft memory errors and attributed to cosmic rays and other causes . There are different techniques that counteract soft memory errors and improve the reliability of DRAM , of which error @-@ correcting code ( ECC ) memory and its advanced variants ( such as lockstep memory ) are most commonly used . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Increased densities of DRAM integrated circuits ( ICs ) have led to physically smaller memory cells capable of storing smaller charges , resulting in lower operational noise margins , increased rates of electromagnetic interactions between memory cells , and greater possibility of data loss . As a result , disturbance errors have been observed , being caused by cells interfering with each other 's operation and manifesting as random changes in the values of bits stored in affected memory cells . The awareness of disturbance errors dates back to the early 1970s and Intel 1103 as the first commercially available DRAM IC ; since then , DRAM manufacturers have employed various mitigation techniques to counteract disturbance errors , such as improving the isolation between cells and performing production testing . However , researchers proved in a 2014 analysis that commercially available DDR3 DRAM chips manufactured in 2012 and 2013 are susceptible to disturbance errors , while using the term row hammer to name the associated side effect that led to observed bit flips . 
 The opportunity for the row hammer effect to occur in DDR3 memory is primarily attributed to DDR3 's high density of memory cells and the results of associated interactions between the cells , while rapid DRAM row activations have been determined as the primary cause . Frequent row activations cause voltage fluctuations on the associated row selection lines , which have been observed to induce higher @-@ than @-@ natural discharge rates in capacitors belonging to nearby ( adjacent , in most cases ) memory rows , which are called victim rows ; if the affected memory cells are not refreshed before they lose too much charge , disturbance errors occur . Tests show that a disturbance error may be observed after performing around 139 @,@ 000 subsequent memory row accesses ( with cache flushes ) , and that up to one memory cell in every 1 @,@ 700 cells may be susceptible . Those tests also show that the rate of disturbance errors is not substantially affected by increased environment temperature , while it depends on the actual contents of DRAM because certain bit patterns result in significantly higher disturbance error rates . 
 A variant called double @-@ sided hammering involves targeted activations of two DRAM rows surrounding a victim row : in the illustration provided in this section , this variant would be activating both yellow rows with the aim of inducing bit flips in the purple row , which in this case would be the victim row . Tests show that this approach may result in a significantly higher rate of disturbance errors , compared to the variant that activates only one of the victim row 's neighbouring DRAM rows . 
 = = = Mitigation = = = 
 Different methods exist for more or less successful detection , prevention , correction or mitigation of the row hammer effect . Tests show that simple ECC solutions , providing single @-@ error correction and double @-@ error detection ( <unk> ) capabilities , are not able to correct or detect all observed disturbance errors because some of them include more than two flipped bits per memory word . A less effective solution is to introduce more frequent memory refreshing , with the refresh intervals shorter than the usual 64 ms , but this technique results in higher power consumption and increased processing overhead ; some vendors provide firmware updates that implement this type of mitigation . One of the more complex prevention measures performs counter @-@ based identification of frequently accessed memory rows and proactively refreshes their neighboring rows ; another method issues additional infrequent random refreshes of memory rows neighboring the accessed rows regardless of their access frequency . Research shows that these two prevention measures cause negligible performance impacts . 
 Since the release of Ivy Bridge microarchitecture , Intel Xeon processors support the so @-@ called pseudo target row refresh ( pTRR ) that can be used in combination with pTRR @-@ compliant DDR3 dual in @-@ line memory modules ( DIMMs ) to mitigate the row hammer effect by automatically refreshing possible victim rows , with no negative impacts on performance or power consumption . When used with DIMMs that are not pTRR @-@ compliant , these Xeon processors by default fall back on performing DRAM refreshes at twice the usual frequency , which results in slightly higher memory access latency and may reduce the memory bandwidth by up to 2 – 4 % . 
 The <unk> memory standard published by <unk> includes optional hardware support for the so @-@ called target row refresh ( TRR ) that prevents the row hammer effect without negatively impacting performance or power consumption . Additionally , some manufacturers implement TRR in their <unk> products , although it is not part of the <unk> memory standard published by <unk> . Internally , TRR identifies possible victim rows , by counting the number of row activations and comparing it against predefined chip @-@ specific maximum activate count ( MAC ) and maximum activate window ( tMAW ) values , and refreshes these rows to prevent bit flips . The MAC value is the maximum total number of row activations that may be encountered on a particular DRAM row within a time interval that is equal or shorter than the tMAW amount of time before its neighbouring rows are identified as victim rows ; TRR may also flag a row as a victim row if the sum of row activations for its two neighboring rows reaches the MAC limit within the tMAW time window . 
 Due to their necessity of huge numbers of rapidly performed DRAM row activations , row hammer exploits issue large numbers of uncached memory accesses that cause cache misses , which can be detected by monitoring the rate of cache misses for unusual peaks using hardware performance counters . Version 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 of the <unk> memory diagnostic software , released on February 13 , 2015 , includes a so @-@ called hammer test that checks whether computer hardware is susceptible to disturbance errors . 
 = = Implications = = 
 Memory protection , as a way of preventing processes from accessing memory that has not been assigned to each of them , is one of the concepts behind most modern operating systems . By using memory protection in combination with other security @-@ related mechanisms such as protection rings , it is possible to achieve privilege separation between processes , in which programs and computer systems in general are divided into parts limited to the specific privileges they require to perform a particular task . Using privilege separation can also reduce the extent of potential damage caused by computer security attacks by restricting their effects to specific parts of the system . 
 Disturbance errors ( explained in the section above ) effectively defeat various layers of memory protection by " short circuiting " them at a very low hardware level , practically creating a unique attack vector type that allows processes to alter the contents of arbitrary parts of the main memory by directly manipulating the underlying memory hardware . In comparison , " conventional " attack vectors such as buffer overflows aim at circumventing the protection mechanisms at the software level , by exploiting various programming mistakes to achieve alterations of otherwise inaccessible main memory contents . 
 = = = Exploits = = = 
 The initial research into the row hammer effect , publicized by a group of authors in June 2014 , described the nature of disturbance errors and indicated the potential for constructing an attack , but did not provide any examples of a working security exploit . Another research paper , created by a group of authors and published in October 2014 , did not imply the existence of any security @-@ related issues arising from the row hammer effect . 
 On March 9 , 2015 , Google 's Project Zero revealed two working privilege escalation exploits based on the row hammer effect , establishing its exploitable nature on the x86 @-@ 64 architecture . One of the revealed exploits targets the Google Native Client ( NaCl ) mechanism for running a limited subset of x86 @-@ 64 machine instructions within a sandbox , exploiting the row hammer effect to escape from the sandbox and gain the ability to issue system calls directly . This NaCl vulnerability , tracked as CVE @-@ 2015 @-@ <unk> , has been mitigated by modifying the NaCl so it does not allow execution of the clflush ( cache line flush ) machine instruction , which has been found to be required for constructing an effective row hammer attack . 
 The second exploit revealed by Project Zero runs as an unprivileged Linux process on the x86 @-@ 64 architecture , exploiting the row hammer effect to gain unrestricted access to all physical memory installed in a computer . By combining the disturbance errors with memory spraying , this exploit is capable of altering page table entries ( <unk> ) used by the virtual memory system for mapping virtual addresses to physical addresses , which results in the exploit gaining unrestricted memory access . Due to its nature and the inability of the x86 @-@ 64 architecture to make clflush a privileged machine instruction , this exploit can hardly be mitigated on computers that do not use hardware with built @-@ in row hammer prevention mechanisms . While testing the viability of exploits , Project Zero found that about half of the 29 tested laptops experienced disturbance errors , with some of them occurring on vulnerable laptops in less than five minutes of running row @-@ hammer @-@ inducing code ; the tested laptops were manufactured between 2010 and 2014 and used non @-@ ECC DDR3 memory . 
 In July 2015 , a group of security researchers published a paper that describes an <unk> and instruction @-@ set @-@ independent way for exploiting the row hammer effect . Instead of relying on the clflush instruction to perform cache flushes , this approach achieves uncached memory accesses by causing a very high rate of cache eviction using carefully selected memory access patterns . Although the cache replacement policies differ between processors , this approach overcomes the architectural differences by employing an adaptive cache eviction strategy algorithm . The proof of concept for this approach is provided both as a native code implementation , and as a pure JavaScript implementation that runs on Firefox 39 . The JavaScript implementation , called <unk> , uses large typed arrays and relies on their internal allocation using large pages ; as a result , it demonstrates a very high @-@ level exploit of a very low @-@ level vulnerability . 
 = Raid on Haverhill ( 1708 ) = 
 The Raid on Haverhill was a military engagement that took place on August 29 , 1708 during Queen Anne 's War . French , Algonquin , and Abenaki warriors under the command of Jean @-@ Baptiste Hertel de Rouville descended on Haverhill , then a small frontier community in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . In the surprise attack , 16 people were killed and another 14 to 24 were taken captive . A rapid militia muster gave chase , and in a skirmish later in the day , nine of the French and Indian party were killed and some of their prisoners escaped . 
 Haverhill was not the original target of the raiders . Expecting a larger Indian contingent , French authorities planned to engage in a series of raids on the communities of the Piscataqua River . However , the unwillingness of some Indian tribes to participate in the expedition forced the French to reduce the scope of the operation and choose an easier target . The raid was more costly to the French than previous frontier raids like that in 1704 on Deerfield , Massachusetts because the province had been warned of the raiders ' advance . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Queen Anne 's War ( as the War of the Spanish Succession was called in the colonies of British America ) broke out in 1702 , it sparked war on the already tense frontier between the English colonies of New England and the colonies of New France , including Acadia and Canada . French military officers from the troupes de la marine , the defense force of New France , often led parties of Indians from their settlements along the Saint Lawrence River south to the northern frontiers of New England , which then included small communities in what is now northern Massachusetts and southern New Hampshire and Maine . 
 The largest and most successful raid of the war occurred in February 1704 , when Jean @-@ Baptiste Hertel de Rouville led about 250 men , principally Indians on a raid against the frontier town of Deerfield in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Hertel de Rouville 's band killed or took prisoner many of the townsfolk , returning to Canada on a difficult trek in which a number of the prisoners died ; many of the surviving captives were adopted into Indian communities afterward . Massachusetts fortified its frontier with militia in response to this raid , and launched a raid against Acadia in retaliation . 
 The Massachusetts village of Haverhill was also subjected to smaller @-@ scale raids in 1704 , but it was not originally the target of the ambitious expedition planned by New France 's Governor @-@ General Philippe de Rigaud Vaudreuil in 1708 . In the aftermath of the failed English siege of Port Royal , Acadia in 1707 , Vaudreuil was criticized by French Marine Minister the Comte de Pontchartrain for failing to apply sufficient pressure on the New England colonies . Vaudreuil was also concerned over the increasing tendency of Indians that were under French influence to engage in illicit trade with the Province of New York , cutting into New France 's economic activity . Vaudreuil decided to address these issues by organizing a major raid into New England that was intended to be even larger in scope than the Deerfield raid . 
 Vaudreuil 's plan was to amass a force of as many as 400 men for attacks on the towns of New Hampshire on the Piscataqua River . In order to maintain some secrecy over the size and target of the expedition , forces from several points along the Saint Lawrence River would descend to Lake Winnipesaukee , where they would rendezvous with Abenaki and <unk> tribal parties . The main French party departed from Trois @-@ Rivières , and consisted of about 100 men , drawn from Canadian militia and the troupes de la marine , under the command of Hertel de Rouville . This party included a number of veterans from the Deerfield raid , and they were accompanied by bands of Abenaki and Nipissing . A band of 220 Iroquois from the <unk> and Kahnawake tribes was to depart Montreal under the command of René Boucher de La <unk> , and additional Huron and Abenakis were to come from near Quebec . 
 Reports that a major expedition was being planned made their way via Indian traders to Albany , New York , and from there to Boston . Because the expedition 's targets were not known , little could be done to prepare specific defenses . A party of about 40 provincial militia were sent to Haverhill in response to these reports . 
 = = Expedition difficulties = = 
 Elements of the expedition departed in mid @-@ July from the Saint Lawrence River . As the Quebec party ascended the Saint @-@ François River , a Huron died in an accident . This was viewed as a bad portent by many of the Indians , and the Hurons turned back . Among the Iroquois from Montreal , who traveled via Lake Champlain , some men fell sick and the rest refused to continue , in what some contemporaries thought was a ruse by the Iroquois to avoid conflict . Vaudreuil believed this was the case , and reports reached the English at Albany that the Iroquois had deliberately chosen to abandon the expedition " not to join war against New England . " Despite these setbacks , Vaudreuil ordered Hertel de Rouville to press on , even if he received no further reinforcements . When his company reached Lake Winnipesaukee , he found that no eastern Indians willing to participate in the expedition had been found . Hertel de Rouville was consequently left with a band of about 160 men , which limited his options for raiding targets to places that were less fortified . 
 Haverhill was chosen as the target for several reasons . The village layout was already well @-@ known from the 1704 raids and from an earlier raid in the Nine Years ' War . It was not particularly large ( 25 to 30 houses ) , its location lent itself poorly to defense , and only some of the houses were fortified . A fast @-@ moving raiding party could be in and out of the village before the alarm could be raised . The party arrived outside Haverhill and prepared to begin the raid on Sunday , August 29 . It was joined at some point on its travels by the exiled Abenaki war chief <unk> , who lived not far from Haverhill , and had received word of the expedition 's advance . 
 At the time , responsibility for Haverhill 's defense was divided . The local militia was under the command of Simon Wainwright , whose house had a view of the entire village . The town 's defenses had been supplemented by three small ( three to four man ) garrisons of colonial troops under the overall command of Major Turner . 
 = = Raid = = 
 The raiders successfully sneaked past the outer garrisons of provincial militia , and were first spotted in the pre @-@ dawn light by a villager . Firing his gun to raise the alarm , he ran for the village , with the French and Indians in noisy pursuit . The action quickly became general as the raiders descended on the houses in the village . One of the colonial garrisons was stationed in the home of the minister , Benjamin Rolfe , who had barred the door in an attempt to keep the raiders out . Raiders fired through the door , wounding Rolfe , and then broke the door down . They then slaughtered Rolfe , his wife , infant child , and the colonial militiamen , who , " paralyzed by fear " , were begging for mercy . In another house , one baby was thrown through an open window by a raider but suffered no injury . A number of villagers escaped by hiding in cellars whose trapdoors were not discovered by the raiders . Captain Wainwright was preparing to organize a defense when gunfire from the raiders passed through the door to his house , killing him instantly . 
 The raiding and pillaging continued until the sounds of approaching militia companies reached the raiders , who quickly lit the town meetinghouse on fire and left with their accumulated prisoners and loot . The reinforcements came from neighboring communities ( some from as far away as Salem ) and mustered under Major Turner 's command when they arrived . One party of Haverhill militiamen discovered the raiders ' baggage camp several miles from the village , and took their packs . Captain Samuel Ayer 's company , numbering about 20 , pursued the retreating raiders . Eventually strengthened by further militia , he engaged the encumbered raiders . In a furious rear @-@ guard action the raiders fought off the militia ( killing Ayer in the action ) , but lost nine killed , including Hertel de Rouville 's brother , and 18 wounded . Because of the skirmish , the raiders abandoned some of their loot , and some of their prisoners got away . The village recorded that 30 to 40 people were killed or captured , which included those who escaped in the later skirmish . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The raiders ' return to Canada was difficult . Joseph Bartlett , one of their captives , described the privations suffered due the loss of the force 's baggage . One day they caught a hawk , which was divided among 15 men ; his share , the head , was " the largest meal I had these four days . " Bartlett remained in captivity with the Indians for four years . Some of the Frenchmen , rather than attempt the journey without their supplies , surrendered themselves to Massachusetts authorities . 
 French accounts of the raid greatly exaggerated the numbers involved , claiming that several hundred had been killed , and that the post @-@ raid skirmish had involved as many as 200 English colonists . The raid was more costly to the French than previous raids had been : because of better preparedness on the part of the Massachusetts militia , the French suffered a higher proportion of casualties than they had in the Deerfield raid . 
 The raid was the last large @-@ scale attack the French launched against Massachusetts in the war . Minor attacks occurred along its frontier , and Wells , then part of Massachusetts but now in Maine , was attacked by a substantial force in 1712 . Port Royal fell in 1710 to an expedition that included British marines , and the British abandoned a 1711 naval expedition against Quebec after some of its troop transports ran aground at the mouth of the St. Lawrence with significant loss of life . 
 = The Story of a Fierce Bad Rabbit = 
 The Story of A Fierce Bad Rabbit is a children ’ s book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , and first published by Frederick Warne & Co. in December 1906 . The book tells of a bad little rabbit who is fired upon by a hunter and loses his tail and whiskers . The book was intended for babies and very young children , and was originally published on a strip of paper that folded into a wallet and was tied with a ribbon . The format was unpopular with booksellers , and eventually reprinted in the standard small book format of the Peter Rabbit library . Although the book sold well , there are not many left in existence . It provides the young child with an introduction to books and the Peter Rabbit universe . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A bad rabbit finds a good rabbit sitting on a bench eating a carrot his mother gave him . Wanting the carrot , he takes it from the good rabbit and scratches him . The good rabbit escapes and hides in a nearby hole . Meanwhile , a hunter notices the bad rabbit sitting on the bench and mistakes him for a bird . He fires at the bad rabbit , but finds nothing but a carrot and a rabbit tail on the bench . The good rabbit then sees the bad rabbit running away without his whiskers and tail . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 The Tale of A Fierce Bad Rabbit was written for Louie Warne , the daughter of Potter 's publisher , Harold Warne . The child thought Peter Rabbit much too well @-@ behaved and wanted a story about a truly bad rabbit . Potter was experimenting with toy books at the time and A Fierce Bad Rabbit was published for Christmas 1906 in a panorama format of fourteen pictures and text printed from left to right on a long strip of paper that folded accordion @-@ fashion into a wallet tied with a ribbon . The format was popular with readers but unpopular with booksellers who found the item too difficult to keep folded , tied , and in its place once curious customers opened and examined it . 
 In 1916 , Potter completed a new frontispiece for the tale , and A Fierce Bad Rabbit was reprinted in a slightly smaller format than the other books in the Peter Rabbit library . Today , the book is printed in the standard small format of the series . 
 = = Critical commentaries = = 
 Potter 's three panorama books of 1906 – The Story of A Fierce Bad Rabbit , The Story of Miss Moppet , and The Sly Old Cat – are vignettes rather than the typical tales she produced of causality , extended plot , and variety of character . Each story has a very limited cast of characters with one dominant character ( the title character ) , and each is dependent upon an archetypal animosity : rabbit versus hunter and cat versus rodent . In their simplicity and unusual format , these stories were intended for babies and very young children , but Potter was never at her best when writing for a clearly defined audience . A Fierce Bad Rabbit fails for this reason , and for its overt moralizing and stiff illustrations . Most damaging to the book 's success are the two rabbits . Both lack the adorable cuteness of Peter Rabbit and his kin . 
 A Fierce Bad Rabbit focuses on a traditional rather than a creative approach to storytelling and reflects Potter 's inexperience with babies and very young children . She appears to be more interested in naming and designating this or that rather than developing plot and exploring character . She names and directs the child 's attention to the rabbit 's tail , whiskers , and claws , for example , rather than to the animal 's facial expression . When the hunter appears , he is <unk> introduced with , " This is a man with a gun . " The gun goes off as expected with the stereotypical " <unk> ! " instead of a more creative onomatopoeia term Potter would have surely devised had she been writing this book for older children . 
 The panorama books are not Potter 's best efforts , but do demonstrate her ability to pare text and illustrations to essentials . She worked best though with more complicated plots and characters , and with specific settings rather than generalized backgrounds . Her inexperience with babies and very young children is evident in the original panorama format itself for a long strip of paper and a wallet are likely to be mutilated by the very young . The story in its current standard small book format of the Peter Rabbit series is considered to provide very young children with an introduction to books in general and to the world of Peter Rabbit . 
 Pop culture references : The book is referenced in the final episode of To Play the King . The Prime Minister states that Britain is " a nation of fierce , bad rabbits , " and that Potter , more than any other writer , influenced his personal prose style . 
 = Orange Line ( MBTA ) = 
 The Orange Line is one of the four subway lines of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority . It extends from Forest Hills in Jamaica Plain , Boston in the south to Oak Grove in Malden in the north . It meets the Red Line at Downtown Crossing , the Blue Line at State , and the Green Line at Haymarket and North Station . It connects with Amtrak service at Back Bay and North Station , and MBTA Commuter Rail service at Back Bay , North Station , Ruggles station in Roxbury , and Forest Hills . From 1901 to 1987 , it provided the first elevated rapid transit in Boston ; the last elevated section was torn down in 1987 when the southern portion of the line was moved to the Southwest Corridor . 
 All stations on the Orange Line are handicapped accessible . These stations are equipped with high @-@ level platforms for easy boarding , as well as elevators for easy platform access . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Main Line of the electric Boston Elevated Railway opened in segments , starting in 1901 . It proceeded from Sullivan Square along the Charlestown Elevated to the Canal Street Incline near North Station . It was carried underground by the Tremont Street Subway ( now part of the Green Line ) , returning above ground at the Pleasant Street Incline ( now closed , located just south of Boylston station ) . A temporary link connected from there to the Washington Street Elevated , which in 1901 ran from this point via Washington Street to Dudley Square ( which is most of what is now Phase 1 of the Silver Line ) . 
 Also in 1901 , the Atlantic Avenue Elevated opened , branching at Causeway Street to provide an alternate route through downtown Boston ( along the shoreline , where today there is no rail transit ) to the Washington Street Elevated . 
 In 1908 , a new Washington Street Tunnel opened , allowing Main Line service to travel from the Charlestown Elevated , underground via an additional new portal at the Canal Street Incline , under downtown Boston and back up again to meet the Washington Street Elevated and Atlantic Avenue Elevated near Chinatown . Use of the parallel Tremont Street Subway was returned exclusively to streetcars . 
 By 1909 , the Washington Street Elevated had been extended south to Forest Hills . Trains from Washington Street were routed through the new subway , either all the way to Sullivan Square , or back around in a loop via the subway and then the Atlantic Avenue Elevated . 
 In 1919 , the Charlestown Elevated was extended north from Sullivan Square to Everett , over surface right @-@ of @-@ way parallel to Alford Street / Broadway , with a drawbridge over the Mystic River . The Boston Elevated had long @-@ term plans to continue this extension further north to Malden , a goal which would only be achieved decades later , under public ownership and not via the Everett route . 
 = = = Closure of Atlantic Avenue Elevated and ownership changes = = = 
 Following a 1928 accident at a tight curve on Beach Street , the southern portion of the Atlantic Avenue Elevated , between South Station and Tower D on Washington Street , was closed ( except for rush @-@ hour trips from Dudley to North Station via the Elevated ) , breaking the loop ; non @-@ rush @-@ hour Atlantic Avenue service was reduced to a shuttle between North and South Stations . In 1938 , the remainder of the Atlantic Avenue Elevated was closed , leaving the subway as the only route through downtown - what is now the Orange Line between Haymarket and Chinatown stations . 
 Ownership of the railway was transferred from the private Boston Elevated Railway to the public Metropolitan Transit Authority ( MTA ) in 1947 ; the MTA was itself reconstituted as the modern Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority ( MBTA ) in 1964 . 
 = = = Orange Line naming = = = 
 The line was known as the Main Line Elevated under the Boston Elevated Railway , and the Forest Hills – Everett Elevated ( Route 2 on maps ) under the Metropolitan Transportation Authority . 
 After taking over operations in August 1964 , the MBTA began rebranding many elements of Boston 's public transportation network . On August 26 , 1965 , the four rapid transit lines were assigned colored names related to their history and geography . The Elevated became the Orange Line after Orange Street , an old name for the section of Washington Street immediately south of downtown , under which the Washington Street Tunnel runs . When designing the rebranding , Cambridge Seven Associates originally planned for yellow instead of orange , but yellow was rejected after testing . 
 In January and February 1967 , the four original Washington Street Tunnel stations were renamed . Transfer stations were given the same name for all lines : Winter and Summer stations plus Washington on the Red Line became Washington , Milk and State plus Devonshire on the Blue Line became State Street after the cross street , and Union and Friend plus Haymarket Square on the Green Line became Haymarket after Haymarket Square . Boylston Street was renamed Essex to avoid confusion with nearby Boylston station on the Green Line . 
 In May 1987 , Essex was renamed Chinatown after the adjacent Chinatown neighborhood , and Washington renamed Downtown Crossing after the adjacent shopping district . In March 2010 , New England Medical Center station was renamed as Tufts Medical Center two years after the eponymous hospital changed its name . 
 = = = <unk> of Charlestown and Everett service = = = 
 The Boston Transportation Planning Review looked at the line in the 1970s , considering extensions to reach the beltway Route 128 , with termini at Reading in the north and Dedham in the south . As a result of this review , the Charlestown Elevated - which served the Charlestown neighborhood north of downtown Boston and the inner suburb Everett - was demolished and replaced in 1975 . 
 The Haymarket North Extension rerouted the Orange Line through an underwater crossing of the Charles River . Service in Charlestown was replaced with service along Boston and Maine tracks routed partially beneath an elevated section of Interstate 93 , ultimately to Wellington and then to Oak Grove in Malden , Massachusetts instead of Everett . Rail service to Everett was replaced with buses . 
 = = = Closure of Washington Street Elevated = = = 
 Construction of Interstate 95 into downtown Boston was cancelled in 1972 after local protest over the necessary demolition . However , land for I @-@ 95 's Southwest Corridor through Roxbury had already been cleared of buildings ; moreover , the state had already committed to using this vacant land for transportation purposes . As a result , instead of an 8 @-@ lane Interstate highway with a relocated Orange Line running in its median ( in a manner similar to the Chicago Transit Authority 's Dan Ryan and Congress and Jefferson Park lines ) , the space would be occupied by the realigned Orange Line , a reconstructed three @-@ track mainline for Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor and MBTA Commuter Rail trains , and a linear park . After this re @-@ routing was accomplished in 1987 , the Washington Street Elevated was torn down , the last major segment of the original elevated line to be demolished . 
 Between April 30 and May 3 , 1987 , the Washington Street Elevated south of the Chinatown station was closed to allow the Orange Line to be tied into the new Southwest Corridor . On May 4 , 1987 , the Orange Line was rerouted from the southern end of the Washington Street Tunnel onto the new Southwest Corridor . Instead of rising up to elevated tracks , it now veered west at the Massachusetts Turnpike and followed the Pike and the old Boston and Albany Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way to the existing MBTA Commuter Rail stop at Back Bay . It then continued along new tracks , partially covered and partially open but depressed , to Forest Hills . This MBTA right @-@ of @-@ way is also shared by Amtrak as part of the national Northeast Corridor intercity passenger rail service . 
 While ending more or less at the same terminus ( Forest Hills ) , the new routing bypassed significantly to the west of its previous route on Washington Street ; local residents were promised replacement service . Originally , plans provided for light rail vehicles street running in mixed traffic , from Washington Street to Dudley Square , then diverting southeastward on Warren Street towards Dorchester . In 2002 , Phase 1 of the Silver Line bus rapid transit was added to connect Washington Street to the downtown subways , attempting to address this service need . This replacement service was controversial , as many residents preferred the return of rail transportation . 
 = = = Renovations during the Big Dig = = = 
 Haymarket and North Station received major renovations during the Big Dig in the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century , as the Causeway Street Elevated portion of the Green Line was buried , its physical connection to the Orange Line was improved to make transfers easier , the Canal Street Incline was finally closed , and the Green Line was re @-@ rerouted through a new portal closer to the river , near the <unk> Bunker Hill Bridge . 
 = = = Assembly = = = 
 In the early 2000s , Somerville began planning an infill station between Sullivan and Wellington to serve the new Assembly Square development . The $ 57 million station was funded by the state 's Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development , FTA Section <unk> New Starts program , and Federal Realty Investment Trust ( the developer of Assembly Square ) . Construction began in late 2011 and finished in mid 2014 . The new station , Assembly , opened on September 2 , 2014 . It was the first new station on the MBTA subway system since 1987 . 
 = = = Winter issues and resiliency work = = = 
 During the unusually brutal winter of 2014 @-@ 2015 , the entire MBTA system was shut down on several occasions by heavy snowfalls . The aboveground sections of the Orange and Red lines were particularly vulnerable due to their exposed third rail , which iced over during storms . When a single train stopped due to power loss , other trains soon stopped as well ; without continually running trains pushing snow off the rails , the lines were quickly covered in snow . ( Because the Blue Line was built with overhead lines on its surface section due to its proximity to corrosive salt air , it was not subject to icing issues . ) 
 During 2015 , the MBTA is implementing its $ 83 @.@ 7 million Winter Resiliency Program , much of which focused on preventing similar issues with the Orange and Red lines . The Southwest Corridor section of the Orange Line is located in a trench and is protected from the worst weather , but the 1970s @-@ built Haymarket North Extension had older infrastructure and was in worse shape . From Sullivan Square north , it is exposed to the weather and largely built on an embankment , rendering it more vulnerable . That section is receiving new heated third rail , switch heaters , and snow fences to reduce the impacts of inclement weather . The work requires <unk> of the line from Sullivan Square to Oak Grove on many weeknights . 
 = = = Historical routes = = = 
 = = Station listing = = 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 The " T " previously had a fleet of Pullman @-@ Standard heavy rail cars for the Orange Line . These cars , known as <unk> , had been in service since the 1950s , and saw service on both the elevated and the northern extension before they were retired in 1981 . Several remained on the property for some time before being scrapped . The <unk> cars were a favorite for fans , as the small motorman 's cab enabled passengers to stand at the front for an operator 's @-@ eye view . 
 The Orange Line is standard gauge heavy rail and uses a third rail for power . The current fleet is the <unk> series , built between 1979 and 1981 by Hawker Siddeley Canada Car and Foundry ( now Bombardier Transportation ) of Thunder Bay , Ontario , Canada . They are 65 feet ( 20 m ) long and 9 ft 3 in ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) wide , with three pairs of doors on each side . They are based on the <unk> model used by PATH in New Jersey . There are 120 cars , numbered <unk> @-@ <unk> . All in @-@ service Orange Line trains run in six @-@ car configurations . 
 = = = New trains = = = 
 In late 2008 , the MBTA began the planning process for new Orange and Red Line vehicles . The agency planned for a simultaneous order for 146 Orange Line cars ( to replace the whole fleet ) and 74 Red Line cars ( to replace the older 1500 and 1600 series cars ) . A similar order was used in the late 1970s for the current Orange Line cars and the old Blue Line cars , ordered at the same time and largely identical except for size . In October 2013 , MassDOT announced plans for a $ 1 @.@ 3 billion subway car order for the Orange and Red Lines , which would provide 152 new cars to replace the current 120 @-@ car fleet and add more frequent service . 
 On October 22 , 2014 , the MassDOT Board awarded Chinese manufacturer CNR a $ 566 @.@ 6 million contract to build 152 replacement railcars for the Orange Line , as well as additional cars for the Red Line . CNR will build the Type B cars at a new manufacturing plant in Springfield , Massachusetts , with initial deliveries expected in 2018 and all cars in service by 2023 . In conjunction with the new rolling stock , the remainder of the $ 1 @.@ 3 billion allocated for the project will pay for testing , signal improvements and expanded maintenance facilities , as well as other related expenses . 
 While waiting for new cars , service has deteriorated due to maintenance problems with the old cars . The number of trains at rush hour was reduced from 17 ( 102 cars ) to 16 ( 96 cars ) in 2011 ; in the same year , daily ridership surpassed 200 @,@ 000 . Increased running times - largely due to longer dwell times from increased ridership - resulted in headways being lengthened from 5 minutes before 2011 to 6 minutes in 2016 . The increased fleet size with the new trains will allow headways to be reduced to 4 to 5 minutes at peak . In the interim , a 2016 test of platform markings at North Station which show boarding passengers where to stand to avoid blocking alighting passengers , resulted in a one @-@ third decrease in dwell times . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 The Orange Line has two tracks ( one in each direction ) and a third track between Wellington and the Charles River portal . This track is used to bypass construction on the other two , and for testing newly delivered cars for the Orange and Blue lines . The primary maintenance and storage facility is at Wellington Station . Had the Orange Line been extended to Reading , the third track would have been the northbound local track and the present @-@ day northbound track would have become the express track . 
 = Delaware Route 11 = 
 Delaware Route 11 ( DE 11 ) is a state highway in Kent County , Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 302 ( MD 302 ) at the Maryland border near <unk> , Maryland northeast to DE 300 near Kenton . The road , known as <unk> Road for its entire length , passes through the farmland of western Kent County and then through the town of Hartly , where it intersects DE 44 . The route was built as a state highway in the 1920s and 1930s and received the DE 11 designation by 1936 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 11 begins at the Maryland border in western Kent County , where the road continues west into Maryland as MD 302 towards <unk> . From the state line , DE 11 heads northeast on two @-@ lane , undivided <unk> Road through a mix of woods and farms , with occasional residences . The road enters the town of Hartly , where it passes several homes . In the center of town , the route crosses DE 44 and heads north before it curves northeast out of Hartly . DE 11 continues into rural areas , making another turn north . The road runs northeast and comes to an end at DE 300 to the southwest of Kenton . 
 DE 11 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 2 @,@ 413 vehicles at the eastern terminus at DE 300 to a low of 1 @,@ 443 vehicles at the south end of Hartly . None of DE 11 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 what is now DE 11 existed as an unimproved county road . The portion of the route north of Hartly was built as a paved state highway in 1927 . The road south of Hartly was taken over by the state and paved by 1931 . DE 11 was assigned to its current alignment by 1936 . The route has not changed since its inception . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Typhoon Olive ( 1952 ) = 
 Typhoon Olive was the strongest Pacific typhoon in 1952 . The thirteenth tropical storm and the ninth typhoon of the season , it developed about 1 @,@ 600 mi ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) southwest of Honolulu , Hawaii on September 13 . The next day , the system attained tropical storm intensity . Beginning to rapidly intensify , Olive attained typhoon intensity on September 15 . Olive reached Category 5 intensity on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale on September 16 . 
 Olive produced significant damage on Wake Island , where wind gusts reached 142 mph ( 229 km / h ) . Significant flooding was reported , and the majority of the structures were destroyed . However , few injuries were reported , and the island 's facilities were restored in 1953 . Typhoon Olive remains one of the most intense tropical cyclones to affect the island . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 8 , an area of disturbed weather , located near 12 @.@ 0 ° N 169 @.@ 0 ° W , was plotted as a tropical wave on surface weather maps . Operationally , however , the system was not classified as a tropical storm until September 15 ; however , postseason analysis determined that the system acquired tropical storm intensity on 0000 UTC on September 15 . Tropical Storm Olive , moving west @-@ northwest near 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) , turned toward Wake Island on September 15 . Around 1800 UTC Olive was upgraded into typhoon , with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Continuing to intensify , Olive passed near Wake Island , where maximum sustained winds of 127 mph ( 204 km / h ) were recorded . Around this time , reconnaissance aircraft reported a minimum central pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) . On September 16 , Olive intensified from a Category 2 to a Category 4 typhoon , attained the equivalence of super typhoon intensity , and strengthened to a peak intensity of 185 mph ( 298 km / h ) the following day far from land . On September 18 , Olive weakened from a Category 5 to a Category 2 typhoon and recurved northeast . On September 19 , the cyclone lost typhoon intensity . Tropical Storm Olive transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and was last monitored on September 21 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On Wake Island , 750 people sheltered in World War II bunkers . Olive , the second typhoon to affect the island since 1935 , produced sustained wind speeds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) and peak gusts of 142 mph ( 229 km / h ) on the island . Significant flooding was also recorded . Damage was severe ; it is estimated that 85 % of the island 's structures were demolished due to the storm . All of the homes and the island 's hotel were destroyed . Additionally , the island 's chapel and quonset huts were destroyed . The island 's LORAN station , operated by the United States Coast Guard , was also destroyed . On September 18 , water and power services were restored . The facilities on the island were fully restored in 1953 . The total cost to repair damages caused by Olive amounted to $ 1 @.@ 6 million ( 1952 USD ; $ 13 million 2009 USD ) . No fatalities occurred on the island , and four injuries were reported . None of the 230 Pan American World Airways employees received injuries . 
 = Mario Party 4 = 
 Mario Party 4 ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Mario <unk> Fō ) is a party video game for the GameCube , developed by Hudson Soft and published by Nintendo . Mario Party 4 is the fourth installment in a series of board game style , and was the first game in the series to be released for GameCube . It was released in North America on October 21 , 2002 , in Japan on November 8 , 2002 , and in Europe and Australia on November 29 , 2002 . It is the fourth game in the Mario Party series . Mario Party 4 is followed by Mario Party 5 . 
 Mario Party 4 features eight playable characters : Mario , Luigi , Princess Peach , Yoshi , Wario , Donkey Kong , Princess Daisy and Waluigi from the Mario series , who can be directed as characters on six themed game boards in the game . The objective of the game is to earn as many stars as possible , which are obtained by purchase from a single predefined space on the game board . Each character 's movement is determined by a roll of a die , with a roll from each player forming a single turn . Each turn in Mario Party 4 is followed by a minigame in which characters compete for coins they can use to purchase items and stars . It is the final game in the Mario Party series to include Donkey Kong as a playable character until Mario Party 10 for the Wii U. 
 Mario Party 4 received above @-@ average reviews from the media , although there were several complaints regarding a lack of originality and slow pacing during games . The game won the Family Game of The Year award at the Interactive Achievement Awards of 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mario Party 4 is based on an interactive board game played by four characters from the Mario series , which are controlled either by the player or the game 's Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) . The game features eight playable characters , although they do not have any different gameplay attributes from each other ( save for favouring certain items when controlled by the AI ) . Players can arrange their characters into opposing pairs , or play independently in a battle royale . As with most board games , each participant takes turns in rolling a dice block ( 1 to 10 ) to determine the number of spaces moved on the board . A minigame follows each round of four turns , which yields a coin prize for the winner . A set number of these are required to purchase a star , with the victor being the character with the most stars at the end of the game . The length of a game can vary as the predetermined number of minigames is adjustable in multiples of five . Stars are usually attained by purchase at the specific space on the board where it is set , with the star location changing to another space after every acquisition . Three extra stars can be obtained if " Bonus mode " is switched on , with a star each awarded to the player with the most minigames won , most coins collected , and most happening spaces visited . This mode also contains hidden blocks , which will grant either coins or a star when located and hit . 
 Mario Party 4 features six boards , five of which take their name from a secondary Mario character , such as Goomba . The boards are themed to correspond with their titular character , and contain specialised features to reflect this such as the roulette wheel in the casino @-@ based " Goomba 's Greedy Gala " . The on @-@ board characters follow a set route , although this becomes optional when arriving at a junction . The boards also contain multiple " Events " , which are generic stations placed on every board . These include " Lottery Shops " , where money is gambled on item prizes , and " Boo Houses " , where Boo is paid to steal either coins or a star from an opponent . The majority of spaces on the boards are denoted by either blue or red circles , with blue granting coins and red deducting them . Alternative spaces are also available , such as " happening spaces " , which trigger an event exclusive to the current board . " Mushroom Spaces " grant the user either a " Mega " or " Mini " Mushroom — " Mega Mushrooms " extend the movement range while " Mini Mushrooms " curtail it . Additionally , giant characters will bypass " Events " and stars while reduced characters can access special areas on the board via pipes . Multiple other items can be bought from on @-@ board shops , such as " Swap Cards " , which exchanges items between two players . 
 The minigames in Mario Party 4 are short , unrelated events with a specified objective that the players must attempt to meet to earn coins as a reward . Minigames are unlocked during the main " Party Mode " , although they can be played outside of the game board context in " Minigame Mode " . This allows the player to either freely play minigames ; select which minigames they want , and control conditions for victory in a match , such as the " 3 @-@ win @-@ match " ; or play 2 vs. 2 minigames to claim a space on a tic @-@ tac @-@ toe board . Minigames are split into seven categories : " 4 @-@ player " , " 1 vs 3 " , " 2 vs 2 " , " Battle " , " Bowser " , " Story " , and " etc . " . The first three occur randomly after each set of turns during a party , while " Battle " can only be triggered by landing on the corresponding space on the board . Unlike regular minigames , the players must contribute their money and then compete to reclaim it or earn more by winning the minigame . There are also rarer groups of minigames , such as the Bowser minigames requiring the loser to forfeit items or coins and the <unk> games , which can only be accessed by characters reduced by the " Mini Mushroom " . A set of minigames that cannot be played during normal conditions are located in the " Extra room " , featuring <unk> and Whomp . 
 The game features a loose plot in that the player must progress through " Story mode " to earn presents from the eponymous characters of the pertaining boards . These are presents that had been brought to the player 's birthday party in the game , which must be completed by earning the most stars in a board game and subsequently defeating the present giver in a special one @-@ on @-@ one Story minigame . This is all contained within the " Party Cube " , which grants the wishes of its users ; the story 's climax comes in the form of Bowser , who wishes to disrupt the party with his own board , hosted by Koopa Kid . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mario Party 4 , like all games in the Mario Party series , except for Mario Party 9 and Mario Party : Island Tour , was developed by Hudson Soft and published by Nintendo . It is the last Mario Party game to have Donkey Kong as a playable character ( until Mario Party 10 ) and to have Wario wearing his classic long @-@ sleeve shirt . It is also the first Mario Party game to have Yoshi 's main voice replacing his classic " record @-@ scratching " voice from the first three Mario Party games , and the first to have default teams . It is also the first Mario game to feature Princess Peach and Princess Daisy 's current main dresses , including Daisy 's short orange hair , with her current gold crown , and Caucasian skin color . It is also the only Mario Party game to have Bowser as a playable character , though only in a hidden minigame . 
 The game was first announced in a 2002 Nintendo press conference in Tokyo , with the announcements made by Shigeru Miyamoto and Satoru Iwata . It was targeted as part of the 2002 roster of Nintendo games , which they rated as their " biggest year " for software at the time . Nintendo presented a playable demonstration of the game at E3 2002 , featuring a limited set of minigames . The game featured voice acting from Charles Martinet ( Mario , Luigi , Wario , Waluigi and Donkey Kong ) , Jen Taylor ( Peach , Daisy and Toad ) , and Kazumi Totaka ( Yoshi ) , all three of whom worked on previous games in the Mario franchise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mario Party 4 received " average " reviews according to the review aggregation website Metacritic . In Japan , Famitsu gave it a score of 30 out of 40 . 
 GameSpot 's Ryan Davis praised the game 's minigame format , although he noted that " players who have already exhausted themselves on previous Mario Party titles may not find enough here to draw them back again " . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell acknowledged the variety and thematic features of the boards , but thought they were too large , resulting in a " glacial pace " when coupled with the on @-@ board animations . Despite this , IGN praised the boards for the thematic features on each one , which helped to " ease the tediousness " . The game 's controls were lauded for their compatibility with the minigames and simplicity , with most minigames requiring simple actions and button presses . 
 The game 's multiplayer was praised by reviewers , especially in comparison to the single @-@ player " Story Mode " . The multiplayer element was noted for appealing to a diverse demographic for its party game qualities and being an " ' everybody ' title " . Conversely , " Story mode " was criticised for exacerbating issues relating to pace , which was already remarked as having " snail 's pace " . Additionally , the Artificial Intelligence involved was bemoaned for contributing an imbalance in the game , with the random availability of quality items giving players an unfair advantage . The " reversal of fortune " space , which initiates a minigame by which the victor would receive another player 's stars or coins , was criticised for similar reasons , as it potentially <unk> players who do well in the game . The minigames were mainly met with a positive reaction , with critics praising their simplicity . The grouping feature in the minigames were also welcomed for contributing a new dynamic of gameplay , although Bramwell commented that " It might seem a little odd to gang up with your competitors in some cases " . 
 Most reviewers noted the game 's graphical improvement from its predecessors , with the minigames ' visual style in particular receiving praise . Although IGN remarked that the game was graphically a " huge improvement since we last saw the franchise " , they proceeded to comment that " It 's a mixed bag of good and bad " . GameSpot complained that the character animations appear " a bit lifeless " and that the boards were not aesthetically pleasing . The game 's audio was met with an ambivalent reaction , with critics enjoying the music but complaining about the " annoying " character catchphrases . While not memorable , the music was lauded for fitting the game 's whimsical nature . Mario Party 4 won the " Family Game of The Year " award at the 2003 Interactive Achievement Awards . The game sold 1 @.@ 1 million units from its release to December 27 , 2007 in North America . 
 = Wim Umboh = 
 Ahmad Salim ( 26 March 1933 – 24 January 1996 ) , better known by his birth name Wim Umboh but also known by the Chinese name Liem Yan Yung , was an Indonesian director who is best known for his melodramatic romances . 
 Born in North Sulawesi , Umboh was orphaned at the age of eight and later adopted by a Chinese @-@ Indonesian doctor . After high school , he moved to Jakarta and found work at Golden Arrow Studios as a janitor and , later , translator . In 1955 he made his screen debut as a director with <unk> <unk> ( Behind the Walls ) . During his career , which spanned more than forty years , Umboh directed close to fifty movies , which garnered 29 Citra Awards from the Indonesian Film Festival . He was diagnosed with liver cancer in 1978 but , after recovering , he continued to work until his death from complications of diabetes and a stroke . Umboh was married three times and had two children . 
 An authoritarian director who strove for perfection , Umboh was known for experimenting with different technologies and , according to fellow director Teguh Karya , memorised the entire dialogue of his films during shooting . He preferred medium and close @-@ up shots . Umboh influenced numerous Indonesian directors , including Karya , Slamet Rahardjo , Garin Nugroho , and Arifin C. Noer , and his work launched the careers of several Indonesian stars , including Sophan Sophiaan and Roy Marten . Among his most famous works are Pengantin Remadja ( Teenage Bride ; 1971 ) , Mama ( 1972 ) , and Pengemis dan Tukang Becak ( The Beggar and the Pedicab Driver ; 1978 ) , the last of which was Umboh 's personal favourite . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Umboh was born in <unk> , Manado , North Sulawesi , Dutch East Indies , on 26 March 1933 to a Chinese @-@ Indonesian family . He had 11 siblings . When Umboh was seven , their mother died , and when his father died the following year Umboh was adopted by a Chinese @-@ Indonesian doctor named Liem . After being adopted , he received the Chinese name Liem Yan Yung and began learning Mandarin . While working part @-@ time as a shoemaker , he finished high school ; in high school he began writing scripts for <unk> . In 1952 Umboh decided to go to Jakarta . 
 Umboh was introduced to the film industry in 1953 by Boes Boestami , who secured him a job as a janitor at Golden Arrow Studios , owned by Chok Chin Hsin ( also known as CC Hardy ) . He later became a Mandarin @-@ Indonesian translator for imported films and studied filmmaking from Chok . In the 1950s , he was a member of the Senen Artists ' Group , a group which met at Senen in Jakarta . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Umboh made his directorial debut with <unk> <unk> ( Behind the Walls ) in 1955 . This was followed in 1956 by Terang Bulan Terang di Tengah Kali ( Moonlight Shining in the Middle of the Stream ) , which also marked the first acting role of future director Sjumandjaja . That same year , he married R.O. <unk> , with whom he had had a daughter named Maria the following year ; the couple divorced in 1957 . Umboh founded Aries Film together with Any Mambo in 1960 , and the studio released its first film , Istana Jang <unk> ( The Missing Palace ) . Three years later , he directed his daughter in Bintang <unk> ( Small Star ) . 
 Umboh 's film Sembilan ( Nine ; 1967 ) was the first fully Indonesian film to be both in colour and CinemaScope ; it was released at a time when the Indonesian film industry was incredulous of the profitability of colour films . Umboh released Pengantin Remadja ( Teenage Bride ) in 1971 , which went on to win the Asian Film Festival ; the film cast Sophan Sophiaan and Widyawati in its starring roles and led to the pair taking romantic roles together several more times . Umboh 's 1972 film Mama was the first local production shot in 70 mm film and stereo sound . The film was also shot without a screenplay ; instead , Sjumandjaja wrote the script while shooting was in progress . In 1973 Umboh cast Sophan Sophiaan and Widyawati together again for his film Pernikahan ( Wedding ) , which went on to win eight Citra Awards at the Indonesian Film Festival ; the win was a record which held for 13 years , until Teguh Karya 's <unk> ( Mother ) took away nine <unk> in 1986 . On 23 May 1974 , he married actress Paula <unk> , a divorcée 17 years his junior , in a civil ceremony in Jakarta . 
 Umboh fell ill around the time he was filming Pengemis dan Tukang Becak ( The Beggar and the Pedicab Driver ; 1978 ) , which starred Christine Hakim and Alan <unk> . According to Sophan <unk> , Umboh fell in the bathroom when the film was being shot in Surakarta , Central Java , leaving Umboh was unconscious for eleven days . The film was finished by Lukman Hakim Nain , and Umboh was sent back to Jakarta after several blood infusions in Surakarta . He was treated at <unk> Hospital in Mangga Besar and diagnosed with aggressive liver cancer . At <unk> , he spent a week in the intensive care unit , during which time he lost 9 kilograms ( 20 lb ) , before being put in a regular room . The hospital stay devastated him financially , which led to a 2 @-@ year struggle with the tax office over back taxes . A heavy smoker , after his struggle with cancer he cut back on the habit . 
 By August 1980 Umboh had recovered enough strength to direct his next film , <unk> Cinta Pertama Kali <unk> ( Here Love <unk> for the First Time ) , based on the novel by Mira W. Shortly before directing Putri <unk> Jenderal ( A General 's Daughter ; an adaptation of <unk> <unk> 's novel of the same name ) in 1981 , Umboh divorced <unk> . Umboh converted to Islam in 1983 and changed his name to Ahmad Salim . On 24 August of the following year Umboh married Inne <unk> <unk> , a police officer 's daughter of Sundanese descent 28 years his junior . As his health was improving , Umboh continued to make films , including Kabut <unk> ( The Fog of <unk> ; 1984 ) . Umboh and <unk> had a son , William Umboh <unk> Salim , in 1986 . 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 After the Indonesian film industry crashed in 1992 Umboh directed two television serials : Pahlawan Tak <unk> ( Unknown Hero ; 1994 ) and <unk> . The crash , along with his long illness , led his finances to destabilise , to the point where he lived in government housing . In 1994 Suara <unk> ( now Suara <unk> ) , inaccurately reported him having died , a claim which Umboh publicly refuted . Umboh died at 4 : 45 am <unk> ( UTC + 7 ) on 24 January 1996 in Jakarta of complications from diabetes and a stroke . He was buried in <unk> <unk> Cemetery , South Jakarta . Three weeks before his death , he was reportedly in good health and preparing to film a new serial entitled <unk> Kampus Muda ( Symptoms of a Youth Campus ) . 
 = = Style = = 
 Umboh was an authoritarian perfectionist , who often reshot scenes he felt flawed and refused input from the actors . He sometimes worked together with other directors , including Sjumandjaja , Misbach Yusa Biran , and Arifin C. Noer , to improve the film 's flow . These collaborations influenced the atmosphere of the films ; for example , films shot with Noer like Sesuatu yang Indah ( Something Beautiful ; 1976 ) came across as surrealistic , while collaborations with Sjumandjaja were more realistic . Shooting scripts were often prepared minutes before shooting , but , according to Karya , Umboh memorised each line of dialogue and used his recollection during dubbing . 
 Most of the films directed by Umboh were romantic melodramas , a genre which had existed in Indonesia since the 1950s but was refined by Umboh . However , he preferred shooting films with a social message ; he considered Pengemis dan Tukang Becak his favourite film . When shooting , Umboh minimised his use of master shots , instead preferring to use medium and close @-@ up shots ; his obituary in Kompas notes that around 80 per cent of any given Umboh film used these latter two shots . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Kompas notes that several Indonesian directors have been directly influenced by Umboh . Slamet Rahardjo and Garin Nugroho have continued his exploratory shooting techniques , while his editing and framing methods were further developed by Teguh Karya , <unk> , and Noer . The careers of numerous actors were launched by Umboh 's films , including Sophiaan , Roy Marten , Tanti <unk> , and <unk> Rachman . In a 1996 interview with Republika , Widyawati credited Umboh for her marriage to Sophiaan as he had introduced them for Pengantin Remadja . In a eulogy at Umboh 's funeral , Rahardjo – then head of the Television Actors Guild – said that the Indonesian film industry would be " nothing " if it were not for Umboh 's contributions . 
 = = Awards = = 
 During his career , Umboh 's films received 29 Citra Awards , nine of which were specifically for Umboh as director or editor . Award @-@ winning films he directed include Pengantin Remadja , Mama , and Pengemis dan Tukang Becak . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Lisa Gets an " A " = 
 " Lisa Gets an " A " " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on Fox in the United States on November 22 , 1998 . In the episode , Lisa cheats on a test for which she fails to study and receives an A + + + grade , but becomes guilt @-@ ridden . Meanwhile , Homer buys a lobster with the intention of fattening him up to eat . However , he becomes attached to it and decides to keep it as a pet named Pinchy . 
 " Lisa Gets an " A " " was directed by Bob Anderson , and although it was written by Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , neither the main storyline nor the subplot was conceived by him . The main storyline was instead pitched by former staff writer Ron Hauge , while Richard Appel , who also was a staff writer , had pitched the episode 's subplot for a long time . The episode satirizes educational establishments , and features a parody of the video game Crash Bandicoot . 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa Gets an " A " " was seen by approximately 8 million viewers , and finished in 51st place in ratings the week it aired . Following its broadcast , a scene in the episode garnered criticism from the The Catholic League , but the controversy went largely ignored by The Simpsons ' staff . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , and is considered one of the best episodes of the season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a long morning at church , the Simpsons go to the grocery store <unk> Gourmet 's to take advantage of free samples in lieu of a Sunday brunch and Bart 's suggestion that the family go Catholic so they can have " communion wafers and booze " . At the store , Homer wants to buy a lobster , but since the larger ones are too expensive , he decides to buy a small one and fatten him up before he " eats the profits " . Homer also tries to look for normal flavors of ice cream among the unusually named flavors at the " Ken & Harry 's " factory plant , so he puts Lisa into the freezer to look for some in the back , which ultimately causes her to catch a cold . 
 Although Lisa hates the idea , Marge wants Lisa to stay home from school for the next few days to recover from her cold . Lisa is derisive about playing one of Bart 's video games in order to pass the time , but soon becomes addicted to it , and consequently ignores the homework on The Wind in the Willows that she is given by Ralph . She even fakes the perpetuation of her illness so that she can continue playing the game . When Marge finally compels her to return to school , Lisa realizes she is unprepared for a test on the book , having not read it . In a panic she visits Bart , who brings her to Nelson , from whom she gets the test answers . Miss Hoover grades the tests over lunch , and Lisa is awarded the rare grade of A + + + . Meanwhile , Homer has become attached to his lobster and names him Pinchy . When the time comes to cook Pinchy , Homer cannot bring himself to do it , and instead declares him a part of the family . 
 The family is extremely proud of Lisa 's " achievement " , although she is guilt @-@ ridden at having cheated . The next day at school , Principal Skinner informs Lisa that her test grade has brought Springfield Elementary 's GPA up to the state 's minimum standard , and they now qualify for a basic assistance grant . Lisa admits that she cheated on the test , but Skinner and Superintendent Chalmers persuade her to keep it a secret so the school can keep the money . During the presentation , Lisa says that she understands about how desperate the school needs the basic assistance grant money , but also says that the truth is more important , confessing that she cheated . However , this was anticipated by Skinner , who fooled Lisa by staging a fake presentation before the real one , with the comptroller being revealed as Otto wearing a latex mask , allowing the school to keep the money anyway . Meanwhile , Homer discovers that he has accidentally cooked Pinchy while giving him a hot bath . Later that night , a distraught Homer eats his late friend , and finds him delicious . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lisa Gets an " A " " was written by Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham and directed by Bob Anderson . Although the episode was written by Maxtone @-@ Graham , neither of the plots were conceived by him . The main plot involving Lisa was pitched by fellow Simpsons writer Ron Hauge , and the sub @-@ plot involving Homer adopting a lobster was conceived by former staff writer Richard Appel . The writers found it difficult to " get the subplot go [ ing ] , " and it took a long time to come up with the third act , according to Maxtone @-@ Graham . The writers debated what name Homer would give his lobster . Hauge pitched that his name would be " Shelly " , however they eventually settled on naming him " Pinchy " . Hauge also pitched the name of the grocery store <unk> Gourmet 's . At the end of the episode , when Homer is eating Pinchy , a lot of the dialogue was ad @-@ libbed by Dan Castellaneta , who portrays Homer among other characters in the series . It took a long time for the writers to come up with an ending to the episode 's main storyline . Eventually , they settled on an ending that parodied the 1973 caper film The Sting . 
 In real life , lobsters are black in color , turning red after being cooked . However , in " Lisa Gets an " A " " , Pinchy is red throughout the whole episode . The Dash Dingo video game was difficult to animate , according to Hauge , as the animators had to " make it look less than The Simpsons style " . In order to achieve the desired effect , the animators decided to <unk> the video game . The episode features the second appearance of Gavin , who first appeared in the season seven episode " Marge Be Not Proud " , and " Range Rover Mom " , Gavin 's mother . They were both voiced by Tress MacNeille . The false Comptroller Atkins was portrayed by series regular cast member Harry Shearer , while the real Atkins was voiced by Hank Azaria , who is also a regular cast member for the series . The name of the character was based on the name of Jacqueline Atkins , a writer 's assistant on The Simpsons . The episode also features Marcia Wallace , Pamela Hayden , Maggie Roswell , Russi Taylor and Karl Wiedergott . 
 The episode satirizes the " skewed priorities " sometimes associated with educational establishments . Even though Principal Skinner knows that Lisa cheated on her test , he " looks the other way " so that the school meets the requirements for government @-@ funding . In the DVD commentary for the episode , the episodes showrunner Mike Scully opined that " there is a lot of truth in this story [ ... ] There are certain requirements that the school has to meet in order to get state funding , and there are things that they 'd rather look the other way on if it 's gonna cost them money . This does really happen . " 
 While staying home from school , Lisa plays a video game called Dash Dingo . The video game is a spoof of the 1996 platform video game Crash Bandicoot . In a scene in the episode , Lisa imagines that she will fail the test . She imagines that the president of Harvard University , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , will be disappointed in her and recommend her to Brown University , where Otto was apparently on faculty . The scene was conceived by Maxtone @-@ Graham , whose alma mater was Brown University . He stated that all his friends from Brown and Harvard " loved " the joke . The liqueur <unk> is also mentioned in the episode . With the government @-@ funded grant money , Springfield Elementary are able to afford a Coleco , a 1980s home computer . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and controversy = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 22 , 1998 , " Lisa Gets an " A " " received an 8 @.@ 0 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 8 million viewers . The episode finished in 51st place in the ratings for the week of November 16 – 22 , 1998 , tied with the ABC program Sabrina the Teenage Witch . 
 After its original broadcast , the episode garnered scrutiny from The Catholic League . In a scene in the episode , the Simpsons are on their way home from a church service , and Bart says " I ’ m starving . Mom , can we go Catholic so we can get Communion wafers and booze ? " To which Marge replies " No , no one is going Catholic . Three children is enough , thank you . " In an issue of the Catholic League 's monthly newspaper Catalyst , the organization wrote " The Fox animated TV show , " The Simpsons , " is loved by millions for its engaging characters . It was with regret , therefore , that we were forced to take issue with its November 22 episode [ " Lisa Gets an " A " " ] . " They added that William Anthony Donohue , the current president of the organization , had sent a letter to Fox , reading " Can you possibly explain why this dialogue was included in the show ? " In response , Thomas Chavez , Fox 's manager for broadcast standards and practices , wrote a " lengthy " letter , in part re @-@ printed on the same issue of Catalyst . It read : 
 According to Mark I. Pinsky of The gospel according to the Simpsons : bigger and possibly even better ! edition with a new afterword exploring South park , Family guy , and other animated TV shows , the Catholic League was " not persuaded " by Chavez ' letter , and stated that they " sarcastically " responded in Catalyst : " Now why didn ’ t we think of that ? Just goes to show how thoughtful the Hollywood gang really is . " According to Pinsky , the controversy did not have any impact on the show and was " simply ignored " by The Simpsons ' staff . 
 = = = Home release and critical reception = = = 
 On August 7 , 2007 , the episode was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Matt Groening , Mike Scully , George Meyer , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Ron Hauge , Yeardley Smith and Mike B. Anderson participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Lisa Gets an " A " " received generally positive reviews from critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide described it as " A fabulously defining moment in Lisa 's life , showing what happens if you let your guard slip . " They continued by writing " What makes this work even more is the false ending which shows that everyone in Springfield is as adept at predicting Lisa 's morality as the viewers are . " They concluded their review by calling it " An absolutely inspired piece of comedy . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote that he " [ took ] great delight in the way this episode skewers the skewed priorities of the educational establishment . " He added that " Lisa acts like her usual prissy self , but that factor acts to allow the show to succeed . " He concluded by writing that the episode " connects to real emotions pretty well and offers some funny moments . " Digital Entertainment New 's Jake McNeill described it as one of the season 's best episodes , giving particular praise to its subplot , which he called " great " . James Plath of DVD Town wrote that " the real fun in this episode comes from Homer 's attachment to a lobster he brings home . " Giving the episode a more mixed review , the Currentfilm.com staff called it " memorable " , although " the majority of the episode remains uneven " . They wrote that " The episode remains entertaining simply because of Homer 's subplot , " and compared Pinchy to Mojo the Helper Monkey from the season nine episode " Girly Edition " and Stampy the Elephant from the season five episode " Bart Gets an Elephant " , which they considered to be " great ( and brief ) Simpsons pets " . 
 = Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon = 
 Max Havoc : Curse of The Dragon is a straight @-@ to @-@ DVD action film directed by Albert Pyun and Isaac Florentine on the island of Guam in 2004 . Swiss actor Mickey Hardt plays Max Havoc , an ex @-@ kickboxer turned sports photographer . Max has to help an art dealer and her sister , played by Joanna Krupa and Tawney <unk> , flee from a yakuza clan trying to retrieve a valuable jade dragon statue . Aimed at the European market , the film was planned to kickstart a franchise , which would have included a sequel and a syndicated television series in the United States , but these plans did not materialize . A sequel , Max Havoc : Ring of Fire , was eventually shot in Canada . 
 The film was originally slated to be directed in Hawaii , but a series of mishaps led to filming on Guam . Most of the film was shot there by Pyun , including a cameo by Carmen Electra . A smaller part was added by Florentine to improve the film 's marketability , including added cameos by David Carradine and Richard Roundtree . It premiered on Guam in 2005 and on DVD in 2007 , earning around US $ 250 @,@ 000 . Most critics reviews were negative , chiding the plot , casting and the cliché portrayal of Guam , but some praised fight choreography and the " so bad it 's good " value . 
 Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon has garnered press through lawsuits regarding its financing . Guam Economic Development and Commerce Authority ( GEDCA ) gave a $ 800 @,@ 000 loan guarantee to producer John F. S. Laing , which was forfeited as the film failed to recoup the investment . GEDCA alleged Laing defrauded them , while he claimed Guam authorities promised him funding he did not receive . This kicked off a lengthy legal battle , ending with a settlement between Laing and GEDCA . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story centers around Max Havoc ( Mickey Hardt ) , an ex @-@ kickboxing champion known as " Mad Max " , turned <unk> sports photographer . Max quit kickboxing after accidentally killing a fellow boxer during an unlikely comeback in the ring , but still suffers from flashbacks to the fight . After a bar scuffle over a biker girl ( Nikki Ziering ) , his agent ( Diego <unk> ) sends him to Guam for a publicity photo shoot . There , Max encounters Tahsi ( Richard Roundtree ) , his former kickboxing coach , now an antiques dealer , and promises to catch up with him later . While photographing an outrigger canoe race from a jet ski , Max rescues Christy Goody ( Tawney Sablan ) , a vacationer who was about to be unwittingly run over by the canoes . In the process , he knocks over one of the canoes , earning the wrath its head rower , Moko ( Pyun veteran Vincent <unk> ) . He is also admonished by Jane ( Joanna Krupa ) , Christy 's sister , for his brazen driving . However , she later apologizes and agrees to a dinner date . 
 In the meantime , Tahsi is approached by a thief ( Danielle Burgio ) , who has fled to Guam with a stolen rare jade dragon and wants to pawn it , promising to return in 24 hours . Tahsi agrees , but does not promise not to sell it . Indeed , Jane Goody , who turns out to be a friend of his , visits his shop and buys the dragon , despite Tahsi 's reluctance . She later has it appraised , learning it is worth many times more than she paid for it , heightening her hopes of paying the tuition for her sister 's medical degree . Later , an enforcer ( Arnold Chon ) for the yakuza group Black Dragons , the original owners of the jade dragon , appears in Tahsi 's shop with the thief in a headlock , demanding the figurine 's return . Tahsi refuses to reveal Jane 's identity and is killed along with the thief . 
 Max and the Goody sisters are soon involved in a <unk> with henchwoman Eiko ( Ji Ling ) . After Max saves the sisters , and is involved in a further fight with Quicksilver ( Johnny Trí Nguyễn ) , he is contacted by the leader of the criminals , Aya ( Marie <unk> ) , who is also Eiko 's lesbian lover . The Black Dragons explain that the jade dragon is actually an urn containing the ashes of their former leader , Yoshida , and that they believe it holds mystical value and will stop at nothing to get it back . Max and the sisters agree to return the dragon at noon the following day in return for their own personal safety . They are helped by locals , including beach vendor Debbie ( Carmen Electra ) and Moko , with whom Max reconciled at the scene of Tahsi 's killing . Nevertheless , Jane is torn between returning the figurine and protecting their lives , and ensuring that her sister finishes her M.D. The deal falls through as Jane 's cell phone battery dies , and she does not arrive at the meet in time . Max escapes the angry henchmen on a jet ski . 
 The head of the Black Dragons ( David Carradine , credited as Grand Master ) , pays a visit to Guam to take the matter into his own hands . It turns out that he is a man prominently seen ringside in Max 's flashbacks . The Black Dragons kidnap Christy , enticing Max and Jane to come to their hideout . Max and Grand Master reach an agreement that Max will fight Arnold Chon 's character to death . If Max wins , Max and the Goody sisters can go free . Max almost deals a deadly blow to the enforcer 's head , but stops himself at the last moment , sparing his life , yet winning the fight . He turns over the urn to the yakuza , and receives a priceless katana as a gift . Max and his allies celebrate the end of the adventure in a party . The film ends with Max embracing Jane Goody on a beach during sunset . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Director Albert Pyun cast Mickey Hardt as Max Havoc , as he was planning " toward European TV appeal , " based on Hardt 's role in the Donnie Yen film The Twins Effect and German TV series Puma : Fighter With a Heart ( German : Der Puma – Kämpfer mit Herz ) , where Yen did fight choreography . He originally planned to cast Joanna Krupa as the younger sister , Christy Goody , with Jane 's part going to an established actress , but Krupa ended up playing the older sister , and local actress Tawney Sablan was cast in her stead in her first film role . Rapper Fat Joe and Taiwanese actress Shu Qi did not make the cast , according to Pyun , due to film 's financial problems . Billed as a top star , Carmen Electra appears in two brief scenes as a beach vendor , who flirts with Max Havoc when he returns a life jacket . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to Pyun , the idea of Max Havoc has existed since at least 2001 . At the time , he was asked to direct the film in Hawaii . After the September 11 attacks , it was decided that filming in Miami was more economically viable . Pyun said that Hawaiian film star Mark <unk> was interested in playing the character of Max Havoc , but that he backed out after anthrax appeared in Florida . Bali was considered next for filming but the idea was abandoned after the terrorist bombing there in 2002 . The director and producer settled on filming on Guam , voicing their interest to Guam officials in late 2003 . Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon was supposed to be the first of two films to act as a backdoor pilot into a Max Havoc television series . 
 Filming began in March and finished in May 2004 . Some of the scenes were done in East Hagåtña Bay . Pyun had planned to shoot the film with a Vancouver @-@ based film crew , but after they were denied visas , he eventually had to resort to hiring a Los Angeles crew , which , he said , he later regretted . He complained about a lack of infrastructure for filming on Guam , as well as hostility from government officials once the film crew arrived on the island , and claimed that he was denied shooting on Waikiki Beach , which cost the film time and sponsorships . He also claimed he was not paid his director 's fee , calling the film " the worst financial decision [ he ] ever made . " Guam businesses and Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon crew members also reported not being paid for work on the film . 
 The producer , John F. S. Laing , blamed Pyun for the failure of the film . After the filming was completed on Guam , director Isaac Florentine was hired to touch up the film in Los Angeles in order to improve its marketability , adding around ten minutes of screen time in the process . Florentine declined screen credit , stating in a later interview that he " [ did ] n 't feel it [ was ] fair " to Pyun . The L.A. shoot took ten days , and featured David Carradine and Richard Roundtree , who were not part of the original cut . 
 = = Release = = 
 Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon premiered on Guam television on December 10 , 2005 . Because the film was poorly received and never played in theaters as promised , it was described as a " box office flop " by Guam 's press . In February 2005 , producer John F.S. Laing stated he had trouble finding a theatrical distributor for the film . As of 2010 , the film was reported to have grossed $ 15 @,@ 000 on Guam and $ 242 @,@ 229 internationally . On January 23 , 2007 , Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon was released on DVD in Region 1 . The DVD extras contained interviews and several text pages about the cast , a three @-@ minute trailer , a poster , a collection of still images from the film , and a calendar for 2007 featuring actresses from the film . The film was not rated by the Motion Picture Association of America . 
 A sequel , titled Max Havoc : Ring of Fire , premiered on September 12 , 2006 and on DVD on August 21 , 2007 . The film was produced in Canada and directed by Terry Ingram . Mickey Hardt reprises his role as Max Havoc , who comes to Seattle to do a photoshoot of a tennis champion played by Christina Cox , but has to deal with a street gang and organized crime , while Dean Cain plays the main antagonist . Max Havoc : Ring of Fire received mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews , being called a " run of the mill B @-@ movie . " On September 30 , 2009 , both films were released as a double feature on Blu @-@ ray in Germany . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon received mostly negative reviews . Reviewers were mostly focused on the film 's lacking plot and rampant cliché use . David Cornelius of DVD Talk described it as " the kind of moronic C @-@ level action flick that always stars some former martial arts champ " , noting that the controversy behind the funding of the film was more interesting than the film itself , and finishing with the advice to skip the film . Albert Valentin of Kung Fu Cinema was less critical of the film , praising choreography and Mickey Hardt 's performance in action sequences . Combustible Celluloid 's Jeffrey M. Anderson gave the film a neutral @-@ to @-@ positive review , mentioning " the overall ridiculousness of the film charmed [ him ] " , and commenting positively on the chemistry between Hardt 's and Krupa 's characters . Gene Park of Guam 's Pacific Daily News was , however , jarred by inaccuracies in the plot . He called the film a " guilty pleasure without the pleasure . " He thought the action editing was " epileptic " and compared the whole film to a travelogue . As of 2015 , review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes counts one positive and one negative review of the film . 
 Author Camilla <unk> later criticized Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon for its shortcoming as a promotional vehicle for Guam and its film industry , noting the <unk> portrayal of Guam , especially in the parting scene where U.S. mainland @-@ based characters bid farewell to Chamorro people in a cliché fashion . 
 = = Litigation = = 
 At the request of producer John F.S. Laing and director Albert Pyun , the Guam Economic Development and Commerce Authority gave an $ 800 @,@ 000 loan guarantee to Laing and his company Guam Motion Pictures Company ( GMPC ) to secure a third party loan from Comerica Bank in order to finance the film . GMPC was created by Laing on Guam to produce Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon , while Laing 's stateside company , Rigel Entertainment , was to handle distribution . GMPC was also supposed to produce a further theatrical film and two travel documentaries . In June 2006 , Laing defaulted on the loan to Comerica and the guarantee was forfeited . The rights to the film were subsequently auctioned by Comerica . A newly formed Canadian company , Up North Entertainment , Inc . , bought the film for $ 83 @,@ 000 . Laing was listed as one of three directors of Up North Entertainment . Guam 's share of the foreclosure sale money was $ 9 @,@ 090 . 
 The film has been mired in litigation on Guam and in California . Laing filed a case in California against the Government of Guam , alleging that he agreed to guarantee the collateral , but that the agreement was procured under duress , and that he was underpaid by Guam government for a series of public service announcements featuring Carmen Electra . In March 2008 , the case was dismissed and Laing was ordered to pay Guam 's legal fees . Laing appealed twice and lost both appeals . GEDCA called Laing 's California lawsuit a " tactical maneuver " . Laing was also sued by the Government of Guam for fraud . Matthew Borden , attorney for the GEDCA , accused Laing of coming to the island with intention to defraud the government and people of Guam . In a retort , Laing claimed the Government of Guam pledged $ 3 million in loans and other incentives if he were to come to the island and make Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon there . Guam officials denied making such a pledge and Laing admitted he did not possess any written agreements on the matter . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 A trial began in Guam Superior Court on February 13 , 2012 . After six years of litigation on Guam , a settlement was reached on May 11 . The GEDCA Board of Directors approved Laing 's offer of $ 350 @,@ 000 in place of paying back the original $ 800 @,@ 000 guarantee . The agreement stipulated that Laing would make a payment of $ 250 @,@ 000 on June 30 , with the remainder paid by September 30 . 
 By the June deadline , Laing had made a payment of $ 200 @,@ 000 . GEDCA requested the outstanding $ 50 @,@ 000 along with the $ 100 @,@ 000 remaining balance to be paid by Laing by the September deadline . When asked by a local talk radio station if the Max Havoc : Curse of the Dragon settlement money would be a windfall for GEDCA and could be used for future economic development projects on Guam , GEDCA administrator Karl <unk> stated that the money would barely pay for the legal fees incurred during the years of legal fighting with Laing . In September , Rigel Entertainment declared bankruptcy . On October 26 , GEDCA board met and established that Laing had made a partial late payment of $ 75 @,@ 000 on the $ 150 @,@ 000 still outstanding . A new deadline was set for January 31 , 2013 . Laing missed the January deadline , but in late February , GEDCA reported receiving the money , thus bringing the lawsuit to a close . 
 = 2008 Brazilian Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Brazilian Grand Prix ( formally the XXXVII Grande Prêmio do Brasil ) was a Formula One motor race held on 2 November 2008 at the Autódromo José Carlos Pace , Interlagos , in São Paulo , Brazil . It was the 18th and final race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 71 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Felipe Massa after starting from pole position . Fernando Alonso finished second in a Renault , and Kimi Räikkönen third in a Ferrari . 
 Massa started the race alongside Toyota driver Jarno Trulli . Massa 's teammate Räikkönen began from third next to McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton . Rain fell minutes before the race , delaying the start , and as the track dried Massa established a lead of several seconds . More rain late in the race made the last few laps treacherous for the drivers , but could not prevent Massa from winning the Grand Prix . Sebastian Vettel of Toro Rosso finished in fourth place behind Alonso and Räikkönen . Hamilton passed Toyota 's Timo Glock in the final corners of the race to finish fifth , securing him the points needed to take the Drivers ' Championship . 
 Hamilton received praise from many in the Formula One community , including former Champions Damon Hill and Michael Schumacher . The McLaren driver also received official congratulations from Queen Elizabeth II and British Prime Minister Gordon Brown . Massa 's win and Räikkönen 's third place helped Ferrari win the Constructors ' Championship . The Grand Prix was David Coulthard 's final race ; the Scot retired after 246 race starts . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Heading into the final race of the season , McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 94 points ; Ferrari driver Felipe Massa was second on 87 points , seven points behind Hamilton . A maximum of ten points were available for the final race , which meant that Massa could still win the title if Hamilton finished in sixth place or lower . Otherwise , Hamilton would be Champion . In the event of a points tie , Massa would win the Championship on a count @-@ back , having more wins . Behind Hamilton and Massa in the Drivers ' Championship , Robert Kubica was third on 75 points in a BMW , and Massa 's Ferrari teammate Kimi Räikkönen was fourth on 69 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading on 156 points and McLaren – Mercedes were second on 145 points , 11 points behind , with a maximum of 18 points available . If the two Ferraris finished in the top six , the team would secure the Constructors ' Championship , even if the McLaren drivers were to finish as the top two . Prior to this race , Hamilton was criticised by many pundits for not keeping a cool head at the 2008 Japanese Grand Prix . The Times columnist Edward Gorman said that Hamilton should win the Championship , but : 
 Alternatively Hamilton may suffer another one of his rushes of blood to the head and do something utterly unnecessary at Interlagos , just as he did in Japan eight days ago and in Brazil last year , and throw it all away ... Suddenly defending even a seven @-@ point lead sounds a tall order . 
 Former Formula One team owner Eddie Jordan created controversy when he said that " if Massa tries to take him out as he did in Japan in order to steal the title then Lewis has to be ready for it , " adding " If he tries that on then Lewis has to turn his wheel into Massa to ensure he does not finish the race either – he has to take his wheel off . " Both Hamilton and Massa rejected the comments ; Massa said " Playing dirty has never been part of my game . I don 't want anything to do with it . The only thing on my mind is winning the race . " 
 The weekend marked David Coulthard 's final race . Coulthard 's Red Bull RB4 was decorated in the colours of " Wings for Life " , a charity dedicated to raising awareness of spinal cord injuries . Coulthard said " I 'm dedicating my last race to the vision of making paraplegia curable " . Red Bull Racing received approval from the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile , Formula One 's governing body , to run Coulthard 's car in different colours than his teammate Mark Webber . This was also the last Formula One race broadcast by ITV in the United Kingdom and Telecinco in Spain ; the rights went to the BBC and La <unk> , respectively , for 2009 . Also , this was the last race for the Honda team before they announced that they would pull out of F1 due to the global economic crisis . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the race ; the first on Friday morning and the second on Friday afternoon . Both sessions lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . The two sessions on Friday were affected by occasionally damp conditions , which made the track moderately slippery . Massa was quickest with a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 305 in the first session , less than two @-@ tenths of a second faster than Hamilton . Räikkönen was just off Hamilton 's pace , followed by Kubica , Heikki Kovalainen , and Fernando Alonso . Webber was seventh , still within a second of Massa 's time . In the second practice session , Alonso was fastest with a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 296 , less than six @-@ hundredths of a second quicker than second @-@ placed Massa . Jarno Trulli took third place , ahead of Räikkönen , Webber and Sebastian Vettel . Hamilton only managed ninth place , locking his McLaren 's wheels and struggling for grip . Kovalainen was only quick enough for fifteenth position . The Saturday morning session was held on a much warmer track , which reached temperatures as high as 36 ° C ( 97 ° F ) . Alonso was again quickest , posting a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 141 , narrowly faster than both McLaren drivers . Massa , Vettel , and Nick Heidfeld rounded out the top six positions . Räikkönen only managed twelfth , failing to improve on his times set early in the session . 
 The qualifying session on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for 20 minutes and eliminated the cars from qualifying that finished the session 16th or lower . The second part of qualifying lasted 15 minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions 11 to 15 . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth , and decided pole position . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Massa clinched his sixth pole position for the season , and his third consecutive pole at Interlagos , with a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 368 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Trulli , in his best qualifying performance of the season . Räikkönen qualified third , though he was happy with beginning the race on the racing line behind his teammate . Hamilton qualified fourth , half a second behind Massa , having battled both Ferrari drivers for time during the first two qualifying sessions . Hamilton 's slow pace in the final qualifying session compared to the first two suggested he was carrying more fuel than his title challengers . Hamilton 's teammate Kovalainen qualified fifth . Alonso , Vettel , Heidfeld , Sébastien Bourdais and Timo Glock rounded out the top ten . Kubica only managed 13th , having struggled with overall grip for much of the day . Coulthard , in his final Formula One race , qualified 14th ; Rubens Barrichello , in 15th , was quicker than Honda teammate Jenson Button in 17th . The Williams and Force India drivers qualified at the back of the grid , covering positions 16 to 20 with Button . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions on the grid were damp before the race , the air temperature at 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) ; rain or thunderstorms were expected . The race was due to begin at 15 : 00 local time ( UTC @-@ 2 ) , but was delayed by ten minutes when heavy rain hit the track at 14 : 56 . Every team but one changed the tyres on both their cars from dry @-@ weather tyres to intermediate tyres . Kubica 's car was the exception , remaining on the dry set @-@ up . Following the formation lap , Kubica returned to the pits , his team changing the car 's tyres to intermediates . This meant the Polish driver would start the race from the pit @-@ lane . 
 Massa retained his pole position lead into the first corner , followed by Trulli , Räikkönen , Hamilton and Kovalainen . Coulthard was hit from behind by Nico Rosberg into turn two , spinning him around . The Red Bull car then collided with Rosberg 's Williams teammate Kazuki Nakajima . This damaged the suspension and forced Coulthard to retire in his final race . Piquet spun off at the next corner , his car hitting the barriers . Kovalainen was passed by Alonso and Vettel mid @-@ lap , dropping him to seventh . The accidents of Coulthard and Piquet prompted the deployment of the safety car at the end of the first lap . The track conditions began to dry early on ; Force India 's Giancarlo Fisichella was the first driver to stop for dry @-@ weather tyres , pitting at the end of lap two . He remained in 18th position . Racing resumed on lap five when the safety car pulled into the pit @-@ lane . Rosberg and Button both pitted on lap seven , each changing to dry @-@ weather tyres . Bourdais , Glock , Adrian Sutil and Nakajima followed a lap later . By lap 11 , the rest of the field had changed to dry @-@ weather tyres . Fisichella benefited from pitting the earliest for dry tyres , moving up the order to a high of fifth position . 
 Nakajima spun on lap 13 , losing five seconds on the lap . On lap 15 , Massa set a new fastest lap of 1 : 16 @.@ 888 , and extended his lead over Vettel . Hamilton remained behind Fisichella , and though his McLaren car appeared quicker , he was unable to pass the Force India driver until lap 18 . Glock passed Fisichella two laps later . Trulli and Bourdais collided on lap 20 into turn one , sending the Toro Rosso driver across the grass . Bourdais lost six places and rejoined in 13th place . Trulli 's Toyota teammate , Timo Glock , passed Fisichella later on in the same lap for sixth . Massa and Sebastian Vettel traded fastest lap times ; Vettel 's 1 : 14 @.@ 214 on lap 25 was surpassed by Massa 's 1 : 14 @.@ 161 a lap later . However , Vettel pitted soon after , having been lighter @-@ fuelled than his Ferrari opponent . He rejoined in sixth position , behind Glock . Kovalainen passed Trulli and Fisichella in separate manoeuvres , gaining seventh position . On lap 36 Massa set the fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 13 @.@ 736 . 
 Timo Glock was fuelled so he could complete the race without stopping again , when he pitted on lap 36 . Massa was the first of the Championship frontrunners to pit , on lap 38 ; Alonso and Hamilton pitted two laps after . When Räikkönen pitted on lap 43 , Massa had regained the lead , ahead of Alonso . Räikkönen rejoined ahead of Hamilton in third place . Fisichella 's stop was marred by transmission problems , dropping him to 18th position when he resumed . Vettel pitted again on lap 51 , his team fuelling him to the finish . He rejoined in fifth . By lap 54 , Massa had extended his already comfortable lead over Alonso to 9 @.@ 6 seconds . Vettel was closing in quickly on Hamilton , the McLaren driver needing to finish no lower than fifth to win the Championship . 
 Light rain began to fall on lap 63 . Heidfeld pitted and his BMW pit crew changed his tyres to intermediates , echoing their strategy at the Belgian Grand Prix which had granted the German a podium position . Kovalainen pitted on lap 65 ; Alonso and Räikkönen pitted a lap later . Hamilton and Vettel halted their battle for fourth position when they came into the pits to change onto intermediate tyres on lap 66 . Glock chose to remain on his dry @-@ weather tyres and rose from seventh to fourth place as those ahead of him pitted . Massa pitted on lap 67 , meaning that all of the frontrunners , with the exception of Glock , were now on intermediate tyres . The rain began to fall heavily on lap 69 , as Hamilton ran wide , which allowed Vettel to take fifth position . As Massa crossed the finish line to win the race , Hamilton battled Vettel for the crucial point needed to win the Championship . However , Vettel and Hamilton passed Glock in the final corners , the Toyota driver struggling for grip as his dry @-@ weather tyres slid on the wet track . Premature joy in the Ferrari garage soon turned to disappointment as Hamilton finished the race in fifth position , clinching the Championship by a single point and becoming Formula One 's youngest Championship winner until Vettel in 2010 . Räikkönen 's third @-@ place finish behind Alonso was enough to secure Ferrari the constructors ' title . After the race , one of the Hondas caught fire . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three finishers appeared on the podium and in the subsequent press conference . Massa said that he had " almost done everything perfectly " , and expressed his disappointment that despite winning the race he had not won the Championship . However , he gave his congratulations to Hamilton for his title win : 
 We need to congratulate Lewis because he did a great championship and he scored more points than us , so he deserves to be champion . I know how to lose and I know how to win and as I said before it is another day of my life from which I am going to learn a lot . 
 Massa 's Ferrari teammate Kimi Räikkönen expressed disappointment in the outcome of the Drivers ' Championship , but acknowledged the support of his team , saying " we won at least the team championship " . Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo was reportedly so angry with the result , however , that he destroyed the television he was viewing the race on . McLaren boss Ron Dennis praised Hamilton , saying " He just keeps delivering and , at the end of the day , he 's just two years into his career . So there 's a long way to go . " 
 Hamilton received official congratulations from Queen Elizabeth II , following similar plaudits from British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Opposition Leader David Cameron . Former Formula One Champions also congratulated Hamilton ; 1996 Formula One Champion Damon Hill called the McLaren driver " one of the greatest drivers we have had in this country " . Multiple Champion Michael Schumacher praised both Hamilton and Massa , saying the Ferrari driver 's performance indicated his winning abilities . Massa was praised for his sportsmanship after the race ; Joe Saward of GrandPrix.com said " He took defeat with a grace and a style that one rarely sees in modern sport . " 
 However , Eddie Jordan said that Hamilton " didn 't really give himself the best chance of winning the championship – and was very lucky " . The former team boss called McLaren 's strategy " a disaster " . GrandPrix.com expressed disbelief in the outcome : " It was a showdown so improbable that even Hollywood would not have made a film of it . The scriptwriters would have been laughed out of the studios . " Autosport magazine writer Adam Cooper called the race " epic " . After considering other Formula One title finales , Cooper concluded " nothing has ever matched what we saw [ in Brazil ] " . 
 Timo Glock remained certain the decision to stay on dry @-@ weather tyres , when other teams were pitting for wet @-@ weather tyres , was a correct one : " We were running seventh before the rain came and we would have probably finished there if it had been totally dry . Instead we finished sixth so that shows the strategy was the right one . " Glock added that the conditions were so poor " I didn 't even know that Lewis had overtaken me until after the race " . 
 Kubica 's finish in 11th position meant that he lost third place in the Championship to Räikkönen . After the race , Kubica said " We made too many mistakes during the weekend and this is the result . " His team said that they had received the wrong information about track conditions at the start of the race , which led them to keep the Polish driver 's car on dry @-@ weather tyres when the rest of the field had changed to intermediates . 
 David Coulthard expressed his disappointment in his early exit from his final Formula One race , saying that " I 'm pretty gutted , it 's not how I wanted to end my career . " The Scottish driver said that he had planned to perform doughnuts for the crowd , a celebration discouraged in Formula One . Coulthard left Formula One after 15 years with 246 race starts and 13 wins . Red Bull team principal Christian Horner said " It 's a great shame for David to be eliminated from his last Grand Prix at the first corner , but he can look back on a long and illustrious career where he 's achieved a great deal . " Coulthard continued to work for Red Bull Racing in 2009 as a testing and development consultant . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates the World Champions . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Ethan Hawke = 
 Ethan Green Hawke ( born November 6 , 1970 ) is an American actor , writer and director . He has been nominated for four Academy Awards and a Tony Award . Hawke has directed two feature films , three Off @-@ Broadway plays , and a documentary , and wrote the novels The Hottest State ( 1996 ) and Ash Wednesday ( 2002 ) . 
 He made his film debut in 1985 with the science fiction feature Explorers , before making a breakthrough appearance in the 1989 drama Dead Poets Society . He then appeared in numerous films before taking a role in the 1994 Generation X drama Reality Bites , for which he received critical praise . In 1995 he starred in the romantic drama Before Sunrise , and later in its sequels Before Sunset ( 2004 ) and Before Midnight ( 2013 ) . 
 Hawke has been twice nominated for both the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor ; his writing contributions to Before Sunset and Before Midnight were recognized , as were his performances in Training Day ( 2001 ) and Boyhood ( 2014 ) . Hawke was further honored with SAG Award nominations for both films , along with BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for the latter . 
 His other films include the science fiction drama Gattaca ( 1997 ) , the contemporary adaptation of Hamlet ( 2000 ) , the action thriller Assault on Precinct 13 ( 2005 ) , the crime drama Before the Devil Knows You 're Dead ( 2007 ) , and the horror film Sinister ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hawke was born in Austin , Texas , to Leslie ( née Green ) , a charity worker , and James Hawke , an insurance actuary . Hawke 's parents were high school sweethearts in Fort Worth , Texas , and married young , when Hawke 's mother was 17 . Hawke was born a year later . Hawke 's parents were students at the University of Texas at Austin at the time of his birth , and separated and later divorced in 1974 . 
 After the separation , Hawke was then raised by his mother . The two relocated several times , before settling in New York City , where Hawke attended the Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn Heights . Hawke 's mother remarried when he was 10 and the family moved to West Windsor Township , New Jersey , where Hawke attended West Windsor Plainsboro High School ( renamed to West Windsor @-@ Plainsboro High School South in 1997 ) . He later transferred to the Hun School of Princeton , a secondary boarding school , from which he graduated in 1988 . 
 In high school , Hawke aspired to be a writer , but developed an interest in acting . He made his stage debut at age 13 , in a school production of George Bernard Shaw 's Saint Joan , and appearances in West Windsor @-@ Plainsboro High School productions of Meet Me in St. Louis and You Can 't Take It with You followed . At the Hun School he took acting classes at the McCarter Theatre on the Princeton campus , and after high school graduation he studied acting at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh , eventually dropping out after he was cast in Dead Poets Society ( 1989 ) . He twice enrolled in New York University 's English program , but dropped out both times to pursue acting roles . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1985 – 1993 : Early years and Dead Poets Society = = = 
 Hawke obtained his mother 's permission to attend his first casting call at age 14 . He secured his first film role in 1985 's Explorers , in which he played an alien @-@ obsessed schoolboy alongside River Phoenix . The film received favorable reviews but had poor box office revenues , a failure which Hawke has admitted caused him to quit acting for a brief period after the film 's release . Hawke later described the disappointment as difficult to bear at such a young age , adding " I would never recommend that a kid act . " His next film appearance was not until 1989 's comedy drama Dad , where he played Ted Danson 's son and Jack Lemmon 's grandson . 
 In 1989 , Hawke made his breakthrough appearance , playing a shy student opposite Robin Williams 's inspirational English teacher in Dead Poets Society . The film was critically well @-@ received ; the Variety reviewer noted " Hawke ... gives a haunting performance . " With revenue of US $ 235 million worldwide , the film remains Hawke 's most commercially successful picture to date . Hawke later described the opportunities he was offered as a result of the film 's success as critical to his decision to continue acting : " I didn 't want to be an actor and I went back to college . But then the [ film 's ] success was so monumental that I was getting offers to be in such interesting movies and be in such interesting places , and it seemed silly to pursue anything else . " 
 Hawke 's next film , 1991 's White Fang , brought his first leading role . The film , an adaptation of Jack London 's novel of the same name , featured Hawke as Jack Conroy , a Yukon gold hunter who befriends a <unk> ( played by Jed ) . According to The Oregonian , " Hawke does a good job as young Jack ... He makes Jack 's passion for White Fang real and keeps it from being ridiculous or overly sentimental . " Hawke then appeared in A Midnight Clear ( 1992 ) , a well @-@ received war film by Keith Gordon , and survival drama Alive ( 1993 ) , a film adaptation of Piers Paul Read 's 1974 book . Hawke portrayed Nando <unk> , one of the survivors of the crash . 
 = = = 1994 – 2000 : Critical success , Reality Bites and Before Sunrise = = = 
 Hawke 's next role was in the Generation X drama Reality Bites ( 1994 ) , in which he played Troy , a slacker who mocks the ambitions of his love interest ( played by Winona Ryder ) . Film critic Roger Ebert called Hawke 's performance convincing and noteworthy : " Hawke captures all the right notes as the boorish Troy . " The New York Times noted , " Mr. Hawke 's subtle and strong performance makes it clear that Troy feels things too deeply to risk failure and admit he 's feeling anything at all . " Nonetheless , the film was a box office disappointment . Hawke also appeared in the 1994 film Quiz Show . Although he was originally considered for the lead role of Charles Van Doren , he took on a supporting role and had his screen time cut considerably during production . 
 The following year Hawke again received critical acclaim , this time for his performance in Richard Linklater 's 1995 drama Before Sunrise . The film follows a young American ( Hawke ) and a young French woman ( Julie Delpy ) , who meet on a train and disembark in Vienna , spending the night exploring the city and getting to know one another . The San Francisco Chronicle praised Hawke and Delpy 's performances : " [ they ] interact so gently and simply that you feel certain that they helped write the dialogue . Each of them seems to have something personal at stake in their performances . " 
 Away from acting , Hawke directed the music video for the 1994 song " Stay ( I Missed You ) , " by singer @-@ songwriter Lisa Loeb , who was a member of Hawke 's theater company at the time the song was included in Reality Bites . In a 2012 interview , Hawke said that the song is the only number @-@ one popular song by an unsigned artist in the history of music . He published his first novel in 1996 , The Hottest State , about a love affair between a young actor and a singer . Hawke said of the novel , " Writing the book had to do with dropping out of college , and with being an actor . I didn 't want my whole life to go by and not do anything but recite lines . I wanted to try making something else . It was definitely the scariest thing I ever did . And it was just one of the best things I ever did . " The book met with a mixed reception . Entertainment Weekly said that Hawke " opens himself to rough literary scrutiny in The Hottest State . If Hawke is serious ... he 'd do well to work awhile in less exposed venues . " The New York Times thought Hawke did " a fine job of showing what it 's like to be young and full of confusion " , concluding that The Hottest State was ultimately " a sweet love story " . 
 In Andrew Niccol 's science fiction film Gattaca ( 1997 ) , " one of the more interesting scripts " Hawke said he had read in " a number of years " , he played the role of a man who infiltrates a society of genetically perfect humans by assuming another man 's identity . Although Gattaca was not a success at the box office it drew generally favorable reviews from critics ; The Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram reviewer wrote that " Hawke , building on the sympathetic @-@ but @-@ edgy presence that has served him well since his kid @-@ actor days , is most impressive " . 
 Hawke appeared in the 1998 film Great Expectations , a contemporary film adaptation of the Charles Dickens novel of the same name . During the same year , Hawke 's second collaboration with Linklater , The Newton Boys , based on the true story of the Newton Gang , was released . In 1999 , Hawke starred in Snow Falling on Cedars , based on David Guterson 's novel of the same title . The film received ambivalent reviews and Entertainment Weekly wrote , " Hawke <unk> himself into such a dark knot that we have no idea who Ishmael is or why he acts as he does . " 
 Hawke 's next film role was in Michael Almereyda 's 2000 film Hamlet , in which he played the title character . The film transposed the famous William Shakespeare play to contemporary New York City , a technique Hawke felt made the play more " accessible and vital " . Salon reviewer wrote : " Hawke certainly isn 't the greatest Hamlet of living memory ... but his performance reinforces Hamlet 's place as Shakespeare 's greatest character . And in that sense , he more than holds his own in the long line of actors who 've played the part . " 
 In 2001 , Hawke appeared in two more Linklater movies : Waking Life and Tape , both critically acclaimed . In the animated Waking Life , he shared a single scene with former co @-@ star Delpy continuing conversations begun in Before Sunrise . The real @-@ time drama Tape , based on a play by Stephen <unk> , took place entirely in a single motel room with three characters played by Hawke , Robert Sean Leonard and Uma Thurman . Hawke regarded Tape as his " first adult performance " , a performance noted by Roger Ebert for its " physical and verbal acting mastery " . 
 = = = 2001 – 2006 : Training Day , Oscar nominations and Directorial debut = = = 
 Hawke 's next role , and one for which he received substantial critical acclaim , came in Training Day ( 2001 ) . Hawke played rookie cop Jake Hoyt , alongside Denzel Washington , as one of a pair of narcotics detectives from the Los Angeles Police Department spending 24 hours in the gang neighborhoods of South Los Angeles . The film was a box office hit , taking $ 104 million worldwide , and garnered generally favorable reviews . Variety wrote that " Hawke adds feisty and cunning flourishes to his role that allow him to respectably hold his own under formidable circumstances . " Paul Clinton of CNN reported that Hawke 's performance was " totally believable as a doe @-@ eyed rookie going toe @-@ to @-@ toe with a legend [ Washington ] " . Hawke himself described Training Day as his " best experience in Hollywood " . His performance earned him Screen Actors Guild and Academy Award nominations for Best Supporting Actor . 
 Hawke pursued a number of projects away from acting throughout the early 2000s . He made his directorial debut with Chelsea Walls ( 2002 ) , an independent drama about five struggling artists living in the famed Chelsea Hotel in New York City . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . A second novel , 2002 's Ash Wednesday , was better received and made the New York Times Best Seller list . The tale of an AWOL soldier and his pregnant girlfriend , the novel attracted critical praise . The Guardian called it " sharply and poignantly written ... makes for an intense one @-@ sitting read " . The New York Times noted that in the book Hawke displayed " a novelist 's innate gifts ... a sharp eye , a fluid storytelling voice and the imagination to create complicated individuals " , but was " weaker at narrative tricks that can be taught " . In 2003 Hawke made a television appearance , guest starring in the second season of the television series Alias , where he portrayed a mysterious CIA agent . 
 In 2004 Hawke returned to film , starring in two features , Taking Lives and Before Sunset . Upon release , Taking Lives received broadly negative reviews , but Hawke 's performance was favored by critics , with the Star Tribune noting that he " plays a complex character persuasively " . Before Sunset , the sequel to Before Sunrise ( 1995 ) co @-@ written by Hawke , Linklater , and Delpy , was much more successful . The Hartford Courant wrote that the three collaborators " keep Jesse and Celine iridescent and fresh , one of the most delightful and moving of all romantic movie couples . " Hawke called it one of his favorite movies , a " romance for realists " . Before Sunset was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay , Hawke 's first screenwriting Oscar nomination . 
 Hawke starred in the 2005 action thriller Assault on Precinct 13 , a loose remake of John Carpenter 's 1976 film of the same title , with an updated plot . The film received reasonable reviews ; some critics praised the dark swift feel of the film , while others compared it unfavorably to John Carpenter 's original . Hawke also appeared that year in the political crime thriller Lord of War , playing an Interpol agent chasing an arms dealer played by Nicolas Cage . In 2006 , Hawke was cast in a supporting role in Fast Food Nation , directed by Richard Linklater based on Eric Schlosser 's best @-@ selling 2001 book . The same year Hawke directed his second feature , The Hottest State , based on his eponymous 1996 novel . The film was released in August 2007 to a tepid reception . 
 = = = 2007 – 2012 : Before the Devil Knows You 're Dead and Brooklyn 's Finest = = = 
 In 2007 , Hawke starred alongside Philip Seymour Hoffman , Marisa Tomei , and Albert Finney in the crime drama Before the Devil Knows You 're Dead . The final work of Sidney Lumet , the film received critical acclaim . USA Today called it " highly entertaining " , describing Hawke and Hoffman 's performances as excellent . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised Hawke 's performance , noting that he " digs deep to create a haunting portrayal of loss " . 
 The following year , Hawke starred with Mark Ruffalo in the crime drama What Doesn 't Kill You . Despite the favorable reception , the film was not given a proper theatrical release due to the bankruptcy of its distributor . In 2009 , Hawke appeared in two features : New York , I Love You , a romance movie comprising 12 short films , and Staten Island , a crime drama co @-@ starring Vincent D 'Onofrio and Seymour Cassel . 
 In 2010 , Hawke starred as a vampire hematologist in the science fiction horror film <unk> . Filmed in Australia with the <unk> brothers , the feature received reasonable reviews , and earned US $ 51 million worldwide . His next role was in Antoine Fuqua 's Brooklyn 's Finest as a corrupt narcotics officer . The film opened in March to a mediocre reception , yet his performance was well @-@ received , with the New York Daily News concluding , " Hawke — continuing an evolution toward stronger , more intense acting than anyone might 've predicted from him 20 years ago — drives the movie . " 
 In a 2011 television adaptation of Herman Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick , Hawke played the role of Starbuck , the first officer to William Hurt 's Captain Ahab . He then starred opposite Kristin Scott Thomas in Paweł <unk> 's The Woman in the Fifth , a " lush puzzler " about an American novelist struggling to rebuild his life in Paris . 
 In 2012 , Hawke entered the horror genre for the first time , by playing a true crime writer in Scott Derrickson 's Sinister , which grossed US $ 87 million at the worldwide box office — the film was the first in a series of highly profitable films for Hawke after the start of the new decade . In the week prior to the US opening of Sinister , Hawke explained that he was previously turned off by horror because good acting is not always required for success ; however , the producer of Sinister , Jason Blum , formerly ran a theater company with Hawke , and made the offer to the actor based on the character and director : 
 ... when I was younger , I ran a theater company with this guy , Jason Blum . And he loved horror movies and he went on to create his own little subgenre with " Paranormal Activity . " And he kept trying to talk to me about how I should love this whole genre . And I told him : I 've never had a script with a really great character and a real filmmaker attached to it that I 'd be interested in . So , he brought me into it . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Before Midnight and Boyhood = = = 
 During 2013 , Hawke starred in three films of different genres . Before Midnight , the third installment of the Before series , reunited Hawke with Delpy and Linklater . Like its predecessors , the film garnered a considerable degree of critical acclaim ; Variety wrote that " one of the great movie romances of the modern era achieves its richest and fullest expression in Before Midnight , " and called the scene in the hotel room " one for the actors ' handbook . " The film earned co @-@ writers Hawke , Linklater , and Delpy another Academy Award nomination , for Best Adapted Screenplay . 
 Hawke then starred in the horror @-@ thriller The Purge , about an American future where crime is legal for one night of the year . Despite mixed reviews , the film topped the weekend box office with a US $ 34 million debut , the biggest opening of Hawke 's career . Hawke 's third film of 2013 was the action film Getaway , which was both critically and commercially unsuccessful . 
 The release of Linklater 's Boyhood , a film shot over the course of 12 years , occurred in mid @-@ 2014 . It follows the life of an American boy from age 6 to 18 , with Hawke playing the protagonist 's father . The film became the best @-@ reviewed film of 2014 , and was named " Best Film " of the year by numerous critics associations . Hawke said in an interview that the attention was a surprise to him . When he first became involved with Linklater 's project , it did not feel like a " proper movie , " and was like a " radical ' 60s film experiment or something " . At the following awards season , the film was nominated for Academy Award for Best Picture , while winning Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama and BAFTA Award for Best Film . It also earned Hawke multiple awards nominations , including the Academy , BAFTA , Golden Globe , and SAG Award for Best Supporting Actor . 
 Hawke next worked with the <unk> brothers again on the science fiction thriller Predestination , in which Hawke plays a time @-@ traveling agent on his final assignment . Following its premiere at the 2014 SXSW Film Festival , the film was released in Australia in August 2014 and in the US in January 2015 . The film received largely positive reviews and was nominated for the AACTA Award for Best Film . 
 In September 2014 , Hawke 's documentary debut , Seymour : An Introduction , screened at the Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) , winning second runner @-@ up for TIFF 's People 's Choice Award for Best Documentary . Conceived after a dinner party at which both Hawke and Bernstein were present , the film is a profile of classical musician Seymour Bernstein , who explained that , even though he is typically a very private person , he was unable to decline Hawke 's directorial request because he is " so endearing " . Bernstein and Hawke developed a friendship through the filming process , and the classical pianist performed for one of Hawke 's theater groups . The film was well @-@ received among critics and enjoyed a limited release in March 2015 . 
 At the time of a November 2014 interview , Hawke was in the process of filming a new narrative film project about the life of jazz musician Chet Baker . Titled Born to Be Blue , the film is set in 1969 and focuses on Baker 's relationship with girlfriend Diane <unk> . In a December 2014 " Actors on Actors " feature for Variety Media , Hawke said in a filmed discussion with Keira Knightley that actors need " thin skin and a lot of perseverance " . Other upcoming projects for Hawke include the modern @-@ day adaptation of Shakespeare 's play Cymbeline ; the coming @-@ of @-@ age drama Ten Thousand Saints ; Andrew Niccol 's Good Kill ; and Alejandro Amenábar 's thriller film Regression . 
 = = = Stage career = = = 
 Hawke has described theater as his " first love " , a place where he is " free to be more creative " . Hawke made his Broadway debut in 1992 , portraying the playwright Konstantin <unk> in Anton Chekhov 's The Seagull at the Lyceum Theater in Manhattan . The following year Hawke was a co @-@ founder and the artistic director of <unk> , a Manhattan theater company , which survived until 2000 . Outside the New York stage , Hawke made an appearance in a 1995 production of Sam Shepard 's Buried Child , directed by Gary Sinise at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago . In 1999 , he starred as Kilroy in the Tennessee Williams play Camino Real at the Williamstown Theater Festival in Massachusetts . 
 Hawke returned to Broadway in Jack O 'Brien 's 2003 production of Henry IV , playing Henry Percy ( Hotspur ) . New York magazine wrote : " Ethan Hawke 's Hotspur ... is a compelling , ardent creation . " Ben Brantley of the New York Times reported that Hawke 's interpretation of Hotspur might be " too contemporary for some tastes , " but allowed " great fun to watch as he fumes and <unk> . " In 2005 Hawke starred in the Off @-@ Broadway revival of David Rabe 's dark comedy <unk> . New York Times critic Brantley praised Hawke 's performance as the central character Eddie , reporting that " he captures with merciless precision the sense of a sharp mind turning flaccid " . The performance earned Hawke a Lucille Lortel Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor . 
 From November 2006 to May 2007 , Hawke starred as Mikhail Bakunin in Tom Stoppard 's trilogy play The Coast of Utopia , an eight @-@ hour @-@ long production at the Lincoln Center Theater in New York . The Los Angeles Times complimented Hawke 's take on Bakunin , writing : " Ethan Hawke buzzes in and out as Bakunin , a strangely appealing enthusiast on his way to becoming a famous anarchist . " The performance earned Hawke his first Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actor in a Play . In November 2007 he directed Things We Want , a two @-@ act play by Jonathan Marc Sherman , for the artist @-@ driven Off @-@ Broadway company The New Group . The play has four characters played by Paul Dano , Peter Dinklage , Josh Hamilton , and Zoe Kazan . New York magazine praised Hawke 's " understated direction " , particularly his ability to " steer a gifted cast away from the histrionics " . 
 The following year Hawke received the Michael Mendelson Award for Outstanding Commitment to the Theater . In his acceptance speech Hawke said " I don 't know why they 're honoring me . I think the real reason they are honoring me is to help raise money for the theater company . Whenever the economy gets hit hard , one of the first thing [ sic ] to go is people 's giving , and last on that list of things people give to is the arts because they feel it 's not essential . I guess I 'm here to remind people that the arts are essential to our mental health as a country . " 
 In 2009 , Hawke appeared in two plays under British director Sam Mendes : as Trofimov in Chekhov 's The Cherry Orchard and as Autolycus in Shakespeare 's The Winter 's Tale . The two productions , launched in New York as part of the Bridge Project , went on an eight @-@ month tour in six countries . The Cherry Orchard won a mixed review from the New York Daily News , which wrote " Ethan Hawke ... fits the image of the ' <unk> ' student Trofimov , but one wishes he didn 't speak with a perennial frog in his throat . " Hawke 's performance in The Winter 's Tale was better received , earning him a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play . 
 In January 2010 , Hawke directed his second play , A Lie of the Mind , by Sam Shepard on the New York stage . It was the first major Off @-@ Broadway revival of the play since its 1985 premiere . Hawke said that he was drawn to the play 's take on " the nature of reality " , and its " weird juxtaposition of humor and mysticism " . In his review for the New York Times , Ben Brantley noted the production 's " scary , splendid clarity " , and praised Hawke for eliciting a performance that " connoisseurs of precision acting will be savoring for years to come " . Entertainment Weekly commented that although A Lie of the Mind " wobbles a bit in its late stages " , Hawke 's " hearty " revival managed to " resurrect the spellbinding uneasiness of the original " . The production garnered five Lucille Lortel Award nominations including Outstanding Revival , and earned Hawke a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Director of a Play . 
 Hawke next starred in the Off @-@ Broadway premiere of a new play , Tommy <unk> 's Blood from a Stone , from December 2010 to February 2011 . The play was not a critical success , but Hawke 's portrayal of the central character Travis earned positive feedback ; The New York Times said he was " remarkably good at communicating the buried sensitivity beneath Travis 's veneer of wary resignation . " A contributor from the New York Post noted it was Hawke 's " best performance in years " . Hawke won an Obie Award for his role in Blood from a Stone . The following year Hawke played the title role in Chekhov 's Ivanov at the Classic Stage Company . In early 2013 he starred in and directed a new play Clive , inspired by Bertolt Brecht 's Baal and written by Jonathan Marc Sherman . He then returned to Broadway to take the title role in Macbeth at the Lincoln Center Theater , but his performance failed to win over the critics , with the New York Post calling it " underwhelming " for showing untimely restraint in a flashy production . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hawke lives in Boerum Hill , a Brooklyn neighborhood in New York City , and owns a small island in Nova Scotia , Canada . Hawke is a great @-@ grandnephew of Tennessee Williams on his father 's side . Hawke 's maternal grandfather , Howard Lemuel Green , served five terms in the Texas Legislature and was a minor @-@ league baseball commissioner . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 On May 1 , 1998 , Hawke married actress Uma Thurman , whom he had met on the set of Gattaca in 1996 . They have two children : daughter Maya ( b . 1998 ) and son Levon ( b . 2002 ) . The couple separated in 2003 , amid allegations of Hawke 's infidelity , and filed for divorce the following year . The divorce was finalized in August 2005 . 
 Hawke married for a second time in June 2008 , wedding Ryan <unk> , who had briefly worked as a nanny to his and Thurman 's children before graduating from Columbia University . Dismissing speculation about their relationship , Hawke said , " ... my [ first ] marriage disintegrated due to many pressures , none of which were remotely connected to Ryan . " They have two daughters : Clementine Jane ( b . 2008 ) and Indiana ( b . 2011 ) . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Hawke is a long @-@ time supporter of the Doe Fund which helps homeless people obtain housing and employment . He has served as a co @-@ chair of the New York Public Library 's Young Lions Committee , one of New York 's major philanthropic boards . In 2001 Hawke co @-@ founded the Young Lions Fiction Award , an annual prize for achievements in fiction writing by authors under age 35 . In November 2010 , he was honored as a Library Lion by the New York Public Library . In May 2016 , Hawke joined the library ’ s board of trustees . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 He supports the United States Democratic Party , and supported Bill Bradley , John Kerry and Barack Obama for President of the United States in 2000 , 2004 and 2008 , respectively . Hawke is also an activist for gay rights and in March 2011 , he and his wife released a video supporting same @-@ sex marriage in New York . 
 In an October 2012 interview , Hawke said that he prefers great art over politics , explaining that his preference shows " how little " he cares about the latter : 
 ... I think about the first people of our generation to do great art . I see Michael Chabon write a great book ; when I see Philip Seymour Hoffman do Death of a Salesman last year — I see people of my generation being fully realized in their work , and I find that really kind of exciting . But politics ? I don 't know . Paul Ryan is certainly not my man . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Publications = = 
 Hawke , Ethan ( 1996 ) . The Hottest State : A Novel ( 1st ed . ) . Boston : Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Hawke , Ethan ( 2002 ) . Ash Wednesday : A Novel ( 1st ed . ) . New York : Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Hawke , Ethan ( 2015 ) . Rules for a Knight ( 1st ed . ) . New York : Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Hawke , Ethan ( 2016 ) . <unk> : A Story of the Apache Wars ( 1st ed . ) . New York : Grand Central Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 401 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Hawke , Ethan ( April 2009 ) . " The Last Outlaw Poet " . Rolling Stone ( 1076 ) : 50 – 61 , 78 – 79 . ISSN 0035 @-@ <unk> . Archived from the original on April 10 , 2009 . 
 = Washington Park Subdivision = 
 The Washington Park Subdivision is the name of the historic 3 @-@ city block by 8 @-@ city block subdivision in the northwest corner of the Woodlawn community area , on the South Side of Chicago in Illinois that stands in the place of the original Washington Park Race Track . The area evolved as a redevelopment of the land previously occupied by the racetrack . It was originally an exclusively white neighborhood that included residential housing , amusement parks , and beer gardens . 
 During the late 1920s and 1930s , the area became the subject of discriminatory twenty @-@ year covenants , which were determined to be invalid by the United States Supreme Court , when challenged in a seminal case by Carl Hansberry . The case is a vital part of legal studies and considered an important part of a broad class of histories . The play Raisin in the Sun is based on Lorraine Hansberry 's struggles in this neighborhood . 
 = = Location = = 
 Due to the non @-@ rectangular shape of the Washington Park community area , the original Washington Park Race Track actually occupied the Southern two @-@ thirds of the Washington Park Subdivision , which is an 8 @-@ city block by 3 @-@ city block area in northwest corner of the Woodlawn community area and bounded by Dr. Martin Luther King Drive to the west , South Cottage Grove Avenue to the East , East 60th Street to the North and East 63rd Street to the South . This is the area directly south of Washington Park and both south and east of the Washington Park community area . It would be part of the Washington Park community area if the community area were to complete its logical proper rectangle . 
 = = Historical significance = = 
 Between 1884 and 1905 , the race track occupied part of the area now known as Washington Park Subdivision . After the city outlawed gambling , the area was redeveloped as a residential housing subdivision with neighboring commercial recreation such as the White City amusement park that flourished until the Great Depression . The neighborhood also included a beer garden that was remodeled by Frank Lloyd Wright . 
 Between 1900 and 1934 , the African American population in Chicago grew from 30 @,@ 000 to 236 @,@ 000 . In this time , Chicago 's demographics changed so that instead of having this population diluted in scattered places , it was concentrated in two large strips of land . The concentration was enforced by violence at first , but restrictive covenants became the preferred way to enforce segregation after a few decades . 
 When necessary , community organizations used violence to pursue their segregationist purposes , and between 1917 and 1921 , bomb use discouraged encroachment into majority white neighborhoods . The bombs were used at the residences of African Americans as well as the properties of real estate agents and bankers . In 1919 , African American banking magnate Jesse Binga , the owner of the first Chicago bank to be operated by African Americans , and the first African American who lived in the Washington Park <unk> , endured five bombings of his home by angry whites . Binga lived on the block diagonally northwest of the northwest boundary of the subdivision at <unk> South Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive . 
 Although they were previously rare , racially restrictive covenants among property owners that outlawed the purchase , lease , or occupation of their properties by African Americans became common in Chicago in the 1920s , following the Great Migration . Local businessmen and the University of Chicago became alarmed at the prospect of poorer African Americans moving from the Black Belt due to a combination of racial succession and economic decline . In 1926 , the United States Supreme Court upheld racially restrictive covenants in Corrigan v. Buckley ( 271 U.S. 323 ( 1926 ) ) . In 1927 , the Chicago Real Estate Board ( CREB ) sent representatives throughout the city to promote such covenants , which it viewed as a progressive alternative to violence . The board representatives provided model contracts drafted by the Chicago Plan Commission as part of their efforts . By 1928 , the Hyde Park Herald reported that the covenants prevailed throughout the South Side , and 95 % of the homes in the subdivision were covenanted . Most African American neighborhoods were bounded by covenanted areas since 85 % of Chicago was covenanted . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 Between 1928 and 1940 , the subdivision was a legal battleground . In 1928 , landlords in the subdivision signed the covenants in which they agreed that they would not rent to non @-@ whites . The language of the covenants state that no properties in the subdivision " ... shall be sold , given , conveyed or leased to any negro or negroes , and no permission or license to use or occupy any part thereof shall be given to any negro except house servants or janitors or chauffeurs employed thereon ... " The covenants were signed by " owners of land on the one or the other side of Evans , Langley , Champlain , St. Lawrence , Rhodes , Eberhart , Vernon and South Park Avenues , between 60th and 63rd Streets and on 60th , 61st and 62nd Streets between South Park and Cottage Grove Avenues " on September 30 , 1927 , and they were recorded at the Cook County Register of Deeds on February 1 , 1928 . They were intended to be valid and in force until January 1 , 1948 . 
 The Great Depression decreased white demand for the subdivision 's properties . A few well @-@ off African Americans convinced some owners to sell properties to them . The most famous case was that of Dr. James L. Hall , who rented a property located at 419 E. 60th St. from the white Issac Kleiman . In 1933 , Olive Ida Burke ( the wife of Mr. Burke — a future defendant in the famous Hansberry v. Lee case ) sued Kleiman in the case now known as Burke v. Kleiman . The circuit court granted an injunction in favor of the plaintiffs , which was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court of Illinois . The plaintiffs stipulated that as of 1928 more than 95 % of the property owners signed the covenant . This stipulation was later proved false — only 54 % had actually signed . 
 In 1937 , Carl Hansberry purchased a property from James Joseph Burke located at 6140 South Rhodes . Anna M. Lee , and other promoters of the covenants , sued to prevent Hansberry 's family from living in the neighborhood . This led to the Hansberry v. Lee , 311 U.S. 32 ( 1940 ) case . Defendants argued that the stipulation made previously in Burke v. Kleiman that more than 95 % of the owners had signed the covenant was false and the case should be <unk> . Plaintiffs , while admitting to the fact , contended that the principle of res <unk> barred courts from rehearing the old arguments . The Illinois courts ruled in favor of plaintiffs . However the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People decided to represent the buyer in the United States Supreme Court . The case caught the attention of national real estate magazines and African American newspapers . The U. S. Supreme Court eventually reversed that ruling stating the application of res <unk> in this case would violate Fourteenth Amendment . The play Raisin in the Sun was inspired by Lorraine Hansberry 's time in the neighborhood after her father won the repeal of restrictive covenants . 
 The result of Hansberry v. Lee led to racial succession . White tenants were often evicted to make way for higher @-@ paying African American renters . By 1950 , the subdivision was over 99 percent African American . The Hansberry case is a seminal case in civil procedure and class action legal studies . It is also considered an important study of African American , Chicago and legal history . 
 While the purchase case proceeded , some landlords subdivided properties and rented them to blacks at a premium . Some <unk> began encouraging white families to move out so that they could rent properties to African Americans . Smaller property owners were pressed to sell to <unk> or directly to African Americans because the neighborhood was undergoing a racial transformation . The conditions of this neighborhood are described in a section of Black Metropolis by St. Clair Drake and Horace Roscoe Cayton . 
 The Supreme Court ruling and several similar rulings led to the racial transformation of the Woodlawn and Hyde Park community areas . Political futures were determined by positions taken on this issue . Future five @-@ term Mayor of Chicago Richard J. Daley ran for Cook County Sheriff in 1946 as a progressive anti @-@ covenant candidate . Eventually , in Shelley v. Kraemer , 334 U.S. 1 ( 1948 ) , which was argued by Thurgood Marshall , the U. S. Supreme Court declared restrictive covenants in general unenforceable . 
 = André Laguerre = 
 Marc André Laguerre ( February 21 , 1915 – January 18 , 1979 ) was a journalist and magazine editor , best known as the managing editor of Sports Illustrated from 1960 to 1974 , during which time he oversaw the growth in the magazine from a niche publication to become the industry leader in weekly sports magazines . It was under his leadership that the annual Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue was first published . When he retired in 1974 , he had been managing editor of the magazine for 704 issues , then a record among magazines published by Time , Inc . , SI 's parent company . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 André Laguerre was born June 7 , 1915 in England to Frenchman Léon James Laguerre and his English wife , Dorothy . He was the oldest of three children ; he had a younger brother , Leon and a younger sister , Odette . His father was in the French diplomatic corps , and the family moved frequently during his early years . Before the age of ten , Andre had lived in England , France and Syria . In the summer of 1927 , his father took a post at the French Consulate General in San Francisco . The family lived in the upper @-@ class neighborhood of Sea Cliff , and Andre attended a number of private schools , including the Santa Monica School and St. Ignatius College Preparatory . While in San Francisco , he became a fan of American sports , especially baseball , and also had his first job in journalism , as a <unk> for the San Francisco Chronicle . In 1929 , he was sent back to England for school . He graduated in 1931 , having earned an Oxford Certificate , but he declined to matriculate at Oxford University , instead preferring to pursue a career as a journalist . He enrolled in a correspondence course , and took a job at a book store to support himself . 
 = = Early career and military service = = 
 He worked hard for many years as a freelance journalist , and began to be noticed for his writing . He wrote for both English language and French language publications . In 1938 , he covered the Munich Agreement for the French daily Paris @-@ Soir . When World War II broke out , he enlisted in the French Army as a corporal . His first assignment was on patrol on the Maginot Line . He later served as a liaison to the British forces at Arras , and remained with them until the Battle of Arras forced their retreat . He stayed with the British forces until the Dunkirk evacuation in 1940 , where he was one of the last to be evacuated . His evacuation ship was sunk by a mine , and he was rescued by a British destroyer , bleeding heavily from a neck wound . Laguerre credited his rescue to his ease with the English language ( his rescuers took him for British ) . He criticised his rescuers in later years for refusing to help Frenchmen who were around him ; many of them drowned . 
 After his rescue and recovery from his injuries , days after Charles de Gaulle 's famous June 18th Speech , he was given the option of being discharged from his duties , or to join the Free French forces . He chose the latter . He was assigned as a sentry guarding Charles de Gaulle 's headquarters . While at that post , he wrote a letter to de Gaulle suggesting techniques to improve the morale of Free French troops . De Gaulle took immediate notice , making him assistant to the chief press <unk> . Within a few months , de Gaulle moved Laguerre into the chief position himself , making him his primary press liaison . He followed de Gaulle on his travels to North Africa in 1943 to inspect Free French forces there , and to Washington , D.C. to visit with American President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1944 . He stayed on de Gaulle 's staff for a while after the war , but after interviewing with Henry Luce , the head of Time , Inc . , he left de Gaulle 's service to accept a job writing for Time magazine . 
 = = Time = = 
 Laguerre began his Time career in 1946 as one of the magazine 's European correspondents . Working mainly out of the Time Paris bureau , he hobnobbed with Paris 's top citizens ; he was a frequent dinner guest of Albert Camus . He also maintained his connection to sports , first acquired in his youth in San Francisco , by moonlighting as a sports reporter for the Paris @-@ based English @-@ language International Herald Tribune , writing a horse racing column under the pseudonym " Eddie Snow " . 
 Meanwhile , Laguerre was attracting the attention of Time , Inc . ' s top brass . In 1948 , he was promoted to Paris bureau chief and , in December 1950 , he was brought to New York by Time founder Henry Luce for a special one @-@ year assignment to work out of the main Time offices . He returned to Europe in 1951 to serve as London bureau chief . In 1955 , after the sudden death of the Paris bureau chief , he was given that position back , and for a time he held both posts simultaneously . While Time bureau chief of London and Paris , he also spent some time writing about his favorite subject , sports , for the magazine , for which he covered the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz , Switzerland , and the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki , Finland . In early 1956 , he accepted a temporary assignment to head a contingent of writers to cover the 1956 Winter Olympics in Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy for Time , Inc . ' s fledgling Sports Illustrated , started two years earlier by Luce . His first article for the magazine was a piece on the dominance of the Soviet Union in their first Winter Olympics . Three months later , Luce installed him as assistant managing editor of Sports Illustrated . 
 On June 7 , 1955 , Laguerre married Princess Nathalie Alexandria <unk> de Beauharnais , a Russian princess and descendant of both Catherine the Great and Joséphine de Beauharnais . The couple had met in 1943 while André was working for General de Gaulle , and Nathalie was a reporter for Time . They had two daughters , Michèle Anne Laguerre and Claudine Hélène Laguerre . 
 = = Sports Illustrated = = 
 As assistant managing editor , his first major assignment was to head the team of reporters and photographers covering the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne , Australia . Among those traveling with Laguerre were Roger Bannister , the former British track and field star and first man in history to run a competition mile in under four minutes , and Roy Terrell , who would eventually succeed Laguerre as managing editor of Sports Illustrated . 
 = = = Managing editor = = = 
 Laguerre was promoted to managing editor of Sports Illustrated in May 1960 , after four years as assistant managing editor . His time at the magazine was instrumental in saving what was , when he took over , a financially insolvent publication . He would serve as managing editor for fourteen years , leading the magazine for a total of 704 issues , then a record among Time , Inc. managing editors . During his tenure , the circulation grew from 900 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 issues , and the advertising budget grew from $ 11 @.@ 9 million to $ 72 @.@ 2 million . He altered the look and feel of the magazine , changing its focus from a lifestyle magazine that focused on leisure sports , to one that covered the major American team sports , at a time when television vastly altered the way in which such sports were covered . As such , he kept Sports Illustrated at the head of the growth of interest in these sports . He also placed a heavy emphasis on the use of color photography and late deadline , to keep the magazine up to date and visually appealing . He hired and encouraged writers who were masters at prose , emphasizing writing over sportswriting , and the crop of writers he brought to the magazine , including Frank Deford , Dan Jenkins , Budd Schulberg , and Gil <unk> , helped change the way people wrote about sports . 
 Laguerre had been very guarded about his personal life among his coworkers . Deford , who worked closely with him for many years , and who looked up to him as a mentor , said of him , " Laguerre was a fascinating paradox : He was almost constitutionally withdrawn , but among the friends he chose , he was magnetic . " One publisher called him " A powerful personality " while another called him " A close @-@ mouthed , self @-@ contained man who seemed forbidding to some ... despite his reserve , [ his ] personality was pervading , dominating ; he exuded strength and leadership . " 
 Among his more curious and enduring innovations was the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue . The winter months , between the college bowl season and the start of Major League Baseball 's spring training , was a slow time for sports journalism . At the time , winter team sports like basketball and ice hockey were regional niche sports , and there was little to write about . Laguerre had instituted an annual February issue titled " Fun in the Sun " , where he sent his staff to an exotic locale to write about and photograph it for his readers . In 1964 , he asked Jule Campbell , then a fashion reporter for Sports Illustrated , to " go to some beautiful place and put a pretty girl on the cover " of that year 's " Fun in the Sun " issue . That year 's issue featured only five pages of girls in swimsuits , and still predominantly featured travel writing , including articles about snorkeling and fish @-@ watching . With the help of that year 's " Fun in the Sun " issue , 1964 became the first year that Sports Illustrated would turn a profit . Though originally only planned as a one @-@ off event , Laguerre was convinced by Sports Illustrated art director Dick <unk> to bring back the swimsuits in 1965 , only " a lot sexier " . Laguerre once again assigned Jule Campbell to scout models and locations . The 1965 issue contained an article entitled " The Nudity Cult " and de @-@ emphasized the travelogue @-@ like writing of previous " Fun in the Sun " issues from which it evolved . Since then , the Swimsuit Issue has become the biggest selling issue of the magazine , and a major cross @-@ over publication for the fashion and modeling worlds as well . 
 Laguerre 's tenure as managing editor had a profound effect on the other 51 issues of the year as well . During the magazine 's first several years , prior to Laguerre 's arrival , the magazine did not place major American team sports at the forefront . As an example , during 1955 and 1956 , the magazine 's first two years , it featured as many articles on fishing as on professional football , 23 articles . By 1965 – 1966 , five years into Laguerre 's term , the magazine published only eight articles on fishing , while it published over 60 articles on pro football . 
 Besides changing the types of sports being covered , the manner in which they were covered changed as well . Under earlier managing editors , the magazine 's writing and editorial staff was organized by department . Thus , there was a fashion department , a travel department , and a sports department , which covered all sports . Laguerre reorganized the magazine , giving each sport its own separate department , so there would be a dedicated staff of writers in the baseball department , and a different boxing department , and another for pro football , and so on . Laguerre also encouraged serious investigative journalism , and did not shy away from controversial issues . In 1961 , writer Ray Cave broke a story on point shaving in college basketball . In 1968 , under Laguerre 's direction , and under secrecy from his superiors , the magazine ran a five @-@ part series on the experience of black athletes in America . 
 Laguerre 's later years showed less success as the magazine became an industry leader . In 1968 , its coverage of the Mexico City Olympics was heavily criticized , having been " scooped " on most stories by both Time and Life magazines . A 1969 book by Jack Olsen , titled The Girls in the Office , embarrassed Time Inc. over its treatment of its female employees , including those at Sports Illustrated . In 1970 , 23 women on staff at Sports Illustrated signed a petition demanding equal treatment . Laguerre relented , promoting Pat Ryan to senior editor , and paying her the same as the men in her same position . By 1973 , Laguerre 's leadership was under a direct challenge from within his staff and from his superiors . A January 1973 story in New York Magazine was highly critical of the degrading quality of the writing and of the stagnating corporate culture at Sports Illustrated . By September of that year , Laguerre was asked to step down as managing <unk> was offered an executive position in corporate offices which he refused and his resignation was complete by February 1 , 1974 . 
 = = Later career and death = = 
 After retiring as managing editor , he remained with Sports Illustrated in order to head a group looking into publishing international editions of the magazine . He was offered the job as managing editor of Playboy , and , insulted by the low $ 45 @,@ 000 salary Hugh Hefner offered him , he turned the job down . In 1975 , he founded a bi @-@ monthly horse @-@ racing magazine , Classic , which he headed until shortly before his death of a heart attack in New York on January 18 , 1979 at the age of sixty @-@ three . 
 = Windows 10 = 
 Windows 10 is a personal computer operating system developed and released by Microsoft as part of the Windows NT family of operating systems . It was officially unveiled in September 2014 following a brief demo at Build 2014 . The first version of the operating system entered a public beta testing process in October 2014 , leading up to its consumer release on July 29 , 2015 . 
 = = Description and features = = 
 Windows 10 introduces what Microsoft described as " universal apps " ; expanding on Metro @-@ style apps , these apps can be designed to run across multiple Microsoft product families with nearly identical code ‍ — ‌ including PCs , tablets , smartphones , embedded systems , Xbox One , Surface Hub and Windows Holographic . The Windows user interface was revised to handle transitions between a mouse @-@ oriented interface and a touchscreen @-@ optimized interface based on available input devices ‍ — ‌ particularly on 2 @-@ in @-@ 1 PCs ; both interfaces include an updated Start menu which incorporates elements of Windows 7 's traditional Start menu with the tiles of Windows 8 . The first release of Windows 10 also introduces a virtual desktop system , a window and desktop management feature called Task View , the Microsoft Edge web browser , support for fingerprint and face recognition login , new security features for enterprise environments , and DirectX 12 and WDDM 2 @.@ 0 to improve the operating system 's graphics capabilities for games . 
 Microsoft described Windows 10 as an " operating system as a service " that would receive ongoing updates to its features and functionality , augmented with the ability for enterprise environments to receive non @-@ critical updates at a slower pace , or use long @-@ term support milestones that will only receive critical updates , such as security patches , over their five @-@ year lifespan of mainstream support . Terry Myerson , executive vice president of Microsoft 's Windows and Devices Group , argued that the goal of this model was to reduce fragmentation across the Windows platform , as Microsoft aimed to have Windows 10 installed on at least one billion devices in the two to three years following its release . 
 Windows 10 received mostly positive reviews upon its original release in July 2015 ; critics praised Microsoft 's decision to downplay user @-@ interface mechanics introduced by Windows 8 ( including the full screen apps and Start screen ) in non @-@ touch environments to provide a desktop @-@ oriented interface in line with previous versions of Windows , although Windows 10 's touch @-@ oriented user interface mode was panned for containing regressions upon the touch @-@ oriented interface of Windows 8 . Critics also praised the improvements to Windows 10 's bundled software over 8 @.@ 1 , Xbox Live integration , as well as the functionality and capabilities of Cortana personal assistant and the replacement of Internet Explorer with Microsoft Edge . 
 Critics characterized the initial release of Windows 10 in July 2015 as being rushed , citing the incomplete state of some of the operating system 's bundled software ( such as the Edge web browser ) , as well as the stability of the operating system itself on launch . Windows 10 was also criticized for limiting how users can control its operation , including limited controls over the installation of updates on the main consumer @-@ oriented edition in comparison to previous versions . Privacy concerns were also voiced by critics and advocates , as the operating system 's default settings and certain features require the transmission of user data to Microsoft or its partners . Microsoft has also received criticism for how it has distributed Windows 10 to users of existing versions of Windows , which has included the automatic downloads of installation files to computers , the recurring display of pop @-@ ups advertising the upgrade , and allegations of the installation process being scheduled or initiated automatically without expressed user consent . 
 As of June 2016 , Windows 10 use is on the rise , with previous versions of Windows declining in their share of total usage as measured by web traffic . The operating system is running on 350 million active devices and has an estimated usage share of 22 % on personal computers and 12 % across all platforms ( PC , mobile , tablet , and console ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 At the Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conference in 2011 , Andrew Lees , the chief of Microsoft 's mobile technologies , stated that the company intended to have a single software ecosystem for PCs , phones , tablets , and other devices . " We won ’ t have an ecosystem for PCs , and one for phones , and one for tablets ‍ — ‌ they 'll all come together . " 
 In December 2013 , technology writer Mary Jo Foley reported that Microsoft was working on an update to Windows 8 codenamed " Threshold " , after a planet in Microsoft 's Halo video game franchise . Similarly to " Blue " ( which became Windows 8 @.@ 1 ) , Foley called Threshold a " wave of operating systems " across multiple Microsoft platforms and services , scheduled for the second quarter of 2015 . Foley reported that among the goals for Threshold was to create a unified application platform and development toolkit for Windows , Windows Phone and Xbox One ( which all use a similar Windows NT kernel ) . 
 In April 2014 , at the Build Conference , Microsoft 's Terry Myerson unveiled an updated version of Windows 8 @.@ 1 that added the ability to run Windows Store apps inside desktop windows and a more traditional Start menu in place of the Start screen seen in Windows 8 . The new Start menu takes after Windows 7 's design by using only a portion of the screen and including a Windows 7 @-@ style application listing in the first column . The second column displays Windows 8 @-@ style app tiles . Myerson stated that these changes would occur in a future update , but did not elaborate . Microsoft also unveiled the concept of a " universal Windows app " , allowing Windows Store apps created for Windows 8 @.@ 1 to be ported to Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 and Xbox One while sharing a common codebase , with an interface designed for different device form factors , and allowing user data and licenses for an app to be shared between multiple platforms . Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 would share nearly 90 % of the common Windows Runtime APIs with Windows 8 @.@ 1 on PCs . 
 Screenshots of a Windows build which purported to be Threshold were leaked in July 2014 , showing the previously presented Start menu and windowed Windows Store apps followed by a further screenshot in September 2014 of a build identifying itself as " Windows Technical Preview " , numbered <unk> , showing a new virtual desktop system , a notification center , and a new File Explorer icon . 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 Threshold was officially unveiled during a media event on September 30 , 2014 , under the name Windows 10 ; Myerson said that Windows 10 would be Microsoft 's " most comprehensive platform ever " , providing a single , unified platform for desktop computers , laptops , tablets , smartphones , and all @-@ in @-@ one devices . He emphasized that Windows 10 would take steps towards restoring user interface mechanics from Windows 7 to improve the experience for users on non @-@ touch devices , noting criticism of Windows 8 's touch @-@ oriented interface by keyboard and mouse users . Despite these concessions , Myerson noted that the touch @-@ oriented interface would evolve as well on 10 . In describing the changes , Joe <unk> likened the two operating systems to electric cars , comparing Windows 7 to a first @-@ generation Toyota Prius hybrid , and Windows 10 to an all @-@ electric Tesla ‍ — ‌ considering the latter to be an extension of the technology first introduced in the former . 
 In regards to Microsoft naming the new operating system Windows 10 instead of Windows 9 , Terry Myerson stated that " based on the product that 's coming , and just how different our approach will be overall , it wouldn 't be right to call it Windows 9 . " He also joked that they could not call it " Windows One " ( alluding to several recent Microsoft products with a similar brand , such as OneDrive , OneNote , and Xbox One ) because Windows 1 @.@ 0 already existed . Tony Prophet , Microsoft Vice President of Windows Marketing , stated at a San Francisco conference in October 2014 that Windows 9 " came and went " , and that Windows 10 is not " an incremental step from Windows 8 @.@ 1 , " but " a material step . We 're trying to create one platform , one eco @-@ system that unites as many of the devices [ sic ] from the small embedded Internet of Things , through tablets , through phones , through PCs and , ultimately , into the Xbox . " 
 Further details surrounding Windows 10 's consumer @-@ oriented features were presented during another media event held on January 21 , 2015 , entitled " Windows 10 : The Next Chapter " . The keynote featured the unveiling of Cortana integration within the operating system , new Xbox @-@ oriented features , Windows 10 Mobile , an updated Office Mobile suite , Surface Hub ‍ — ‌ a large @-@ screened Windows 10 device for enterprise collaboration based upon <unk> Pixel technology , along with <unk> ‑ augmented reality eyewear and an associated platform for building apps that can render holograms through <unk> . 
 Additional developer @-@ oriented details surrounding the " Universal Windows Platform " concept were revealed and discussed during Microsoft 's developers ' conference Build . Among them were the unveiling of " <unk> " , which provides a middleware toolchain for compiling Objective @-@ C based software ( particularly , iOS software ) to run as universal apps on Windows 10 and Windows 10 Mobile . A port of Candy Crush Saga made using the toolkit , which shared much of its code with the iOS version , was demonstrated , alongside the announcement that the King @-@ developed game would be bundled with Windows 10 at launch . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 On June 1 , 2015 , Microsoft first announced that Windows 10 would be released on July 29 , 2015 . Microsoft began an advertising campaign centering on Windows 10 , " Upgrade Your World " , on July 20 , 2015 with the premiere of television commercials in Australia , Canada , France , Germany , Japan , the United Kingdom , and the United States . The commercials focused on the tagline " A more human way to do " , emphasizing new features and technologies supported by Windows 10 that sought to provide a more " personal " experience to users . The campaign culminated with launch events in thirteen cities on July 29 , which celebrated " the unprecedented role our biggest fans played in the development of Windows 10 " . 
 = = Features = = 
 Windows 10 harmonizes the user experience and functionality between different classes of device , and addresses shortcomings in the user interface that were introduced in Windows 8 . Windows 10 Mobile , the successor to Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 , shares some user interface elements and apps with its PC counterpart . 
 The Windows Runtime app ecosystem was revised into the Universal Windows Platform ( <unk> ) . These universal apps are made to run across multiple platforms and device classes , including smartphones , tablets , Xbox One consoles , and other compatible Windows 10 devices . Windows apps share code across platforms , have responsive designs that adapt to the needs of the device and available inputs , can synchronize data between Windows 10 devices ( including notifications , credentials , and allowing cross @-@ platform multiplayer for games ) , and are distributed through a unified Windows Store . Developers can allow " cross @-@ buys " , where purchased licenses for an app apply to all of the user 's compatible devices , rather than only the one they purchased on ( e.g. , a user purchasing an app on PC is also entitled to use the smartphone version at no extra cost ) . 
 On Windows 10 , Windows Store serves as a unified storefront for apps , Groove Music ( formerly Xbox Music ) , and Movies & TV ( formerly Xbox Video ) . Windows 10 also allows web apps and desktop software ( using either Win32 or .NET Framework ) to be packaged for distribution on the Windows Store . Desktop software distributed through Windows Store is packaged using the App @-@ V system to allow <unk> . 
 = = = User interface and desktop = = = 
 A new iteration of the Start menu is used on the Windows 10 desktop , with a list of places and other options on the left side , and tiles representing applications on the right . The menu can be resized , and expanded into a full @-@ screen display , which is the default option in Tablet mode . A new virtual desktop system was added . A feature known as Task View displays all open windows and allows users to switch between them , or switch between multiple workspaces . Windows Store apps , which previously could be used only in full screen mode , can now be used in self @-@ contained windows similarly to other programs . Program windows can now be snapped to quadrants of the screen by dragging them to the corner . When a window is snapped to one side of the screen , Task View appears and the user is prompted to choose a second window to fill the unused side of the screen ( called " Snap Assist " ) . Windows ' system icons were also changed . 
 Charms have been removed ; their functionality in Windows Store apps is accessed from an App commands menu on their <unk> . In its place is Action Center , which displays notifications and settings toggles . It is accessed by clicking an icon in the system tray , or dragging from the right of the screen . Notifications can be synced between multiple devices . The Settings app ( formerly PC Settings ) was refreshed and now includes more options that were previously exclusive to the desktop Control Panel . 
 Windows 10 is designed to adapt its user interface based on the type of device being used and available input methods . It offers two separate user interface modes : a user interface optimized for mouse and keyboard , and a " Tablet mode " designed for touchscreens . Users can toggle between these two modes at any time , and Windows can prompt or automatically switch when certain events occur , such as disabling Tablet mode on a tablet if a keyboard or mouse is plugged in , or when a 2 @-@ in @-@ 1 PC is switched to its laptop state . In Tablet mode , programs default to a maximized view , and the taskbar contains a back button and hides buttons for opened or pinned programs ; Task View is used instead to switch between programs . The full screen Start menu is used in this mode , similarly to Windows 8 , but scrolls vertically instead of horizontally . 
 = = = System security = = = 
 Windows 10 incorporates multi @-@ factor authentication technology based upon standards developed by the FIDO Alliance . The operating system includes improved support for biometric authentication through the Windows Hello and Passport platforms ; devices with supported cameras ( requiring infrared illumination , such as Intel <unk> ) allow users to log in with <unk> or iris @-@ recognition , similarly to Kinect . Devices with supported readers support fingerprint @-@ recognition login . Credentials are stored locally and protected using asymmetric encryption . The Passport platform allows networks , software and websites to authenticate users using either a PIN or biometric login to verify their identity , without sending a password . 
 The enterprise version of Windows 10 offers additional security features ; administrators can set up policies for the automatic encryption of sensitive data , selectively block applications from accessing encrypted data , and enable Device Guard ‍ — ‌ a system which allows administrators to enforce a high security environment by blocking the execution of software that is not digitally signed by a trusted vendor or Microsoft . Device Guard is designed to protect against zero @-@ day exploits , and runs inside a hypervisor so that its operation remains separated from the operating system itself . 
 = = = Command line = = = 
 Win32 console windows can now be resized without any restrictions , can be made to cover the full screen by pressing Alt + <unk> Enter , and can use standard keyboard shortcuts , such as those for cut , copy , and paste . Other features such as word wrap and transparency were also added . These functions can be disabled to revert to the legacy console , if needed . 
 " Redstone " adds Windows Subsystem for Linux , a version of the Ubuntu user space that can run natively on Windows . The subsystem translates Linux system calls that Ubuntu uses to those of the Windows NT kernel . This allows the Bash and other 64 @-@ bit Ubuntu command line apps to run within the Windows console ; however , Bash cannot run Windows software and Windows cannot run Linux software . 
 = = = Storage requirements = = = 
 To reduce the storage footprint of the operating system , Windows 10 automatically compresses system files . The system can reduce the storage footprint of Windows by approximately 1 @.@ 5 GB for 32 @-@ bit systems and 2 @.@ 6 GB for 64 @-@ bit systems . The level of compression used is dependent on a performance assessment performed during installations or by OEMs , which tests how much compression can be used without harming operating system performance . Furthermore , the Refresh and Reset functions use runtime system files instead , making a separate recovery partition redundant , allowing patches and updates to remain installed following the operation , and further reducing the amount of space required for Windows 10 by up to 12 GB . These functions replace the <unk> mode introduced on Windows 8 @.@ 1 Update , which allowed OEMs to configure low @-@ capacity devices with flash @-@ based storage to use Windows system files out of the compressed <unk> image typically used for installation and recovery . Windows 10 also includes a function in its Settings app that allows users to view a breakdown of how their device 's storage capacity is being used by different types of files , and determine whether certain types of files are saved to internal storage or an SD card by default . 
 = = = Online services and functionality = = = 
 Windows 10 introduces a new default web browser , Microsoft Edge . It features a new standards @-@ compliant rendering engine forked from Trident , annotation tools , and offers integration with other Microsoft platforms present within Windows 10 . Internet Explorer 11 is maintained on Windows 10 for compatibility purposes , but is deprecated in favor of Edge and will no longer be actively developed . 
 Windows 10 incorporates Microsoft 's intelligent personal assistant , Cortana , which was first introduced with Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 in 2014 . Cortana replaced Windows ' embedded search feature , supporting both text and voice input . Many of its features are a direct carryover from Windows Phone , including integration with Bing , setting reminders , a Notebook feature for managing personal information , as well as searching for files , playing music , launching applications and setting reminders or sending emails . Cortana is implemented as a universal search box located alongside the Start and Task View buttons , which can be hidden or condensed to a single button . 
 Microsoft Family Safety is replaced by Microsoft Family , a parental controls system that applies across Windows platforms and Microsoft online services . Users can create a designated family , and monitor and restrict the actions of users designated as children , such as access to websites , enforcing age ratings on Windows Store purchases , and other restrictions . The service can also send weekly e @-@ mail reports to parents detailing a child 's computer usage . Unlike previous versions of Windows , Child accounts in a family must be associated with a Microsoft account ‍ — ‌ which allows these settings to apply across all Windows 10 devices that a particular child is using . 
 Windows 10 also offers the Wi @-@ Fi Sense feature originating from Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 ; users can optionally have their device automatically connect to suggested open hotspots , and share their home network 's password with contacts ( either via Skype , People , or Facebook ) so they may automatically connect to the network on a Windows 10 device without needing to manually enter its password . Credentials are stored in an encrypted form on Microsoft servers , and sent to the devices of the selected contacts . <unk> are not viewable by the guest user , and the guest user is not allowed to access other computers or devices on the network . Wi @-@ Fi Sense is not usable on <unk> @-@ encrypted networks . Adding " _ <unk> " at the end of the <unk> will also block the corresponding network from being used for this feature . 
 Universal calling and messaging apps for Windows 10 are built in as of the November 2015 update : Messaging , Skype Video , and Phone . These offer built @-@ in alternatives to the Skype download and sync with Windows 10 Mobile . 
 = = = Multimedia and gaming = = = 
 Windows 10 provides heavier integration with the Xbox ecosystem . Xbox SmartGlass is succeeded by the Xbox app , which allows users to browse their game library ( including both PC and Xbox console games ) , and Game DVR is also available using a keyboard shortcut , allowing users to save the last 30 seconds of gameplay as a video that can be shared to Xbox Live , OneDrive , or elsewhere . Windows 10 also allows users to control and play games from an Xbox One console over a local network . The Xbox Live SDK allows application developers to incorporate Xbox Live functionality into their apps , and future wireless Xbox One accessories , such as controllers , are supported on Windows with an adapter . Microsoft also intends to allow cross @-@ buys and save synchronization between Xbox One and Windows 10 versions of games ; Microsoft Studios games such as <unk> and Quantum Break are intended as being exclusive to Windows 10 and Xbox One . 
 Candy Crush Saga and Microsoft Solitaire Collection are also automatically installed upon installation of Windows 10 . 
 Windows 10 adds native game recording and screenshot capture ability using the newly introduced game bar . Users can also have the OS continuously record gameplay in the background , which , then , allows the user to save the last few , user configurable , moments of gameplay to the hard disk . 
 Windows 10 adds FLAC and <unk> codecs and support for the <unk> media container , allowing these formats to be opened in Windows Media Player and other applications . 
 = = = = DirectX 12 = = = = 
 Windows 10 includes DirectX 12 , alongside WDDM 2 @.@ 0 . Unveiled March 2014 at GDC , DirectX 12 aims to provide " console @-@ level efficiency " with " closer to the metal " access to hardware resources , and reduced CPU and graphics driver overhead . Most of the performance improvements are achieved through low @-@ level programming , which allow developers to use resources more efficiently and reduce single @-@ threaded CPU bottlenecking caused by abstraction through higher level APIs . DirectX 12 will also feature support for vendor agnostic multi @-@ GPU setups . WDDM 2 @.@ 0 introduces a new virtual memory management and allocation system to reduce workload on the kernel @-@ mode driver . 
 = = Removed features = = 
 Windows Media Center was discontinued , and is uninstalled when upgrading from a previous version of Windows . Upgraded Windows installations with Media Center will receive the paid app Windows DVD Player free of charge for a limited , but unspecified , time . Microsoft had previously relegated Media Center and integrated DVD playback support to a paid add @-@ on beginning on Windows 8 due to the cost of licensing the required DVD decoders , and the increasing number of PC devices that do not have optical drives at all . 
 The OneDrive built @-@ in sync client , which was introduced in Windows 8 @.@ 1 , no longer supports offline placeholders for online @-@ only files in Windows 10 . Functionality to view offline files is expected to be added in the future by a new Windows app . 
 Users are no longer able to synchronize Start menu layouts across all devices associated with a Microsoft account . A Microsoft developer justified the change by explaining that a user may have different applications they want to emphasize on each device that they use , rather than use the same configuration across each device . The ability to automatically install a Windows Store app across all devices associated with an account was also removed . 
 Web browsers can no longer set themselves as a user 's default without further intervention ; changing the default web browser must be performed manually by the user from Settings ' " Default apps " page , ostensibly to prevent browser hijacking . 
 Parental controls no longer support browsers other than Internet Explorer and Edge , and the ability to control browsing by a whitelist was removed . Also removed were the ability to control local accounts , the ability to scan a machine for applications to allow and block , and the " Curfew " feature where a parent could specify allowed times . 
 The Food & Drink , Health & Fitness , and Travel apps have been discontinued . 
 While all Windows 10 editions include fonts that provide broad language support , some fonts for Middle Eastern and East Asian languages ( Arabic , Chinese , Hindi , Japanese , Korean , etc . ) are no longer included with the standard installation to reduce storage space used , but are available without charge as optional font packages . When software invokes text in languages other than those for which the system is configured and does not use the Windows font fallback mechanisms designed always to display legible glyphs , Windows displays unsupported characters as a default " not defined " glyph , a square or rectangular box , or a box with a dot , question mark or " x " inside . 
 Windows Defender could be integrated into File Explorer 's context menu in Windows 8.x , but Microsoft initially removed integration from Windows 10 , restoring it in Windows 10 build <unk> in response to user feedback . 
 User control over Windows Updates was removed . In earlier versions users could opt for updates to be installed automatically , or to be notified so they could update as and when they wished , or not to be notified ; and they could choose which updates to install , using information about the updates . Windows 10 Pro and Enterprise users may be configured by an administrator to defer updates , but only for a limited time . For example , in its Canadian licensing agreement , users of Windows 10 " may stop receiving updates on your device by turning off Internet access . If and when you re @-@ connect to the Internet , the software will resume checking for and installing updates . " Under the Windows end @-@ user license agreement , users consent to the automatic installation of all updates , features and drivers provided by the service , and to the automatic removal or changes to features being modified or no longer provided . 
 Build <unk> removes Windows Journal . 
 Build <unk> modifies the Wi @-@ Fi Sense feature to remove its ability to share Wi @-@ Fi credentials with other contacts ; Wi @-@ Fi passwords can still be synced between devices tied to the same Microsoft account . 
 = = Editions and pricing = = 
 Windows 10 is available in four main editions for personal computer devices , of which the Home and Pro versions are sold at retail in most countries , and as pre @-@ loaded software on new computers . Home is aimed at home users , while Pro is aimed at small businesses and enthusiasts . Each edition of Windows 10 includes all of the capabilities and features of the edition below it , and add additional features oriented towards their market segments ; for example , Pro adds additional networking and security features such as <unk> , Device Guard , Windows Update for Business , and the ability to join a domain . The remaining editions , Enterprise and Education , contain additional features aimed towards business environments , and are only available through volume licensing . 
 As part of Microsoft 's unification strategies , Windows products that are based on Windows 10 's common platform but meant for specialized platforms are marketed as editions of the operating system , rather than as separate product lines . An updated version of Microsoft 's Windows Phone operating system for smartphones , and also tablets , was branded as Windows 10 Mobile . Editions of Enterprise and Mobile will also be produced for embedded systems , along with Windows 10 <unk> Core , which is designed specifically for use in small footprint , low @-@ cost devices and Internet of Things ( <unk> ) scenarios and is similar to Windows Embedded . 
 = = = Preview releases = = = 
 A public beta program for Windows 10 known as the Windows Insider Program ( previously Windows Technical Preview ) began with the first publicly available preview release on October 1 , 2014 . Insider preview builds are aimed towards enthusiasts and enterprise users for the testing and evaluation of updates and new features . Users of the Windows Insider program receive occasional updates to newer preview builds of the operating system and will continue to be able to evaluate preview releases after general availability ( GA ) in July 2015 ‍ — ‌ this is in contrast to previous Windows beta programs , where public preview builds were released less frequently and only during the months preceding GA . Windows Insider builds continued being released after the release to manufacturing ( RTM ) of Windows 10 . 
 = = = Public release = = = 
 Microsoft promoted that Windows 10 would become generally available ( GA ) on July 29 , 2015 . In comparison to previous Windows releases , which had a longer turnover between the release to manufacturing ( RTM ) and general release to allow for testing by vendors ( and in some cases , the development of " upgrade kits " to prepare systems for installation of the new version ) , an HP Inc. executive explained that because it knew Microsoft targeted the operating system for a release in 2015 , the company was able to optimize its then @-@ current and upcoming products for Windows 10 in advance of its release , negating the need for such a milestone . 
 The general availability build of Windows 10 , numbered <unk> , was first released on July 15 , 2015 to Windows Insider channels for pre @-@ launch testing prior to its formal release . Although a Microsoft official stated that there would be no specific RTM build of Windows 10 , <unk> was described as an RTM build by media outlets because it was released to all Windows Insider members at once ( rather than to users on the " Fast ring " first ) , it no longer carried pre @-@ release branding and desktop watermark text , and because its build number had mathematical connections to the number 10 in reference to the operating system 's naming . The Enterprise edition was released to volume licensing on August 1 , 2015 . 
 Users are able to in @-@ place upgrade through the " Get Windows 10 " application ( GWX ) and Windows Update , or the " Media Creation Tool " , which is functionally identical to the Windows 8 online installer , and can also be used to generate an ISO image or USB install media . In @-@ place upgrades are supported from most editions of Windows 7 with Service Pack 1 and Windows 8 @.@ 1 with Update 1 , while users with Windows 8 must first upgrade to Windows 8 @.@ 1 . Changing between architectures ( e.g. upgrading from 32 @-@ bit edition to a 64 @-@ bit editions ) via in @-@ place upgrades is not supported ; a clean install is required . In @-@ place upgrades may be rolled back to the device 's previous version of Windows , provided that 30 days have not passed since installation , and backup files were not removed using Disk Cleanup . 
 Windows 10 was available in 190 countries and 111 languages upon its launch , and as part of efforts to " re @-@ engage " with users in China , Microsoft also announced that it would partner with <unk> and Tencent to help promote and distribute Windows 10 in China , and that Chinese PC maker Lenovo would provide assistance at its service centers and retail outlets for helping users upgrade to Windows 10 . At retail , Windows 10 is priced similarly to editions of Windows 8 @.@ 1 , with U.S. prices set at $ 119 and $ 199 for Windows 10 Home and Pro respectively . A Windows 10 Pro Pack license allows upgrades from Windows 10 Home to Windows 10 Pro . Retail copies ship on USB flash drive media or DVD @-@ ROM media . New devices shipping with Windows 10 were also released during the operating system 's launch window . 
 Windows RT devices cannot be upgraded to Windows 10 . 
 = = = = Free upgrade offer = = = = 
 For the first year of availability ( until July 29 , 2016 ) , upgrade licenses for Windows 10 are available at no charge to users who own a genuine license for an eligible edition of Windows 7 or Windows 8 , and have installed the latest service pack for their currently installed version ( <unk> and Windows 8 @.@ 1 respectively ) . Enterprise customers under an active Software Assurance ( SA ) contract with Microsoft are entitled to obtain Windows 10 Enterprise under their existing terms , as with previous versions of Windows . Enterprise customers whose SA agreement is expired or are under a volume license that does not have upgrade rights , all users running non @-@ genuine copies of Windows , and those without an existing Windows 7 or 8 license , are not entitled to freely upgrade to Windows 10 ; upgrading from a non @-@ genuine version is possible , but will result in a non @-@ genuine copy of 10 . 
 On the RTM build of Windows 10 , to activate and generate the " digital entitlement " for Windows 10 , the operating system must first be installed as an in @-@ place upgrade . Once installed , the operating system can be reinstalled on that particular system via normal means without a product key , and the system 's license will automatically be detected via online activation . As of the November 2015 build , an existing Windows 7 or Windows 8 @.@ 1 product key can be entered during installation to activate the free license , without the need to upgrade first to " activate " the hardware with Microsoft 's activation servers . 
 The Windows Insider Preview version of Windows 10 automatically updated itself to the generally released version as part of the version progression , and continues to be updated to new beta builds , as it had throughout the testing process . Microsoft has explicitly stated that Windows Insider is not a valid upgrade path for those running a version of Windows that is ineligible for the upgrade offer ; although , if it was not installed with a license carried over from an in @-@ place upgrade to 10 Insider Preview from Windows 7 or 8 , the Insider Preview does remain activated as long as the user does not exit the Windows Insider program . 
 On June 1 , 2015 , the " Get Windows 10 " application ( " GWX " ) was activated on Windows devices running versions eligible to upgrade to , and compatible with , Windows 10 . Via a system tray icon , users can access an application that advertises Windows 10 and the free upgrade offer , checks for device compatibility , and allows users to " reserve " an automatic download of the operating system upon its release . On July 28 , a pre @-@ download process began in which Windows 10 installation files were downloaded to some computers that had reserved it . Microsoft stated that those who reserved Windows 10 would be able to install it through GWX in a phased rollout process , although the operating system can alternatively be downloaded at any time using a separate " Media Creation Tool " setup program ( similar to Windows 8 's setup program ) , that allows for the creation of DVD or USB installation media . 
 = = = = Licensing = = = = 
 During upgrades , Windows 10 licenses are not tied directly to a product key . Instead , the license status of the system 's current installation of Windows is migrated , and a " Digital entitlement " is generated during the activation process , which is bound to the hardware information collected during the process . If Windows 10 is reinstalled cleanly and there have not been any significant hardware changes since installation ( such as a motherboard change ) , the online activation process will automatically recognize the system 's digital entitlement if no product key is entered during installations . However , unique product keys are still distributed within retail copies of Windows 10 . As with previous non @-@ volume @-@ licensed versions of Windows , significant hardware changes will invalidate the digital entitlement , and require Windows to be re @-@ activated . 
 = = Updates and support = = 
 Windows 10 is serviced in a significantly different manner from previous releases of Windows . Its delivery is often described by Microsoft as a " service " , due to its ongoing updates , with Terry Myerson explaining that Microsoft 's aim is that " the question ' what version of Windows are you running ' will cease to make sense . " 
 Unlike previous versions of Windows , Windows Update does not allow the selective installation of updates , and all updates ( including patches , feature updates , and driver software ) are downloaded and installed automatically . Users can only choose whether their system will reboot automatically to install updates when the system is inactive , or be notified to schedule a reboot . It is possible , however , to defer the download of updates if they are received over a WiFi ( not Ethernet ) network by marking the WiFi connection as metered ( this will also slow program updates , file synchronisation , and live tile updating ) . Updates can cause compatibility or other problems ; a Microsoft troubleshooter program allows bad updates to be uninstalled . 
 Windows Update can also use a peer to peer system for distributing updates ; by default , users ' bandwidth is used to distribute previously downloaded updates to other users , in combination with Microsoft servers . Users can instead choose to only use peer @-@ to @-@ peer updates within their local area network . 
 The original RTM release of Windows 10 ( " Windows 10 , released in July 2015 " ) receives mainstream support for five years after its original release , followed by five years of extended support , but this is subject to conditions . Microsoft 's support lifecycle policy for the operating system notes that " Updates are cumulative , with each update built upon all of the updates that preceded it " , that " a device needs to install the latest update to remain supported " , and that a device 's ability to receive future updates will depend on hardware compatibility , driver availability , and whether the device is within the OEM 's " support period " ‍ — ‌ a new aspect not accounted for in lifecycle policies for previous versions . Microsoft initially stated that Windows 10 would freely receive updates for the " supported lifetime of the device . " To comply with U.S. accounting laws , revenue for Windows 10 is deferred " on a straight @-@ line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades are expected to be provided by estimated device life " , defined as two to four years depending on " customer type . " 
 = = = Upgraded builds = = = 
 Upgraded builds of Windows 10 will occasionally be released , containing new features and other major improvements . The pace at which upgrades are received is dependent on which release channel is used ; the default branch for all users of Windows 10 Home and Pro is " Current Branch " , ( CB ) which receives stable builds as they are publicly released by Microsoft . Windows Insider branches receive unstable builds as they are released , at either a " Fast " pace ( immediately after release ) or " Slow " pace ( slightly delayed from their " Fast " release ) . The Pro and Enterprise editions may optionally use the " Current Branch for Business " release channel ( CBB , referred to in Windows Update settings as " <unk> upgrades " ) , which receives the stable builds on a roughly four @-@ month delay from their CB release . CBB may defer build upgrades for up to eight months , after which the new build must be installed in order to maintain support and access to security updates . Administrators can also use the " Windows Update for Business " service to organize structured deployments of updates and build upgrades across their networks . By installing Windows 10 upgrades , installed programs may be subject to automatic removal if declared " incompatible " . 
 Windows 10 Enterprise can also use the " Long @-@ term support branch " ( LTSB ) . LTSB milestones of Windows 10 are periodic snapshots of Windows 10 's CBB branch , and will receive only critical patches over their 10 @-@ year support lifecycle . Systems can also be placed one or two versions behind the most recent LTSB build to allow for structured deployments and internal lifecycles . Microsoft director Stella <unk> explained that " we have businesses [ that ] may have mission @-@ critical environments where we respect the fact they want to test and stabilize the environment for a long time . " 
 = = = = Threshold 2 = = = = 
 The second stable build of Windows 10 , build <unk> ( also known as the " November Update " , " Version 1511 " , and " Threshold 2 " ( <unk> ) ) , began to be distributed via Windows Update on November 12 , 2015 . It contains various improvements to the operating system , its user interface , bundled services , as well as the introduction of Skype @-@ based universal messaging apps , and the Windows Store for Business and Windows Update for Business features . 
 On November 21 , 2015 , <unk> was temporarily pulled from public distribution . The upgrade was re @-@ instated on November 24 , 2015 , with Microsoft stating that the removal was due to a bug that caused privacy and data collection settings to be reset to defaults when installing the upgrade . 
 = = = = Redstone = = = = 
 The third stable build of Windows 10 ( officially known as the " Anniversary Update " , and codenamed " Redstone " ( <unk> ) ) , is scheduled to be released on August 2 , 2016 , marking nearly one year since the original RTM release of Windows 10 . The " Redstone " branch is expected to comprise two major stable builds . While both were originally to be released during 2016 , it was later reported that the second had been delayed into 2017 so that it would be released in concert with that year 's wave of Microsoft first @-@ party devices . 
 The Redstone branch introduces new features such as the Windows Ink platform , which will ease the ability to add stylus input support to applications and provide an " Ink Workspace " area , enhancements to Cortana 's proactive <unk> a dark user interface theme mode , and improvements to Universal Windows Platform intended for video games . Redstone will also support Windows Subsystem for Linux , a new component that provides an environment for running Linux @-@ compatible binary software in an Ubuntu @-@ based user mode environment . 
 = = System requirements = = 
 The basic hardware requirements to install Windows 10 are the same as for Windows 8 @.@ 1 and Windows 8 , and only slightly higher than Windows 7 . The 64 @-@ bit versions require a CPU that supports certain instructions . Devices with low storage capacity must provide a USB flash drive or SD card with sufficient storage for temporary files during upgrades . 
 Some pre @-@ built devices may be described as " certified " by Microsoft . Certified tablets must include Power , Volume up , and Volume down keys ; <unk> Win and Rotation lock keys are no longer required . 
 As with Windows 8 , all certified devices must ship with UEFI Secure Boot enabled by default . Unlike Windows 8 , OEMs are no longer required to make Secure Boot settings user @-@ configurable , meaning that devices may optionally be locked to run only Microsoft @-@ signed operating systems . A supported infrared @-@ illuminated camera is required for Windows Hello face authentication . Device Guard requires a UEFI system with no third @-@ party certificates loaded , and CPU virtualization extensions ( including <unk> and <unk> ) enabled in firmware . 
 In January 2016 , Microsoft announced that Windows 10 will be the only Windows platform that it will officially support on known future CPU <unk> ; Windows 7 and Windows 8 @.@ 1 support for systems using Intel 's <unk> processors will be phased out ; and beginning with the upcoming generations of Intel ( <unk> Lake ) and AMD ( Bristol Ridge ) architectures , Windows 10 will be the only Windows platform supported . Further in the future , using the latest generation processors will always require the latest generation operating system . Terry Myerson said that Microsoft did not want to make further investments in optimizing older versions of Windows and associated software for newer generations of processors . 
 = = Reception = = 
 TechRadar felt that Windows 10 would be " the new Windows 7 " , citing the operating system 's more familiar user interface , improvements to bundled apps , performance improvements , a " rock solid " search system , and the Settings app being more full @-@ featured than its equivalents on 8 and 8 @.@ 1 . The Microsoft Edge web browser was praised for its performance , albeit not being in a feature @-@ complete state on @-@ launch . Whilst considering them a " great idea in principle " , concerns were shown for Microsoft 's focus on the universal app ecosystem , noting that " It 's by no means certain that developers are going to flock to Windows 10 from iOS and Android simply because they can convert their apps easily . It may well become a no @-@ brainer for them , but at the moment a conscious decision is still required . " 
 Engadget was similarly positive , noting that the upgrade process was painless , and that Windows 10 's user interface had balanced aspects of Windows 8 with those of previous versions with a more mature aesthetic . Cortana 's always @-@ on voice detection was considered to be its " true strength " , also citing its query capabilities and personalization features , but noting that it was not as pre @-@ emptive as Google Now . Windows 10 's stock applications were praised for being improved over their Windows 8 counterparts , and for supporting windowed modes . The Xbox app was also praised for its Xbox One streaming functionality , although recommending its use over a wired network due to inconsistent quality over Wi @-@ Fi . In conclusion , it was argued that " Windows 10 delivers the most refined desktop experience ever from Microsoft , and yet it 's so much more than that . It 's also a decent tablet OS , and it 's ready for a world filled with hybrid devices . And , barring another baffling <unk> , it looks like a significant step forward for mobile . Heck , it makes the Xbox One a more useful machine . " 
 Ars Technica noted that Windows 10 's new Start menu system had an artificial cap of 500 entries , and that any apps beyond this cap would not appear in the Start menu 's " All apps " view , nor search results . The new Tablet mode interface was panned for removing the charms and app switching , making the Start button harder to use by requiring users to reach for the button on the bottom @-@ left rather than at the center of the screen when swiping with a thumb , and for making application switching less instantaneous through the use of Task View . Microsoft Edge was praised for being " tremendously promising " , and " a much better browser than Internet Explorer ever was " , but criticized it for its lack of functionality on @-@ launch . In conclusion , contrasting Windows 8 as being a " reliable " platform albeit consisting of unfinished concepts , Windows 10 was considered " the best Windows yet " and was praised for having a better overall concept in its ability to be " comfortable and effective " across a wide array of form factors , but that it was <unk> than previous versions of Windows were on @-@ launch . 
 ExtremeTech considered that Windows 10 restricted the choices of users , citing its more opaque setting menus , forcing users to give up bandwidth for the peer @-@ to @-@ peer distribution of updates , and for taking away user control of specific functions , such as updates , explaining that " it feels , once again , as if Microsoft has taken the seed of a good idea , like providing users with security updates automatically , and shoved the throttle to maximum . " Especially in combination with the free upgrade offer , some outlets also noted that Windows 10 heavily emphasized freemium services , such as media storefronts , Office 365 , and paid functionality in bundled games such as Microsoft Solitaire Collection ‍ — ‌ which requires purchase of a subscription to remove in @-@ game advertising and unlock additional features , even though said features were added to the app 's Windows 8 version in March 2013 . 
 = = = Market share and sales = = = 
 Twenty @-@ four hours after it was released , Microsoft announced that more than 14 million devices were running Windows 10 . On August 26 , Microsoft said more than 75 million devices were running Windows 10 , in 192 countries , and on more than 90 @,@ 000 unique PC or tablet models . According to Terry Myerson , there were more than 110 million devices running Windows 10 as of October 6 , 2015 . On January 4 , 2016 , Microsoft reported that Windows 10 had been activated on more than 200 million devices since the operating system 's launch in July 2015 . 
 In the monthly hardware survey conducted by the video game distribution platform Steam , approximately 34 @.@ 05 % of all devices surveyed ran a version of Windows 10 ( either 32 @-@ bit or 64 @-@ bit architecture ) as of January 2016 , in comparison to 42 @.@ 08 % using Windows 7 . On 64 @-@ bit architecture only , Windows 10 was used by 32 @.@ 77 % , behind 34 @.@ 31 % on Windows 7 64 @-@ bit . 
 According to StatCounter , Windows 10 overtook Windows 8 @.@ 1 in December 2015 . 
 According to StatCounter market share statistics ( based on web use proxy ) , Iceland was the first country where Windows 10 was ranked first , ( not only on the desktop ) , it also holds across all platforms ( British Crown dependency Isle of Man got there earlier , late in 2015 ) with several bigger European countries following . 
 At the end of June 2016 , Windows 10 had been installed on nearly 350 million devices . 
 = = = Update system changes = = = 
 Windows 10 Home is permanently set to download all updates automatically , including cumulative updates , security patches , and drivers , and users cannot individually select updates to install or not . Microsoft offers a diagnostic tool that can be used to hide updates and prevent them from being reinstalled , but only after they had been already installed , then uninstalled without rebooting the system . Tom Warren of The Verge felt that , given web browsers such as Google Chrome had already adopted such an automatic update system , such a requirement would help to keep all Windows 10 devices secure , and felt that " if you 're used to family members calling you for technical support because they 've failed to upgrade to the latest Windows service pack or some malware disabled Windows Update then those days will hopefully be over . " 
 Concerns were raised that due to these changes , users would be unable to skip the automatic installation of updates that are faulty or cause issues with certain system configurations ‍ — ‌ although build upgrades will also be subject to public beta testing via Windows Insider program . There were also concerns that the forced installation of driver updates through Windows Update , where they were previously designated as " optional " , could cause conflicts with drivers that were installed independently of Windows Update . An example of such a situation occurred just prior to the general release of the operating system , when an Nvidia graphics card driver that was automatically pushed to Windows 10 users via Windows Update caused issues that prevented the use of certain functions , or prevented their system from booting at all . 
 Criticism was also directed towards Microsoft 's decision to no longer provide specific details on the contents of cumulative updates for Windows 10 . On February 9 , 2016 , Microsoft retracted this decision and began to provide release notes for cumulative updates on the Windows website . 
 Some users reported that during the installation of the November upgrade , some applications ( particularly utility programs such as CPU @-@ Z and <unk> ) were automatically uninstalled during the upgrade process , and some default programs were reset to Microsoft @-@ specified defaults ( such as Photos app , and Microsoft Edge for PDF viewing ) , both without warning . 
 = = = Distribution practices = = = 
 Microsoft has received mixed reception for its methods of promoting the free upgrade . The main subject of criticism is the " Get Windows 10 " ( GWX ) program used to advertise and initiate the download , which was first downloaded and installed via patch <unk> in March 2015 for Windows 8 @.@ 1 ; a Computerworld writer felt the program constituted a " nag " . Microsoft has also received criticism for using deceptive user interfaces to coax users into installing the operating system , downloading installation files without user consent , and making it difficult for users to suppress the advertising and notifications if they do not wish to upgrade to 10 . Registry keys and group policies can be used to partially disable the GWX mechanism , but the installation of patches to the GWX software via Windows Update may reset these keys back to defaults , and thus reactivate the software . Third @-@ party programs have also been created to assist users in applying measures to mitigate the GWX mechanism . 
 In September 2015 , it was reported that Microsoft was triggering automatic downloads of the Windows 10 installation files on all compatible Windows 7 or 8 @.@ 1 computers with Windows Update configured to automatically download and install updates , regardless of whether or not they had specifically requested the upgrade . Microsoft officially confirmed the change , claiming it was " an industry practice that reduces time for installation and ensures device readiness . " This move has been criticized by users who have data caps or devices with low storage capacity , as resources were consumed by the automatic downloads of up to 6 GB of data . Other critics argued that Microsoft should not have triggered any downloading of Windows 10 installation files without user consent . 
 In October 2015 , Windows 10 began to appear as an " Optional " update in the Windows Update interface , but checked off for installation on some systems . A Microsoft spokesperson stated that this was a mistake , and that the download would no longer be checked off by default . However , on October 29 , 2015 , Microsoft announced that it planned to consider Windows 10 as a " recommended " update in the Windows Update interface some time in 2016 , which will cause an automatic download of installation files and a one @-@ time prompt with a choice to install to appear . In December 2015 , it was reported that a new advertising dialog had begun to appear , only containing " Upgrade now " and " Upgrade tonight " buttons , and no obvious method to decline installation besides the close button . 
 In March 2016 , some users also alleged that their Windows 7 and 8 @.@ 1 devices had automatically begun upgrading to 10 without their consent . In June 2016 , the GWX dialog 's behavior changed to make closing the window imply a consent to a scheduled upgrade . Despite this , an <unk> editor disputed the claims that upgrades had begun without any consent at all ; testing showed that the upgrade to Windows 10 would only begin once the user accepts the end @-@ user license agreement ( EULA ) presented by its installer , and that not doing so would eventually cause the upgrade process to time out and produce a Windows Update error . It was concluded that these users may have unknowingly clicked the " Accept " prompt without full knowledge that this would begin the upgrade . 
 On January 21 , 2016 , Microsoft was sued in small claims court by a user whose computer , shortly after the release of the OS , had attempted to upgrade to Windows 10 without her consent . The upgrade failed , and her computer was left in an unstable state thereafter , which disrupted the ability to run her travel agency . The court ruled in favor of the user and awarded her $ 10 @,@ 000 in damages , but Microsoft appealed . However , in May 2016 , Microsoft dropped the appeal and chose to pay the damages . Shortly after the suit was reported on by the Seattle Times , Microsoft confirmed that it was updating the GWX software once again to add more explicit options for opting out of a free Windows 10 upgrade ; the new notification is a full @-@ screen pop @-@ up window notifying users of the impending end of the free upgrade offer , and contains " Remind me later " , " Do not notify me again " and " <unk> me three more times " options . 
 = = = Privacy and data collection = = = 
 Privacy advocates and other critics have expressed concern regarding Windows 10 's privacy policies and its collection and use of customer data . Under the default " Express " settings , Windows 10 is configured to send various information to Microsoft and other parties , including the collection of user contacts , calendar data , and " associated input data " to personalize " speech , typing , and inking input " , typing and inking data to improve recognition , allowing apps to use a unique " advertising ID " for analytics and advertising personalization ( functionality introduced by Windows 8 @.@ 1 ) and allow apps to request the user 's location data and send this data to Microsoft and " trusted partners " to improve location detection ( Windows 8 had similar settings , except that location data collection did not include " trusted partners " ) . Users can opt out from most of this data collection , but telemetry data for error reporting and usage is also sent to Microsoft , and this cannot be disabled on non @-@ Enterprise versions of Windows 10 . Microsoft 's privacy policy states , however , that " Basic " -level telemetry data is <unk> and cannot be used to identify an individual user or device . The use of Cortana also requires the collection of data " such as your device location , data from your calendar , the apps you use , data from your emails and text messages , who you call , your contacts and how often you interact with them on your device ” to personalize its functionality . 
 Rock Paper Shotgun writer Alec Meer argued that Microsoft 's intent for this data collection lacked transparency , stating that " there is no world in which 45 pages of policy documents and opt @-@ out settings split across 13 different settings screens and an external website constitutes ' real transparency ' . " ExtremeTech pointed out that , whilst previously <unk> against Google for similar data collection strategies , " [ Microsoft ] now <unk> up your data in ways that would make Google jealous . " However , it was also pointed out that the requirement for such vast usage of customer data had become a norm , citing the increased reliance on cloud computing and other forms of external processing , as well as similar data collection requirements for services on mobile devices such as Google Now and Siri . In August 2015 , Russian politician Nikolai <unk> called for Windows 10 to be banned from use within the Russian government , as it sends user data to servers in the United States . The country had passed a federal law requiring all online services to store the data of Russian users on servers within the country by September 2016 , or be blocked . Writing for ZDNet , Ed Bott said that the lack of complaints by businesses about privacy in Windows 10 indicated " how utterly normal those privacy terms are in 2015 . " In a Computerworld editorial , Preston Gralla said , " The kind of information Windows 10 gathers is no different from what other operating systems gather . But Microsoft is held to a different standard than other companies . " 
 Microsoft Services Agreement reads that the company 's online services may automatically " download software updates or configuration changes , including those that prevent you from accessing the Services , playing counterfeit games , or using unauthorized hardware peripheral devices . " Critics interpreted this statement as implying that Microsoft would scan for and delete unlicensed software installed on devices running Windows 10 . However , others pointed out that this agreement was specifically for Microsoft online services such as Microsoft account , Office 365 , Skype , as well as Xbox Live , and that the offending passage most likely referred to digital rights management on Xbox consoles and first @-@ party games , and not plans to police pirated video games installed on Windows 10 PCs . Despite this , some torrent trackers announced plans to block Windows 10 users , also arguing that the operating system could send information to anti @-@ piracy groups that are affiliated with Microsoft . Writing about these allegations , Ed Bott of ZDNet compared Microsoft 's privacy policy to Apple 's and Google 's and concluded that " after carefully reading the Microsoft Services Agreement , the Windows license agreement ... and the Microsoft Privacy Statement carefully , I don 't see anything that looks remotely like Big Brother . " Columnist Kim Komando argued that " Microsoft might in the future run scans and disable software or hardware it sees as a security threat , " consistent with the Windows 10 update policy . 
 = Sugar Ray Robinson = 
 Sugar Ray Robinson ( born Walker Smith Jr . ; May 3 , 1921 – April 12 , 1989 ) was an American professional boxer . Frequently cited as the greatest boxer of all time , Robinson 's performances in the welterweight and middleweight divisions prompted sportswriters to create " pound for pound " rankings , where they compared fighters regardless of weight . He was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1990 . 
 Robinson was 85 – 0 as an amateur with 69 of those victories coming by way of knockout , 40 in the first round . He turned professional in 1940 at the age of 19 and by 1951 had a professional record of 128 – 1 – 2 with 84 knockouts . From 1943 to 1951 Robinson went on a 91 fight unbeaten streak , the third longest in professional boxing history . Robinson held the world welterweight title from 1946 to 1951 , and won the world middleweight title in the latter year . He retired in 1952 , only to come back two and a half years later and regain the middleweight title in 1955 . He then became the first boxer in history to win a divisional world championship five times , a feat he accomplished by defeating Carmen Basilio in 1958 to regain the middleweight championship . Robinson was named " fighter of the year " twice : first for his performances in 1942 , then nine years and over 90 fights later , for his efforts in 1951 . 
 Renowned for his flamboyant lifestyle outside the ring , Robinson is credited with being the originator of the modern sports " entourage " . After his boxing career ended , Robinson attempted a career as an entertainer , but it was not successful . He struggled financially until his death in 1989 . In 2006 , he was featured on a commemorative stamp by the United States Postal Service . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robinson was born Walker Smith Jr. in Ailey , Georgia , to Walker Smith Sr. and Leila Hurst . Robinson was the youngest of three children ; his older sister Marie was born in 1917 and his older sister Evelyn was born in 1919 . His father was a cotton , peanut , and corn farmer in Georgia , who moved the family to Detroit where he initially found work in construction . According to Robinson , Smith Sr. later worked two jobs to support his family — cement mixer and sewer worker . " He had to get up at six in the morning and he 'd get home close to midnight . Six days a week . The only day I really saw him was Sunday ... I always wanted to be with him more . " 
 His parents separated and he moved with his mother to the New York City neighborhood of Harlem at the age of twelve . Robinson originally aspired to be a doctor , but after dropping out of De Witt Clinton High school in ninth grade he switched his goal to boxing . When he was 15 , he attempted to enter his first boxing tournament but was told he needed to first obtain an AAU membership card . However , he could not procure one until he was eighteen years old . He received his name when he circumvented the AAU 's age restriction by borrowing a birth certificate from his friend Ray Robinson . Subsequently told that he was " sweet as sugar " by a lady in the audience at a fight in Watertown , New York , Smith Jr. became known as " Sugar " Ray Robinson . 
 Robinson idolized Henry Armstrong and Joe Louis as a youth , and actually lived on the same block as Louis in Detroit when Robinson was 11 and Louis was 17 . Outside the ring , Robinson got into trouble frequently as a youth , and was involved with a violent street gang . He married at 16 . The couple had one son , Ronnie , and divorced when Robinson was 19 . He finished his amateur career with an 85 – 0 record with 69 knockouts — 40 coming in the first round . He won the Golden Gloves featherweight championship in 1939 , and the organization 's lightweight championship in 1940 . 
 = = Boxing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Robinson made his professional debut on October 4 , 1940 , winning via second @-@ round knockout over Joe Echevarria . Robinson fought five more times in 1940 , winning each time , with four wins coming by way of knockout . In 1941 , he defeated world champion Sammy Angott , future champion Marty Servo and former champion <unk> Zivic . The Robinson @-@ Angott fight was held above the lightweight limit , since Angott did not want to risk losing his lightweight title . Robinson defeated Zivic in front of 20 @,@ 551 at Madison Square Garden — one of the largest crowds in the arena to that date . Robinson won the first five rounds according to The New York Times Joseph C. Nichols , before Zivic came back to land several punches to Robinson 's head in the sixth and seventh rounds . Robinson controlled the next two rounds , and had Zivic wobbly in the ninth . After a close tenth round , Robinson was announced as the winner on all three scorecards . 
 In 1942 , Robinson knocked out Zivic in the tenth round in a January rematch . The knockout loss was only the second of Zivic 's career in more than 150 fights . Robinson knocked him down in the ninth and tenth rounds before the referee stopped the fight . Zivic and his corner protested the stoppage ; James P. Dawson of The New York Times stated " [ t ] hey were criticizing a humane act . The battle had been a slaughter , for want of a more delicate word . " Robinson then won four consecutive bouts by knockout , before defeating Servo in a controversial split decision in their May rematch . After winning three more fights , Robinson faced Jake LaMotta , who would become one of his more prominent rivals , for the first time in October . He defeated LaMotta via unanimous decision , although he failed to get Jake down . Robinson weighed 145 lb ( 66 kg ) compared to 157 @.@ 5 for LaMotta , but he was able to control the fight from the outside for the entire bout , and actually landed the harder punches during the fight . Robinson then won four more fights , including two against Izzy <unk> , from October 19 to December 14 . For his performances , Robinson was named " Fighter of the Year " . He finished 1942 with a total of 14 wins and no losses . 
 Robinson built a record of 40 – 0 before losing for the first time to LaMotta in a 10 @-@ round re @-@ match . LaMotta , who had a 16 lb ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) weight advantage over Robinson , knocked Robinson out of the ring in the eighth round , and won the fight by decision . The fight took place in Robinson 's former home town of Detroit , and attracted a record crowd . After being controlled by Robinson in the early portions of the fight , LaMotta came back to take control in the later rounds . After winning the third LaMotta fight less than three weeks later , Robinson then defeated his childhood idol : former champion Henry Armstrong . Robinson fought Armstrong only because Armstrong was in need of money . By now Armstrong was an old fighter , and Robinson later stated that he carried Armstrong . 
 On February 27 , 1943 , Robinson was inducted into the United States Army , where he was again referred to as Walker Smith . Robinson had a 15 @-@ month military career . Robinson served with Joe Louis , and the pair went on tours where they performed exhibition bouts in front of US troops . Robinson got into trouble several times while in the military . He argued with superiors who he felt were discriminatory against him , and refused to fight exhibitions when he was told African American soldiers were not allowed to watch them . In late March , 1944 , Robinson was stationed at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn , waiting to ship out to Europe , where he was scheduled to perform more exhibition matches . But on March 29 , Robinson disappeared from his barracks . When he woke up on April 5 in Fort Jay Hospital on Governor 's Island , he had missed his sailing for Europe and was under suspicion of deserting . He himself reported falling down the stairs in his barracks on the 29th , but said that he had complete amnesia , and he could not remember any events from that moment until the 5th . According to his file , a stranger had found him in the street on 1 April and helped him to a hospital . In his examination report , a doctor at Fort Jay concluded that Robinson 's version of events was sincere . He was examined by military authorities , who claimed he suffered from a mental deficiency . Robinson was granted an honorable discharge on June 3 , 1944 . He later wrote that unfair press coverage of the incident had " branded " him as a " deserter " . Robinson maintained his close friendship with Louis from their time in military service , and the two went into business together after the war . They planned to start a liquor distribution business in New York City , but were denied a license due to their race . 
 Besides the loss in the LaMotta rematch , the only other mark on Robinson 's record during this period was a 10 @-@ round draw against José Basora in 1945 . 
 = = = Welterweight champion = = = 
 By 1946 , Robinson had fought 75 fights to a 73 – 1 – 1 record , and beaten every top contender in the welterweight division . However , he refused to cooperate with the Mafia , which controlled much of boxing at the time , and was denied a chance to fight for the welterweight championship . Robinson was finally given a chance to win a title against Tommy Bell on December 20 , 1946 . Robinson had already beaten Bell once via decision in 1945 . The two fought for the title vacated by Servo , who had himself lost twice to Robinson in non @-@ title bouts . In the fight , Robinson , who only a month before had been involved in a 10 @-@ round brawl with Artie Levine , was knocked down by Bell . The fight was called a " war , " but Robinson was able to pull out a close 15 round decision , winning the vacant welterweight title . 
 In June 1947 , after four non @-@ title bouts , Robinson was scheduled to defend his title for the first time in a bout against Jimmy Doyle . Robinson initially backed out of the fight because he had a dream that he was going to kill Doyle . A priest and a minister convinced him to fight . Sadly , his dream proved true . On June 25 , 1947 Robinson dominated Doyle and scored a decisive knockout in the eighth round that knocked Doyle unconscious and resulted in Doyle 's death later that night . Robinson said that the impact of Doyle 's death was " very trying " . 
 After his death , criminal charges were threatened against Robinson in Cleveland , up to and including manslaughter , though none actually materialized . After learning of Doyle 's intentions of using the bout 's money to buy his mother a house , Robinson gave Doyle 's mother the money from his next four bouts so she could purchase herself a home , fulfilling her son 's intention . 
 In 1948 , Robinson fought five times , but only one bout was a title defense . Among the fighters he defeated in those non @-@ title bouts was future world champion Kid Gavilán in a close , controversial 10 @-@ round fight . Gavilán hurt Robinson several times in the fight , but Robinson controlled the final rounds with a series of jabs and left hooks . In 1949 , he boxed 16 times , but again only defended his title once . In that title fight , a rematch with Gavilán , Robinson again won via decision . The first half of the bout was very close , but Robinson took control in the second half . Gavilán would have to wait two more years to begin his own historic reign as welterweight champion . The only boxer to match Robinson that year was Henry <unk> , who fought him to a 10 @-@ round draw in Buffalo . 
 Robinson fought 19 times in 1950 . He successfully defended his welterweight title for the last time against Charley Fusari . Robinson won a lopsided 15 round decision , knocking Fusari down once . Robinson donated all but $ 1 of his purse for the Fusari fight to cancer research . In 1950 , Robinson fought George Costner , who had also taken to calling himself " Sugar " and stated in the weeks leading up to the fight that he was the rightful <unk> of the name . " We better touch gloves , because this is the only round , " Robinson said as the fighters were introduced at the center of the ring . " Your name ain 't Sugar , mine is . " Robinson then knocked Costner out in 2 minutes and 49 seconds . 
 = = = Middleweight champion = = = 
 Robinson stated in his autobiography that one of the main considerations for his move up to middleweight was the increasing difficulty he was having in making the 147 lb ( 67 kg ) welterweight weight limit . However , the move up would also prove beneficial financially , as the division then contained some of the biggest names in boxing . Vying for the Pennsylvania state middleweight title in 1950 , Robinson defeated Robert Villemain . Later that year , in defense of that crown , he defeated Jose Basora , with whom he had previously drawn . Robinson 's 50 @-@ second first round knockout of Basora set a record that would stand for 38 years . In October 1950 , Robinson knocked out Bobo Olson a future middleweight title holder . 
 On February 14 , 1951 , Robinson and LaMotta met for the sixth time . The fight would become known as The St. Valentine 's Day Massacre . Robinson won the undisputed world middleweight title with a 13th round technical knockout . Robinson <unk> LaMotta for the first 10 rounds , then unleashed a series of savage combinations on LaMotta for three rounds , finally stopping the champion for the first time in their legendary six @-@ bout series — and dealing LaMotta his first legitimate knockout loss in 95 professional bouts . LaMotta had lost by knockout to Billy Fox earlier in his career . However , that fight was later ruled to have been fixed and LaMotta was sanctioned for letting Fox win . That bout , and some of the other bouts in the six @-@ fight Robinson @-@ LaMotta rivalry , was depicted in the Martin Scorsese film Raging Bull . " I fought Sugar Ray so often , I almost got diabetes , " LaMotta later said . Robinson won five of his six bouts with LaMotta . 
 After winning his second world title , he embarked on a European tour which took him all over the Continent . Robinson traveled with his flamingo @-@ pink Cadillac , which caused quite a stir in Paris , and an entourage of 13 people , some included " just for laughs " . He was a hero in France due to his recent defeat of LaMotta — the French hated LaMotta for defeating Marcel Cerdan in 1949 and taking his championship belt ( Cerdan died in a plane crash en route to a rematch with LaMotta ) . Robinson met President of France Vincent Auriol at a ceremony attended by France 's social upper crust . During his fight in Berlin against Gerhard Hecht , Robinson was disqualified when he knocked his opponent with a punch to the kidney : a punch legal in the US , but not Europe . The fight was later declared a no @-@ contest . In London , Robinson lost the world middleweight title to British boxer Randolph Turpin in a sensational bout . Three months later in a rematch in front of 60 @,@ 000 fans at the Polo Grounds , he knocked Turpin out in ten rounds to recover the title . In that bout Robinson was leading on the cards but was cut by Turpin . With the fight in jeopardy , Robinson let loose on Turpin , knocking him down , then getting him to the ropes and unleashing a series of punches that caused the referee to stop the bout . Following Robinson 's victory , residents of Harlem danced in the streets . In 1951 , Robinson was named Ring Magazine 's " Fighter of the Year " for the second time . 
 In 1952 , he fought a rematch with Olson , winning by a decision . He next defeated former champion Rocky Graziano by a third @-@ round knockout , then challenged world light heavyweight champion Joey Maxim . In the Yankee Stadium bout with Maxim , Robinson built a lead on all three judges ' scorecards , but the 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) temperature in the ring took its toll . The referee , Ruby Goldstein , was the first victim of the heat , and had to be replaced by referee Ray Miller . The fast @-@ moving Robinson was the heat 's next victim – at the end of round 13 , he collapsed and failed to answer the bell for the next round , suffering the only knockout of his career . 
 On June 25 , 1952 after the Maxim bout , Robinson gave up his title and retired with a record of 131 – 3 – 1 – 1 . He began a career in show business , singing and tap dancing . After about three years , the decline of his businesses and the lack of success in his performing career made him decide to return to boxing . He resumed training in 1954 . 
 = = = Comeback = = = 
 In 1955 , Robinson returned to the ring . Although he had been inactive for two and a half years , his work as a dancer kept him in peak physical condition : in his autobiography , Robinson states that in the weeks leading up to his debut for a dancing engagement in France , he ran five miles every morning , and then danced for five hours each night . Robinson even stated that the training he did in his attempts to establish a career as a dancer were harder than any he undertook during his boxing career . He won five fights in 1955 , before losing a decision to Ralph ' Tiger ' Jones . He bounced back , however , and defeated Rocky Castellani by a split decision , then challenged Bobo Olson for the world middleweight title . He won the middleweight championship for the third time via a second round knockout — his third victory over Olson . After his comeback performance in 1955 , Robinson expected to be named fighter of the year . However , the title went to welterweight Carmen Basilio . Basilio 's handlers had lobbied heavily for it on the basis that he had never won the award , and Robinson later described this as the biggest disappointment of his professional career . " I haven 't forgotten it to this day , and I never will " , Robinson wrote in his autobiography . They fought for the last time in 1956 , and Robinson closed the four fight series with a fourth round knockout . 
 In 1957 , Robinson lost his title to Gene Fullmer . Fullmer used his aggressive , forward moving style to control Robinson , and knocked him down in the fight . Robinson , however , noticed that Fullmer was vulnerable to the left hook . Fullmer headed into their May rematch as a 3 – 1 favorite . In the first two rounds Robinson followed Fullmer around the ring , however in the third round he changed tactics and made Fullmer come to him . At the start of the fourth round Robinson came out on the attack and stunned Fullmer , and when Fullmer returned with his own punches , Robinson traded with him , as opposed to clinching as he had done in their earlier fight . The fight was fairly even after four rounds . But in the fifth , Robinson was able to win the title back for a fourth time by knocking out Fullmer with a lightning fast , powerful left hook . Boxing critics have referred to the left @-@ hook which knocked out Fullmer as " the perfect punch " . It marked the first time in 44 career fights that Fullmer had been knocked out , and when someone asked Robinson after the fight how far the left hook had travelled , Robinson replied : " I can 't say . But he got the message . " 
 Later that year , he lost his title to Basilio in a rugged 15 round fight in front of 38 @,@ 000 at Yankee Stadium , but regained it for a record fifth time when he beat Basilio in the rematch . Robinson struggled to make weight , and had to go without food for nearly 20 hours leading up to the bout . He badly damaged Basilio 's eye early the fight , and by the seventh round it was swollen shut . The two judges gave the fight to Robinson by wide margins : 72 – 64 and 71 – 64 . The referee scored the fight for Basilio 69 – 64 , and was booed loudly by the crowd of 19 @,@ 000 when his decision was announced . The first fight won the " Fight of the Year " award from The Ring magazine for 1957 and the second fight won the " Fight of the Year " award for 1958 . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Robinson knocked out Bob Young in the second round in Boston in his only fight in 1959 . A year later , he defended his title against Paul Pender . Robinson entered the fight as a 5 – 1 favorite , but lost a split decision in front of 10 @,@ 608 at Boston Garden . The day before the fight Pender commented that he planned to start slowly , before coming on late . He did just that and outlasted the aging Robinson , who , despite opening a cut over Pender 's eye in the eighth round , was largely ineffective in the later rounds . An attempt to regain the crown for an unheard of sixth time proved beyond Robinson . Despite Robinson 's efforts , Pender won by decision in that rematch . On December 3 of that year , Robinson and Fullmer fought a 15 @-@ round draw for the WBA middleweight title , which Fullmer retained . In 1961 , Robinson and Fullmer fought for a fourth time , with Fullmer retaining the WBA middleweight title by a unanimous decision . The fight would be Robinson 's last title bout . 
 Robinson spent the rest of the 1960s fighting 10 @-@ round contests . In October 1961 , Robinson defeated future world champion Denny Moyer via unanimous decision . A 12 – 5 favorite , the 41 @-@ year @-@ old Robinson defeated the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Moyer by staying on the outside , rather than engaging him . In their rematch four months later , Moyer defeated Robinson on points , as he pressed the action and made Robinson back up throughout the fight . Moyer won 7 – 3 on all three judges scorecards . Robinson lost twice more in 1962 , before winning six consecutive fights against mostly lesser opposition . In February 1963 , Robinson lost via unanimous decision to former world champion and fellow Hall of Famer Joey Giardello . Giardello knocked Robinson down in the fourth round , and the 43 @-@ year @-@ old took until the count of nine to rise to his feet . Robinson was also nearly knocked down in the sixth round , but was saved by the bell . He rallied in the seventh and eight rounds , before struggling in the final two . Robinson then embarked on an 18 @-@ month boxing tour of Europe . 
 Robinson 's second no @-@ contest bout came in September , 1965 in Norfolk , Virginia in a match with an opponent who turned out to be an impostor . Boxer Neil Morrison , at the time a fugitive and accused robber , signed up for the fight as Bill Henderson , a capable club fighter . The fight was a fiasco , with Morrison being knocked down twice in the first round and once in the second before the disgusted referee , who said " Henderson put up no fight " , walked out of the ring . Robinson was initially given a TKO in 1 : 20 of the second round after the " obviously frightened " Morrison laid himself down on the canvas . Robinson fought for the final time in 1965 . He lost via unanimous decision to Joey Archer . Famed sports author Pete Hamill mentioned that one of the saddest experiences of his life was watching Robinson lose to Archer . He was even knocked down and Hamill pointed out that Archer had no knockout punch at all ; Archer admitted afterward that it was only the second time he had knocked an opponent down in his career . The crowd of 9 @,@ 023 at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh gave Robinson several standing ovations , even while he was being thoroughly outperformed by Archer . 
 On November 11 , 1965 , Robinson announced his retirement from boxing , saying : " I hate to go too long campaigning for another chance . " Robinson retired from boxing with a record of 173 – 19 – 6 ( 2 no contests ) with 108 knockouts in 200 professional bouts , ranking him among the all @-@ time leaders in knockouts . 
 = = After retiring as a boxer = = 
 In his autobiography , Robinson states that by 1965 he was broke , having spent all of the $ 4 million in earnings he made inside and out of the ring in his career . A month after his last fight , Robinson was honored with a Sugar Ray Robinson Night on December 10 , 1965 in New York 's Madison Square Garden . During the ceremony , he was honored with a massive trophy . However , there was not a piece of furniture in his small Manhattan apartment with legs strong enough to support it . Robinson was elected to the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1967 , two years after he retired . In the late 1960s he acted in some television shows , like Mission : Impossible . An episode of Land of the Giants called " Giants and All That Jazz " had Sugar as a washed up boxer opening a nightclub . He also appeared in a few films including the Frank Sinatra cop movie The Detective ( 1968 ) , the cult classic Candy ( 1968 ) , and the thriller The Todd Killings ( 1971 ) as a police officer . In 1969 , he founded the Sugar Ray Robinson Youth Foundation for the inner @-@ city Los Angeles area . The foundation does not sponsor a boxing program . He was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus that was treated with insulin . In Robinson 's last years , he was diagnosed with Alzheimer 's disease . He died in Los Angeles at the age of 67 and was interred in the Inglewood Park Cemetery , Inglewood , California . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Robinson married Marjorie Joseph in 1938 ; the marriage was annulled the same year . Their son , Ronnie Smith , was born in 1939 . Robinson met his second wife Edna Mae Holly , a noted dancer who performed at the Cotton Club and toured Europe with Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway , in 1940 . According to Robinson , he met her at a local pool he frequented after his boxing workouts . In an attempt to get her attention he pushed her into the pool one day , and claimed it was an accident . After this attempt was met with disdain , he appeared at the nightclub she danced at and introduced himself . Soon the couple were dating and they married in 1943 . They had one son , Ray Robinson Jr . ( born 1949 ) and divorced in 1960 . She appeared on the first cover of Jet magazine in 1951 . In April 1959 , Robinson 's eldest sister Marie died of cancer at the age of 41 . 
 In 1965 , Robinson married Millie Wiggins Bruce and the couple settled in Los Angeles . When Robinson was sick with his various ailments , his son accused Robinson 's wife of keeping him under the influence of medication to manipulate him . According to Ray Robinson Jr . , when Sugar Ray 's mother died , Sugar Ray could not attend his mother 's funeral because Millie was drugging and controlling him . However , Robinson had been hospitalized the day before his mother 's death due to agitation which caused his blood pressure to rise . Robinson Jr. and Edna Mae also claimed that they were kept away from Robinson by Millie during the last years of his life . 
 He was a Freemason , a membership shared with a number of other athletes , including fellow boxer Jack Dempsey . 
 Robinson was a Christian . 
 = = Boxing style = = 
 Rhythm is everything in boxing . Every move you make starts with your heart , and that 's in rhythm or you 're in trouble . 
 Robinson was the modern definition of a boxer puncher . He was able to fight almost any style : he could come out one round brawling , the next counter punching , and the next fighting on the outside . Robinson also possessed great speed and knockout power . He fought a very conventional way with a firm jab , but threw hooks and uppercuts in flurries in an unconventional way . He possessed tremendous versatility — according to boxing analyst Bert Sugar , " Robinson could deliver a knockout blow going backward . " Robinson was efficient with both hands , and he displayed a variety of effective punches — according to a TIME magazine article in 1951 , " Robinson 's repertoire , thrown with equal speed and power by either hand , includes every standard punch from a bolo to a hook — and a few he makes up on the spur of the moment . " Robinson commented that once a fighter has trained to a certain level , their techniques and responses become almost reflexive . " You don 't think . It 's all instinct . If you stop to think , you 're gone . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Robinson has been ranked as the greatest boxer of all time by sportswriters , fellow boxers , and trainers . The phrase " pound for pound " , was created by sportswriters for him during his career as a way to compare boxers irrespective of weight . Hall of Fame fighters such as Muhammad Ali , Joe Louis , Roberto Durán and Sugar Ray Leonard have ranked Robinson as the greatest pound for pound boxer in history . In 1997 , The Ring ranked him as the best pound for pound fighter in history , and in 1999 , he was named " welterweight of the century , " " middleweight of the century , " and overall " fighter of the century " by the Associated Press . In 2007 , ESPN.com featured the piece " 50 Greatest Boxers of All Time " , in which it named Robinson the top boxer in history . In 2003 , The Ring magazine ranked him number 11 in the list of all @-@ time greatest <unk> . Robinson was also ranked as the # 1 welterweight and the # 1 pound for pound boxer of all @-@ time by the International Boxing Research Organization . 
 Robinson was one of the first African Americans to establish himself as a star outside sports . He was an integral part of the New York social scene in the 1940s and 1950s . His glamorous restaurant , Sugar Ray 's , hosted stars such as Frank Sinatra , Jackie Gleason , Nat " King " Cole , Joe Louis , and Lena Horne among others . Robinson was known as a flamboyant personality outside the ring . He combined striking good looks , with charisma , and a flair for the dramatic : He drove a flamingo @-@ pink Cadillac , and was an accomplished singer and dancer , who once pursued a career in the entertainment industry . According to ESPN.com 's Ron <unk> : " He was the pioneer of boxing 's bigger @-@ than @-@ life entourages , including a secretary , barber , masseur , voice coach , a coterie of trainers , beautiful women , a dwarf mascot and lifelong manager George <unk> . " When Robinson first traveled to Paris , a steward referred to his companions as his " entourage " . Although Robinson said he did not like the word 's literal definition of " attendants " , since he felt they were his friends , he liked the word itself and began to use it in regular conversation when referring to them . In 1962 , in an effort to persuade Robinson to return to Paris — where he was still a national hero — the French promised to bring over his masseur , his hairdresser , a man who would whistle while he trained , and his trademark Cadillac . This larger than life persona made him the idol of millions of African American youths in the 1950s . Robinson inspired several other fighters who took the nickname " Sugar " in homage to him such as Sugar Ray Leonard , Sugar Shane Mosley , and MMA fighter " Suga " Rashad Evans . 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = Lillehammer Olympiapark = 
 Lillehammer Olympiapark AS , trading as <unk> , is a company established following the 1994 Winter Olympics to operate the Olympic venues in Lillehammer , Norway . Owned by Lillehammer Municipality , it operates five sports venues : Birkebeineren Ski Stadium , Håkons Hall , Lillehammer Olympic Bobsleigh and Luge Track , Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena and the ski jumping hill of Lysgårdsbakken . In addition to serving sports events , the company provides tourist and group activities at the venues as well as catering to larger events . 
 In the Lillehammer bid for the 1994 Winter Olympics , the agreement between Lillehammer Municipality and the state specified that the municipality was responsible for financing all necessary sports venues . However , after the games were awarded the responsibility was taken over by Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee ( LOOC ) and the town 's five venues were ultimately funded through state grants . To allow for post @-@ Olympic use , a fund was created by the state , of which Lillehammer Olympiapark received 146 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . Unlike the Hamar venues , which survive on their fund 's yield , the Lillehammer venues have used up their capital . From 2014 the post @-@ Olympic use fund will be depleted and alternative organization and funding is being looked into . A leading proposal is that the bobsleigh and luge track be taken over by the state , while the remaining venues be retained by the company and jointly funded by the municipality and Oppland County Municipality . 
 = = History = = 
 As part of the 1985 and 1987 agreements with the Parliament of Norway ahead of the 1994 Winter Olympics bid , Lillehammer Municipality was responsible for financing and building all Olympic venues and associated facilities . To fulfill their obligation , the municipality established Lillehammer Olympiske Anlegg ( LOA ) in 1989 . Mr. Haavind was hired as the company 's first managing director . At the same time the Post @-@ Olympics Use Committee was established to ensure activity at the venues after the Olympics . LOA 's first task was , in cooperation with local and national authorities and LOOC , to decide on locations and budgets . 
 By 1989 , political discussions had started regarding the creation of a fund to finance post @-@ Olympic use . The sledding track , especially , would incur high operating costs , estimated at between NOK 5 and 6 million per year . Total deficits for the five Lillehammer venues were in 1990 estimated at ca . NOK 15 million per year . Initially the government offered to grant NOK 55 million for the fund , but the Post @-@ Olympic Use Committee estimated that NOK 215 million would be necessary . They further proposed that the capital could be used as share capital in the proposed company Olympia <unk> , which would be jointly privately and publicly owned and operate the venues . 
 The budgets were reviewed by Parliament on 23 April 1990 . They also decided to re @-@ organize the Olympics into a concern model , which saw both LOA and the Post @-@ Olympics Use Committees becoming subsidiaries of LOOC , and the Post @-@ Olympics Use Committees changing its name to Lillehammer Olympiavekst ( LOV ) . Separate companies were established to construct the venues in Hamar and Gjøvik , owned by the respective municipalities . The municipal governments of Øyer and Ringebu each received a 24 @.@ 5 @-@ percent stake in LOV . Lillehammer Municipality gained a 24 @.@ 5 @-@ percent stake in the new holding company , Lillehammer ' 94 AS . Gerhard Heiberg , President of LOOC , was appointed chair of both LOV and LOA . LOV was given the responsibility for operating the venues after the Olympics . 
 LOOC and the Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development started negotiations concerning the fund in October 1990 . The government increased the fund size to NOK 130 million in January 1991 , as well as allocating NOK 70 of the reserve funding to post @-@ Olympic use . Lillehammer Municipality stated that they wanted a disproportionate share of the funding , but this was rejected by Minister Kjell Borgen . The fund would be insufficient , which caused a conflict between the five municipalities . Gjøvik and Hamar chose not to take an ownership stake in LOV as they did not want a Lillehammer @-@ based company to manage the towns ' main venues . At the same time , Lillehammer Municipality did not want the two other towns to own part of LOV , as they hoped the entire fund would be used to finance the five venues in Lillehammer . Gjøvik and Hamar took steps to create their own joint venture to operate their three arenas , while Borgen stated that all the venues should be allocated to one company . Ringebu Mayor Erik Winther stated that he felt that his municipality had been tricked into joining LOV and that they were not allowed to participate as an equal partner . 
 Haavind was replaced by Bjørn Sund in 1991 . The post @-@ use funds were distributed such that LOA received NOK 76 million . It also acquired a thirty @-@ percent stake in Hamar Olympiske Anlegg , which operates Vikingskipet and Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre in Hamar , and Gjøvik Olympiske Anlegg , which operates Gjøvik Olympic Cavern Hall in Gjøvik . Lillehammer was the only of the five host municipalities to not use municipal grants to build their venues . By late 1991 , LOOC desired a closer cooperation , resulting in a merger between LOA and Lillehammer ' 94 which took the latter 's name . By 1 January 1993 also LOV and LOOC had also been merged to a single entity . Planning of post @-@ Olympic use and demobilization started in early 1993 . 
 LOOC transferred the ownership of the Olympic venues in Lillehammer to the municipality for NOK 1 million on 7 September 1993 . By then the government had increased the post @-@ Olympic fund to NOK 200 million . Ownership of the Hamar and Gjøvik venues had previously been transferred to the respective municipal governments . The fund was established in September and is managed by a separate foundation , Stiftelsen Lillehammer <unk> . Additional capital for the fund was secured through LOOC 's financial buffers not being used and the surplus transferred to the funds . In June 1994 the fund was set to NOK 401 @.@ 3 million . 
 Minister of Local Government and Regional Development , Gunnar Berge , stated in January 1995 that he was concerned that the post @-@ Olympic use funds were being used up too quickly and that money was being used for unsuitable projects . However , he rejected that the state should take control over the venues or the money . After one year , Lillehammer Olympiapark had used NOK 32 of 146 million , while the company Olympia Utvikling / Troll Park had used NOK 14 of 95 million . For the Lillehammer companies , this meant that the fund was estimated to run out after ten instead of twenty years . In contrast , Hamar Olympiske Anlegg had only used the fund 's yield . LOOC criticized the post @-@ Olympic use companies , stating that they were too bureaucratic , that their combined 100 employees were too many , and that one or two companies would be sufficient . 
 By 1999 , Lillehammer Olympiapark had an annual revenue of NOK 20 million , of which a third came from the fund . Commercial activities contributed half the revenue , while the remaining fraction came from sports activities . Between 80 and 90 percent of the rental time went to sports activities . A report published by Lillehammer University College in 2007 concluded that all the 260 permanent jobs created in the Lillehammer area as a result of the Olympics were directly dependent on subsidies from the post @-@ Olympic use funds . In the late 2000s , Lillehammer Olympiapark was using between NOK 8 and 12 million per year . There was NOK 25 million left in the fund in 2012 , which is scheduled to be closed in 2014 , after it has served for 20 years . Lillehammer Olympiapark started planning the organization of the venues in 2010 . The company recommended that the subsidies be equally funded between Lillehammer Municipality , Oppland County Municipality and the Ministry of Culture . Specifically it recommended that the state take over ownership of the bobsleigh and luge track , while the county took partial ownership of Lillehammer Olympiapark . The state would thus continue to finance the track , which is the only such venue in Northern Europe , while the municipality and county finance the other four venues . The venues are recommended held to such a standard that they can host world cup and world championships in relevant sports . 
 = = Operations = = 
 As of 2010 , the company had a revenue of NOK 56 million , up NOK 10 million from 2009 , yielding a profit of NOK 2 million . The company employed between 51 and 55 people , it is based at Håkons Hall and is entirely owned by Lillehammer Municipality . The company 's revenue comes from a series of sources , the most important being events and tourists . At Lysgårdsbakken , the company operates a chairlift and viewing platform at the top of the tower , as well as a downhill and bobsleigh simulator . The company tailors events to companies with various activities at the hill , including a ceremony to light to Olympic Flame . Kanthaugen and its lift is rented out for tobogganing . The sledding track serves groups and tourists with activities such as <unk> and for @-@ man bobsleigh with an authorized pilot , <unk> , skeleton and skeleton rafting . Next to the track is an activity park with activities such as snowmobile and all @-@ terrain vehicle tracks . 
 = = Venues = = 
 = = = Birkebeineren Ski Stadium = = = 
 The arena covers an area of 200 hectares ( 490 acres ) , and is 3 kilometers ( 2 mi ) from the town center . For the Olympics , 27 kilometers ( 17 mi ) of cross @-@ country tracks and 9 kilometers ( 6 mi ) of biathlon tracks were built . There are two stadiums , one for cross @-@ country skiing and one for biathlon . The former has a spectator capacity for 31 @,@ 000 , while the latter has a capacity for 13 @,@ 500 . Permanent buildings include a finishing house for biathlon , a finishing house for cross @-@ country and a plant room . The cross @-@ country stadium is 200 meters ( 660 ft ) long , while the biathlon stadium is 150 meters ( 490 ft ) long ; the biathlon stadium has 30 shooting stations . As a recreational venue , Birkebeineren connects to 450 kilometers ( 280 mi ) of skiing tracks , including a public 5 @-@ kilometer ( 3 mi ) lighted track which is lit until 22 : 00 every day during winter . During the summer , the tracks are available for jogging , running , roller skiing and similar activities . The FIS Cross @-@ Country World Cup has been hosted three times , in 1993 , 2000 and 2002 , all in February or March . The FIS Nordic Combined World Cup has been hosted seven times at the stadium , and the Biathlon World Cup four times , between 1993 and 1997 . 
 = = = Håkons Hall = = = 
 Håkons Hall is an arena which was used for ice hockey at the 1994 Winter Olympics . In the 1994 Winter Paralympics , Håkons Hall was used for the opening and closing ceremonies . The venue has a capacity for 11 @,@ 500 seated spectators and is the largest handball and ice hockey venue in the country . The stands are flexible and telescopic , allowing for flexibility in hall use and seating capacity . The arena can be configured with a 330 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 600 sq ft ) stage . The hall can be set up to serve 2 @,@ 000 people at a banquet , or divided up to serve smaller groups . The venue has among other events hosted the finals of the 1999 IIHF World Championship in ice hockey , the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2004 , 2008 European Men 's Handball Championship , the 2010 European Women 's Handball Championship and the World Women 's Handball Championship in 1993 and 1999 . 
 = = = Lillehammer Olympic Bobsleigh and Luge Track = = = 
 Lillehammer Olympic Bobsleigh and Luge Track is 1 @,@ 710 meters ( 5 @,@ 610 ft ) long , with the competitive length for bobsleigh and men 's singles in luge being 1 @,@ 365 meters ( 4 @,@ 478 ft ) and for men 's doubles and women 's singles being 1 @,@ 065 meters ( 3 @,@ 494 ft ) . The track has 16 turns and contains 24 photocells for timekeeping . The track has a vertical drop of 112 meters ( 367 ft ) for the entire course , with an average eight percent and maximum fifteen percent grade . The start is located at 384 meters ( 1 @,@ 260 ft ) above mean sea level . It allows for a maximum speed of 130 kilometres per hour ( 81 mph ) and has a spectator capacity is 10 @,@ 000 . After the Olympics , the track has been used for the FIBT World Championships 1995 in skeleton and the FIL World Luge Championships 1995 . 
 = = = Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena = = = 
 Kanthaugen is located next to <unk> , slightly uphill from Stampesletta , one kilometer ( half a mile ) east of Lillehammer 's town center . It consists of three hills , each tailor @-@ made for aerials , moguls and ski ballet , respectively . Above the Olympic hills is a 1 @-@ kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) long tobogganing hill which uses the competitive area as a finish . At the base of the hill is the spectator area , which featured temporary bleachers during the Olympics . The spectator capacity for aerials and ski ballet is 15 @,@ 000 , while it is 12 @,@ 000 for moguls . Also at the foot of the hill is a jury tower overlooking the aerials hill . The venue is equipped with snowmaking equipment , a T @-@ bar lift and floodlights . In addition to freestyle skiing at the 1994 Winter Olympics , it has hosted FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup events twice , on 26 to 28 March 1993 and on 3 to 5 March 1995 . 
 = = = Lysgårdsbakken = = = 
 The twin ski jumping hill consists of a large hill with a construction point ( K @-@ point ) of 123 and a hill size ( HS ) of 138 , and a normal hill has a K @-@ point of 90 and a hill size of 100 . The hill has a capacity for 35 @,@ 000 spectators , of which 7 @,@ 500 can be seated . In addition , up to 25 @,@ 000 people can followed the games from free areas around the venue . Auxiliary structures include a start house , a judges tower — which includes office space for organizers and judges — a media building , and a technical room below the stands , as well as a first aid room and restrooms . It also features a high @-@ pressure snow production facility with outtakes all along the approach and outrun . Transport to the large hill tower is accessible via a chair lift . Lysgårdsbakken is a regular site for FIS Ski Jumping World Cup and FIS Nordic Combined World Cup tournaments . FIS Ski Jumping World Cup has been hosted nearly every year since 1993 . Since 2004 , with the exception of 2007 and 2010 , Lysgårdsbakken is a co @-@ host of the Nordic Tournament . In 2005 , the hills were the eleventh @-@ most visited tourist attraction in Norway . 
 = EVA Air = 
 EVA Air Corporation ( pronounced " E @-@ V @-@ A Air " ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; Pe ̍ h @-@ ōe @-@ jī : <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) ( <unk> : <unk> ) is a Taiwanese international airline based at Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport near Taipei , Taiwan , operating passenger and dedicated cargo services to over 40 international destinations in Asia , Australia , Europe , and North America . EVA Air is largely privately owned and flies a fully international route network . It is a 5 star airline , rated by Skytrax . It is the second largest Taiwanese airline . EVA Air is headquartered in <unk> , Taoyuan City , Taiwan . 
 Since its founding in 1989 as an affiliate of shipping conglomerate Evergreen Group , EVA Air has expanded to include air cargo , airline catering , ground handling , and aviation engineering services . Its cargo arm , EVA Air Cargo , links with the Evergreen worldwide shipping network on sea and land . Its domestic and regional subsidiary , UNI Air , operates a medium and short @-@ haul network to destinations in Taiwan , Macau and China with its main hub in Kaohsiung , Taiwan . As of January 2015 , EVA Air is the 3rd safest airline in the world , with no hull losses , accidents , or fatalities since its establishment . 
 EVA Air operates a mixed fleet of Airbus and Boeing aircraft , with Airbus A330 , Boeing 747 , Airbus A321 , and Boeing 777 airliners primarily used on passenger routes , along with Boeing 747 freighters used on cargo routes . The airline was one of the first carriers to introduce the Premium Economy class ( called Elite class in EVA Air ) , which it debuted in 1991 . Elite class is onboard Boeing 777 and selected Boeing 747 aircraft . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 In September 1988 , during the 20th anniversary celebration of Evergreen Marine Corporation ’ s founding , company chairman Chang Yung @-@ fa announced his company ’ s intentions to establish Taiwan ’ s first private international airline . The opportunity to create a major Taiwanese airline had just arisen following a decision by the Taiwanese government to liberalise the country ’ s air transportation system . Government requirements still mandated global experience and financial capital requirements for any company seeking permission to initiate international airline service from Taiwan . 
 Upon recipient of regulatory approval , EVA Airways Corporation was formally established in March 1989 . The airline was originally to be called Evergreen Airways , however this was deemed too similar to the unrelated Evergreen International cargo airline . In October 1989 , the newly formed EVA Airways Corporation placed a US $ 3 @.@ 6 billion order for 26 aircraft from Boeing and McDonnell Douglas , including Boeing 747 @-@ 400 and MD @-@ 11 airliners . 
 Operations began on 1 July 1991 with a small fleet of EVA Air Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER aircraft featuring business and economy class seating . Initial destinations from Taipei were Bangkok , Seoul , Jakarta , Singapore , and Kuala Lumpur . By the end of the year , the EVA Air network had expanded to include additional cities in East Asia and its first European destination , Vienna . First year revenues reached US $ 40 million . 
 = = = Expansion in the 1990s = = = 
 In 1992 , EVA Air received the first of its Boeing 747 @-@ 400 aircraft on order , and launched its premium economy class , " Economy Deluxe " , on its 747 transpacific flights to Los Angeles , beginning in December of that year . EVA Air 's premium economy cabin , one of the first in the airline industry , featured a wider 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 abreast configuration , <unk> , individual <unk> video , and enhanced meal services . EVA Air 's Economy Deluxe cabin ( later renamed " Evergreen Deluxe " and " Elite Class " ) proved popular with the traveling public . For international services , EVA Air 's 747s were configured with 104 premium economy seats as part of a 370 @-@ seat , four @-@ class cabin , in addition to first , business and economy classes . In 1993 , EVA Air added flights to Seattle , New York , Bangkok and Vienna with the Boeing 747 @-@ 400 . 
 By 1994 , EVA Air was providing regular service to 22 destinations worldwide , and carrying over 3 million passengers annually . In 1995 , the airline posted its first profit on revenues of US $ 1 @.@ 05 billion , one year ahead of schedule . Internationally , EVA Air 's rapid expansion and increased passenger volume was boosted by its safety record , in contrast to its primary competitor , China Airlines . In addition to receiving <unk> ( IATA Operational Safety Audit ) certification , EVA Air in 1997 achieved simultaneous official ISO 9002 certification in the areas of Passenger , Cargo , and Maintenance Services . 
 Dedicated EVA Air Cargo operations began in April 1995 , with the first weekly McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 freighter flights to Taipei , Singapore , Penang , San Francisco , New York , and Los Angeles . EVA Air Cargo 's fleet was expanded to five freighters by the end of the year . Previously , EVA Air Cargo operations mainly relied on passenger aircraft cargo space . 
 In the mid – 1990s , EVA Air expanded into the domestic Taiwan market by acquiring shares in Makung International Airlines , followed by Great China Airlines and Taiwan Airways . On 1 July 1998 , all three carriers , as well as EVA 's existing domestic operations , merged under the UNI Air title . UNI Air became EVA Air 's domestic intra @-@ Taiwanese subsidiary , operating <unk> flights out of its base in Kaohsiung , Taiwan 's southern port and second @-@ largest city . 
 = = = Maturation in the early 2000s = = = 
 In 2000 , EVA Air embarked on its first major long @-@ haul fleet renewal . The airline became one of the launch customers for the Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER , ordering four aircraft plus eight options . At the same time , the airline placed three orders for the Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR . In January 2001 , EVA Air ordered its first Airbus aircraft , the A330 @-@ 200 . The Boeing 777 aircraft were intended for United States and European services , while the Airbus A330 aircraft were intended for regional Asian routes . 
 In 2001 , EVA Air began listing public stock offerings on the Taiwan Stock Exchange . Initially , one percent of the company 's shares was offered over @-@ the @-@ counter , with one @-@ quarter held by parent company Evergreen Marine Corporation and EVA Air employees , respectively . In 2002 , EVA Air underwent internal corporate reforms , with staff reductions and streamlined management . This culminated a process which had begun in 1997 , when the Asian financial crisis began affecting profitability . The 2002 – 2003 SARS contagion also affected passenger traffic for medium @-@ haul flights in Southeast Asia , while long @-@ haul flights to North America , Japan , and Europe were less affected . 
 In 2004 , EVA Air converted its remaining eight options for Boeing 777 @-@ 300ERs into firm orders . The first Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER entered service as EVA Air 's new flagship aircraft in July 2005 . With the arrival of its new Boeing 777s , EVA Air launched a comprehensive revamp of its cabins , introducing lie @-@ flat seats in its new Premium Laurel business class cabin , and upgrading its premium economy product to the new Elite Class cabin . The airline 's A330s were introduced with two @-@ class Premium Laurel and Economy cabins . In December 2005 , EVA Air and its associated divisions had 5 @,@ 098 employees , and the airline 's network spanned 40 passenger destinations worldwide , with additional cargo destinations . 
 = = = <unk> in the late 2000s = = = 
 In 2007 , EVA Air announced a nonstop Taipei to New York ( John F. Kennedy International Airport ) service , to be operated with its new long @-@ range Boeing 777 @-@ 300ERs . At the same time , the airline withdrew passenger service from Taipei to Paris . On 31 October 2008 , EVA Air announced a resumption of Taipei to Paris service with thrice @-@ weekly passenger flights beginning 21 January 2009 . In 2008 , the airline also announced the suspension of services to Auckland . The carrier also prepared to increase direct flights to China , after initiating weekly charter flights in July 2008 following changes to the Three Links travel agreements . 
 For the 2007 – 2008 period , EVA Air coped with a 34 % surge in fuel prices , which contributed to a US $ 61 @.@ 2 million 2007 loss . In August 2008 , EVA Air reported a second quarterly loss due to increased fuel costs . In response , the airline implemented cost @-@ saving measures , including flight schedule reductions and fee increases . In early 2008 , EVA Air 's business office in El Segundo , California , announced a major staff reduction , with over half the staff advised that they would no longer be employed by May 2008 . Functions performed by those local staff were shifted to Taiwan by half , such as the reservation center . 
 EVA Air carried 6 @.@ 2 million passengers in 2007 , and employed 4 @,@ 800 staff members as of April 2008 . The carrier returned to profitability in the first quarter of 2009 , with a US $ 5 @.@ 9 million net gain . In August 2010 , EVA Air was named one of the top 10 international airlines in Travel + Leisure 's World 's Best Awards . 
