 = = = Oxford University and England trial = = = 
 Geen was selected to play for Oxford against Cambridge in four consecutive years from 1910 to 1913 . In the first of these , on 13 December 1910 , a 9 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd turned up at Queen 's , mostly to watch Ronnie Poulton , playing for Oxford . Cambridge started strong but a try by Bryn Lewis was disallowed in the opening minutes after a touch judge signalled that Geen had put his foot into touch in the preceding Oxford move . Moments later , Poulton ran through the Cambridge defence , drew the fullback and passed to Geen to dive in at the corner for a try . With Turner 's conversion , Oxford led 5 – 0 . A similar passage of play again saw Poulton put Geen through for a try , but he dropped the ball after crossing the line while trying to get closer to the posts . 
 Geen got his second try after another break from Poulton . Cambridge meanwhile scored two tries and at half @-@ time were leading 15 – 13 . Fifteen minutes into the second half , a second try for Cambridge put them five points ahead . An injury to one of Cambridge 's scoring wings reduced the team to fourteen players ; a forward moved to cover the wing , giving Oxford an advantage in the forwards . Poulton capitalised on it : he scored from a dummy pass to Geen ; and ran in a solo try after receiving a pass from <unk> Freddie Knott . The end score was 23 – 18 to Oxford . 
 A couple of days before the Varsity Match , talk in the press had been of Geen 's likely selection for England for the forthcoming Home Nations Championship . Geen and Poulton , who together were considered the scoring force of the Oxford team , were both selected to play for England in the second trial match against The North in Leeds . Although Geen scored a try in the game , his form was lacking and he was outshone by Poulton . So for the third and final trial , England versus The Rest on 7 January 1911 , Geen was not selected . 
 In the run up to the 1911 Varsity Match , the Poulton – Geen partnership was a constant threat to opposition teams . Ten days before the Varsity Match , Oxford beat London Scottish 39 – 3 . Twice Poulton put Geen in the clear , with the latter ending the day with four tries in total . On 12 December , Cambridge were favourites to win but Poulton captained Oxford to victory , in front of a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 . Geen 's form coming in to the game was suspect but he proved his worth . However , Poulton suffered a hamstring injury early on and his replacement Eric Thomas , a forward , lacked the speed and skills to combine effectively with Geen . Nevertheless , he came close to scoring , but , as he had done in the previous year 's match , he dropped the ball over the tryline . He was to repeat the error the following year . 
 = = = Newport Rugby Club and Wales = = = 
 Geen played for Newport Rugby Club before going to Oxford and returned to Newport during the holiday periods , providing " dazzling entertainment " . He was described by Tommy Vile 's biographer Philip J Grant as looking " the promising player in Wales " ; and scored 10 tries and a dropped goal in 14 games for the Monmouthshire club . On 24 October 1912 , he was part of the team that played and beat the touring South Africans 9 – 3 . He was not first choice for the game , but when George Hirst failed to recover from an injury sustained at Leicester the week before , Geen was his replacement . 
 South Africa was as yet undefeated on the tour , with wins over Somerset , Devon , Cornwall , Monmouthshire , Glamorgan and Llanelli . Whereas Newport , according to " <unk> " ( W J Townsend Collins ) writing in the Argus , had been poor in attack in their previous three encounters and weak in defence in the last two . Townsend Collins later recollected that the South Africans were taller , heavier , stronger and faster . The Newport victory was the result of " superior tactics and superlative captaincy " . 
 Just before half time , a try by Newport 's Jack Wetter was disallowed for a forward pass . The ball was then worked back to Fred Birt , standing within range in front of the posts , and he kicked a drop @-@ goal , putting the home side 4 – 0 ahead at the break . In the second half , the Springboks repeatedly attacked but the Newport defence kept them from crossing the line , although a break from Dick Luyt , the South African centre , left Douglas Morkel to score under the posts . Luyt failed to convert and Newport remained a point ahead . Newport scored again through a cross @-@ kick from Wetter , which Birt jumped on over the line for a try , which he then converted . 
 Newport was one of only three teams to beat the Springboks on the tour and Geen played his part , bringing down Johan <unk> when he was within sight of the try line . He was praised after the match for his play . The Times the following day reported : " Newport deserved the victory , if only for their remarkably sound and highly intelligent defence ... In spite , however , of the good play of the Newport forwards ... the South African backs would have scored at least three tries but for the fine tackling of Geen and Reg Plummer , the Newport wings , who saved one certain try by just stopping Otto Van Der Hoff on the line . " 
 Geen was then selected and played three times for Wales in the 1912 – 1913 season . He earned his first cap against the same touring South Africans on 14 December . His next international appearance , under the captaincy of his Newport team mate Tommy Vile , was on 18 January 1913 against England . Wales were beaten in Cardiff 0 – 12 . After the game , and disappointed by the performance of most of the team , the selectors made nine changes for the upcoming match against Scotland . Only two backs were to be retained , Bobby Williams , the fullback , and Billy Geen , deemed the outstanding threequarter against England , moving from wing to centre . However , on the Wednesday preceding the encounter in Edinburgh , Geen withdrew after a training session due to an ongoing shoulder injury , and his place on the team was taken by Willie Watts . 
 His final game for Wales was on 8 March 1913 against Ireland , when he showed " brilliance and judgment " ( according to Townsend Collins ) helping to create two tries towards a Welsh 16 – 13 victory . Geen was selected to play centre for the first match of the 1914 Home Nations against England at Twickenham but was forced to withdraw due to injury . He was replaced , once again , by Willie Watts , and probably missed out on four more caps for Wales . 
 = = = Barbarian F.C. = = = 
 In 1911 , Geen was approached by Barbarian F.C. , an invitational touring rugby team based in England , to join them on their 1911 Easter tour . Geen played in two matches of the tour , the first a 15 – 8 loss against Cardiff RFC where he was captained by Ireland 's Tommy Smyth . Despite missing the Swansea game two days later , Geen returned to the Barbarians squad to face Cheltenham , which ended in a 8 – 3 victory for the tourists . Later that year Geen was again invited to play for the Barbarians , another contest against Cardiff in their traditional Boxing Day encounter . In 1912 Geen played in his first Barbarians match outside Wales , facing the Leicester Tigers . His captain on that day was England international Edgar Mobbs , and although finishing on the losing side , Geen scored his first and only try for the Barbarians . 
 With the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , competitive rugby union matches were suspended . Despite this , Edgar Mobbs organized two Barbarians matches against Leicester in early 1915 to aid recruiting and to raise charity funds . Mobbs then arranged one final Barbarians match against the Royal Army Medical Corps ( RAMC ) , leading a team made up of military personnel , including Geen in his last Barbarians appearance , to a 10 – 3 victory . Of Geen 's team @-@ mates on that day , Mobbs and another England international Arthur James Dingle , would also die in action during the war . 
 = = = International appearances for Wales = = = 
 = = Military service and death = = 
 Geen was commissioned second lieutenant in the 9th Battalion , King 's Royal Rifle Corps on 21 August 1914 . He trained in Petworth and was sent to the Western Front in May 1915 . The 9th was assigned to the 14th ( Light ) Division and served with it during the Second Battle of Ypres . After six weeks ' combat , the battalion was withdrawn for rest but two days later was sent back to the front to reinforce the 41st Brigade . Geen was killed in action on 31 July 1915 at Hooge , Belgium . He was last seen leading his men in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting as they advanced towards ruined village buildings . Major John Hope wrote : " Geen fought gloriously , and was last seen alive leading his platoon in a charge after being for hours subjected to liquid fire and every device the Germans could bring to bear to break through . Seventeen officers and 333 other ranks of this battalion were killed in this engagement , in which officers and men showed themselves worthy of the best traditions of their Regiment . " 
 Billy Geen is commemorated on panels 51 and 53 of the Menin Gate in Ypres , the memorial to missing soldiers from the battles of the Ypres Salient . 
 = Ibuki ( Street Fighter ) = 
 Ibuki ( <unk> , Ibuki , also written as <unk> ) is a fictional character from Capcom 's fighting game franchise Street Fighter , introduced in the original version of Street Fighter III in 1997 . After a few appearances in other games and her own comic book miniseries , she has returned to the main series since Super Street Fighter IV . Ibuki is a young prodigy ninja @-@ in @-@ training from an ancient clan , but who nevertheless would rather like to live normal life of a modern Japanese teenager . She has pet named Don , a close friend in Sakura , and her friendly rivals include R. Mika . Ibuki 's unique , technical and tricky moveset relies on mobility , aggressiveness and deception to be most effective . She has become one of the most popular females in the Street Fighter series , being also regarded by some as one of top ninja characters in all video games . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ibuki is a teenage girl from the Glade of Ninjas ( <unk> , Shinobi no Sato , " Shinobi Village " ) , a secret village hidden in the mountains of Japan that is home to an ancient ninja clan . Although trained in ninjutsu since infancy , with continuous rigorous training and special missions , Ibuki is otherwise an ordinary high school girl with an attraction to pop idols . She yearns to be more carefree , and prefers ordinary schoolgirl attire over her traditional ninja outfit , which she considers ugly . In battle , she uses taijutsu , a fighting style that combines several Japanese martial arts . Ibuki is 162 cm tall and weighs 46 kg , her measurements are <unk> / <unk> / <unk> , and her birthday is on December 6 . 
 Ibuki has a pet tanuki ( raccoon dog ) named Don ( どん ) / Don @-@ chan ( <unk> ) , who has been with her since her childhood . Other members of Ibuki 's ninja clan that appear in her stage in the first two Street Fighter III games include Sanjō ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and Raion ( <unk> ) . Ibuki 's friend , appearing in her endings in the original Street Fighter III : New Generation and in Street Fighter III : 2nd Impact , as well in some other games , is a ninja girl named Sarai Kurosawa ( <unk> , Kurosawa Sarai ) , who hails in the same village and attends the same high school . The young boy who spars with Ibuki before a match in 3rd Strike is named Yūta Homura ( <unk> , Homura Yūta ) . It was rumored that original Street Fighter character Geki was her father , but this was never confirmed as canon . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 = = = = Street Fighter = = = = 
 Ibuki and Elena have been the only female fighters in the Street Fighter III sub @-@ series until they were joined by Makoto and Chun @-@ Li in Street Fighter III : 3rd Strike ( 1999 ) . In the plots of the original Street Fighter III and 2nd Impact , Ibuki is sent by her clan to retrieve a mysterious " G file " from Gill 's organization , the Illuminati . In Ibuki 's game end sequence , Gill hands her the file after their battle . In 3rd Strike , Ibuki shares a special pre @-@ fight introductory sequence with her rival Makoto . She is shown preparing to graduate from high school and is studying for her college application exams , hoping to move away from home to enjoy a normal campus life and find a boyfriend . As part of her final exam , Ibuki is sent to find and defeat the elderly martial arts legend named Oro . In her 3rd Strike ending she is accepted into the fictional <unk> University ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> Daigaku ) , at first without knowledge of its cover for an elite ninja training camp . 
 A kunai resembling her is seen in Fei Long 's ending in Street Fighter IV ( 2008 ) . She was later revealed to be playable in Super Street Fighter IV ( 2010 ) , where her introductory sequence shows her interacting with a fellow Capcom ninja Guy for the first time . Her story for the game depicts her looking for fun and boys to date . Ibuki also meets Sakura <unk> , as she tries to get Sakura to introduce her to a boy . 
 Ibuki reappears as a playable character in Street Fighter V as one of the DLC characters released after the game 's launch . She was supposed to arrive in May 2016 but was delayed to July . In her prologue story , Ibuki finally finishes her ninja assignment and is informed by her friend Sakura about the party invitation sent from her rival Karin <unk> . Arriving at the <unk> Estate , Ibuki fights and defeat Birdie and Karin . After the fight , Karin lest her stay at the party with handsome boys and gives her the contract which has been approved by the Ibuki village to work with her . Ibuki also appears in the end of R. Mika 's prologue story , rejecting her offer in muscle training which angers R. Mika who beats her in a fight . Ibuki and R. Mika continue to argue through the course of the game 's main story , " A Shadow Falls " , which begins when they and Karin travel to the New York City to find out who is behind the activation of the seven Black Moons , eventually finding out it is a Shadaloo plot . During the first infiltration of the Shadaloo base , Ibuki fights Balrog but fails to beat him . She then uses her smoke bomb to distract the enemies and the two <unk> escape with it until they reunited with Karin . They witness Zangief beat Abel , Ibuki watching in disgust while R. Mika idolizes him . In the final assault against Shadaloo , Ibuki and R. Mika fight off Shadaloo soldiers . Ibuki is last seen watching Shadaloo 's destruction with the other fighters . 
 = = = = Other games = = = = 
 Ibuki is one of the characters representing the Street Fighter series in Namco 's crossover fighting game , Street Fighter X Tekken ( 2012 ) , with Rolento as her tag team partner . In it , she is persuaded by her village leaders to accept Rolento 's request for a joint mission to the South Pole , serving as his advisor on infiltration . In the story mode , Rolento initially addresses the very annoyed Ibuki as private but " promotes " her to the rank of sergeant by the end of the game . According to a backstory for the Street Fighter X Tekken DLC ninja costume @-@ swap for the Tekken series ' Asuka Kazama , Asuka was sent Ibuki 's village to learn the ninja arts from her . Ibuki 's own Tekken swap costume is in the style of Yoshimitsu , with her latest assignment having her join his Manji Clan . 
 A super deformed version of Ibuki is a playable character in the fighting game Super Gem Fighter Mini Mix / Pocket Fighter ( 1997 ) , in which she sneaks off from her ninja training for an ice cream in Tokyo . Ibuki is also playable in the mobile puzzle game Street Fighter : Puzzle Spirits ( 2014 ) , and appears as a card in the browser @-@ based social game Onimusha Soul ( 2012 ) and in person in Street Fighter Battle Combination ( 2015 ) . Her cards also appear in SNK vs. Capcom : Card Fighters Clash ( 1999 ) and SNK vs. Capcom : Card Fighters DS ( 2007 ) . She has a cameo in Capcom Fighting Evolution / Capcom Fighting Jam ( 2004 ) . 
 Producer / director Ryota Niitsuma originally considered her for inclusion as a playable character in Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars ( 2008 ) , but she was ultimately cut due to time constraints . The " head student at Ibuki 's ninja village " was supposed to be a new player character in the rejected concept of Street Fighter IV Flashback by Backbone Entertainment , which would also have feature a cameo of a much younger version of Ibuki . 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The character that became Ibuki has been originally conceived as a ninja boy before the gender was swapped , and the male version 's design might have been re @-@ used for Ibuki 's sparring partner Yūta Homura . Super Street Fighter IV main battle planner said Ibuki is an " orthodox ninja at first glance , but her character is one of a normal girl , so we are trying to bring out her feminine side in her lines and dialogue as well as in her proportions . " The game 's director said she was probably the most difficult character to make while trying to best show " her charm , even behind the mask , " as " Ibuki is cute even at a first glance , so that might be what you focus on , but we 've also put a lot of effort into her motions and her design . " Ibuki 's English voice actress Kat Steel , hired for her knowledge of the character displayed during the audition , wrote it " was a treat because her character is sassy , mischievous , and oh so girlish ! " For Street Fighter X Tekken , Capcom abortively planned to give Ibuki some attacks featuring Don . 
 Ibuki 's build is depicted as slim and athletic , with black hair held tightly back in a topknot ponytail that drops well beneath her waist . Her usual fighting outfit , in which she has appeared in most of the games , is a type of ninja <unk> , consisting of a sleeveless upper garment , baggy pants ( slit at the sides ) , arm guards , and a mask that conceals the lower half of her face . Her footwear consists only of cloth bandages wrapped around her shins , ankles and instep . Ibuki 's alternative , everyday costume is a blue @-@ and @-@ white Japanese schoolgirl uniform , or casual clothes — in the same color scheme — with a chain of miniature kunai knives and a fake tanuki tail , introduced in Super Street Fighter IV Arcade Edition . One of her scrapped costume concepts for Super Street Fighter IV was a very distinct , partially armored ninja outfit , which was more skimpy and featured two Japanese swords on her back . 
 After nearly two decades , Ibuki was radically redesigned for Street Fighter V , where her main costume changes to a modified version of her schoolgirl outfit with above @-@ knee @-@ high socks mixed with a black mask and purple elements of <unk> Japanese armour on her hands and legs . Before deciding on it , the designers tried many different costume ideas by adjusting the ratio of her two personalities ; the rejected concept art sketches ( including one with full tanuki suit ) were posted on Capcom 's blog . Ibuki 's premium summer costume is a <unk> armored swimsuit , with partial leggings and a cape @-@ like face scarf resembling this of Capcom 's own Strider Hiryu , which comes in a variety of colors . Her premium battle costume is an altogether different and more fashionable blue ninja outfit with a floral theme with a sword on her back , where for the first time she has loose hair . 
 = = = = Gameplay = = = = 
 According to Computer and Video Games , " Ibuki appears to be one of the most powerful and most popular character " in Street Fighter III . VentureBeat 's Chris Hoadley opined Ibuki was the strongest character in Street Fighter III : 2nd Impact and GameSpot felt her to be , in terms of gameplay , most similar to Cammy and Geki . According to UGO , Ibuki in Street Fighter III " has the strength and speed to face off against any top @-@ tier character " , as she is " quick , somewhat unpredictable and easy to pick up " , and " she 's just as likely to attack an opponent from the front as she is to dash into the air and rain down several kunai . It 's this type of diversity in fighting that makes her attractive to players . " Retro Gamer opined " this female ninja is fast , mobile and can stun opponents quickly . While she loses in a toe @-@ to @-@ toe brawl against most characters , she has plenty of trickery to get around a tight defence and dictate the match . " AskMen wrote that " while her specials lack the dazzle and spark of most of Street Fighter 's cast Ibuki 's still lethal in the right hands , juggling her opponents with some seemingly endless combos . " 
 In Super Street Fighter IV , the developers attempted to retain Ibuki 's playstyle and feel from Street Fighter III . She was also given a super jump ( the only character , other than C. Viper , to have one in this game ) and made adjustments to have combos that utilize it . Capcom 's <unk> Sano said that " Ibuki is suited to those who want to get the most out of a single character " and " beginners can use her too , but if I had to pick I 'd say she 's suited for intermediate . " Capcom Europe described Ibuki ’ s " <unk> " ( " Thunder Strike " ) command grab as having some unique properties and being one of the most powerful moves in the game . According to an MTV guide , Ibuki is " one of the hardest characters to master in this latest iteration " and players need to gain " a strong understanding of each character 's moves and abilities before truly coming to grips with what the weak , yet versatile Ibuki has to offer . " 
 In a guide to Super Street Fighter IV : 3D Edition , GameSpy stated that Ibuki has " got some unique strengths and enough versatility that we think she can cope with most opponents . Her damage is a bit lacking , but with enough craftiness in your execution you can make up for it . " Listing the biggest mistakes to avoid in the game , GamesRadar advised Ibuki 's players to not <unk> her " kunai air @-@ knives " , but to rather use them sparingly in not predictably as a tool to help get close to the opponent . According to GamesRadar , " Ibuki makes up for her relatively weak damage by having some of the trickiest mobility in the game , letting a skilled player dash circles around their confused opponent . " According to Edge , Ultra Street Fighter IV 's addition of delayed wakeup , which lets one stay on the floor longer after being knocked down to put an opponent off their rhythm , was " primarily designed to <unk> characters like Cammy , Akuma and Ibuki who are at their most effective when an opponent is getting up off the ground . " Professional player <unk> , whose preferred character in Super Street Fighter IV was Ibuki , said in interview for Famitsu that Ibuki in Street Fighter X Tekken " is ultimately based on her <unk> Arcade Edition version " and so it is easy for people familiar with this game " to jump right in . " He also noted a few character @-@ specific changes between these games , such as Ibuki 's kunai attacks gaining the knock @-@ down ability . 
 In Street Fighter V , she gains new special moves such as to dodge @-@ teleport , glide , and throw bombs with different fuses , making her even more distracting and <unk> . According to Capcom , " Ibuki has always been a very mobile character with various target combos , but she now has even more ways to mix @-@ up the opponent with the ability to glide through the air and toss out ninja bombs , making it very difficult to predict where she will land and where her next attack will come from . <unk> have also been a cornerstone of her playstyle , but now players will have to be much more strategic in their use as she can only stock five at a time before she has to quickly obtain another set . That said , their utility is just as powerful as ever as she can send her entire stock flying at the opponent for serious damage . Ibuki digs into her bag of ninja tools and throws a bomb at the opponent . Depending on which direction is held upon activation , the bomb can either go off quickly , after a slight delay or after a longer delay . " Ibuki is also able to detonate her bombs manually by hitting them with kunai and their explosions can not harm her . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 = = = = Comics = = = = 
 Ibuki appears in Street Fighter comic books , including in Street Fighter : Unlimited . Notably she received her own four @-@ issue miniseries Street Fighter Legends : Ibuki , written by Jim <unk> and drawn by Omar Dogan . It was was published by UDON Entertainment in 2010 to coincide with the release of Super Street Fighter IV . One alternative cover was drawn by Adam Warren and the entire miniseries was later included in the compilation Street Fighter Legends : The Ultimate Edition . In Ibuki , the character 's fictional background was revealed : she had been destined to become a perfect assassin for the Geki clan ( in to the comic , Geki is not an individual person but a clan that is rival to Ibuki 's ) , but one of them , <unk> , fled with the baby . She also interacts with Elena , in addition to Makoto and Sarai . 
 For writing Ibuki , <unk> was nominated for a Joe Shuster Award . He said that , compared to Sakura , " Ibuki 's a more complex character , more flawed . She 's a great ninja but she isn 't even sure this is what she wants out of life . ( ... ) Sakura 's never @-@ give @-@ up attitude may be more of a classic anime archetype , but I feel Ibuki 's a character more people can empathize with . " He added , " Ibuki ’ s personality has been limited to game endings and oh @-@ so brief lines of dialogue from her victory quotes , so expanding upon those with this focused story is an honour and a challenge . " In a poll by Omar Dogan on his DeviantArt website , most of voters wanted to see Ibuki " wearing something cute " , and precisely something in the Harajuku @-@ style Lolita fashion . Dogan 's own favourite part of the story was " the part where Ibuki and Oro battle . " 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 Ibuki is a favored character for use in promotional artwork , and has several figurines and action figures made in her image . These include figures from Kotobukiya , Mega Hobby , <unk> , <unk> Toys , Square Enix 's Play Arts Kai , and Capcom itself , including one designed by Street Fighter III character concept artist Kinu Nishimura . 
 Ibuki 's Xbox Live Avatar costume was released in 2010 . Sakura is shown controlling Ibuki in a handheld Street Fighter III game she plays in the anime film Street Fighter Alpha : The Animation . Her cards are featured in the card game Universal Fighting System . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ibuki was met with a positive critical and fan reception regarding her character design , attractiveness and personality , and with a mixed reception regarding her gameplay issues . Despite her debut in a relatively obscure entry in the series , Ibuki has become one of the most popular Street Fighter female characters . Capcom producer Yoshinori Ono said Ibuki is so " popular because she is insanely fun to play . " Professional Street Fighter commentator and player Femi <unk> ( F @-@ Word ) recalled Ibuki in Third Strike has changed his life when he was a young teenager : " I saw this ninja girl and I picked her up , that became my destiny . " In 2002 , she was voted the 12th most popular Street Fighter character in Capcom 's own poll for the 15th anniversary of Street Fighter . Street Fighter IV director Takashi Tsukamoto described her as " a character that many people were waiting for ; " a teaser trailer suggesting her inclusion in the game , revealed by Yoshinori Ono at the Evolution Championship Series 2011 tournament event , excited the crowd . Ibuki was voted the 16th most requested Street Fighter side character to be added to the roster of Tekken X Street Fighter in an official poll by Namco in 2013 . 
 Previewing Street Fighter III , Computer and Video Games highlighted Ibuki and Necro as " two of the finest " fighters in the game . In 2008 , GameDaily placed Ibuki 15th on its list of top Street Fighter characters of all time , expressing surprise that " all she wants to do is live a normal life . " That same year , IGN 's D. F. Smith ranked her as the 22nd top Street Fighter character and the only ninja on their list . In 2015 , Ben Lee from Digital Spy ranked the " fast , relentless , kick @-@ ass , and often unpredictable " Ibuki as the 12th best Street Fighter character . IGN 's Jesse Schedeen featured her among the characters he wanted to appear in Street Fighter IV . GamesRadar 's Mikel Reparaz similarly listed Ibuki among the 12 characters he would like to see in Super Street Fighter IV despite her being " one of the weaker characters " in Street Fighter III , citing her " enduring popularity " , " rapid , skill @-@ centric combos and high @-@ flying special moves " and her costume " which leaves her hips conspicuously bare and devoid of any sign of underpants . " Martin Robinson of AskMen too named Ibuki as of the five characters it wished to be included in Super Street Fighter IV , writing that " ninjas might be ten @-@ a @-@ penny in videogames , but none are as effortlessly cool as Ibuki " and adding that she " makes this list primarily for her style " but is " no slouch in combat either . " According to the GameZone review of the game , " it ’ s unfathomable to think that anyone could not fall in love with Ibuki and Makoto , introduced in Street Fighter III , all over again . " In his review of Super Street Fighter IV , Tim Higgins from The Telegraph wrote Ibuki was his personal favourite new fighter in the game for " all slippery evasive manoeuvres and devastating bread and butter combos . " GamesRadar 's Lucas Sullivan called her inclusion in Street Fighter IV " a stroke of genius " and requested her return in Street Fighter V. 
 Capcom 's <unk> Okada said Ibuki was the most popular of the Street Fighter III female characters , probably because of her appearance contrasting a young girl " of the current times " with " this old @-@ time ninja look " . Nevertheless , MTV 's Brad Nicholson blamed Ibuki 's " bland , tan , and masked getup that hasn ’ t changed much since her days in Street Fighter III , " for her not appearing on the cover of Super Street Fighter IV despite all her " ravenous fans . " Giovanni <unk> , designer of Akane the <unk> , intended look of the titular character on the game 's cover as " a small tribute to two of the most famous kunoichi from the history of the videogames – a mix of Mai Shiranui with a bit of Ibuki . " In 2012 , Gelo Gonzales of FHM included Ibuki among the nine " sexiest ninja babes in games " and compared her to Sam Pinto . GamesRadar 's Sullivan also compared the Killer Instinct 3 character <unk> to Ibuki , as similarly being " an agile fighter who can orchestrate a lot of very tricky setups from the air . " 
 In 2004 , Nich Maragos and David Smith of 1UP.com ranked Ibuki as the sixth overall best ninja character in video games , calling her " one of the coolest @-@ looking characters " in Street Fighter III but " also one of the least capable in competition . " That same year , Aubrey <unk> of UGO featured her on a list of the 25 " <unk> fighting females to ever be pixelated " and commented that Ibuki is " not only super @-@ hot , but she 's also a ninja , which is like a ' chocolate in my peanut butter ' situation . " UGO 's Paul <unk> further stated that she " set the new standard in female fighters , " adding , " forget Chun @-@ Li " . GameZone included the " amazing " Ibuki in their 2011 list of " best video game ninjas " and stated : " We ’ re glad she ’ s still a staple in this series to this very day – but when is she going to come over to Marvel vs. Capcom territory ? " Márcio Pacheco Alexsandro of Brazil 's Game Hall placed her at tenth spot of his 2014 list of top kunoichi characters in games , opining that that she is " far from having such status as Chun @-@ Li , but has her charm , especially if you like Japanese schoolgirls . " Joe <unk> from WhatCulture.com placed Ibuki at 19th spot on his 2015 list of the greatest female fighting game characters of all time : " Ninja 's are always cool , but Ibuki takes that awesome factor to a whole new level . " In 2016 , Steven Hanson from Destructoid described her as " everybody 's favorite schoolgirl ninja . " 
 = Bazy Tankersley = 
 Ruth " Bazy " Tankersley ( March 7 , 1921 – February 5 , 2013 ) was an American breeder of Arabian horses and a newspaper publisher . She was a daughter of Senator Joseph Medill McCormick . Her mother was progressive Republican Congresswoman Ruth Hanna McCormick , making Tankersley a granddaughter of the late Senator Mark Hanna of Ohio . Although Tankersley was involved with conservative Republican causes as a young woman , including a friendship with Senator Joseph McCarthy , her progressive roots reemerged in later years ; by the 21st century , she had become a strong supporter of environmental causes and backed Barack Obama for president in 2008 . 
 Tankersley 's father died when she was a child . When her mother remarried , the family moved to the southwestern United States where Tankersley spent considerable time riding horses . She became particularly enamored of the Arabian breed after she was given a part @-@ Arabian to ride . At 18 she began working as a reporter for a newspaper published by her mother . She later ran a newspaper in Illinois with her first husband , Peter Miller , and then in 1949 she became the publisher of the conservative Washington Times @-@ Herald . That paper was owned by her uncle , the childless Robert McCormick , who viewed Tankersley as his heir until the two had a falling out over editorial control of the newspaper and her relationship with Garvin Tankersley , who became her second husband . After The Washington Post absorbed the Times @-@ Herald , she shifted to full @-@ time horse breeding . 
 Tankersley purchased her first purebred Arabian when she was 19 , and began her horse breeding operation , Al @-@ Marah Arabians , in Tucson , Arizona , in 1941 . As she moved across the US for her newspaper career , her horses and farm name went with her . She purchased her foundation sire Indraff in 1947 , while living in Illinois . Upon her move to Washington , DC , her Al @-@ Marah operation relocated to Montgomery County , Maryland , where it became the largest Arabian farm in the United States by 1957 . Tankersley returned to Tucson in the 1970s , where in addition to horse breeding , she created an apprenticeship program at Al @-@ Marah to train young people for jobs in the horse industry . She set up a second horse operation , the Hat Ranch , near Flagstaff , Arizona . Over her career she bred over 2 @,@ 800 registered Arabians and was one of the largest importers of horses from the Crabbet Arabian Stud in England . 
 Tankersley was a patron of many charities . Upon her death from Parkinson 's disease in 2013 she bequeathed the Tucson ranch to the University of Arizona and placed the Hat Ranch in a conservation trust . In her final years , she downsized her breeding operation to about 150 horses , and most remaining stock went to her son , Mark Miller , who moved the Al @-@ Marah Arabian farm name and horse operation to his home base near Clermont , Florida . 
 = = Background and personal life = = 
 Tankersley was described as having " inherited a love of politics and horses , not necessarily in that order . " She was born in Chicago , Illinois , on March 7 , 1921 . Her nickname " Bazy " came from how she pronounced the word " baby " when she was a toddler . Her father was Joseph Medill McCormick , part @-@ owner of the Chicago Tribune and a Senator for Illinois . Her mother , Ruth Hanna McCormick , was a daughter of Senator Mark Hanna of Ohio , and Ruth was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Illinois , serving in the 71st Congress from 1929 to 1931 as a progressive Republican . Bazy was the youngest of three children ; her siblings were Katherine ( " Katrina " ) , ( 1913 – 2011 ) and John ( 1916 – 1938 ) . 
 When Tankersley was four , her father died by suicide , believed to be partly attributed to his defeat for renomination in 1924 . Her mother remarried in 1932 to Albert Gallatin Simms , a congressman from New Mexico , lawyer , and banker . Tankersley spent part of her childhood on her mother 's Rock River dairy farm in Byron , Illinois , and later moved to the Southwest with her mother and stepfather , living at a ranch owned by Simms in Albuquerque , New Mexico , at first , and then moving in 1937 to the Trinchera Ranch , a 250 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 100 @,@ 000 ha ) property in Colorado that her mother had purchased . Tankersley attended a boarding school in Virginia and spent summers in the West . Her love of horses in general and the Arabian horse in particular came from those years : " Right away , my stepfather bought me a cow pony , and I wore it out ... So my mother got me a 3 ⁄ 4 Arabian that I couldn 't wear out . " She also showed horses on the East Coast in the 1930s . Her interest in Arabian horses led her to meet several major breeders of the time , including Jimmie Dean of Traveler 's Rest , Roger Selby , W. R. Brown and Carl Raswan . 
 Tankersley did not complete high school , and later said , " I virtually had no education . " Nonetheless , she studied genetics at Vermont 's Bennington College between 1939 and 1941 without completing a degree . While there , she gained some notoriety for genetic studies she conducted by raising fruit flies in her dorm room . In 2004 , she was awarded an honorary doctorate in Humane Letters from the University of Arizona . 
 Tankersley married Maxwell Peter Miller , Jr. in 1941 . She and Miller lived in Tucson for two years , where she developed a deep love for Arizona . They then moved to Chicago for a time , and subsequently to her mother 's Trinchera Ranch , which Bazy ran . Her mother died of pancreatitis on December 31 , 1944 , two months after a serious riding accident . The couple moved back to Illinois prior to relocating to Washington , DC . 
 Tankersley divorced Miller in 1951 to marry Garvin E. " Tank " Tankersley , an editor at the Washington Times @-@ Herald ten years older than she was . Garvin Tankersley had started his news career as a photographer . He was the managing editor when he left the paper in 1952 . The couple met while Bazy was running the Times @-@ Herald , but Robert McCormick , Bazy 's uncle and owner of the newspaper , considered Garvin Tankersley to be of unsuitable social status for Bazy because " Tank " was from a poor Lynchburg , Virginia , family . McCormick also disapproved of her divorce . Bazy saw the latter stance as hypocritical , given McCormick 's own complicated personal life . McCormick 's attempts to end the relationship ultimately prompted the couple to elope , and the Tankersleys were married for 45 years until Garvin 's death in 1997 . 
 Tankersley also dabbled in campaign politics . In 1948 she organized " Twenties for Taft " clubs to support the 1948 Presidential campaign of Robert A. Taft . She followed in the footsteps of her mother Ruth , who was the first woman to manage a presidential campaign , the 1940 and 1944 efforts of Thomas E. Dewey . Tankersley later described herself as a friend of Senator Joseph McCarthy , and in 1952 she advocated for the removal of Guy Gabrielson as chair of the Republican National Committee . Tankersley 's politics shifted dramatically during her life . Noting her earlier strong affiliation with the Republican party and conservative politics , The Washington Post reported that in 2008 she voted for Barack Obama . She also supported Democratic Arizona Representative Gabrielle Giffords . 
 From her two marriages , Tankersley had three biological children : a son , Mark Miller , born in 1947 , and two daughters , Kristie Miller ( born 1944 ) and Tiffany Tankersley ( 1970 – 2012 ) . She also had two stepchildren , Anne Tankersley Sturm and Garvin Tankersley , Jr . At the time of her death , she had six grandchildren and two great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = = Newspaper career = = 
 At 18 , Tankersley began working as a reporter for the Rockford Star , published by her mother . She gained experience running a newspaper in 1946 when she and Peter Miller purchased the LaSalle Post @-@ Tribune in LaSalle , Illinois , and the Peru News @-@ Herald , in Peru , Illinois , merging the papers to create the Daily News @-@ Tribune . In 1949 , her uncle , " Colonel " Robert R. McCormick , appointed her as the publisher of the family @-@ owned Washington Times @-@ Herald , an " isolationist and <unk> " paper known for sensationalism . McCormick had purchased it following the 1948 death of Eleanor Medill " Cissy " Patterson , his first cousin , and wanted Bazy to use the paper to create " an outpost of American principles " . Robert McCormick had no children of his own , " doted " on Bazy , and considered her the heir to his newspaper company . Tankersley was 28 at the time and was given the title of Vice @-@ President . 
 During Tankersley 's tenure as publisher of the Times @-@ Herald , the paper was embroiled in two controversies related to McCarthy , one involving attacks intended to help unseat Democratic Senator Millard E. Tydings in 1950 , and the other a lawsuit brought by Drew Pearson in 1951 over what Pearson viewed as a " conspiracy to smear his reputation " . In the Tydings case , a composite photograph created by Garvin made Tydings appear to be meeting with a communist party leader and was a factor in Tydings losing his race . It also brought Tankersley and her paper to the attention of the United States Senate , where the paper 's treatment of Tydings was viewed by a bipartisan Senate panel as a violation of " simple decency and honesty " and " a shocking abuse of the spirit and intent of the First Amendment of the Constitution " . The lawsuit was a $ 5 @.@ 1 million cause filed by Pearson against multiple defendants , including McCarthy and the Times @-@ Herald , Westbrook Pegler and Fulton Lewis , alleging they had " contrived ... to hold plaintiff up to public scorn and ridicule " . Pearson frequently criticized McCarthy , McCarthy criticized Pearson in a speech on the floor of the Senate , and the two men had even been in a physical altercation in December 1950 . The Times @-@ Herald ran articles critical of Pearson and in one case described Pearson as a " New Deal communist " , though it was asserted to have been a typographical error that should have read " columnist " . 
 Tankersley was publisher of the newspaper for only 19 months . By April 1951 , McCormick and Tankersley developed differences of opinions over both the newspaper and her relationship with Garvin Tankersley . " I understood when I went to the Times @-@ Herald I was to have full control . That control was not given me ... There is some difference in our political beliefs . I have broader Republican views than [ McCormick ] has . I am for the same people as the colonel , but I am for some more people . " McCormick also told her to decide between Garvin Tankersley and the Tribune Company . As a result , she resigned from the Times @-@ Herald . McCormick tried to run the paper himself , but lost money on the venture , and sold the Times @-@ Herald to The Washington Post in 1954 . When he announced the sale , one of the paper 's board members insisted that Tankersley be given a chance to purchase it , so McCormick gave her 48 hours to match the $ 10 million asking price . She could not raise the money do so . Upon the purchase of the Times @-@ Herald , the Post consolidated its market position by discontinuing the rival paper . Though estranged for many years , Bazy and McCormick reconciled prior to his death . 
 After the sale , Tankersley continued to write a newspaper column for the Post , but also began to raise Arabian horses as a full @-@ time occupation . 
 = = Horse breeding career = = 
 In her 70 @-@ year career as a horse breeder , Tankersley emphasized athleticism and disposition in her Arabians . She is recorded as the breeder of over 2 @,@ 800 registered Arabian foals in her lifetime , making her possibly the largest Arabian horse breeder in the world . At 19 , she purchased her first Arabian horse , a mare named <unk> , using money from the sale of another horse she had ridden while at boarding school in Virginia . She founded the Al @-@ Marah Arabian Horse Farm in 1941 on a 40 acres ( 16 ha ) property when she first lived in Tucson . Mark Miller stated that the name Al @-@ Marah was selected by Carl Raswan , who said it was Arabic for " a verdant garden oasis " . 
 Throughout her newspaper career , she moved the Al @-@ Marah farm name with her , to Illinois from 1944 to 1949 , and outside of Washington , DC , in Maryland , where she lived from 1949 to 1975 . Thereafter , she returned to Tucson permanently . She consistently used bloodlines from the Crabbet Arabian Stud , both via horses descended from early American importations as well as her own purchases from the estate of Lady Wentworth in the late 1950s . This unbroken line gives rise to Miller 's assertion that the Al @-@ Marah herd is the " oldest continuously @-@ bred , privately @-@ owned band of Arabians in the world " . 
 = = = Illinois = = = 
 While she lived in Illinois , in 1947 Tankersley purchased a stallion named Indraff for $ 10 @,@ 000 . Indraff was bred by Roger Selby of Ohio , and was a son of the Crabbet @-@ bred stallion * Raffles . He became her foundation herd sire , and sired 254 purebred Arabians over his lifetime . Tankersley 's first foundation mare , <unk> , was also of Crabbet bloodlines . By the time she left Illinois in 1949 , Tankersley owned 45 Arabians . 
 = = = Maryland = = = 
 Upon arrival in the Washington , DC , area , Tankersley recreated Al @-@ Marah Arabians in Montgomery County , near Washington . The Al @-@ Marah property in Potomac , Maryland , consisted of 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 610 ha ) , and for a time the Tankersleys also raised cattle there . The farm later moved to Barnesville , Maryland . Al @-@ Marah was not only a horse breeding facility ; the Tankersleys also hosted a number of political and social events . By 1957 , Al @-@ Marah was the largest Arabian horse farm in the United States . In that year , Lady Wentworth , owner of the Crabbet Arabian Stud , died and a number of horses were made available for sale . Tankersley bought 32 horses , the largest importation of Crabbet bloodstock to the United States in history . Lady Gladys Yule of the Hanstead Stud died within a few weeks of Lady Wentworth , and more top @-@ quality Arabians bred in the UK were put on the market . Tankersley purchased 14 Hanstead horses , the largest group from that estate sold to a single buyer . The arrival of the English horses was , in Tankersley 's view , an opportunity to preserve the core bloodlines tracing back to the horses originally gathered by Abbas Pasha . 
 Following these importations , Tankersley began to build her breeding program around two Crabbet sire lines , which she called the Double R cross . The first " R " stallion bloodline was that of * Raffles via his son Indraff , and the other " R " bloodline was that of Rissalix , a Crabbet @-@ bred stallion owned by Hanstead , and sire of three Crabbet mares Tankersley imported . The two stallion lines shared a common female line to <unk> ; she was the maternal granddam of Raffles and dam of Rissalix . In 1958 , Tankersley added to her Double R program when she leased and imported the Rissalix son * Count <unk> , a Hanstead @-@ bred horse . She owned him outright by 1959 . She later added another Rissalix son from Hanstead , * <unk> . In 1962 , she imported another Crabbet @-@ bred stallion , * Silver Vanity . She used her knowledge of genetics to institute a program of selectively inbreeding horses of bloodlines she considered of excellent quality . In her early years , she also looked for " golden crosses " , such as breeding offspring of Indraff to progeny of the Maynesboro @-@ bred stallion <unk> . 
 = = = Arizona = = = 
 Tankersley missed Arizona and wanted to return . " I would read Arizona Highways and cry , " she said . The Tankersleys moved back to Tucson and settled there permanently in 1975 . She designed many of the buildings on her Tucson property herself . She added new stallions to her herd with <unk> in the 1980s , and a * Silver Vanity descendant , SDA Silver Legend , in 2001 . Later in the 2000s , continuing her pattern of seeking " golden crosses " , she imported the stallion * <unk> Andronicus from Australia , an outcross for her intensely Crabbet @-@ based bloodlines . He became the 2006 National Champion Arabian Sport Horse , with the reserve champion AM Power Raid , a stallion from within her program . 
 Ultimately Tankersley operated two facilities in Arizona , her Al @-@ Marah Arabian Farm , a 110 @-@ acre ( 45 ha ) facility , and the Hat Ranch in Williams , near Flagstaff . The ranch property she purchased was the former Quarter Circle Double X Ranch and had been owned by Isabella Greenway , who had hosted Eleanor and Franklin Delano Roosevelt there . Tankersley , though identified as a Republican , displayed a photo of FDR at the ranch . The Hat Ranch was home to her young stock , allowing them to live free in an open range setting for two years before beginning training . It also served as the location for an annual think tank meeting for leaders of the Arabian Horse Association . The ranch also hosted the Straw Bale Forums where politicians , conservation leaders and academics could meet and discuss major issues . In 2003 , Tankersley was given the Arabian Breeder 's Association Lifetime Breeder 's Award . 
 = = = Apprenticeship program = = = 
 In 1973 , Tankersley created an apprenticeship program to train people both for work as employees at her ranch and for positions elsewhere in the horse industry . It grew into an intensive two @-@ year course that covered all aspects of the horse industry , provided participants college credit through Pima Community College , and was licensed by the US Department of Labor . She also donated horses to an Arabian breeding program at Michigan State University . Tankersley was noted throughout her career for her support of youth involvement with Arabian horses . 
 = = = Death and bequests = = = 
 Tankersley died on February 5 , 2013 . She had Parkinson 's disease . As she aged , Tankersley downsized her horse breeding operation from 350 horses to under 150 just prior to her death . Her son , Mark Miller , inherited many of her remaining horses and moved the Al @-@ Marah Arabian farm name and the horse operation to his home base near Clermont , Florida . Miller had run an entertainment venue called Arabian Nights , in Kissimmee , Florida , near Disney World , from 1988 until 2013 . He used Al @-@ Marah @-@ bred horses to present a 90 @-@ minute dinner show performance every night of the year that featured 50 Arabian horses . He closed the program in December 2013 to focus on the transplanted Al @-@ Marah herd on his Florida property . 
 The Tucson Al @-@ Marah Ranch , consisting of 85 acres ( 34 ha ) with an estimated worth of $ 30 million , was donated to the University of Arizona 's College of Agriculture as a working ranch . The Hat Ranch had a conservation easement with rights to more than 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 610 ha ) given to the Grand Canyon Trust to prevent further development . Tankersley 's longtime employee , Jerry Hamilton , will continue to manage the Hat Ranch for Miller as a home for young horses bred by Al @-@ Marah . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Tankersley once stated , " I come from that old @-@ fashioned background of noblesse oblige : If you 're born with money , you have an obligation to do good works for others . " She was also noted for a strong personality , as her friend , Hermann Bleibtreu of the University of Arizona explained : " If she was in any position of leadership or power , she was dominant . " She became a strong environmentalist , donating to conservation , environmental , and aquaculture research . She supported renewable energy , smart growth , and water conservation , and promoted reform of state land management . She also helped Defenders of Wildlife preserve the <unk> Canyon . Carl Hodges , of the University of Arizona 's Environmental Research Lab , stated , " she was as fine and intellectually competent an environmentalist as anybody I 'd ever known . " 
 Her financial support also went to charities for disabled children and assorted cultural activities . While in Maryland , she was involved in the creation of two private schools , the Primary Day School in Bethesda and the Barnesville School . In Tucson in 1980 she founded the St. Gregory College Preparatory School , now called The Gregory School . 
 Tankersley was a consistent advocate of the Arabian breed as a performance horse . In addition to the show ring and endurance riding , where she sometimes rode her own horses , she also tested her horses on the race track . In endurance , one of her horses won the Tevis Cup , and many others earned national championships over the course of her career . She was a major promoter of the Arabian Horse Association Sport Horse Nationals , and her horses acquired many championships at that competition . Further supporting Tankersley 's interest in sport horse disciplines , two of her horses , Al Marah <unk> and Al @-@ Marah Quebec , were the first Arabians accepted into the American Trakehner Registry . 
 Tankersley founded the Arabian Horse Owners Foundation ( AHOF ) in 1963 as a charity to fund the needs of the Arabian horse community . As of 2013 the most recent project of the foundation was to develop the Arabian section of the International Museum of the Horse at the Kentucky Horse Park in Lexington , Kentucky : the Al @-@ Marah Arabian Horse Galleries . Housed there are the collections of the AHOF and the Arabian Horse Trust . During the 2010 World Equestrian Games , which were held at the Kentucky Horse Park , the foundation sponsored and funded the exhibit " Gift of the Desert : The Art , History and Culture of the Arabian Horse " , bringing publicity to the Arabian breed during a major international equestrian competition . 
 = Mole Hunt = 
 " Mole Hunt " is the pilot episode of the animated comedy Archer . It was the first episode produced for the show and originally aired as a special sneak preview on September 17 , 2009 , but officially aired billed as the second episode on January 14 , 2010 , after the episode " Training Day " , which aired the same day . 
 In the episode , suave yet rude and belligerent spy Sterling Archer , prompted by questions regarding his expense account , breaks into the mainframe computer of his organization ISIS and inadvertently discovers a mole in the organization . The episode was written by Archer creator and co @-@ executive producer , Adam Reed , and directed by Mack Williams . It was produced at Floyd County Productions and animated at Radical Axis Studio in Atlanta , over the course of approximately one month . 
 The FX Network officially greenlit the series in August 2009 for six episodes — along with an additional four scripts — and planned on airing it alongside the fifth season of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia . However , because of production time constraints , the network was forced to push the official series run to January 2010 and changed Philadelphia 's paired series to The League , but aired the special sneak preview of this episode following the season premiere of Philadelphia on September 17 , 2009 , without promoting it or listing it on channel listings . 
 " Mole Hunt " attracted 1 @.@ 4 million viewers , with 950 @,@ 000 between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received generally favorable reviews from television critics , who noted that despite its raunchiness , it contained sharp dialogue and quick wit . H. Jon Benjamin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his performance as Archer in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sterling Archer , a suave agent from the spy organization ISIS , partakes in a torture training exercise , but causes it to be terminated after complaining about fellow agent Krenshaw 's fake @-@ torture tactics . The following day , while trying to get members of the organization to smell his dry cleaning due to its strangely curry @-@ like odor , he is called into the office of Malory , his mother and boss , where he is chastised for misusing his ISIS @-@ run expense account . He seeks assistance from Cyril , a member of the organization and his ex @-@ girlfriend 's current boyfriend , to clear his account , but he refuses . Attempts to get access to accounts with a made @-@ up " Mole Hunt " also meet with failure . Archer tries getting secretary Cheryl to leave the mainframe open that night , allowing Archer to easily slip in and clear his account , but she too denies his request . 
 Without any outside options , Archer is forced to manually break into ISIS 's mainframe . Though he initially thinks that this will be an extremely difficult task , he discovers that actual security is appallingly terrible and he easily figures out the password to hack his account after the first try . While trying to transfer all of his excess expenses from his account to Krenshaw , the agent enters the room and holds a gun up to Archer 's head . He reveals that he is actually a Russian spy named Kremenski and fears the agency has started to realize that he is a mole , so he plans on stealing $ 50 @,@ 000 from Archer 's account and fleeing from the country . Just then , however , Archer 's ex @-@ girlfriend — Agent Lana Kane — arrives and pulls a gun on Kremenski . She and Archer begin to argue and the mole is able to escape . 
 They pursue him outside , where Cyril and Malory have already arrived . Kremenski grabs Malory and threatens to kill her if they do not let him leave ; Archer tries to turn the tables on him by grabbing Lana and threatening to do the same , but Kremenski does not care about her well being . When Lana proclaims that Archer is getting an erection ( caused by picturing Malory being dead ) , Kremenski lets go of Malory in disgust , allowing Archer room to shoot him several times in his chest and once in the head , killing him . 
 Despite his previous actions of breaking into ISIS and hacking the mainframe , Archer is excused from his expenses after Cyril comes to the assumption that Kremenski had been stealing from Archer 's account the whole time . Malory notes that she would have known if there was a mole at ISIS , her earlier phone call shown to have been with Nikolai Jakov , head of the KGB . She changes the subject when questioned , and rather complains that someone left donuts on the floor attracting ants . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mole Hunt " was written by Archer creator and executive producer Adam Reed , while the series ' animation director Mack Williams directed it . Reed had been known for his creation of several Adult Swim animated television programs that he worked on with Archer co @-@ executive producer Matt Thompson , such as Sealab 2021 and Frisky Dingo . In 2008 , while walking along the Via de la Plata in Spain , Reed conceived the concept of Archer . Being a longtime " rabid fan " of FX Network and its original programming , he pitched the concept to the network and they accepted it , ordering six episodes of the series to be produced , along with an additional four scripts . 
 The pilot episode was produced at Reed 's Floyd County Productions studio in Atlanta , Georgia , over the course of approximately one month . Animation took place at Radical Axis Studio , also located in Atlanta . The artistic style of the series was designed to be as realistic as possible , so the character designers used as much reference material as they could . In order to create consistency between the separate animators , the artists take photographs of each actor and utilize Adobe Illustrator to trace over them as a base for each actor 's character . As Chad Hurd , the lead character designer for the series , noted , the end result resembles " a 1960 ’ s comic book come to life . " 
 FX originally planned on pairing the premiere of Archer with the fifth season of the network 's situation comedy It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia on Thursday nights in the fall . However , the network learned of the long , month @-@ long production length it would take to create the needed six episodes and realized that there was not enough time to have all of the episodes ready before Philadelphia began its new season . FX then decided to reschedule the series and start airing it in January 2010 , and replaced Archer with The League as Philadelphia 's companion show . Despite this , FX also decided to air a sneak airing of " Mole Hunt " following the season five premiere of Philadelphia on September 17 , 2009 . The network did not promote the sneak peek , nor did they feature it on any program listings , and merely informed select television critics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its official broadcast on FX on January 14 , 2010 , " Mole Hunt " , which aired as the second episode , attracted 1 @.@ 4 million viewers , with 950 @,@ 000 of them being within the key 18 – 49 demographics . This was a slight drop from the airing of the second episode " Training Day " , which aired the same day and attracted 1 @.@ 2 million viewers in between the ages of 18 and 49 , and 1 @.@ 8 million viewers in total . In 2010 , H. Jon Benjamin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for voicing Archer in the episode ; he lost , however , to Anne Hathaway for her performance in The Simpsons . 
 " Mole Hunt " received generally favorable reviews from television critics and media outlets . David Hinckley of the New York Daily News wrote that it " has a little ' Arrested Development ' and a little of ' The Office ' and maybe some ' Mad Men , ' " and recommended it to readers as one of the " new and good on TV this fall . " <unk> also commented favorably on the scene where Archer tries firing bullets at the door to the mainframe , only to a bullet ricochet and hit another agent , likening it to " Leslie Nielsen classics . " Matt Roush of TV Guide said that he " got many more sustained belly laughs " out of the episode than he did with the aforementioned Philadelphia premiere . 
 Writing for Variety , Brian Lowry opined that with " Mole Hunt , " Archer " gives FX something that the drama @-@ heavy channel hasn 't enjoyed for awhile — namely , a sharp comedic arrow in its quiver . " Jonathan Toomey of TV Squad applauded the character development in the " Mole Hunt , " as it " was fairly impressive . " Moreover , though , Toomey praised the dialogue , saying " The back and forth between Archer and Figgis and Archer and Lana were laugh out loud funny , " and noted that he wished he could incorporate the phrase " baby town frolics " from the episode into a conversation . Toomey did , however , say that he felt that the plotting was " a bit of a stretch , " and noted that the realization that Krenshaw was actually a Russian spy named Kremenski was " out of nowhere " and " a bit confusing . " 
 Whitney Matheson wrote for USA Today that " Mole Hunt " was " crude and offbeat " but " also very funny and a welcome addition to [ her ] DVR queue . " Maureen Ryan , writing for the Chicago Tribune , applauded both the voice cast and the " deadpan wit and surreal goofiness . " Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald , awarded the episode a " B + " calling it a " spy spoof [ that ] hits a bull ’ s @-@ eye with risque snark and one of the best vocal casts assembled for any animated series . " In an article for the San Francisco Chronicle , Tim Goodman called " Mole Hunt " a " brilliant pilot . " Rob Owen in his review for the series in the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said that though it was crude , the episode is " far more clever than last fall 's disappointing ' <unk> , ' " and that it " wins points with its observational humor about modern life and in its mocking of mundane workplace minutiae . " Aaron Barnhart wrote in his article for McClatchy News Service that it was " very funny . " 
 Other reviewers , however , have commented negatively towards " Mole Hunt . " Barry Garron of The Hollywood Reporter did not enjoy the episode , saying it " looks great but could be much funnier " and " rife with words that would be bleeped on broadcast channels and even most other basic @-@ cable outlets . " Rick Bentley of McClatchy Newspapers wrote , " Most of the comedy is milked from the personal relationships in the office , which start off tedious and only grow more annoying . The adult material – from nudity to words you haven 't heard on basic cable – comes across as merely an attempt to be shocking . It 's hard to be shocked when you are bored . " 
 On the season one DVD boxset , there is a bonus where this episode played out as normal with the character of Sterling Archer being replaced by a velociraptor replacing Archer 's dialogue with appropriate dinosaur noises . 
 = Zodiac ( film ) = 
 Zodiac is a 2007 American mystery @-@ thriller film directed by David Fincher . The screenplay by James Vanderbilt is based on the 1986 non @-@ fiction book of the same name by Robert Graysmith . The film stars Jake Gyllenhaal , Mark Ruffalo , and Robert Downey , Jr . , with Anthony Edwards , Brian Cox , Elias Koteas , Donal Logue , John Carroll Lynch , Dermot Mulroney and Chloë Sevigny in supporting roles . 
 Zodiac tells the story of the manhunt for a notorious serial killer who called himself the " Zodiac " and killed in and around the San Francisco Bay Area during the late 1960s and early 1970s , leaving several victims in his wake and taunting police with letters , blood stained clothing , and ciphers mailed to newspapers . The cases remain one of Northern California 's most infamous unsolved crimes . 
 Fincher , Vanderbilt and producer Bradley J. Fischer spent 18 months conducting their own investigation and research into the Zodiac murders . Fincher employed the digital Thomson Viper Filmstream camera to photograph the film . However , Zodiac was not shot entirely digitally ; traditional high @-@ speed film cameras were used for slow @-@ motion murder sequences . 
 Reviews for Zodiac were very positive , lauding the film 's writing , directing , acting and historical authenticity . The film grossed over $ 84 million worldwide against a production budget of $ 65 million . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On July 4 , 1969 , an unknown man attacks Darlene Ferrin and Mike Mageau with a handgun , at a lovers ' lane in Vallejo , California . Mageau survives ; Ferrin dies . 
 One month later , the San Francisco Chronicle receives encrypted letters written by the killer calling himself the " Zodiac " and taunting the police . Political cartoonist Robert Graysmith is not taken seriously by crime reporter Paul Avery or the editors and is excluded from the initial details about the killings despite his interest in the case . When the newspaper publishes the letters , a married couple is able to decipher one . At a local bar , Avery initially makes fun of Graysmith before they discuss the coded letters . Graysmith interprets the letter , which Avery finds helpful , and Avery begins sharing information . The Zodiac killer attacks law student Bryan Hartnell and Cecelia Shepard at Lake Berryessa in Napa County on September 27 , 1969 . Shepard dies two days later , and Hartnell survives . One of Graysmith 's insights about the letters is that the Zodiac 's reference to man as " the most dangerous animal of them all " is a reference to the story and film The Most Dangerous Game ( which features Count <unk> as a man who hunts live human prey ) . The fact that both <unk> 's surname and the name " Zodiac " start with a " Z " also seems significant . 
 Two weeks later , San Francisco taxicab driver Paul Stine is shot and killed in the city 's Presidio Heights district immediately after dropping the killer off . The Zodiac killer mails pieces of Stine 's blood stained shirt to the Chronicle , along with a taunting letter . San Francisco police detectives Dave Toschi and his partner Bill Armstrong are assigned to the Stine case , and work closely with Vallejo 's Jack Mulanax and Detective Ken <unk> in Napa . The killer , or someone posing as him , continues to toy with authorities by sending more letters and speaks on the phone with lawyer Melvin Belli when he makes an appearance on a television talk show . Avery and Graysmith form an alliance , delving deeper into the case as time permits . 
 In 1971 , Detectives Toschi , Armstrong , and Mulanax question Arthur Leigh Allen , a suspect in the Vallejo case . Allen behaves suspiciously during the interview . They ask to see his watch and notice that he wears a Zodiac brand wristwatch which has the same logo used by the killer . However , a handwriting expert insists that Allen did not write the Zodiac letters , even though Allen is said to be ambidextrous . Avery receives a letter threatening his life ; becoming increasingly paranoid , he turns to drugs and alcohol . At one point , he shares information with the Riverside Police Department , angering both Toschi and Armstrong . The case 's notoriety weighs on Toschi , who is bothered when Graysmith shows up at the theater where Toschi is watching a Hollywood film , Dirty Harry , loosely based on the Zodiac case , with his wife . 
 In 1978 , Avery leaves the Chronicle , and moves to the Sacramento Bee . Graysmith persistently contacts Toschi about the Zodiac murders , and eventually impresses the veteran detective with his knowledge of the case . While Toschi cannot directly give Graysmith access to the evidence , he provides contact names of other police departments in other counties where Zodiac murders occurred . Armstrong transfers from the San Francisco Police homicide division , and Toschi is demoted for supposedly forging a Zodiac letter . Graysmith continues his own investigation , which is profiled in the Chronicle , and he allows himself to be interviewed on television about his book @-@ in @-@ progress concerning the case . He begins receiving anonymous phone calls with heavy breathing . Because of his immersion in the case , Graysmith loses his job and his wife Melanie leaves him , taking their children with her . Graysmith acquires more information that points to Allen as the Zodiac , and although circumstantial evidence seems to indicate his guilt , the physical evidence , such as fingerprints and handwriting samples , do not implicate him . 
 In December 1983 , Graysmith tracks Allen down to a Vallejo Ace Hardware store , where he is employed as a sales clerk . The men have a brief encounter before Graysmith leaves . Eight years later , victim Mike Mageau meets with authorities and identifies Allen from a police mugshot . As the authorities walk by an airport book store , copies of Graysmith 's book Zodiac are shown . Final title cards inform the audience that Allen died in 1992 before he could be questioned further . A DNA test performed in 2002 on an archived autopsy sample did not match a partial DNA sample gathered from the postage stamp on one of the Zodiac letters , but this does not rule him out as a suspect . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jake Gyllenhaal as Robert Graysmith , a cartoonist for the San Francisco Chronicle . While researching the film , Fincher considered Gyllenhaal to play Graysmith . According to the director , " I really liked him in Donnie Darko and I thought , He ’ s an interesting double @-@ sided coin . He can do that naive thing but he can also do possessed . " To prepare for his role , Gyllenhaal met Graysmith and videotaped him in order to study his mannerisms and behavior . 
 Mark Ruffalo as SFPD Inspector David Toschi . Initially , Ruffalo was not interested in the project but Fincher wanted him to play Toschi . He met with the actor and told him that he was rewriting the screenplay . " I loved what he was saying and loved where he was going with it , " the actor remembers . For research , he read every report on the case and read all the books on the subject . Ruffalo met Toschi and found out that he had " perfect recall of the details and what happened when , where , who was there , what he was wearing . He always knew what he was wearing . I think it is seared into who he is and it was a big deal for him . " 
 Robert Downey , Jr. as Paul Avery , a journalist at the San Francisco Chronicle who covered the Zodiac killer case . 
 Anthony Edwards as SFPD Inspector William Armstrong . When casting the role , Fincher said he thought of Edwards because " I knew I needed the most decent person I could find , because he would be the balance of the movie . In a weird way , this movie wouldn ’ t exist without Bill Armstrong . Everything we know about the Zodiac case , we know because of his notes . So in casting the part , I wanted to get someone who is totally reliable . " 
 Brian Cox as Melvin Belli , a prominent defense attorney who received a letter from the Zodiac killer . 
 Elias Koteas as Sgt. Jack Mulanax , a police detective from Vallejo . 
 Donal Logue as Ken <unk> , a police detective in Napa . 
 John Carroll Lynch as Arthur Leigh Allen , a prime suspect in the case . Allen was never charged with these crimes . 
 Dermot Mulroney as Captain Marty Lee , Armstrong 's and Toschi 's supervisor in the SFPD homicide division . 
 Philip Baker Hall as Sherwood Morrill , a handwriting analyst . Baker Hall had previously appeared in the 2005 film The Zodiac . 
 Chloë Sevigny as Melanie Graysmith , Graysmith 's wife . 
 John Getz as Templeton Peck , Chronicle managing editor . 
 John Terry as Charles Thieriot , another editor at the Chronicle , who is involved with the first Zodiac letter . 
 Adam Goldberg as Duffy Jennings , a real life journalist who replaced Avery at the San Francisco Chronicle when the latter went to the San Francisco Examiner . He received a letter from the Zodiac in 1978 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 James Vanderbilt had read Robert Graysmith 's book Zodiac in 1986 while in high school . Years later , after becoming a screenwriter , he got the opportunity to meet Graysmith , and became fascinated by the folklore surrounding the Zodiac Killer . He then decided to try to translate the story into a script . Vanderbilt had endured bad experiences in the past , in which the endings of his scripts had been changed , and wanted to have more control over the material this time . He pitched his adaptation of Zodiac to Mike Medavoy and Bradley J. Fischer from Phoenix Pictures , by agreeing to write a spec script if he could have more creative control over it . 
 Graysmith first met Fischer and Vanderbilt at the premiere of Paul Schrader 's film , Auto Focus , which was based on Graysmith 's 1991 book about the life and death of actor Bob Crane . A deal was made and they optioned the rights to Zodiac and Zodiac Unmasked when they became available after languishing at another studio for nearly a decade . David Fincher was their first choice to direct based on his work on Seven . Originally , he was going to direct an adaptation of James Ellroy 's novel , The Black Dahlia ( later filmed by Brian De Palma ) , and envisioned a five @-@ hour , $ 80 million mini @-@ series with film stars . When that fell through , Fincher left that project and moved on to Zodiac . 
 Fincher was drawn to this story because he spent much of his childhood in San Anselmo in Marin County during the initial Zodiac murders . " I remember coming home and saying the highway patrol had been following our school buses for a couple weeks now . And my dad , who worked from home , and who was very dry , not one to soft @-@ pedal things , turned slowly in his chair and said : ' Oh yeah . There 's a serial killer who has killed four or five people , who calls himself Zodiac , who 's threatened to take a high @-@ powered rifle and shoot out the tires of a school bus , and then shoot the children as they come off the bus . ' " For Fincher as a young boy , the killer " was the ultimate boogeyman " . The director was also drawn to the unresolved ending of Vanderbilt 's screenplay because it felt true to real life , as cases are not always solved . 
 Fincher realized that his job was to dispel the mythic stature the case had taken on over the years by clearly defining what was fact and what was fiction . He told Vanderbilt that he wanted the screenplay re @-@ written but with additional research done from the original police reports . Fincher found that there was a lot of speculation and hearsay and wanted to interview people directly involved in the case in person to see if he believed what they were telling him . Fincher did this because he felt a burden of responsibility in making a film that convicted someone posthumously . 
 Fincher , Fischer and Vanderbilt spent months interviewing witnesses , family members of suspects , retired and current investigators , the only two surviving victims , and the mayors of San Francisco and Vallejo . Fincher said , " Even when we did our own interviews , we would talk to two people . One would confirm some aspects of it and another would deny it . Plus , so much time had passed , memories are affected and the different telling of the stories would change perception . So when there was any doubt we always went with the police reports " . During the course of their research , Fincher and Fischer hired Gerald McMenamin , an internationally known forensic linguistics expert and professor of linguistics at California State University Fresno , to analyze the Zodiac 's letters . Unlike document examiners in the 1970s , he focused on the language of the Zodiac and how he formed his sentences in terms of word structure and spelling . 
 Fincher and Fischer approached Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer to finance the film but talks with them fell through because the studio wanted the running time fixed at two hours and fifteen minutes . They then approached other studios , and Warner Bros. and Paramount Pictures agreed to share the production costs and were willing to be more flexible about the running time . The film was a tough sell to the studios and the executives were concerned about the heavy amount of dialogue and the lack of action scenes , as well as the inconclusive nature of the story arc . 
 When Dave Toschi met Fincher , Fischer and Vanderbilt , the director told him that he was not going to make another Dirty Harry ( which had been loosely based on the Zodiac case ) . Toschi was impressed with their knowledge of the case and afterwards , he realized that he had learned a lot from them . In addition , the Zodiac 's two surviving victims , Mike Mageau and Bryan Hartnell were consultants on the film . 
 Alan J. Pakula ’ s film All the President 's Men was the template for Zodiac as Fincher felt that it was also " the story of a reporter determined to get the story at any cost and one who was new to being an investigative reporter . It was all about his obsession to know the truth " . And like in that film , he did not want to spend time telling the back story of any of the characters , focusing , instead , on what they did in regards to the case . " 
 Vanderbilt was drawn to the notion that Graysmith went from a cartoonist to one of the most significant investigators of the case . He pitched the story as : " What if Garry Trudeau woke up one morning and tried to solve the Son of Sam " ? As he worked on the script , he became friends with Graysmith . The filmmakers were able to get the cooperation of the Vallejo Police Department ( one of the key investigators at the time ) because they hoped that the film would inspire someone to come forward with a crucial bit of information that might help solve this decades @-@ old cold case . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 While researching the film , Fincher considered Jake Gyllenhaal to play Robert Graysmith . According to the director , " I really liked him in Donnie Darko and I thought , ' He 's an interesting double @-@ sided coin . He can do that naive thing but he can also do possessed . ' " In preparation for his role Gyllenhaal met Graysmith , and videotaped him to study his mannerisms and behavior . 
 Initially , Mark Ruffalo was not interested in the project but Fincher wanted him to play David Toschi . He met with the actor and told him that he was rewriting the screenplay . " I loved what he was saying and loved where he was going with it " , the actor remembers . For research , he read every report on the case and read all the books on the subject . Ruffalo met Toschi and found out that he had " perfect recall of the details and what happened when , where , who was there , what he was wearing . He always knew what he was wearing . I think it is seared into who he is and it was a big deal for him . " 
 When casting the role of Inspector William Armstrong , Fincher said he thought of Anthony Edwards because " I knew I needed the most decent person I could find , because he would be the balance of the movie . In a weird way , this movie wouldn 't exist without Bill Armstrong . Everything we know about the Zodiac case , we know because of his notes . So in casting the part , I wanted to get someone who is totally reliable . " 
 Originally , Gary Oldman was to play Melvin Belli but " he went to a lot of trouble , they had appliances , but just physically it wasn 't going to work , he just didn 't have the girth " , Graysmith remembers . Brian Cox was cast instead . 
 The finished film has an unusually large cast of characters . In a May 15 , 2007 , film review , Variety noted , " Performances and casting are impeccable down to the smallest role . " 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Fincher decided to use the digital Thomson Viper Filmstream camera to shoot the film . Fincher had previously used the Thomson Viper over the past three years on commercials for Nike , Hewlett Packard , Heineken and Lexus which allowed him to get used to and experiment with the equipment . He was able to use inexpensive desktop software like Final Cut Pro to edit Zodiac . Fincher remarked in an interview , " <unk> almost always end up being disappointing , like the veil is pierced and you look at it for the first time and think , ' Oh my god , this is what I really have to work with . ' But when you can see what you have as it 's gathered , it can be a much less neurotic process . " 
 Zodiac was the first production to employ the Filmstream camera in its native Filmstream mode , which records an uncompressed video stream , allowing for exceptional quality . 
 Contrary to popular belief , Zodiac was not shot entirely digitally ; traditional high @-@ speed film cameras were used for slow @-@ motion murder sequences . Michael Mann 's Miami Vice , as well as his previous effort , Collateral ( a co @-@ production of Paramount and its current sister studio DreamWorks , and which also starred Mark Ruffalo ) , were also shot with the camera but mixed in other formats . Once shot on the Viper camera , the files were converted to <unk> HD 1080i and edited in Final Cut Pro . This was for editorial decisions only . During the later stages of editing the original uncompressed 1080p 4 : 4 : 4 RAW digital source footage was assembled automatically to maintain an up @-@ to @-@ date digital " negative " of the film . Other digital productions like Superman Returns or Apocalypto recorded to the HDCAM tape format . 
 Fincher had previously worked with director of photography Harris Savides on Seven ( he shot the opening credits ) and The Game . Savides loved the script but realized , " there was so much exposition , just people talking on the phone or having conversations . It was difficult to imagine how it could be done in a visual way . " Fincher and Savides did not want to repeat the look of Seven . The director 's approach to Zodiac was to create a look mundane enough that audiences would accept that what they were watching was the truth . The filmmakers also did not want to glamorize the killer or tell the story through his eyes . " That would have turned the story into a first @-@ person @-@ shooter video game . We didn 't want to make the sort of movie that serial killers would want to own , " Fincher said . 
 Savides ' first experience with the Viper Filmstream camera was shooting a Motorola commercial with Fincher . From there , he used it on Zodiac . Fincher wanted to make sure that the camera was more inclined towards film production so that the studio would be more comfortable about using it on a project with large budget . To familiarize himself with the camera , he " did as many things ' wrong ' as I possibly could . I went against everything I was supposed to do with the camera . " Savides felt comfortable with the camera after discovering its limitations . 
 Fincher and Savides used the photographs of William Eggleston , Stephen Shore 's work from the early Seventies , and actual photos from the Zodiac police files . The two men worked hard to capture the look and feel of the period as Fincher admitted , " I suppose there could have been more VW bugs but I think what we show is a pretty good representation of the time . It is not technically perfect . There are some flaws but some are intended . " The San Francisco Chronicle was built in the old post office in the Terminal Annex Building in downtown Los Angeles . A building on nearby Spring Street subbed for the Hall of Justice and the San Francisco Police Department . Production began on September 12 , 2005 . The filmmakers shot for five weeks in the San Francisco Bay Area and the rest of the time in Los Angeles , bringing the film in under budget , wrapping in February 2006 . The film took 115 days to shoot . 
 Some of the cast was not happy with Fincher 's exacting ways and perfectionism . Some scenes required upwards of 70 takes . Gyllenhaal was frustrated by the director 's methods and commented in an interview , " You get a take , 5 takes , 10 takes . Some places , 90 takes . But there is a stopping point . There 's a point at which you go , ' That 's what we have to work with . ' But we would reshoot things . So there came a point where I would say , well , what do I do ? Where 's the risk ? " Downey said , " I just decided , aside from several times I wanted to garrote him , that I was going to give him what he wanted . I think I 'm a perfect person to work for him , because I understand gulags " . Fincher responded , " If an actor is going to let the role come to them , they can 't resent the fact that I 'm willing to wait as long as that takes . You know , the first day of production in San Francisco we shot 56 takes of Mark and Jake – and it 's the 56th take that 's in the movie " . Ruffalo also backed up his director 's methods when he said , " The way I see it is , you enter into someone else 's world as an actor . You can put your expectations aside and have an experience that 's new and pushes and changes you , or hold on to what you think it should be and have a stubborn , immovable journey that 's filled with disappointment and anger . " 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Digital Domain handled the bulk of the film 's 200 + effects shots , including pools of blood and bloody fingerprints found at crime scenes . For the murder of Cecelia Shepard that took place at Lake Berryessa , blood seepage and clothing stains were added in post @-@ production . Fincher did not want to shoot the blood with practical effects because wiping everything down after every take would take too long so the murder sequences were done with CG blood . 
 CG was also used to recreate the San Francisco neighborhood at Washington and Cherry Streets where cab driver Paul Stine was killed . The area had changed significantly over the years and residents didn 't want the murder to be re @-@ created in their neighborhood , so Fincher shot the six @-@ minute sequence on a bluescreen stage . Production designer Donald Burt gave the visual effects team detailed drawings of the intersection as it was in 1969 . Photographs of every possible angle of the area were shot with a high @-@ resolution digital camera , allowing the effects crew to build computer @-@ based geometric models of homes that were then textured with period facades . 3 @-@ D vintage police motorcycles , squad cars , a firetruck and street lights were added to the final shot . 
 The film 's establishing shots of the Bay Area were created by Matte World Digital . The " helicopter shots " of the fireworks @-@ laden sky over Vallejo , the San Francisco waterfront , and the cab driving through San Francisco were CG , as was the shot looking down from the tower of the Golden Gate Bridge . 
 A time @-@ lapse sequence showing the building of the Transamerica Pyramid was a hybrid of 2D and 3D matte painting . The shot was initially created using reference photos of the Pyramid taken from the rooftop of Francis Ford Coppola 's Sentinel Building . MWD 's visual effects supervisor , Craig Barron , then researched the Pyramid 's original construction techniques for accuracy in the animated sequence . 
 The art for the Zodiac poster was also provided by Matte World Digital at Fincher 's request . Barron and his crew shot digital photos of the city skyline at night and composited them with a stock photo taken from the top of the Golden Gate Bridge . Layers of fog were added for the final image . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Originally , Fincher envisioned the film 's soundtrack to be composed of 40 cues of vintage music spanning the nearly three decades of the Zodiac story . With music supervisor George <unk> , the director searched for the right pop songs that reflected the era , including Three Dog Night 's cover of " Easy to Be Hard " because " it 's so ingrained in my psyche as being what the summer of ' 69 sounded like in northern California " . Initially , Fincher did not envision an original score for the film , but rather a tapestry of sound design , vintage songs of the period , sound bites and clips of KFRC ( an AM radio giant ) and " Mathews Top of the Hill Daly City " ( home of a prominent hi @-@ fi dealership of the time ) . The director told the studio that he did not need a composer and would buy various songs instead . They agreed , but as the film developed , sound designer and longtime Fincher collaborator Ren Klyce felt there were places in some scenes that could have used music . So , he inserted music from two of his favorite soundtracks , David Shire 's scores for The Conversation and All the President 's Men . Fincher was eager to work with Shire as All the President 's Men was one of his favorite films and one of the primary cinematic influences on Zodiac . He reminded Klyce of the deal that he had made with the studio . 
 Klyce got in touch with sound and film editor Walter Murch who worked on The Conversation and he got Klyce in touch with Shire . Fincher sent the composer a copy of the script and flew him in for a meeting and a screening in L.A. At first , Fincher only wanted 15 – 20 minutes of score and for it to be all based on solo piano . As Shire worked on it and incorporated textures of a Charles Ives piece called , " The Unanswered Question " and Conversation @-@ based cues , he found that he had 37 minutes of original music . The orchestra Shire assembled consisted of musicians from the San Francisco Opera and S.F. ballet . Shire said , " There are 12 signs of the Zodiac and there is a way of using atonal and tonal music . So we used 12 tones , never repeating any of them but manipulating them " . He used specific instruments to represent the characters : the trumpet for Toschi , the solo piano for Graysmith and the dissonant strings for the Zodiac killer . 
 = = Release = = 
 An early version of Zodiac ran three hours and eight minutes . It was supposed to be released in time for Academy Award consideration but Paramount felt that the film ran too long and asked Fincher to make changes . Contractually , he had final cut and once he reached a length he felt was right , the director refused to make any further cuts . To trim down the film to two hours and forty minutes , he had to cut a two @-@ minute blackout montage of " hit songs signaling the passage of time from Joni Mitchell to Donna Summer . " It was replaced with a title card that reads , " Four years later . " Another cut scene that test screening audiences did not like involved " three guys talking into a speakerphone " to get a search warrant as Toschi and Armstrong talk to SFPD Capt. Marty Lee ( Dermot Mulroney ) about their case against suspect Arthur Leigh Allen . Fincher said that this scene would probably be put back on the DVD . 
 To promote Zodiac , Paramount posted on light @-@ poles in major cities original sketches of the actual Zodiac killer with the words , " In theaters March 2nd , " at the bottom . The film was screened in competition at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival on May 17 , 2007 with Fincher and Gyllenhaal participating in a press conference afterwards . The director 's cut of Zodiac was given a rare screening at the Walter Reade Theater in New York City on November 19 , 2007 with Fincher being interviewed by film critic Kent Jones afterwards . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The DVD for Zodiac was released on July 24 , 2007 and is available widescreen or fullscreen , presented in anamorphic widescreen , and an English Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround track . There are no extra materials included . 
 According to David Prior , producer of the subsequent two @-@ disc special edition , the initial bare bones edition " was only reluctantly agreed to by Fincher because I needed more time on the bonus material . The studio was locked into their release date , so Fincher allowed that version to be released first . It had nothing to do with Fincher ' double dipping his own movie before it even makes it to stores ' and everything to do with buying more time for the special edition " . He stated that the theatrical cut would only be available on the single @-@ disc edition . Prior elaborated further : " Nobody wants fans feeling like they 're being taken advantage of , and I know that double @-@ dipping creates that impression . That 's why it was so important to me that consumers be told there was another version coming . In this case it really was a rock @-@ and @-@ a @-@ hard @-@ place situation , and delaying the second release was done strictly for the benefit of the final product ... But this is a very ambitious project , easily the most far @-@ reaching I 've ever worked on , and owing largely to studio <unk> that I can 't really elaborate on , I didn 't have enough time to do it properly . Thus Fincher bought me the extra time by agreeing to a staggered release , which I 'm very grateful for " . In its first week , rentals for the DVD earned $ 6 @.@ 7 million . 
 The two @-@ disc director 's cut DVD and HD DVD were released on January 8 , 2008 , with its UK release on Blu @-@ ray and DVD announced for September 29 , 2008 . Disc 1 features , in addition to a longer cut of the film , an audio commentary by Fincher and a second by Gyllenhaal , Downey , Fischer , Vanderbilt , and Ellroy . Disc 2 includes a trailer , a " Zodiac <unk> " documentary , a " Visual Effects of Zodiac " featurette , previsualization split @-@ screen comparisons for the Blue Rock Springs , Lake Berryessa , and San Francisco murder sequences , a " This is the Zodiac Speaking " featurette , and a " His Name Was Arthur Leigh Allen " featurette . Other extras apparently originally intended for the set , including TV spots and featurettes on " Digital <unk> " , " Linguistic Analysis " , " Jeopardy Surface : Geographic Profiling " ( Dr. Kim Rossmo 's geographic profile of the Zodiac ) , and " The Psychology of Aggression : Behavioral Profiling " ( Special Agent Sharon <unk> @-@ Hagan 's behavioral profile of the Zodiac ) were omitted . However , the latter three featurettes were made available on the film 's website . This new version runs five minutes longer than the theatrical cut . For Oscar contention , Paramount distributed the Director 's Cut DVD to the Producers Guild of America , the Writers Guild of America and the Screen Actors Guild , instead of the official release version . This was the first time that the studio had done this . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Opening in 2 @,@ 362 theaters on March 2 , 2007 , the film grossed US $ 13 @.@ 3 million in its opening weekend , placing second and posting a per @-@ theater average of $ 5 @,@ 671 . The film was outgrossed by fellow opener Wild Hogs and saw a decline of over 50 % in its second weekend , losing out to the record @-@ breaking 300 . It grossed $ 33 million in North America and $ 51 million in the rest of the world , bringing its current total to $ 84 million , above its estimated $ 65 million production budget . In an interview with Sight & Sound magazine , Fincher addressed the film 's low gross at the North American box office : " Even with the box office being what it is , I still think there 's an audience out there for this movie . Everyone has a different idea about marketing , but my philosophy is that if you market a movie to 16 @-@ year @-@ old boys and don 't deliver Saw or Seven , they 're going to be the most vociferous ones coming out of the screening saying ' This movie sucks . ' And you 're saying goodbye to the audience who would get it because they 're going to look at the ads and say , ' I don 't want to see some slasher movie . ' " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Overall , reviews of the film were highly positive . Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman awarded the film an " A " grade , hailing the film as a " procedural thriller for the information age " that " spins your head in a new way , luring you into a vortex and then deeper still . " Nathan Lee in his review for The Village Voice wrote that director Fincher 's " very lack of pretense , coupled with a determination to get the facts down with maximum economy and objectivity , gives Zodiac its hard , bright integrity . As a crime saga , newspaper drama , and period piece , it works just fine . As an allegory of life in the information age , it blew my mind . " Todd McCarthy 's review in Variety praised the film 's " almost unerringly accurate evocation of the workaday San Francisco of 35 – 40 years ago . Forget the distorted emphasis on hippies and flower @-@ power that many such films indulge in ; this is the city as it was experienced by most people who lived and worked there . " David Ansen , in his review for Newsweek magazine , wrote , " Zodiac is meticulously crafted – Harris Savides 's state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art digital cinematography has a richness indistinguishable from film – and it runs almost two hours and 40 minutes . Still , the movie holds you in its grip from start to finish . Fincher boldly ( and some may think perversely ) withholds the emotional and forensic payoff we 're conditioned to expect from a big studio movie . " 
 Some critics , however , were displeased with the film 's long running time and lack of action scenes . " The film gets mired in the inevitable red tape of police investigations , " wrote Bob Longino of The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , who also felt that the film " stumbles to a rather unfulfilling conclusion " and " seems to last as long as the Oscars . " Andrew Sarris of The New York Observer felt that " Mr. Fincher 's flair for casting is the major asset of his curiously attenuated return to the serial @-@ killer genre . I keep saying ' curiously ' with regard to Mr. Fincher , because I can 't really figure out what he is up to in Zodiac – with its two @-@ hour @-@ and @-@ 37 @-@ minute running time for what struck me as a shaggy @-@ dog narrative . " Christy Lemire wrote in the San Francisco Chronicle that " Jake Gyllenhaal is both the central figure and the weakest link ... But he 's never fleshed out sufficiently to make you believe that he 'd sacrifice his safety and that of his family to find the truth . We are told repeatedly that the former Eagle Scout is just a genuinely good guy , but that 's not enough . " 
 In the United Kingdom , Time Out magazine wrote , " Zodiac isn 't a puzzle film in quite that way ; instead its subject is the compulsion to solve puzzles , and its coup is the creeping recognition , quite contrary to the flow of crime cinema , of how fruitless that compulsion can be . " Peter Bradshaw in his review for The Guardian commended the film for its " sheer cinematic virility , " and gave it four stars out of five . In his review for Empire magazine , Kim Newman gave the film four out of five stars and wrote , " You 'll need patience with the film 's approach , which follows its main characters by poring over details , and be prepared to put up with a couple of rote family arguments and weary cop conversations , but this gripping character study becomes more <unk> suspenseful as it gets closer to an answer that can 't be confirmed . " Graham Fuller in Sight & Sound magazine wrote , " the tone is pleasingly flat and mundane , evoking the demoralising grind of police work in a pre @-@ feminist , pre @-@ technological era . As such , Zodiac is considerably more adult than both Seven , which <unk> over the macabre cat @-@ and @-@ mouse game it plays with the audience , and the macho brinkmanship of Fight Club . " Not all British critics liked the film . David Thompson in The Guardian felt that in relation to the rest of Fincher 's career , Zodiac was " the worst yet , a terrible disappointment in which an ingenious and deserving all @-@ American serial killer nearly gets lost in the meandering treatment of cops and journalists obsessed with the case . " 
 In France , Le Monde newspaper praised Fincher for having " obtained a maturity that impresses by his mastery of form , " while Libération described the film as " a thriller of elegance magnificently photographed by the great Harry Savides . " However , Le Figaro wrote , " No audacity , no invention , nothing but a plot which intrigues without captivating , disturbs without terrifying , interests without exciting . " 
 As of December 2015 , Zodiac has a rating of 89 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 233 reviews dubbing it " Certified Fresh " . Its consensus states " A quiet , dialogue @-@ driven thriller that delivers with scene after scene of gut @-@ wrenching anxiety . David Fincher also spends more time illustrating nuances of his characters and recreating the mood of the 70s than he does on gory details of murder . " . It also has a 78 metascore at Metacritic . 
 = = = = Top ten lists = = = = 
 Only two 2007 films ( No Country for Old Men and There Will Be Blood ) appeared on more critics ' top ten lists than Zodiac . Some of the notable top @-@ ten list appearances are : 
 In the British Film Institute 's 2012 Sight & Sound polls of the greatest movies ever made , three critics and one director – Bong Joon @-@ ho – named Zodiac one of their 10 favorite films . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Nominations 
 Cannes Film Festival 2007 : Palme d 'Or 
 Chicago Film Critics Association Awards 2007 : Best Director , Best Screenplay Adapted 
 Satellite Awards 2007 : Best Supporting Actor ( Brian Cox ) , Best Cinematography ( Harris Savides ) , Best Adapted Screenplay ( James Vanderbilt ) 
 Teen Choice Awards 2007 : Choice Movie Actor : Horror / Thriller ( Jake Gyllenhaal ) 
 Toronto Film Critics Association Awards 2007 : Best Director ( David Fincher ) , Best Picture 
 Online Film Critics Society Awards 2007 : Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Editing 
 World Soundtrack Awards 2007 : Best Original Soundtrack of the Year ( David Shire ) 
 Saturn Award 2008 : Best Action or Adventure Film 
 Bodil Awards 2008 : Best American Film 
 Empire Awards 2008 : Best Director ( David Fincher ) , Best Film , Best Thriller 
 Edgar Allan Poe Awards 2008 : Best Motion Picture Screenplay ( James Vanderbilt ) 
 Golden Trailer Awards 2008 : Best Teaser Poster 
 London Critics Circle Film Awards 2008 : Director of The Year ( David Fincher ) , Film of The Year 
 USC Scripter Award 2008 : James Vanderbilt ( screenwriter ) , Robert Graysmith ( author ) 
 Visual Effects Society Awards 2008 : Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Motion Picture and Outstanding Created Environment in a Live Action Motion Picture 
 Writers Guild of America Awards 2007 : Best Adapted Screenplay ( James Vanderbilt and Robert Graysmith ) from Zodiac 
 = Madagascar Plan = 
 The Madagascar Plan was a proposal by the Nazi German government to relocate the Jewish population of Europe to the island of Madagascar . Franz Rademacher , head of the Jewish Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the German government , proposed the idea in June 1940 , shortly before the Fall of France . The proposal called for the handing over of control of Madagascar , then a French colony , to Germany as part of the French surrender terms . 
 The idea of deporting Polish Jews to Madagascar was investigated by the Polish government in 1937 , but the task force sent to evaluate the island 's potential determined that only 5 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 families could be accommodated , or even as few as 500 families by some estimates . As efforts by the Nazis to encourage emigration of the Jewish population of Germany before World War II were only partially successful , the idea of deporting Jews to Madagascar was revived by the Nazi government in 1940 . 
 Rademacher recommended on 3 June 1940 that Madagascar should be made available as a destination for the Jews of Europe . With Adolf Hitler 's approval , Adolf Eichmann released a memorandum on 15 August 1940 calling for the resettlement of a million Jews per year for four years , with the island governed as a police state under the SS . They assumed that many Jews would succumb to its harsh conditions should the plan be implemented . The plan was not viable due to the British naval blockade . It was postponed after the Axis lost the Battle of Britain in September 1940 , and was permanently shelved in 1942 with the commencement of the Final Solution , towards which it had functioned as an important psychological step . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In the late 1800s and early 1900s there were a number of resettlement plans for European Jews that were precursors to the Madagascar Plan . Paul de Lagarde , an Orientalist scholar , first suggested evacuating the European Jews to Madagascar in his 1878 work Deutsche Schriften ( " German Writings " ) . Members of the Zionist movement in 1904 – 1905 seriously debated the British Uganda Programme , by which Russian Jews , who were in immediate danger from ongoing pogroms , would be settled in what today is Kenya . The plan was later rejected as unworkable by the Zionist Congress . Adherents of <unk> split off from the main Zionist movement and continued to search for a location where Jews might settle and create a state , or at least an autonomous area . The idea of Jewish resettlement in Madagascar was promoted by British antisemites Henry Hamilton Beamish , Arnold Leese , and others . With the cooperation of the French , the Polish government commissioned a task force in 1937 to examine the possibility of deporting Polish Jews to the island . The head of the commission , Mieczysław <unk> , felt the island could accommodate 5 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 families , but Jewish members of the group estimated that only 500 or even fewer families could safely be accommodated . 
 = = In Nazi Germany = = 
 Racism and antisemitism were basic tenets of the Nazi Party and the Nazi government . Discrimination and violent attacks against Jews began immediately after the seizure of power in 1933 . Violence and economic pressure were used by the Nazis to encourage Jews to voluntarily leave the country . By 1939 , around 250 @,@ 000 of Germany 's 437 @,@ 000 Jews had emigrated to the United States , Argentina , the United Kingdom , Palestine , and other countries . 
 The Nazi leadership seized on the idea of deporting the remaining German Jews overseas . Barren , unproductive lands were viewed as appropriate destinations as this would prevent the deportees from flourishing in their new location . In his May 1940 memorandum to Hitler , Concerning the Treatment of the Alien Population in the East , Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler declared that he hoped to see " the term ' Jew ' [ ... ] completely eliminated through the massive immigration of all Jews to Africa or some other colony " . 
 = = = Planning begins = = = 
 Initial discussions began to take place in 1938 among Nazi ideologues such as Julius Streicher , Hermann Göring , Alfred Rosenberg , and Joachim von Ribbentrop , . Ten per cent of Jews under German jurisdiction by that date were Polish nationals . Józef Lipski , the Polish ambassador to Germany , expressed his country 's reluctance to take them back , and the Polish government decreed that Polish passport holders would not be permitted to return except under specific conditions . When Ribbentrop raised the matter with French foreign minister Georges Bonnet in December of that year , Bonnet expressed French reluctance to receive more German Jews and inquired if measures could be taken to prevent their arrival . France itself was contemplating how to deport sone 10 @,@ 000 Jews and considered whether Madagascar might be an appropriate destination . Planning for German deportations to Madagascar formally began in 1940 . Franz Rademacher , recently appointed head of the Jewish Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , forwarded on 3 June to his superior , the diplomat Martin Luther , a memorandum on the fate of the Jews . " The desirable solution is : all Jews out of Europe , " said Rademacher . He briefly considered Palestine as a destination , but deemed it unsuitable , as he considered it undesirable that a strong Jewish state should be created in the Middle East . As well , Palestine was at the time under British control . Rademacher recommended that the French colony of Madagascar should be made available as a destination for the Jews of Europe as one of the terms of the surrender of France , which the Germans had invaded on 10 May 1940 . The resettled Jews , noted Rademacher , could be used as hostages to ensure " future good behaviour of their racial comrades in America " . The plan was developed by Referat D III of the Abteilung Deutschland . 
 Luther broached the subject with Foreign Minister Ribbentrop , who was simultaneously developing a similar scheme . By 18 June , Hitler and Ribbentrop spoke of the Plan with Italian leader Benito Mussolini as a possibility that could be pursued after the defeat of France . Once he learned of the plan , SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Reinhard Heydrich , chief of the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) , insisted that Ribbentrop relinquish any future responsibility for the Plan to that office . As Heydrich had been appointed by Göring in January 1939 to oversee Jewish evacuation from German @-@ occupied territory , the Jewish question was hence under his purview . Adolf Eichmann , head of the RSHA Sub @-@ Department IV @-@ B4 , which dealt with Jewish affairs and evacuation , soon became involved . On 15 August , he released a memorandum titled Reichssicherheitshauptamt : <unk> Projekt ( Reich Main Security Office : Madagascar Project ) , calling for the resettlement of a million Jews per year for four years and abandoning the idea of retaining any Jews in Europe . The RSHA , he emphasized , would control all aspects of the program . While Rademacher called for the colony to be under German control but self @-@ governing under Jewish administration , Eichmann made it plain that he intended for the SS to control and oversee every aspect of life on the island , which they would govern as a police state . 
 Most Nazi bureaux , including the Foreign Office , the Security Police , and the <unk> pinned their hopes on the plan as the last chance to " solve the Jewish problem " through emigration . In particular , Hans Frank , governor of the General Government ( the occupied portion of Poland ) , viewed the forced resettlement to Madagascar as being preferable to the heretofore piecemeal efforts at deportation into Poland . As of 10 July , deportations into Poland were cancelled and construction of the Warsaw ghetto was halted , since it appeared to be unnecessary . 
 = = = Planning continues = = = 
 Rademacher envisioned the founding of a European bank that would ultimately liquidate all European Jewish assets to pay for the plan . This bank would then play an intermediary role between Madagascar and the rest of the world , as Jews would not be allowed to interact financially with outsiders . Göring 's office of the Four Year Plan would oversee the administration of the plan 's economics . 
 Additionally , Rademacher foresaw roles for other government agencies . Ribbentrop 's Foreign Affairs Ministry would negotiate terms with the French for the handover of Madagascar to Germany . It would also play a part in crafting other treaties to deal with Europe 's Jews . Its Information Department , along with Joseph Goebbels and his Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda , would control the flow of information at home and abroad . Viktor Brack , a division chief in the Chancellery of the Führer , would oversee transportation . The SS would undertake the expulsion of the Jews from Europe and govern the island as a police state . The Nazis expected that after the invasion of the United Kingdom in Operation Sea Lion that they would commandeer the British merchant fleet to transport the Jews to Madagascar . Many deportees were expected to perish in the harsh conditions or die at the hands of the SS . 
 = = = Plan abandoned = = = 
 With the failure to defeat the Royal Air Force in the Battle of Britain , the proposed invasion of the UK was postponed indefinitely on 17 September 1940 . This meant the British merchant fleet would not be at Germany 's disposal for use in evacuations , and planning for the Madagascar proposal stalled . In late August 1940 , Rademacher entreated Ribbentrop to hold a meeting at his ministry to begin drawing up a panel of experts to consolidate the plan . Ribbentrop never responded . Likewise , Eichmann 's memorandum languished with Heydrich , who never approved it . Establishment of ghettos in Warsaw and other cities in Poland resumed in August 1940 . Hitler continued to mention the plan until February 1942 , when the idea was permanently shelved . British Empire forces took the island from Vichy France in the Battle of Madagascar in November 1942 and control was transferred to the Free French . 
 At the end of 1940 , Hitler asked Himmler to draft a new plan for the elimination of the Jews of Europe , and Himmler passed along the task to Heydrich . His draft proposed the deportation of the Jews to the Soviet Union via Poland . The later Generalplan Ost ( General Plan for the East ) , prepared by Professor Konrad Meyer and others , called for deporting the entire population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia , either for use as slave labour or to be murdered after the Soviet defeat . After the Axis failure in the Battle of Moscow and the entry of the United States into the war in December 1941 , Hitler resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated immediately rather than after the war , which now had no end in sight . Since transporting masses of people into a combat zone would be impossible , Heydrich decided that the Jews would be killed in extermination camps set up in occupied areas of Poland . The total number of Jews murdered during the resulting Holocaust is estimated at 5 @.@ 5 to 6 million people . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = M @-@ 24 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 24 is a state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan that extends 75 @.@ 691 miles ( 121 @.@ 813 km ) through Southeast Michigan and The Thumb , from northeast Auburn Hills to Unionville . It starts at an interchange with Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and ends where it merges with M @-@ 25 . While the M @-@ 24 designation is similar to that of US Highway 24 ( US 24 ) which has a northern terminus located only a few miles from the southern terminus of M @-@ 24 , M @-@ 24 was never part of US 24 . 
 The first M @-@ 24 in Michigan was replaced by M @-@ 20 when US 10 replaced the original M @-@ 20 in 1926 . A 1936 bypass of downtown Pontiac resulted in the creation of M @-@ 24A which later became BUS M @-@ 24 in 1940 . An extension in 1997 moved the northern end of M @-@ 24 northward from Caro to Unionville , replacing a section of M @-@ 138 in the process . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 24 begins a hundred feet south of an overpass that is part of a double trumpet interchange with I @-@ 75 in Auburn Hills . The interchange also connects with an entrance into The Palace of Auburn Hills , home of the NBA 's Detroit Pistons , and a variety of electronic signs are contained in the area to indicate the status of access to the entrance . The roadway is a continuation of Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) that travels through Pontiac . This section of the highway dedicated to William Davidson , former owner of the Pistons , in legislation signed by Michigan Governor Rick Snyder in May 2011 . 
 The section of M @-@ 24 from its southern terminus in Auburn Hills north to the village of Oxford is one of the busiest stretches of road in the state in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . Near The Palace of Auburn Hills , 50 @,@ 600 vehicles used the roadway on average in 2007 . The road is a standard Michigan expressway design , with at @-@ grade intersections , traffic signals , and Michigan <unk> . M @-@ 24 continues north through the Bald Mountain Recreation Area and along the eastern shore of Lake Orion in the village of Lake Orion . This expressway continues a few miles north of the Lapeer County line , where the highway becomes a two @-@ lane highway for a few miles , before returning to expressway from Metamora to I @-@ 69 . South of Metamora , M @-@ 24 runs parallel to the former right @-@ of @-@ way for the Michigan Central Railroad north into the city of Lapeer . 
 M @-@ 24 continues north from Lapeer running west of Barnes Lake and east of the community of <unk> just south of the M @-@ 90 junction . South of the Tuscola County line , the trunkline passes the <unk> Golf Club and crosses the Pere Marquette Railroad before turning west along Saginaw Road into the community of Mayville and turning north along Mertz Road . South of Caro , M @-@ 24 meets M @-@ 46 . Once past Frank Street in Caro , M @-@ 24 becomes Ellington Street . M @-@ 24 then comes to meet M @-@ 81 in Caro , where the highway becomes Cleaver Road . M @-@ 24 then jogs west along Biebel Road and then north along Unionville Road past a junction with M @-@ 138 to end in Unionville at M @-@ 25 . 
 M @-@ 24 is also known locally as Lapeer Road in several areas , including Orion Township , Oxford Township , and Metamora . In the Village of Oxford , it is also known as Washington Street . In downtown Lapeer , it is known as Main Street , and north of Mayville as Mertz Rd . In the Unionville area , it is also known as Unionville Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original designation = = = 
 In 1919 , the first M @-@ 24 was designated along today 's M @-@ 20 . From Midland east , M @-@ 24 continued along today 's M @-@ 47 . When the U.S. Highway System was created , US 10 replaced M @-@ 20 and M @-@ 20 in turn replaced the first M @-@ 24 . The M @-@ 24 designation was then applied to the current routing . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 The current designation was assigned in two pieces , Pontiac to Lapeer and Vassar to Bay City . The two sections would be joined in 1927 by a concurrency along M @-@ 21 and M @-@ 15 . This arrangement lasted until a permanent solo routing was created in 1930 . The Pontiac area saw a rerouting of M @-@ 24 to an eastern bypass of town in 1936 . The former routing in town became M @-@ 24A . It would be redesignated as BUS M @-@ 24 in 1940 when the State Highway Department debuted business routes in Michigan . The northern terminus was moved to M @-@ 81 in Caro in 1942 , and the southern terminus was shifted to the present location in 1963 . Prior to a 1997 extension , M @-@ 24 ended at M @-@ 81 in Caro ; now it continues up to M @-@ 25 in Unionville . 
 From 2006 to 2008 , M @-@ 24 was expanded to a boulevard between Metamora and Lapeer . There is still a two lane section between the Lapeer / Oakland County Line and Metamora that is planned to be upgraded in the near future . The construction has been delayed because of development close to the highway near Metamora . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mark Speight = 
 Mark Warwick Fordham Speight ( 6 August 1965 – 7 April 2008 ) was an English television presenter , best known as the host of children 's art programme SMart . Speight grew up in Tettenhall , Wolverhampton , and left school at 16 to become a cartoonist . He took a degree in commercial and graphic art and , while working in television set construction , heard of auditions for a new children 's art programme . Speight was successful in his audition and became one of the first presenters of SMart , working on it for 14 years . 
 Speight was also a presenter on See It Saw It , where he met his future fiancée , actress and model Natasha Collins . He took part in live events , such as Rolf on Art and his own Speight of the Art workshops for children . He was involved in charity work ; he became the president of the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign 's Young Pavement Artists Competition , and was a spokesperson for ChildLine . 
 In January 2008 , Speight found Collins 's body in the bath of their shared London flat . He was arrested on suspicion of her murder , but not charged with any offence . An inquest later determined that Collins had died of a drug overdose and severe burns from hot water . In April that year , Speight was reported missing and was later discovered to have taken his own life by hanging himself near Paddington station . Two suicide notes were discovered , describing how he could no longer live without Collins . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Speight was born in Seisdon , Staffordshire , and grew up in Tettenhall , Wolverhampton . Speight had two siblings , Tina @-@ Louise Richmond ( née Speight ) , and Jason Speight . His father , Oliver Warwick Speight , is a property developer , and his mother , Jacqueline Fordham Speight ( née Parker ) , was an art teacher . Jacqueline died on 5 September 2008 , aged 62 , from a stroke allegedly brought on by the stress of her son 's death . Speight attended the independent school Tettenhall College for a year , before moving to state comprehensive Regis School , now known as King 's C.E. School , also in Tettenhall , at the age of 12 . Speight stated in an interview he was a slow learner at school , with a short attention span , and art was a way for him to communicate . He said he did " very badly " because he was a victim of bullying , and the " daily ordeal for two years " forced him to become the " class joker " . Speight left aged 16 and went on to attend Bilston Art School , where he took a degree in commercial and graphic art . 
 = = Career = = 
 He intended to become a cartoonist , but Speight eventually became a TV presenter following a job painting the set of a television production . He auditioned for SMart and , following a successful interview where he met future co @-@ presenter Jay Burridge , he went on to present SMart from its first edition in 1994 . Speight became close friends with Burridge , whose art studio in West London was used to create all of the art content for SMart ; Burridge noted : " We would bounce ideas and jokes off each other all day until we had developed an almost telepathically linked knowledge of what made each other laugh . " Speight and Burridge were joined by third presenter Zoë Ball , who was replaced first by Josie d 'Arby , and then Kirsten O 'Brien and <unk> Botham . With Burridge O 'Brien and Botham Speight presented the spin @-@ off shows SMart on the Road , and <unk> and participated in various live events . He achieved further fame while starring in the BAFTA @-@ nominated ITV Saturday morning show Scratchy & Co. from 1995 until 1998 . 
 Speight worked on numerous other shows , ranging from children 's television to adult factual programmes . His children 's television credits include playing the Abominable No Man in Timmy Mallett 's Timmy Towers and presenting Beat the <unk> , Name That Toon , On Your Marks , <unk> Out , and History Busters , the last of which won a Royal Television Society Award . Speight also worked on This Morning , The Heaven and Earth Show , The Big Breakfast and was a contestant in ITV 's Celebrity Wrestling . Speight also played the king on children 's programme See It Saw It , where he met Natasha Collins . Collins was seriously injured after being hit by a car in 2001 , and had to leave See It Saw It . Speight began dating her in 2003 , and they became engaged in Barbados in 2005 . They planned to get married in fancy dress and Speight joked that the wedding might feature monkeys , his favourite animal . 
 In 2004 , Speight participated in Rolf Harris 's Rolf on Art , for which a giant reproduction of John Constable 's The Hay Wain was created in Trafalgar Square . In 2005 , he was involved in a similar project where Hans Holbein 's portrait of Henry VIII and Leonardo da Vinci 's Mona Lisa were both reconstructed , the latter in the grounds of Edinburgh Castle . Speight had planned a project involving a trip to Borneo in March 2008 to train abused orangutans not to fight each other , but this never took place . Speight regularly toured with Speight of the Art , a series of art workshops he ran for children , and during the Christmas period , he performed in pantomime as " Buttons " in Cinderella at the Watersmeet , Rickmansworth , in December 2007 . 
 Speight was involved in charity work . He was President of the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign 's Young Pavement Artists Competition , originally a one @-@ off , year @-@ long project that ended up lasting eight years , and he was a spokesperson for ChildLine . In 2007 he was the presenter of the Müller Big Art Project for Comic Relief in Trafalgar Square . 
 = = Arrest and disappearance = = 
 On the afternoon of 3 January 2008 , Speight called emergency services after waking up to discover Natasha Collins 's body in the bath at their St John 's Wood flat , in north @-@ west London . Speight told police that he and Collins had spent the previous evening " partying " , drinking wine and vodka , and taking cocaine and sleeping pills . Speight was questioned by police and was subsequently arrested on suspicion of murder and of supplying class A drugs , but was released on bail until the first week of February . Because of this , the BBC cancelled the Saturday repeat edition of SMart . An inquest , which opened on 8 January 2008 , heard that the death was not thought to be suspicious but should be " subject to further investigation " . At that point , police were awaiting results of toxicology tests after a postmortem examination was inconclusive . The BBC cancelled repeat broadcasts of SMart and <unk> until further notice , and on 28 February Speight announced he was quitting SMart , because the " tragic loss " of Collins had left him unable to continue with the show . Speight denied any involvement with Collins 's death , and on 19 March it was reported that the police were no longer considering Speight as a suspect . 
 In April 2008 , the coroner recorded a verdict of death by misadventure in relation to Collins . The cause of death was " cocaine toxicity and immersion in hot water " , according to the consultant pathologist . The inquest found that she had taken " very significant " amounts of cocaine with sleeping pills and vodka , and that she had suffered 60 % burns to her body , including her tongue . The coroner noted that at some stage in the night after both Speight and Collins had gone to bed , Collins got up to have a bath . He said that it was " more likely than not " that a heart problem had caused Collins to fall unconscious while the hot tap was running . Following Collins 's death , Speight moved in with Collins 's mother . 
 Speight planned to meet with Collins 's mother at Covent Garden for coffee on the afternoon of 7 April . He was dropped off at Wood Green tube station that morning , but never appeared at the planned meeting . Speight missed an appointment with a counsellor , but this was because of confusion over dates . Two police officers spoke to him , as he appeared " vacant " , " distracted " and " deep in thought " , but he refused their help . He was captured on CCTV in the afternoon taking money from a cash machine at Queen 's Park station , and he subsequently boarded a southbound Bakerloo line train . He was reported missing the following day by family and friends , and his mother and the mother of Natasha Collins made a public appeal in which they urged him to make contact . Speight 's father also appealed for him to get in touch . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On 13 April , Speight 's body was discovered hanging from the roof of MacMillan House , adjacent to London 's Paddington Station , hidden from public view , six days after he died . The discovery was made by railway workers at 10 : 00 am , and British Transport Police confirmed that the body was Speight 's on 14 April 2008 . An inquest into his death opened on 16 April 2008 , and a post @-@ mortem confirmed the cause of death as hanging . It was then adjourned until 20 May . The police said Speight may have used a sixth floor fire exit to get to the area where he was found . 
 The report of Speight 's death on the BBC 's children 's news programme Newsround provoked complaints that it upset young viewers . The BBC decided to avoid using the word " suicide , " and instead Newsround reported that " police don 't think he was killed by anyone else . " 
 Speight 's funeral was held on 28 April at St Michael and All Angels Church in Tettenhall and hundreds went to pay their respects . The service included a performance by the choir from Tettenhall College , Speight 's former school , and his coffin was carried out of the church accompanied by the theme tune of SMart . He was later cremated and his ashes were interred in Tettenhall . In May , the inquest resumed and determined that Speight was deeply depressed by his fiancee 's death . It was also disclosed that suicide notes had been found , one in his left pocket , and one addressed to his parents in his diary at his home . The notes described how he could not " contemplate life without [ Collins ] " . The coroner , Dr Paul <unk> , said there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death . In May 2008 , Speight 's father created a foundation , Speight of the Art , or <unk> of the Art and launched it at a memorial service that took place on what would have been his 43rd birthday , 6 August 2008 , at St Paul 's Church in Covent Garden , London . 
 = Dr. Bonham 's Case = 
 Thomas Bonham v College of Physicians , commonly known as Dr. Bonham 's Case or simply Bonham 's Case , was decided in 1610 by the Court of Common Pleas in England under Sir Edward Coke , the court 's Chief Justice . Coke said that " in many cases , the common law will control Acts of Parliament " , and explained why he thought so . Coke 's meaning has been disputed over the years ; according to one interpretation , Coke intended the kind of judicial review that would later develop in the United States , whereas other scholars contend that Coke only meant to construe a statute without challenging Parliamentary sovereignty . If Coke intended the former , then he may have eventually changed his view . This statement by Coke is sometimes considered obiter dicta , rather than part of the rationale of the case . 
 Whatever Coke 's meaning , after an initial period when his decision enjoyed some support ( but during which no statutes were declared void ) , Bonham 's Case was thrown aside in favour of the growing doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty . In one of the most prominent early treatises supporting that doctrine , William Blackstone wrote that Parliament is the sovereign law @-@ maker , preventing the common law courts from throwing aside or reviewing statutes in the fashion Coke suggested . Parliamentary sovereignty is now the accepted judicial doctrine in the legal system of England and Wales . Bonham 's Case was met with mixed reactions at the time , with King James I and the Lord Chancellor , Lord Ellesmere , both deeply unhappy with it ; it has been suggested as one of the reasons for Coke 's dismissal from the Common Pleas in 1613 . Academics in the 19th and 20th centuries have been scarcely more favourable , calling it " a foolish doctrine alleged to have been laid down extra @-@ judicially " , and simply an " abortion " . 
 In the United States , Coke 's decision met with a better reaction . During the legal and public campaigns against the writs of assistance and Stamp Act of 1765 , Bonham 's Case was given as a justification for nullifying the legislation , although by 1772 Blackstone 's views gained acceptance . Marbury v. Madison , the American case which in 1803 formed the basis for the exercise of judicial review in the United States under Article III of the Constitution , used the words " void " and " repugnant " , although Marbury 's usage was somewhat different from Coke 's usage . Academics have argued that Coke 's work in Bonham 's Case forms the basis of judicial review in the United States ; other academics disagree , with one scholar calling this " one of the most enduring myths of American constitutional law and theory , to say nothing of history " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The College of Physicians ( renamed in 1674 the Royal College of Physicians ) was historically an elite organisation . Created by royal charter in 1518 , the college was founded by six English academic doctors trained in English universities . It only admitted British men who had trained at a university and passed a three @-@ part Latin exam in medical theory . Only 24 Fellows were allowed , and if an entrant came at a time when all 24 Fellowships were full , he would instead become a Candidate , with the most senior Candidate admitted to the first vacant Fellowship . An Act of Parliament confirming their royal charter also gave the college the ability to act as a court , judging other practitioners and punishing those acting badly or practising without a licence . A second Act , the College of Physicians Act 1553 , amended the charter and gave them the right to imprison , indefinitely , those they judged . This " flew in the face of the common law assumption that to practice medicine one needed only the consent of the patient " ; Despite this , on 8 April 1602 , John Popham , the Chief Justice , upheld the college 's authority to imprison and fine , saying " That no man , though never so learned a <unk> , or doctor may Practise in London , or within <unk> <unk> , without the Colledge <unk> " and " That a free man of London , may lawfully be <unk> by the Colledge " . 
 Thomas Bonham had been admitted to St John 's College , Cambridge , in 1581 . Earning a Bachelor 's degree in 1584 , he completed a Master 's by 1588 and studied for a medical doctorate at Cambridge , later granted by the University of Oxford . By 1602 he had completed his studies and moved to London , where he practised medicine and associated himself with the Barber @-@ Surgeons ' Company , campaigning for it to be allowed to authorise medical practitioners in a similar way to the College of Physicians . Apparently giving up after a failed petition to Parliament in 1605 , Bonham petitioned to join the college on 6 December 1605 , but was rejected and told to return after further study . Returning on 14 April 1606 , he was again told he could not join , and fined £ 5 and threatened with imprisonment for continuing to practise . Bonham ignored this , and kept working as a doctor ; on 3 October it was announced he was to be arrested and fined £ 10 . Bonham again appeared before the college , this time with a lawyer , on 7 November . He announced that he would continue to practise without seeking the college 's permission , since he claimed they had no power over graduates of Oxford or Cambridge . On this he was imprisoned – some say at Fleet Prison , some at Newgate Prison — for contempt , but his lawyer had a writ of habeas corpus issued by the Court of Common Pleas which freed him on 13 November . 
 Bonham 's successful writ worried the college , whose previous success with Popham and " keen cultivation " of Popham , Lord Ellesmere ( the Lord Chancellor ) and other Crown officials had left them assured that their jurisdiction would be maintained . As such , the college appealed directly to the Crown officers , and on 1 May met with a committee of judges at Ellesmere 's house . This committee was composed of Ellesmere , Popham , Thomas Fleming , two judges from the Court of Common Pleas and two from the Court of King 's Bench . These judges all agreed that " for not well <unk> <unk> or practicing the <unk> or arte of <unk> or for disobedience or <unk> donne and committed against <unk> <unk> made by the <unk> ... they may <unk> the offenders without <unk> or <unk> " . This success spurred the college to move against Bonham yet again , this time by suing him in the King 's Bench for £ 60 for maintaining an illicit practice . In a counterattack , Bonham brought a suit in the Common Pleas requesting £ 100 damages , alleging that they had trespassed against his person and wrongfully imprisoned him " against the law and custom of this kingdom of England " . 
 = = Case = = 
 The case was heard in the Court of Common Pleas by Warburton J , Daniel J , Foster J , Walmisley J and the Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke , with a decision finally reached in the winter of 1610 . The college 's lawyers had argued that the two Acts of Parliament and the royal charter " intends , that none shall practise here but those who are most learned and expert , more than ordinary " . As such , the college was free to punish for both practising without a licence and for malpractice , with the 1553 Act giving them the authority to imprison those they judged . Bonham 's lawyers replied by arguing that the Acts and charter were intended to prevent malpractice , not practising without a licence . Moreover , Bonham 's study " [ in the texts at university ] is practise [ sic ] " , and that to become a doctor means to have been considered capable of teaching : " when a man brings with him the ensign of doctrine , there is no reason that he should be examined again , for then if thou will not allow of him , he shall not be allowed , though he is a learned and grave man , and it is not the intent of the King to make a monopoly of this practise " . As such , the Act " doth not inhibit a doctor to practice [ sic ] , but [ only ] <unk> him for ill using , exercising , and making [ of physic ] " ; it covered malpractice , not for illicit practice . 
 Walmisley and Foster sided with the college , with Walmisley delivering the joint opinion . He said that since the statute clearly said " no person " could practise without the college 's licence , only one verdict was acceptable , because the college had a valid licensing authority . The royal charter was to be interpreted as granting the college a duty on behalf of the King : 
 It is the office of a King to survey his subjects , and he is a physician to cure their maladies , and to remove <unk> amongst them , and also to remove all fumes and smells , which may offend or be prejudicial to their health ... and so if a man be not right in his wits , the King is to have the protection and government of him , lest he being infirm , waste or consume his lands or goods ; and it is not sufficient for him that his subjects live , but that they should live happily ; and [ he ] discharges not his office , if his subjects live a life , but [ only ] if they live and flourish ; and he hath cure as well of their bodies as of their lands and goods for health for the body is as necessary as virtue to the mind . 
 As such , in Walmisley 's mind , the King had a duty to protect the health of his subjects , which he had delegated to the college . In addition , Bonham had given " an absurd and contemptuous answer " when he claimed that he would not submit to the college , and " it should be a vain law if it did not provide punishment for them that offend against that " . The monarch had delegated part of his prerogative powers to the college , for the purposes of punishment and imprisonment , and as such it had the right to sit as a court . Coke delivered the majority opinion in favour of Bonham , with Daniel and Warburton assenting . He undertook a closer reading of the college 's charter and associated Acts , and divided the relevant passage into two clauses . The first gave it the power to fine practitioners without licences . The second specified that they could imprison a practitioner for " not well doing , using or practicing physic " . He argued that these constituted separate powers and issues ; the first dealt with authorisation to punish for illicit practise , while the second covered punishment for malpractice . Simply practising without a licence did not constitute malpractice . As such , the college did not have the power to imprison Bonham , who was accused of practising without a licence , not practising dangerously . Coke also went further , arguing against the validity of the charter and its associated Acts . The Acts gave the college the right to act as both judge and a party to a case , which " provided for an absurdity " . Therefore : 
 One cannot be Judge and attorney for any of the parties ... And it appears in our books , that in many cases , the common law will control Acts of Parliament , and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly void ; for when an act of Parliament is against common right and reason , or repugnant , or impossible to be performed , the common law will control it , and adjudge such an Act to be void ; and , therefore in … Thomas Tregor 's case … Herle saith , some statutes are made against law and right , which those who made them perceiving would not put them in execution . 
 Because of this and four other reasons given by Coke , the college was to cease trying to supervise medical practice , and to cease arbitrating and acting as a court . In support of his judgment , Coke cited not only Tregor 's Case , but also two anonymous cases given the academic names of Cessavit 42 and <unk> 11 respectively . 
 = = Significance = = 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 The decision in Bonham 's Case has been described by John Campbell ( Lord Chief Justice and Lord Chancellor in the 19th century ) as " a foolish doctrine alleged to have been laid down extra @-@ judicially " . Philip Allott , in the Cambridge Law Journal , simply called it an " abortion " . Coke was later dismissed from his judicial posts , and Ellesmere immediately began making veiled criticisms . Ellesmere maintained it was unconscionable to allow the judges power to throw aside Acts of Parliament if they were repugnant or contrary to reason ; however , he spoke " not of impossibilities or direct <unk> " . It was acceptable to overturn an Act if it was clearly and obviously repugnant , but not otherwise . 
 Coke has come under criticism for the examples he drew on to justify his decision . The first case he gave , Tregor 's Case , was seriously misquoted . Coke stated that " Herle said some statutes are made against law and right , which those who made them perceiving , would not put into execution " . In fact no reference to " law and right " is found in the original ; Herle wrote that " there are some statutes made which he himself who made them does not will to put into execution " , and only meant that some statutes are poorly drafted , and if they cannot be interpreted to work , Parliament would accept the courts not applying them . Theodore Plucknett wrote that " Whoever reads the whole of Herle 's remarks can see that he did not regard the statute then under discussion as falling within this category ; on the contrary , he suggested a perfectly obvious and straightforward interpretation of it .... Coke 's first authority is far from convincing " . His second authority , Cessavit 42 , " goes much further to support his thesis " , and concerns a situation where William <unk> refused to apply an Act of Parliament because it would undermine several common law principles . However , Plucknett notes the distinction that in Cessavit 42 " the statute is not held void ; it is just ignored . To this fact Coke has really added an explanation and a theory of his own " . 
 His third example , <unk> 11 , was based on the Statute of Carlisle , which required all religious orders to have seals , placed in the custody of the prior and four of the " worthiest brethren " so that the Abbot could not use it without their knowledge . Any decisions made without the seal kept in this fashion were invalid . This clashed with church law , and was incredibly difficult for small religious orders ; as such , Sir Anthony Fitzherbert said that the statute was void , as it was " impertinent " or " impossible " . However , Plucknett again casts doubt on the validity , stating that it " would have looked strong ... [ but ] is , in fact , of doubtful import " . 
 Bonham 's Case was deeply unpopular with the Crown ; Coke was removed from the Common Pleas and sent to the King 's Bench , theoretically a more senior office ( but in practice a less rewarding one ) in 1613 due to his work , and in June 1616 suspended from office and ordered to " correct " his case reports . In October 1617 King James I demanded Coke explain the reasoning behind Bonham 's Case ; Coke claimed that " the words of my report do not import any new opinion , but only a relation of such authorities of law , as had been adjudged and resolved in former times , and were cited in the argument of Bonham 's case " . He refused to admit to any flaws with his writings , and his only corrections were minor typos and rearrangements of the language . If he meant his opinion in this case as an endorsement of judicial review instead of Parliamentary sovereignty , then withdrawal of that endorsement has been inferred from his later writings . 
 = = = Meaning = = = 
 The meaning of Coke 's decision is debated ; it can be construed as marking the supremacy of the common law over Parliament through judicial review , or simply as being another form of statutory interpretation . Noah Feldman suggested that the dispute over the two meanings has its origins in 1930s America , where frustration over judicial review of elements of the New Deal spilled into the academic world . James Kent , in his Commentaries on American Law , argued that Bonham 's Case and cases like it only meant that statutes should be given a " reasonable construction " . Charles Gray , in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , argues that Coke as a judge never intended to advocate the judicial review of statutes . Bernard Bailyn writes that " Coke had not meant ... ' that there were superior principles of right and justice which Acts of Parliament might not contravene ' " , and also writes that by " saying that courts might ' void ' a legislative provision that violated the constitution he meant only that the courts were to construe statutes so as to bring them into conformity with recognized legal principles " . William Searle Holdsworth agreed that it would be a mistake to view isolated statements by Coke in Bonham ’ s Case as endorsing limitations upon Parliament , for several reasons including that Coke himself elsewhere acknowledged the power of Parliament as being " so transcendent and absolute that it cannot be confined either for causes or persons within any bounds " . 
 Raoul Berger , in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review , disagrees with this ; the words of the statute were clear , and the only application it could have was unjust . Statutory interpretation allows for the ignoring of unjust extraneous meanings , but what Coke did was nullify the statute as a whole , along with its main intention . John V. Orth , writing in the Constitutional Commentary , concurs , saying that " If that were so , why did they not say so ? Is it likely that the royal judges , confronting a case involving a statute that had necessarily passed both houses of parliament and received the royal assent , would lightly use the word ' void ' ? " 
 Research by Samuel Thomas and Sir John Baker has led to a reassessment . During the early 17th century , non @-@ common law courts were claiming an " Imperial , almost legislative discretion over statutory interpretation , free from any supervisory jurisdiction of the common law courts " . Coke 's decision can therefore be seen as him reminding those courts that such interpretations were themselves subject to the law , and not down to individual discretion . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 During Coke 's lifetime he was judicially dominant , and his ideas were upheld by his successor as Chief Justice , Sir Henry Hobart , in Day v <unk> and Lord Sheffield v Ratcliffe . After Coke 's death , however , his jurisprudence " naturally suffered an eclipse " , and the next appearance is in Godden v Hales , in 1686 , where the doctrine was twisted to argue that the Crown had the prerogative to dismiss laws of government . Plucknett notes that " the Revolution of 1688 marks the abandonment of the doctrine of Bonham 's Case " , but in 1701 the common law judges cited Coke 's decision with approval in City of London v Wood , with John Holt concluding that Coke 's statement is " a very reasonable and true saying " . His position was of treating statutes in the same way as other documents for the purpose of judicial review ; this was followed for decades . Outside of the judiciary , John Lilburne used Bonham 's Case in his book The <unk> <unk> Liberties of the People of England , and later in his 1649 treason trial , to justify his attack on the Rump Parliament . 
 With the growth of Parliamentary sovereignty as a doctrine , Coke 's theory gradually died out ; William Blackstone , in the first edition of his Commentaries on the Laws of England , wrote that " if the parliament will positively enact a thing to be done which is unreasonable , I know of no power that can control it : and the examples alleged in support of this sense of the rule do none of them prove , that where the main object of a statute is unreasonable the judges are at liberty to reject it ; for that were to set the judicial power above that of the legislature , which would be subversive of all government " . Parliamentary sovereignty is now upheld by the English judiciary as a " central principle of British constitutionalism " , albeit with some issues due to membership in the European Union . The case 's modern irrelevance is such that Philip Hamburger , writing in 2008 , notes that " Bonham 's Case scarcely deserves mention in a history of judicial duty , except for reasons that are now largely forgotten " . 
 = = = Impact in America = = = 
 In the Thirteen Colonies , there were instances when Coke 's statement was interpreted to mean that the common law was superior to statute . For example , drawing on Coke 's statement , James Otis , Jr. declared during the struggle over writs of assistance that it was the duty of the courts to ignore Acts of Parliament " against the constitution and against natural equity " , an argument and struggle that had a significant impact on John Adams . When the Stamp Act of 1765 was declared invalid by the Massachusetts Assembly , the rationale was that it was " against Magna Charta and the natural rights of Englishmen , and therefore , according to the Lord Coke , null and void " . By 1772 , Otis and others had reversed course , adopting Blackstone 's position that judges could not challenge acts of parliament . Even before that point , there were few episodes in which Dr. Bonham 's Case was used as a rallying cry in America , and instead judicial review in America grew primarily from other political and intellectual sources . 
 In Marbury v. Madison ( 1803 ) , the American case that forms the basis for the exercise of judicial review in the United States under Article III of the Constitution , Chief Justice John Marshall stated that " the particular phraseology of the Constitution of the United States confirms and strengthens the principle , supposed to be essential to all written constitutions , that a law repugnant to the constitution is void , and that courts , as well as other departments , are bound by that instrument " . Here , Marshall specifically used the words " void " and " repugnant " , which has been characterised as a deliberate reference to Coke , but Marshall 's principle involved repugnancy to the written Constitution instead of repugnancy to reason . In the later case of Hurtado v. California ( 1884 ) , the U. S. Supreme Court discussed Bonham 's Case specifically , saying that it had not affected the omnipotence of parliament over the common law . 
 Edward Samuel Corwin , writing in the Harvard Law Review , praised the idea of a fundamental higher law of reason enforceable by judges , and accordingly endorsed " the ratification which Coke 's doctrine received in American constitutional law and theory " . Gary McDowell , writing in The Review of Politics , calls this " one of the most enduring myths of American constitutional law and theory , to say nothing of history " . As evidence , McDowell points out that Coke and Bonham 's Case were never discussed during the Constitutional Convention of 1787 . During the ratification conventions , Coke was mentioned , but not in debates over the striking down of unconstitutional statutes . Bonham 's Case itself was never brought up , only Coke 's other writings . An additional point of view is that the United States Supreme Court has come “ full circle to the dictum in Bonham 's Case ” by using the Due Process Clause to strike down what the Court deems " unreasonable " legislation . 
 = Donkey Kong Country = 
 Donkey Kong Country is a 1994 platforming video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It was first released in November 1994 , and under the name Super Donkey Kong ( <unk> , Sūpā Donkī Kongu ) in Japan . The game was later re @-@ released for the Game Boy Color ( 2000 ) , Game Boy Advance ( 2003 ) , Wii Virtual Console ( 2007 ) , Wii U Virtual Console ( 2014 ) , and New Nintendo 3DS ( 2016 ) with a perfect pixel mode . 
 The game is set on " Donkey Kong Island " and centres around Donkey Kong and his nephew Diddy Kong , who must recover their stolen hoard of bananas from King K. Rool and the Kremlings . Development of the game first began shortly after Rare 's Tim and Chris Stamper ran experiments with a Silicon Graphics workstation , rendering realistic 3D sprites . Nintendo became interested in Rare 's work and soon acquired 49 % of the company which culminated in the production of a new title using Alias and SGI technology for the SNES console . The Stamper brothers expressed an interest to create a standalone Donkey Kong game , and assembled a team of 12 to work on the game over an 18 @-@ month development cycle . 
 Donkey Kong Country is the first Donkey Kong game that was not produced or directed by Shigeru Miyamoto , the character 's original creator . It was directed by Tim Stamper instead , although Miyamoto was still involved with the project . Following an intense marketing campaign , Donkey Kong Country received critical acclaim and more than nine million copies were sold worldwide , making it the second @-@ best @-@ selling SNES game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Donkey Kong Country is a platform game where players must complete forty different side @-@ scrolling levels ( forty @-@ one in the Game Boy Color version ) and recover the Kongs ' banana hoard , which has been stolen by the Kremlings . Each level is uniquely themed and consists of varying tasks such as swimming , riding in mine carts , launching out of barrel cannons , or swinging from vine to vine . The player begins with a minimum of six lives . Players lose a life if they get hit by any enemy or fall off the screen . To defeat an enemy , players can either execute a roll , jump or hand slap ( a move only usable by Donkey Kong ) . However , some enemies cannot be taken down in this manner , so the player must throw a barrel or use the assistance of an animal . Enemies vary in difficulty , usually becoming tougher to take down as the game progresses . When the player has lost all their lives , the game is over . However , the player can gain additional lives by collecting items scattered throughout the levels , including bananas , golden letters that spell out K – O – N – G , extra life balloons , and golden animal tokens that lead to bonus levels . There are also many secret passages that can lead to bonus games where the player can earn additional lives or other items , as well as gain possible shortcuts through the level . 
 Players of Donkey Kong Country control one of two characters : Donkey Kong or his nephew Diddy . The player can switch between characters if they are both on the screen . Donkey is the larger of the two , and can defeat enemies more easily while Diddy is faster and more agile . In several levels , players can gain assistance from various animals , who are found by breaking open crates . These helpers include Rambi the Rhino , Expresso the Ostrich , Enguarde the Swordfish , Winky the Frog , and Squawks the Parrot . Each animal can be found in an appropriately themed level : for example , Enguarde can only be found underwater , and Squawks is found in one cave level . Some animals can also give players access to bonus games . 
 The game offers single @-@ player and multiplayer game modes . Multiplayer allows two players to play alternatively in one of two different modes : the competitive " Contest " mode or the cooperative " Team " mode . In Contest mode , each player controls a different set of Kongs and take turns playing each level as quickly as possible ; the objective is to complete the most levels in the fastest time . In Team mode , each player takes the role of one of the two Kongs and play as a tag team : the active player 's Kong will control the progression of the two players while the other player is dormant ; the other player takes control if the active player loses his Kong from damage or if the active decides to switch out . 
 Donkey Kong Country uses a series of map screens to track the players ' progress . Between each level , players control their character on the map screen , navigating to the next level they want to play . Each level on the map is marked with an icon : unfinished levels are marked by Kremlings ( the game 's main enemy ) , while friendly areas are marked by members of the Kong family . Every individual world map screen has one boss enemy at the end of the course , which must be defeated to travel back to the main map screen of the whole island . It is possible to access previous world maps without defeating the boss by finding Funky Kong and borrowing his barrel plane . Players use this ability to select the world from the main screen , then the level within it . During play the game interface hides most game @-@ related information , such as the number of bananas , letters , and animal tokens collected , as well as the number of lives remaining . When an item is collected , the relevant information briefly appears on the screen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Donkey Kong , after investigating his " Kong 's Banana Hoard " , located just below his home , and discovering that his banana hoard has disappeared , embarks on a journey to recover it from King K. Rool and the Kremlings . While collecting bananas on the island 's vastly different regions , Donkey Kong defeats various enemies , including the reptilian Kremlings , and other hazardous creatures native to the island . Aiding him in his quest are some of the other Kongs : Diddy accompanies Donkey Kong on his quest , Cranky provides hints and comic relief , Candy operates the island 's save points , and Funky offers a means of transportation around the island . Also assisting Donkey Kong at times are various ' animal buddies ' ( Rambi the Rhino , Expresso the Ostrich , Enguarde the Swordfish , Winky the Frog , and Squawks the Parrot ) , each with their own unique abilities . After progressing through the island 's different areas , Donkey Kong ultimately arrives on a pirate ship called <unk> Galleon , where Donkey Kong 's nemesis and the leader of the Kremlings , King K. Rool , awaits with Donkey Kong 's banana hoard . Upon his defeat , the game ends with a final shot of Donkey Kong 's banana hoard restored to its former glory , filled with bananas once again . 
 = = Development = = 
 Before Donkey Kong Country 's production , Rare 's Tim and Chris Stamper invested and programmed experiments with a Silicon Graphics Challenge workstation , with their initial focus centred on a boxing game . Although never reaching beyond the stages of initial development , senior Nintendo staff who visited their Twycross studio were impressed with their progress after being shown a working demo . Genyo Takeda was dispatched to Japan to advise then @-@ president of Nintendo Hiroshi Yamauchi on securing a deal with Rare . Following talks between Yamauchi and Rare staff , Nintendo acquired 49 % of the company , which culminated in the production of a new title using Alias and SGI technology and the addition of Rare as a second @-@ party developer . The Stampers expressed interest in making a game based on Donkey Kong and were given Nintendo 's permission . 
 Rare assembled a team of twelve to work on the game , and according to product manager Dan Owsen , a total of 20 people worked on Donkey Kong Country over an 18 @-@ month development cycle – the most that Rare had ever assembled for one project at that point . When Rare presented the first playable version of the game to Nintendo , Nintendo directed them to significantly reduce the difficulty , as they wanted the game to appeal to a broad audience and felt that the game 's numerous secrets would provide sufficient challenge to hardcore gamers . Designer Gregg Mayles was tasked with re @-@ arranging the stages so that the player could " go first time " past obstacles and would eventually slow down into more difficult stages as the game progressed . At this point Donkey Kong creator Shigeru Miyamoto , though otherwise uninvolved with the project , also made some last @-@ minute suggestions which were incorporated into the final game , such as Donkey Kong 's hand slap move . 
 The Donkey Kong character was redesigned with a distinct , three @-@ dimensional physical appearance . While borrowing the red necktie introduced in 1994 's Game Boy version of Donkey Kong , the character featured a new look that would become the standard that continues to be used in nearly all games featuring him . Until Microsoft 's purchase of Rare in 2002 , all Nintendo games featuring Donkey Kong ( including Mario Kart 64 , Super Smash Bros. , and the Mario Party series ) credited Rare for the use of their Donkey Kong model . To develop Donkey Kong 's movements in the game , Rare staff spent hours at nearby Twycross Zoo observing and videotaping real gorillas . However , they found that on the rare occasions when the gorillas moved , their movements were " completely unsuitable for a fast @-@ paced videogame " , and so Donkey and Diddy Kong 's animations were instead loosely based on how a horse gallops . 
 Initially , Rare created Diddy Kong 's model with the intent that it be their update of Donkey Kong Jr . Nintendo felt that the model was too great a departure from Donkey Kong Jr . ' s original look , and insisted that Rare either re @-@ work it to match Donkey Kong Jr . ' s original appearance or present it as a new character entirely . Mayles decided that a new character suited the updated universe of Donkey Kong so he kept Donkey Kong Jr . ' s redesigned model and initially renamed the character " Dinky Kong " , but after legal advice Rare changed it to Diddy Kong . 
 Donkey Kong Country was one of the first games for a mainstream home video game console to use pre @-@ rendered 3D graphics . It was a technique that was also used in the earlier 1993 Finnish game Stardust for the Amiga , and later in Rare 's Killer Instinct . Many later 3D video games also used pre @-@ rendered 3D together with fully 3D objects . Rare took significant financial risks in purchasing the expensive SGI equipment used to render the graphics . David Wise , Rare 's composer from 1985 to 1994 , admitted that the workstations Rare purchased were worth £ 80 @,@ 000 each . A new compression technique they developed in house allowed them to incorporate more detail and animation for each sprite for a given memory footprint than previously achieved on the SNES , which better captured the pre @-@ rendered graphics . Both Nintendo and Rare refer to the technique for creating the game 's graphics as " ACM " ( Advanced Computer Modelling ) . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Donkey Kong Country had a marketing budget of $ 3 @.@ 76 million in the United States . As a part of Nintendo 's marketing campaign , a 15 @-@ minute VHS tape titled Donkey Kong Country : Exposed was sent to subscribers of Nintendo Power magazine . Hosted by comedian Josh Wolf , the video shows a brief tour of Nintendo of America 's headquarters in Redmond , Washington , and footage from the game when it was in the final stages of development . Several game testers provide tips on how to access bonus levels and perform tricks throughout the game . Various interviews promote the level of graphical complexity as being revolutionary for game systems at that time . A segment at the end of the video reminds viewers that the game is available only on Nintendo 's 16 @-@ bit Super Nintendo Entertainment System console and not on rival 32 @-@ bit and CD @-@ ROM based consoles ( e.g. , Sega 32X and Sega CD ) that boasted superior processing power . In a " hidden " section at the end of the cassette , the host of the video opens a door and discovers that Nintendo of America testers are playing an early development version of the Killer Instinct arcade . A character resembling Chief Thunder is shown with notable differences . 
 Nintendo of America partnered with Kellogg 's for a promotional campaign running from the game 's release in November 1994 until April 1995 , in which the packaging for all of Kellogg 's breakfast cereals would feature Donkey Kong Country character art and announce a prize giveaway . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 David Wise composed the majority of the music for Donkey Kong Country , with Eveline Fischer and Robin Beanland also contributing . Wise had started making compositions for the game when he was still a freelance musician . He has said that he originally assumed the music he composed for the game would later be replaced with compositions by a Japanese composer , since he understood how important the Donkey Kong licence was to Nintendo . But he was later asked by Rare to record three jungle demo tunes , which were connected together to become the " DK Swing " : " I guess someone thought the music was suitable , as they offered me a full time position at Rare . " 
 Donkey Kong Country is known for its atmospheric music , mixing natural environmental sounds with prominent melodic and percussive accompaniment . It features a wide variety of different musical styles that attempt to be evocative of the environments in which they appear . This varies with the differing areas of the game , and includes music from levels set in Africa @-@ inspired jungles , caverns , oceanic reefs , frozen landscapes , and industrial factories . Wise cited Koji Kondo 's music for the Mario and Zelda games , Tim and Geoff Follin 's music for Plok , synthesiser @-@ based film soundtracks released in the 1980s and a lot of rock and dance music released that same decade as influences in creator the music for Donkey Kong Country . He has stated that he wanted the music produced by the SNES 's SPC700 chip for the game to sound similar to the Korg <unk> synthesiser , but ended up composing most of the music himself . 
 Donkey Kong Country also had a soundtrack which was released on CD under the title DK Jamz . It was sent to news media and retailers in November 1994 as a promotional item , and released to the general public in March 1995 . DK Jamz consists of fifty tracks , of which tracks 24 – 48 are completely silent , and the remaining two tracks in the end are " secret " bonus tracks not listed in the back of the disc cover . The soundtrack was also the focus of an OverClocked ReMix collaboration titled " Kong in Concert " , later praised by Wise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Donkey Kong Country was very successful upon release in November 1994 , receiving critical acclaim and high praise in retrospective reviews , with an 89 percent approval rating at the review aggregator GameRankings . Many critics consider that Donkey Kong Country " saved " the Super Nintendo Entertainment system from the growing influence of rivals such as the new PlayStation and the rising popularity of the Sonic the Hedgehog series . 
 Reviewers praised the game 's vibrant , colourful and " groundbreaking " graphics . IGN 's Lucas Thomas expressed surprise about how Nintendo 's 16 @-@ bit system could deliver rendered 3D models and praised the detailed character animations , " lush backgrounds " and the " verdant jungle " setting of the game . GamePro declared in their review that " <unk> has all the elements of a classic : outstanding graphics , involving game play , and lots of hidden stuff " . Later , the game was released as a pack @-@ in game in the SNES " Donkey Kong Set " ( which contained a console , controller , connections and the game ) . This facilitated sales of over 1 million copies , making it a Player 's Choice re @-@ release title around 1998 . At review aggregator GameRankings , the SNES version received an 89 % score , the Game Boy Color version 90 % , and the Game Boy Advance version 79 % . Nintendo Power gave a positive review to the Game Boy Color version of the game finding that the game was " improved with multiplayer minigames and a GB Printer feature " while noting that " the graphics lack the detail of the classic , they 're still worth going ape over . " 
 The game was awarded best graphic achievement at the 1994 Consumer Electronics Show by GamePro . It won several awards from Electronic Gaming Monthly in their 1994 video game awards , including Best SNES Game , Best Animation , Best Game Duo and Game of the Year . It was the only video game to be listed in Time 's top ten " Best Products " of 1994 . However , it was also considered by the magazine to be one of the Top 10 Most Over @-@ rated Games of All Time before their 200th issue anniversary in 2005 . The game also made the # 9 spot in GameSpy 's 2003 list of the 25 most over @-@ rated games of all time . Donkey Kong creator Shigeru Miyamoto allegedly criticised the game , calling its gameplay mediocre . However , he has since addressed these rumors and expressed fondness for the game . Despite this , it was rated the 90th @-@ best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list in 2006 . It also received a Nintendo Power Award for Best Overall Game of 1994 and two Kids ' Choice awards , one of each for Favourite Video Game of 1994 and 1995 . The game would go on to eventually sell a total of 9 million copies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Donkey Kong Country 's financial success was a major factor in keeping the SNES ' sales records high at a time when the next generation of consoles were being released , including the PlayStation and the Sega Saturn . Donkey Kong Country sold six million units within its first holiday season . After selling nine million units , Donkey Kong Country became the second @-@ best selling SNES game . Rare 's re @-@ design of the Donkey Kong character would then become a standard for all future Nintendo games featuring him , including his appearances in the Super Smash Bros. series and various Mario Kart games . Furthermore , Donkey Kong Country 's popularity managed to extend its own series - following up with a sequel , Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest , which was released the following year to critical acclaim . The character of Diddy Kong also gained enough popularity to spawn his own game , Diddy Kong Racing was released for the Nintendo 64 in 1997 . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 In 2000 , a version of Donkey Kong Country was released for the Game Boy Color . The GBC version had a new stage in Chimp Caverns , " <unk> <unk> " , as well as a revamped and longer Winky 's Walkway . The GBC version had some of the music scrapped and replaced , often with music that originated in Donkey Kong Land . In 2003 , another version of the game was released for the Game Boy Advance . This version had increased brightness , at the cost of contrast and colour saturation , to make the game easier to see on an unlit LCD screen . Both games had some new features , including new minigames , hidden pictures , and a Time Trial mode ; additionally , the GBA version had multiplayer games . Both versions also had lower sound fidelity and a number of minor changes . Candy Kong no longer runs a save point , so players can save the game in any area . 
 Donkey Kong Country was re @-@ released on the Virtual Console for the Wii in Oceania on 7 December 2006 , Europe the next day , and North America on 19 February 2007 . The Donkey Kong Country series titles were removed from the Wii store in November 2012 , but were ultimately reinstated for the Wii U Virtual Console in 2014 . In Europe , Donkey Kong Country was released on the Wii U Virtual Console on 16 October 2014 , and in Japan on 26 November . On 26 February 2015 , the first three Donkey Kong Country games were released on the Wii U Virtual Console , and were reinstated for the Wii Virtual Console in the United States . On 24 March 2016 , Donkey Kong Country was released for the New Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console . 
 = Boletus aereus = 
 Boletus aereus , the dark cep or bronze bolete , is a highly prized and much sought @-@ after edible mushroom in the family Boletaceae . The bolete is widely consumed in Spain ( Basque Country and Navarre ) , France , Italy , Greece , and generally throughout the Mediterranean . Described as a new species in 1789 by French mycologist Pierre Bulliard , it is closely related to several other European boletes , including B. reticulatus , B. pinophilus , and the popular B. edulis . Some populations in North Africa have been classified as a separate species , B. mamorensis , although they are phylogenetically very close . 
 The fungus predominantly grows in habitats with broad @-@ leaved trees and shrubs , forming symbiotic ectomycorrhizal associations in which the underground roots of these plants are enveloped with sheaths of fungal tissue ( hyphae ) . The cork oak ( Quercus suber ) is a key host . The fungus produces spore @-@ bearing fruit bodies above ground in summer and autumn . The fruit body has a large dark brown cap , which can reach 30 cm ( 12 in ) in diameter . Like other boletes , B. aereus has tubes extending downward from the underside of the cap , rather than gills ; spores escape at maturity through the tube openings , or pores . The pore surface of the fruit body is whitish when young , but ages to a greenish @-@ yellow . The squat brown stipe , or stem , is up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) tall and 10 cm ( 4 in ) thick and partially covered with a raised network pattern , or reticulation . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 French mycologist Pierre Bulliard described Boletus aereus in 1789 . The species epithet is the Latin adjective <unk> , meaning " made with bronze or copper " . His countryman Lucien Quélet transferred the species to the now @-@ obsolete genus Dictyopus in 1886 , which resulted in the synonym Dictyopus aereus , while René Maire reclassified it as a subspecies of B. edulis in 1937 . In 1940 , Manuel Cabral de <unk> @-@ Pinto published the variety B. aereus var. squarrosus from collections made in Brazil , but this taxon is not considered to be taxonomically distinct . 
 In works published before 1987 , the binomial name was written fully as Boletus aereus Fr . , as the description by Bulliard had been sanctioned ( i.e. , treated as if conserved against earlier homonyms and competing synonyms ) in 1821 by the " father of mycology " , Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries . The starting date for all the mycota had been set by general agreement as 1 January 1821 , the date of Fries ' work . The 1987 edition of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature changed the rules on the starting date and primary work for names of fungi ; names can now be considered valid as far back as 1 May 1753 , hence predating publication of Bulliard 's work . 
 Moroccan collections under the cork oak ( Quercus suber ) that were initially regarded as B. aereus were described as a separate species — Boletus mamorensis — in 1978 , on the basis of a rufous chestnut cap and a rooting stipe , or stem , with a reticulation often limited to the top ( apex ) . In 2010 however , molecular phylogenetic studies by Bryn <unk> and colleagues placed these collections close to B. aereus , likely suggesting an ecological variant or subspecies rather than a distinct species . American mycologist Harry Thiers reported Boletus aereus from California in 1975 ; however , a taxonomic revision of western North American porcini boletes in 2008 formally established them as a separate species , Boletus regineus . These differ from B. aereus by nature of their more gelatinous cap skin ( pileipellis ) , and belong in a different porcini lineage . 
 Boletus aereus is classified in Boletus section Boletus , alongside close relatives such as B. reticulatus , B. edulis , and B. pinophilus . A genetic study of the four European species found that B. aereus was sister to B. reticulatus . More extensive testing of worldwide taxa revealed that B. aereus and the genetically close B. mamorensis were sister to a lineage that had split into B. reticulatus and two lineages that had been classified as B. edulis from southern China and Korea / northern China respectively . Molecular analysis suggests that the B. aereus / mamorensis and B. reticulatus / Chinese B. " edulis " lineages diverged around 6 to 7 million years ago . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 Bulliard gave Boletus aereus the common name of le bolet <unk> ( the bronze bolete ) in 1789 , noting that it was called the cep noir ( black cep ) in other countries . It is commonly known as <unk> <unk> ( black fungus ) in Basque , porcino nero ( black piglet ) in Italian , and tête de nègre ( negro 's head ) in French . In Greek it is known as <unk> ( the royal one ) , or <unk> ( little monk ) . The English common name is dark cep , while the British Mycological Society also approved the name bronze bolete . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is hemispherical to convex , reaching 15 – 30 cm ( 6 – 12 in ) in diameter , although specimens of 40 cm ( 16 in ) have been found in some cases . Slightly velvety and lobed or dented , it is dark brown , greyish @-@ brown , violet brown , or purple brown , often with copper , golden , or olivaceous patches . The stipe is 6 – 15 cm ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 – 6 in ) high by 5 – 10 cm ( 2 – 4 in ) wide , usually shorter than the cap diameter , initially barrel shaped but gradually becoming club shaped and tapering at the base . The stipe is pale brown , chestnut , or reddish brown in colour , covered in a brown or concolorous reticulation . Like in other boletes , there are tubes rather than gills on the underside of the cap . The tube openings — known as pores — are small and rounded . Whitish or greyish @-@ white when young , they slowly become yellowish or greenish yellow at maturity , and can turn wine coloured with bruising . The tubes themselves are initially white , later becoming yellowish or olivaceous . The thick flesh is white , exudes a robust and pleasant smell reminiscent of hazelnuts , and has a mild sweet taste . 
 The spores are spindle shaped and measure 10 @.@ 5 – 19 by 4 – 7 μm . The pileipellis is a trichodermium of interwoven septate hyphae , with long cylindrical cells . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Boletus reticulatus is very similar to B. aereus , also occurring during the summer months under broad @-@ leaved trees . It has a paler , often cracked cap and a usually paler stipe covered in a more elaborate and pronounced whitish reticulation , often extending to the stipe base . 
 Boletus pinophilus occurs under conifers , mostly Pinus sylvestris , and has a reddish @-@ brown cap . Microscopically , it can be separated by the more inflated , club- to spindle @-@ shaped hyphal ends of the pileipellis . 
 Boletus edulis occurs later in the season during lower temperatures , mostly under Picea . It has a paler viscid cap , and a paler stipe with an acute white reticulation . Microscopically , it has gelatinised hyphal ends in the pileipellis . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Found mainly in Central and Southern Europe as well as North Africa , Boletus aereus is rare in colder climates such as England , and classified as a vulnerable species in the Czech Republic . Boletus aereus can be locally abundant ; it is the most common bolete in the woodlands of <unk> Regional Natural Park in northern Sicily . In contrast , it has been placed on a provisional Red List of endangered species of Montenegro . Boletus aereus has been reported from several other island ecosystems across the Mediterranean , such as Corsica , Cyprus , <unk> , and Naxos . 
 Mushrooms are mostly found during hot spells in summer and autumn , growing in mycorrhizal association with various broad @-@ leaved trees and sclerophyllous shrubs , especially oak ( Quercus ) , beech ( Fagus ) , chestnut ( Castanea ) , strawberry trees ( Arbutus ) , <unk> ( Erica ) , and rockrose ( Cistus ) , showing a preference for acid soils . <unk> and parks are common habitats . The cork oak in particular is an important symbiont , and the distribution of B. aereus ( along with B. mamorensis ) aligns with the tree across Europe and North Africa . The ectomycorrhizae that B. aereus forms with sweet chestnut ( Castanea sativa ) and downy oak ( Quercus pubescens ) have been described in detail . They are characterized by a lack of hyphal clamps , a <unk> mantle ( made of parallel @-@ orientated hyphae with little branching or overlap ) , and rhizomorphs with differentiated hyphae . A 2007 field study on four species of boletes revealed little correlation between the abundance of fruit bodies and presence of its mycelia below ground , even when soil samples were taken from directly beneath the mushroom ; the study concluded that the triggers leading to formation of mycorrhizae and production of the fruit bodies appear to be more complex than previously thought . 
 In the past the fungus had been reported in China . Recent molecular studies , however , show that Asian porcini appear to belong to different species . 
 = = Edibility and culinary uses = = 
 A choice edible species , Boletus aereus is highly appreciated in Southern Europe for its culinary qualities , and is considered by many to be <unk> superior to Boletus edulis . In the vicinity of Borgotaro in the Province of Parma of northern Italy , the four species Boletus edulis , B. aereus , B. aestivalis , and B. pinophilus have been recognised for their superior taste and officially termed <unk> di Borgotaro . Here , these mushrooms have been collected and exported commercially for centuries . Throughout Spain , it is one of the wild edible fungi most commonly collected for the table , particularly in Aragon , where it is harvested for sale in markets . 
 When collected , the skin of the cap is left intact , and dirt is brushed off the surface . Pores are left unless old and soft . Boletus aereus is especially suited for drying , a process which enhances its flavour and aroma . Like other boletes , the mushrooms can be dried by being sliced and strung separately on twine , then hung close to the ceiling of a kitchen . Alternatively , the mushrooms can be dried by cleaning with a brush ( washing is not recommended ) , and then placed in a wicker basket or bamboo steamer on top of a boiler or hot water tank . Once dry , they are kept in an airtight jar . They are easily reconstituted by soaking in hot , but not boiling , water for about twenty minutes ; the water is infused with the mushroom aroma and can be used as stock in subsequent cooking . When dried , a small amount of the mushroom can improve the taste of less flavoursome fungi @-@ based dishes . 
 = = = Nutritional value = = = 
 Based on analyses of fruit bodies collected in Portugal , there are 367 kilocalories per 100 grams of bolete ( as dry weight ) . The macronutrient composition of 100 grams of dried bolete includes 17 @.@ 9 grams of protein , 72 @.@ 8 grams of carbohydrates , and 0 @.@ 4 grams of fat . By weight , fresh fruit bodies are about 92 % water . The predominant sugar is trehalose ( 4 @.@ 7 grams / 100 grams dry weight ; all following values assume this mass ) , with lesser amounts of mannitol ( 1 @.@ 3 grams ) . There are 6 grams of tocopherols , the majority of which is gamma @-@ tocopherol ( vitamin E ) , and 3 @.@ 7 grams of ascorbic acid . 
 = Norm O 'Neill = 
 Norman Clifford Louis O 'Neill OAM ( 19 February 1937 – 3 March 2008 ) was a cricketer who played for New South Wales and Australia . A right @-@ handed batsman known for his back foot strokeplay , O 'Neill made his state debut aged 18 , before progressing to Test selection aged 21 in late 1958 . Early in his career , O 'Neill was one of the foremost batsmen in the Australian team , scoring three Test centuries and topping the run scoring aggregates on a 1959 – 60 tour of the Indian subcontinent which helped Australia win its last Test and series on Pakistani soil for 39 years , as well as another series in India . His career peaked in 1960 – 61 when he scored 181 in the Tied Test against the West Indies , and at the end of the series , had a career average of 58 @.@ 25 . His performances on the 1961 tour of England saw him named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year . Thereafter his form was less formidable , characterised by nervousness and fidgeting at the start of his innings . Persistent knee problems as well as a controversial media attack on the legality of West Indian bowler Charlie Griffith saw him dropped from the Australian team after 1965 . O 'Neill also bowled occasional leg spin and was regarded as one of the finest fielders of his era . He later became a cricket commentator and his son Mark O 'Neill also played cricket at state level . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The son of a builder , O 'Neill was born in Carlton , New South Wales . He had no cricketing associations on his father 's side of the family , but his maternal uncle , Ron Campion , played for the Glebe club in Sydney Grade Cricket . Campion trained for cricket near the O 'Neill family home , at Bexley Oval . O 'Neill accompanied his uncle to cricket from the age of seven and was given batting practice at the end of each session . At Bexley Primary school , O 'Neill was denied a chance to play cricket as the school did not field a team . Moving on to Kogarah Intermediate High School , O 'Neill played cricket in defiance of a teacher who recommended that he take up athletics . As a teenager , O 'Neill idolised Keith Miller after his uncle took him to the Sydney Cricket Ground : O 'Neill saw Miller play that day and was impressed with the way he hit the ball off the back foot . 
 Under his uncle 's guidance , O 'Neill joined the St George Cricket Club club , in the Sydney Grade competition . He steadily moved up through the grades and broke into the first grade side at the age of 16 . Sensing his potential , the club 's selectors informed him that regardless of form , he would play the full season , which allowed him to be uninhibited in his batting . He made 108 in seven innings . The next season , he was out 12 times leg before wicket in 15 innings , and run out in the other three . O 'Neill attributed his failures to over @-@ aggressiveness and resolved to improve his patience . In the second match of the new season , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old O 'Neill made his first century . With all five state selectors onlooking , he made 28 in the next match and was called into the state squad . 
 = = Shield debut = = 
 O 'Neill made his debut for New South Wales at the age of 18 against South Australia during the 1955 – 56 season . His lack of contribution was highlighted against the backdrop of his team 's crushing innings victory : O 'Neill failed to score a run or take a wicket . New South Wales bowled first and had South Australia at 6 / 49 when Miller introduced O 'Neill 's occasional leg spin , presumably to ease the debutant 's nerves by bringing him into the game . The home team struck 18 from three overs . O 'Neill was listed to bat in the lower middle order but after the top order had made a big start , Miller brought O 'Neill up . He came in against the second new ball and was clean bowled . O 'Neill was dropped and did not play another match for the season , but had gained invaluable experience . 
 O 'Neill steadily rose in the 1956 – 57 season . At the start of the season , with many players still on international duty during the closing stages of the tour to England and the subsequent stopover in the Indian subcontinent , O 'Neill was recalled and made 60 and 63 not out against Queensland at the start of the season . This saw him retain his place when the Test players returned . After making a pair of single @-@ figures scored , he made a sequence of three 60s against South Australia , Victoria and Western Australia , He was rewarded with selection in the one @-@ off match between Ray Lindwall 's XI and Neil Harvey 's XI , which doubled as a national selection trial , before making his first ton ( 127 ) against South Australia . He ended the season with 567 runs at 43 @.@ 61 , and earned selection for a non @-@ Test tour of New Zealand under Ian Craig , in a team composed mainly of young players . He made 102 not out in the only " Test " match that he played , helping to set up a ten @-@ wicket <unk> heading the tour averages with 218 runs at 72 @.@ 66 . Despite this , he was overlooked for the 1957 – 58 Test tour of South Africa . It was regarded as one of the most controversial decisions of the decade . 
 O 'Neill responded during the 1957 – 58 Sheffield Shield season weakened by the absence of the Test players , aggregating 1 @,@ 005 runs at 83 @.@ 75 and taking 26 wickets at 20 @.@ 42 with his leg spinners , thus topping the national bowling and batting averages . Prior to the season , he had never taken a first @-@ class wicket . In the opening match of the summer , he took 3 / 74 against Queensland . He then took a total of 5 / 51 scored 33 and 48 not out in a six @-@ wicket win over Western Australia before taking 3 / 52 and adding two fifties in the return match . He then broke through for his first century of the season , scoring 114 and taking 3 / 44 in a ten @-@ wicket win over South Australia . However , he reached more productive levels in the second half of the season . 
 This comprised 175 against Victoria , 74 and 48 against Queensland , 125 and 23 * against South Australia and 233 against Victoria . His 233 was made in little over four hours and featured 38 fours . It was the first time that a New South Welshman ( let alone a twenty @-@ year @-@ old ) had scored 1 @,@ 000 in a Shield season . Bradman and Bill Ponsford were the only others before him . He added 12 wickets in the final four matches , including 2 / 50 and 4 / 40 in the match against Queensland . O 'Neill 's performances played a large part in his state 's fifth consecutive title . 
 These performances led former Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly to compare him to Bradman and former Test opening batsman Jack Fingleton to lament his non @-@ selection for the South African tour and its reflection on the plight of Australian cricket . 
 At the time , his employers refused to make allowances for him to play sport , forcing him to begin work at six in the morning . As a result , he considered moving to South Australia , where a grocery magnate offered him employment and financial incentives . However , he stayed after state officials intervened , with Sir Ronald Irish , the Australian chairman of Rothmans , providing him with a job in Sydney . At the time , O 'Neill had another offer . Having represented his state in baseball and been nominated in the All @-@ Australian team in 1957 , he was approached by the New York Yankees , having had experience at a pitcher and short stop . O 'Neill was offered a fee more than 25 times that for a single Test match , as well as travel costs and accommodation , to trial with the Yankees . He agreed , but Irish dissuaded him less than a week before his scheduled departure . 
 = = Test debut = = 
 Identified as a future Test prospect , he was selected in a Western Australia Combined XI for a match against the touring England cricket team at the start of the 1958 – 59 season in Perth . Prior to the match , O 'Neill was hounded by the media . The tourists decided to test him with short @-@ pitched bowling , especially Fred Trueman . O 'Neill decided to abstain from hooking , while attacking the spin of Jim Laker with a series of sweep shots . After four and a half hours of uncharacteristic restraint , he compiled 104 with an emphasis on off side play . He took a total of 2 / 67 , removing Fred Trueman and Arthur Milton . 
 He scored 85 against Western Australia and then made 84 not out for New South Wales against England . He was selected for an Australian XI , which played the tourists in a dress rehearsal before the Tests . He made one and two as Australia were crushed by 345 runs . 
 Nevertheless , O 'Neill was selected to make his debut in the five @-@ Test series against England , playing in all of the matches . The First Test in Brisbane was a low scoring match described by Australian captain Richie Benaud as producing " some of the slowest and worst cricket imaginable " , O 'Neill made 34 in Australia 's first innings of 186 to help secure a lead of 52 . He then top @-@ scored with an unbeaten 71 in the second innings , guiding Australia to an eight @-@ wicket victory . O 'Neill scored 71 of the last 89 runs scored while he was at the crease , refusing to be dried up by the England 's usage of leg theory . It enlivened a match plagued by time @-@ wasting , and best remembered for a depressingly slow innings by England 's Trevor Bailey , who scored 68 from 426 balls in seven and a half hours . England captain Peter May described O 'Neill 's innings as " sparkling " and said that it made " everything which had gone before look even more wretched " . Retired English player Ian Peebles , writing in the Sunday Times , said " Although O 'Neill is in the very early stages of his career , it is already something of an occasion when he comes to the wicket , and one can sense the expectancy of the crowd and the heightened tension of the opposition " . Wisden opined that O 'Neill had " saved a game that had been tortuous for days " . For his part , O 'Neill said that the dour play was " unbelievable " and that he was " just about falling to sleep " in the field . 
 He struck 77 in the rain @-@ affected drawn Third Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground and followed this with 56 in the Fourth Test in Adelaide . Despite making a duck in the Fifth Test , he ended the series as the second highest runscorer with 282 at 56 @.@ 40 as Australia took the series 4 – 0 . He bowled two overs without success . Outside the Tests , O 'Neill scored 155 and 128 against Victoria and Western Australia respectively as New South Wales completed their sixth successive Sheffield Shield win . 
 = = Career peak = = 
 The following season O 'Neill was Australia 's leading batsman during the 1959 – 60 tour to Pakistan and India , where he was a part of the last Australian team to win a Test on Pakistani soil for 39 years . After a quiet match in the First Test <unk> @-@ wicket win in Dacca in East Pakistan ( now Bangladesh ) , in which he scored two and 26 not out , O 'Neill played a key role in the victory in the Second Test in Lahore that was to Australia 's last in Pakistan until 1998 . O 'Neill made his maiden Test century of 134 in the first innings to give Australia a 245 @-@ run lead . He then took his maiden Test wicket in Pakistan 's second innings , that of <unk> . This left Australia chasing a target of 122 in the last two hours on the final day . The chase was on schedule with O 'Neill partnering Neil Harvey when the Pakistanis began wasting time to prevent an Australian victory . This was implemented by swapping fielders very slowly when the left and rightt @-@ handed combination of Harvey and O 'Neill took a single , and overs began taking seven minutes instead of three . To counter this , Harvey deliberately backed away when a ball was aimed at the stumps and threw away his wicket by letting himself be bowled for 37 . This allowed Benaud to come in and bat with O 'Neill so that the two rightt @-@ handed batsmen would give no opportunity to waste time by switching the field . Benaud then threatened Pakistani captain Imtiaz Ahmed with a formal complaint over the time @-@ wasting , and <unk> returned to their normal pace . Australia made the target with a few minutes to spare , with O 'Neill on 43 . O 'Neill failed to make double figures in the final Test , which was drawn , but ended the series with 218 runs at 72 @.@ 66 . In another tour match , against the President 's XI , O 'Neill scored an unbeaten 52 in a low @-@ scoring match as Australia stumbled to their target of 116 with only three wickets in hand . 
 O 'Neill 's performances in Pakistan was such that the parents in one cricket @-@ following Karachi family named their new son Anil for its resemblance to O 'Neill . Anil <unk> went on to become the first Hindu to represent Pakistan , playing nine Tests in the 1980s as a wicketkeeper . 
 On the five @-@ Test Indian series which followed , O 'Neill started slowly , aggregating 60 runs in the first two Tests , which were shared 1 – 1 . He returned to form with a leg @-@ side dominated 163 in a high @-@ scoring draw in the Third Test at Brabourne Stadium in Bombay . After scoring 40 in an innings victory in the Fourth Test in Madras , Australia needed a draw in the Fifth Test in Calcutta with four players injured or ill , while Benaud had a dislocated spinning finger . O 'Neill scored 113 in the first innings to help a depleted team take a 137 @-@ run first innings lead and prevent India from squaring the series . He was Australia 's leading scorer in the Tests , with 376 runs at 62 @.@ 66 . He also made his highest first @-@ class score of 284 , against an Indian President 's XI in Ahmedabad . He was the top scorer for the whole subcontinental Test tour , with 594 runs in eight matches at 66 @.@ 00 . 
 He returned to Australia and played in one match for New South Wales at the end of the 1959 – 60 season , scoring 175 as his state defeated Western Australia and won a seventh Shield in a row . Prior to the following Australian summer , O 'Neill was part of an International Cavaliers team that toured South Africa . He scored 133 runs at 21 @.@ 83 . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the 1960 – 61 home Tests series against the West Indies , O 'Neill scored 156 not to set up an innings win for his state over the tourists . He then struck 181 in the first innings of the opening match at Brisbane , his highest Test score . The innings prompted team @-@ mate Bob Simpson to say " if God gave me an hour to watch someone I 'd seen , I 'd request to see Norman O 'Neill . He had the style . " Australia took a first innings lead and O 'Neill made 26 in the second innings as Australia collapsed towards a likely defeat before recovering ; the match ended in the first Tied Test in history . This was the peak of O 'Neill 's career . Having played 14 Tests , he was averaging 67 @.@ 68 with the bat . 
 He then struck 114 as his state defeated the tourists by an innings , and he made 40 and a duck as the Australians took the series lead in the Second Test . He made 70 and 71 in the Third Test loss in Sydney , one of the few players able to combat Lance Gibbs effectively , top @-@ scoring in the first innings and second top @-@ scoring in the second innings . He then made 65 in the second innings in the Fourth Test at Adelaide , where Australia held on by one wicket for a draw . He contributed 48 in the second innings of the Fifth Test as Australia appeared headed for a series victory . However , a late collapse ensued , and Australia scraped home by two wickets to take the series 2 – 1 . O 'Neill ended the series with 522 runs at 52 @.@ 20 . O 'Neill gained attention during the summer for frequently losing his wicket by impulsively sweeping . This was attributed to the dominance of his bottom hand , which saw his bat swinging across the line of flight of the ball . Despite the criticism , he was at the peak of his international career , having made 1398 runs at 58 @.@ 35 in his first 18 Tests . 
 = = Wisden Cricketer of the Year = = 
 O 'Neill was selected for the tour of England in 1961 , and he warmed up by scoring centuries in consecutive matches against Tasmania for the Australian squad . During the English summer , O 'Neill scored 1981 runs at 60 @.@ 03 , narrowly missing becoming only the fourth post @-@ war player after Don Bradman , Neil Harvey and Bill Lawry to make 2 @,@ 000 runs in an Ashes tour . 
 In the third match against Yorkshire , which was O 'Neill 's second for the tour , he scored an unbeaten 100 marked by his cover driving . He followed this with a 74 against Lancashire before a 124 two matches later against Glamorgan , which was described by Wisden as the best of the season . He scored 73 against Gloucestershire and made 122 on his first appearance at Lord 's , against the Marylebone Cricket Club , in what was effectively a dress rehearsal for the Tests . Australia went on to win by 63 runs . In the next match against Sussex , O 'Neill was carried from the ground after suffering a knee injury , and after failing to bat in either innings , it appeared he would be sidelined for a substantial period . 
 However he recovered to be selected for the First Test at Edgbaston , just five days later . He made 82 as Australia scored 9 / 516 declared and took a 321 @-@ run first innings lead , but England could not be dismissed in the second innings and salvaged a draw . He continued his form with an unbeaten 104 against Kent between the Tests . 
 The " Battle of the Ridge " in the Second Test at Lord 's — the home of cricket — was an unhappy one for O 'Neill . On an erratic pitch with a visible ridge that caused uneven bounce , O 'Neill made one and a duck as an Australia scraped home by five wickets in a low @-@ scoring match . 
 He returned to the county matches and scored 162 against Lancashire , before scoring 27 and 19 as England squared the series in the Third Test at Headingley . O 'Neill then scored 142 against Northamptonshire , but the hosts were able to tie the scores when stumps were drawn with four wickets in hand . 
 After rectifying a technical fault , O 'Neill made 67 in the second innings of the Fourth Test at Old Trafford with the series tied at 1 – 1 , helping Australia take a narrow victory to retain the Ashes . Heading into the final Test , O 'Neill had a consistent run , scoring three fifties in four innings . He made his first century against England in the Fifth Test at The Oval with 117 as Australia drew the match to take the series . He did so after being given a " lucky coin " by a spectator and being dropped at second slip when he was on 19 . He scored 324 runs at 40 @.@ 50 in the Tests and was subsequently named as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year for 1962 . Following the Tests , O 'Neill added four half @-@ centuries in five innings in a consistent run towards the close of the tour . He left English soil with 138 against Minor Counties , in a non @-@ first @-@ class match . In all first @-@ class matches , he made seven centuries , and his run aggregate was second only to Lawry , who made 2 @,@ 019 runs . 
 = = International decline = = 
 After this tour , his form began to decline , as he became prone to uncertain and fidgety starts to his innings , which earned him the nickname " Nervous Norm " . A persistent knee injury increasingly troubled him and was to end his career . The 1961 – 62 Australian team was purely domestic with no touring Test team , and New South Wales completed their ninth Sheffield Shield title in a row , O 'Neill had a poor season , scoring only 377 runs at 25 @.@ 13 , passing fifty only twice . 
 The 1962 – 63 home Ashes series was Australia 's first Test matches in 18 months . After an unproductive season last year , O 'Neill started the new summer with 15 and 2 / 30 for a Western Australia Combined XI against Ted Dexter 's Englishmen . His victims with the ball were Dexter and batsman Tom Graveney . He then made his first century in over a year , scoring 131 against Western Australia for his state . O 'Neill completed his preparation for the Tests by helping New South Wales to defeat Dexter 's men by an innings . He scored 143 and took 2 / 36 , removing Graveney and leading batsman Colin Cowdrey . 
 O 'Neill made 56 in the First Test drawn at Brisbane but failed to pass 20 in the next two matches , which were shared by the two teams . After his wife made him a pair of " lucky lemon socks " , he scored 100 in the first innings of the drawn Fourth Test in Adelaide , which turned out to be his last Test century with fifteen Tests before the end of his career . With Alan Davidson injured during the match , O 'Neill was required to bowl substantially , conceding 49 runs in what was his most expensive performance to date . He scored 73 in the Fifth Test in Sydney to finish the series with 310 runs at 34 @.@ 44 , substantially below his career average of 53 @.@ 8 prior to the series . He also took two wickets , one in each of the Third and Fifth Tests , removing Fred Titmus and Dexter respectively . Outside the Tests , O 'Neill struggled and passed 25 once in eight other non @-@ Test innings . This was a 93 against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , which was not enough to prevent defeat . Victoria went on to win the Sheffield Shield and end New South Wales ' nine @-@ year winning streak . 
 At the end of the season , he embarked on a tour with the International Cavaliers , which toured Africa , mostly playing against provincial teams . He played in seven matches and had a productive series , scoring 541 runs at 41 @.@ 54 including a century and four fifties . He also bowled more frequently than usual taking seven wickets at 53 @.@ 29 . 
 The following season in 1963 – 64 , O 'Neill started poorly , passing 12 only once in his first six innings . However , he was retained for the team for the First Test against South Africa in Brisbane , where he scored 82 and 19 not out in a drawn match . He continued his resurgence with 36 and 61 not out the following fixture against Victoria , but was injured during the second innings and forced to retire hurt . This meant that he missed the Second Test , which Australia won by eight wickets . O 'Neill returned and scored half centuries in each of the next two Tests . He also took two wickets to end the series with 285 runs at 40 @.@ 71 and three wickets at 32 @.@ 33 . He added a further two half @-@ centuries in the remaining Shield matches . 
 O 'Neill retained his place for the 1964 tour to England , and scored a century against Western Australia for the touring squad before departing for the northern hemisphere . After failing to pass 16 in his first two outings , he struck form against Glamorgan , scoring 65 and an unbeaten 109 . He then added 151 and 17 not out , leading the way as the Australians defeated the MCC by nine wickets in a dress rehearsal for the Tests . However , O 'Neill scored 98 in the first four innings of the opening two Tests and was forced out of the Third Test with a knee injury , the only non @-@ draw of the series , which Australia won . Nevertheless , he passed 50 in each of the four tour matches during this period , including a 134 against Yorkshire and 90 against Northamptonshire . 
 O 'Neill returned for the final two Tests and ended the series with only 156 runs at 31 @.@ 20 in five Tests without passing fifty and going wicketless . He added another century against Kent and two further fifties in the closing stages of the English summer . 
 His 1964 – 65 tour of the subcontinent on the way back to Australia was even worse , a far cry from his leading role in the previous tour to the subcontinent . After making 40 and 0 in the First Test win in Madras , he was unable to bat either innings in the Second Test in Bombay after being hospitalised due to persistent vomiting , injury as Australia ceded their series lead . He missed the remainder of the series , the Third Test in Calcutta and a one @-@ off Test in Pakistan . Upon his return home , he has a shortened domestic season before Australia left for the West Indies . In five domestic matches , he scored 357 runs at 59 @.@ 50 , including a 133 not against South Australia . 
 O 'Neill started the 1964 – 65 tour of the West Indies strongly , scoring a century in the first match against Jamaica . He was often injured during the tour , but was at his most productive with the bat since the last series against the Caribbean team four years earlier . He made many starts , passing 20 in six of his seven Test innings , but was unable to convert them into big scores . In the First Test , O 'Neill was struck on the hand by Wes Hall and was sent to hospital for X @-@ rays after a break was suspected . During the Second Test , it was the turn of Charlie Griffith to send O 'Neill to hospital , after hitting him on the forearm and causing a large bruise . His 51 and 74 * in the Fourth Test at Bridgetown , Barbados , the last Test of his career , was the only time he passed 50 for the series . He ended with 266 runs at 44 @.@ 33 , missing the Fifth Test due to a broken hand . He managed a healthy return with the ball , taking nine of his 17 Test wickets in the series with an average of 25 @.@ 55 . This included his Test best of 4 / 41 with his leg @-@ <unk> the Second Test in Port of Spain , Trinidad . In this match , he cleaned up the hosts ' tail in the first innings , removing Jackie Hendriks , Wes Hall , Charlie Griffith and Lance Gibbs . 
 At the end of the tour , O 'Neill garnered controversy by writing outspoken newspaper columns accusing opposition pace spearhead Charlie Griffith of chucking . He was one of several Australians who took exception to Griffith 's bowling action , and he put his name to a series of feature articles in Sydney 's Daily Mirror . These labelled Griffith as " an obvious <unk> " , saying the hosts had been " wrong to play " him . O 'Neill stated that " If he is allowed to continue throwing , he could kill someone " . O 'Neill also expressed his desire to not have to face bowling that he deemed to be illegal . When the Daily Mirror syndicated the columns , London 's Daily Mail ignored an embargo and printed the pieces while the Australians were on their homeward flight , putting O 'Neill in breach of his tour contract , which forbade players from commenting in the media during tours . 
 The West Indies lodged an official complaint with Australia , and the Australian Cricket Board replied that it deplored the published comments , although noting that as O 'Neill 's touring contract had expired at the end of the tour , the point was moot . Nevertheless , the ACB changed its stance on players ' writing , so that they could no longer comment on a tour until three months after its conclusion . The event is often perceived to have been a factor in O 'Neill 's eventual departure from the national scene . 
 Outside the Tests , O 'Neill performed strongly in three matches against regional teams , scoring centuries in each of them . He scored 125 , 125 , and 101 in his only three innings , against Jamaica , Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 The following season , O 'Neill was overlooked for selection in all five Tests against the touring England team . Returning to New South Wales , he scored 473 runs at 39 @.@ 42 , including two centuries . 
 O 'Neill was omitted from the squad that toured South Africa in 1966 – 67 , ending his Test career . He continued his Shield career while his former teammates were on the other side of the Indian Ocean , compiling 741 runs at 74 @.@ 10 in a strong season . He started the season with 117 against Western Australia , before scoring a pair of 78s in the return match , helping his team to a tense 13 @-@ run win . He then scored 128 and 22 not out against Victoria and finished his season with 160 and 80 against South Australia , scoring a majority of his team 's first innings score . 
 As a result , he was selected for an Australian Second XI to tour New Zealand . He scored 69 runs at 17 @.@ 25 in two international matches and made his last first @-@ class century , scoring 101 and 58 not out against Auckland . 
 O 'Neill retired upon his return to Australia due to a knee injury . He left a reputation as a highly entertaining batsman who did not manage to fulfil his early promise . " A disappointment he was , perhaps , but his cricket will be recalled when those of lesser gifts are forgotten " , opined the writer EW Swanton . 
 In 61 matches for New South Wales , he scored <unk> runs at 52 @.@ 61 . He compiled <unk> runs at 61 @.@ 57 for St George in grade competition before transferring to Sutherland in the 1965 – 66 club . He scored 168 on his new club 's first day in the competition . 
 A cigarette salesman by trade , he became a commentator in retirement . He married Gwen Wallace , a track and field athlete who won relay gold for Australia at the 1954 British Empire and Commonwealth Games . They had two sons and a daughter . Their eldest child Mark O 'Neill represented New South Wales and Western Australia in the 1980s . O 'Neill also co @-@ owned a racehorse with Richie Benaud , Barry Jarman and Ray Steele , named Pall <unk> , and it won a race in 1961 . 
 O 'Neill died at the age of 71 after a long battle with throat cancer . 
 = = Style = = 
 Standing six feet tall , O 'Neill was compared to Don Bradman upon his entry into Test cricket . At his best , he was a dynamic stroke maker who was a crowd favourite because of his ability to score at a high pace , in particular with his power off the back foot . He was noted for his nimble footwork , which he used to negate spin bowling ; however this slowed in his later career as he put on weight . O 'Neill particularly liked to sweep the slower bowlers . He often put too much emphasis on his right hand , allowing a large space between his hands on the bat handle , and then turning his right shoulder too square towards the bowler . The renowned English batsman and captain Wally Hammond said that O 'Neill was the best all @-@ round batsman he had seen since World War II . O 'Neill 's tall build , strength and good looks also drew comparison to his boyhood idol Keith Miller . Despite the comparisons to Bradman , O 'Neill was much taller and broader , and was often impetuous whereas Bradman was known for his patience and lack of rashness . O 'Neill was also criticised for hitting across the line early in his innings . 
 O 'Neill was highly regarded for his style and entertainment values . Teammate Alan Davidson said " once set he was the most exhilarating player you 'd ever want to see — he was dynamite . He 'd play attacking shots off balls other people would only think of defending . He had wonderful skill and technique . His shots off the back foot down the ground off fast bowlers — you can 't really describe how good they were . " His captain for Australia and New South Wales , Richie Benaud said that he was " one of the greatest entertainers we 've had in Australian cricket " . O 'Neill 's style led the British writer EW Swanton to say " the art of batting , he reminded us , was not dead , merely inexplicably dormant " Wisden opined that " A high innings by O 'Neill is a thing of masterful beauty . His stroking is delectable , immense in its power . " 
 Later in his career , O 'Neill became a nervous and superstitious batsman , particular at the start of an innings . He wrote " batting is a lonely business " in his 1964 autobiography Ins and Outs , opining that he sometimes found first @-@ class cricket to be " depressing and lonely " . 
 He was regarded as an excellent fieldsman at cover , with a powerful and accurate throw , described by Wisden as a " dream throw " honed from a junior career as a <unk> . He was named as utility player in the 1957 All Australian baseball team , and his ability was such that he was approached by Major League Baseball scouts . Before the retirement of Neil Harvey , he and O 'Neill fielded in tandem in the covers and the pair were regarded as the finest fielding combination of the time . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = Try Some , Buy Some = 
 " Try Some , Buy Some " is a song written by English musician George Harrison , first released in 1971 as a single by former Ronettes lead singer Ronnie Spector . The latter recorded this and other Harrison compositions , such as " You " and " When Every Song Is Sung " , in London for a planned comeback album on the Beatles ' Apple Records . The project was co @-@ produced by her husband at the time , Phil Spector , whose temporary withdrawal from music @-@ making in 1966 had forced Ronnie to reluctantly abandon her own career . After the single became only a minor hit , and following recording sessions that had been hampered by the producer 's erratic behaviour , the proposed album was cancelled . In 1973 , Harrison added his own vocal onto a new mix of the instrumental track and included the result on his album Living in the Material World . 
 Harrison wrote " Try Some , Buy Some " during sessions for All Things Must Pass , his successful 1970 triple album , also co @-@ produced by Spector . The song 's austere melody was influenced by Harrison composing on a keyboard instrument rather than guitar . The lyrics reflect his perception of God amid temptations associated with the material world and take the form of a recollection of his first spiritual awakening . Ronnie Spector later admitted to being unable to understand the concept and disliking the song , and commentators have duly noted its unsuitability as a vehicle for her comeback . " Try Some , Buy Some " is notable for the extent to which Phil Spector employed his Wall of Sound production , as well as for being a significant commercial failure for Spector , in the manner of his ambitious 1966 production " River Deep – Mountain High " , by Ike & Tina Turner . The recording features a choir and long , lavishly orchestrated instrumental passages , the musical arrangement for which was supplied by John Barham . Besides Harrison , the backing musicians include Leon Russell , Pete Ham , Klaus Voormann and Jim Gordon . The single 's B @-@ side was " Tandoori Chicken " , an upbeat song in the rockabilly style . 
 Some commentators question the inclusion of Harrison 's reading of " Try Some , Buy Some " on Living in the Material World and view it in an unfavourable light , citing his struggle to sing in a key suited to the former Ronette . Having long been unavailable following its 1971 release – during which time she divorced Spector and attempted to relaunch her career without him – Ronnie Spector 's version was reissued in 2010 on the compilation Come and Get It : The Best of Apple Records . A longtime admirer of the song , David Bowie covered " Try Some , Buy Some " on his 2003 album Reality and performed it on his tours in support of the album . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 George Harrison 's song " Try Some , Buy Some " dates back to the recording sessions for his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass , and was one of a number of tracks left over from that project . In his autobiography , I , Me , Mine ( 1980 ) , Harrison recalls writing the tune on an organ and , not being an accomplished keyboard player , having difficulties doing the correct fingering in both hands . It was only when his friend Klaus Voormann took over the left @-@ hand part , to play the bass line , that he was able to hear the piece as he had imagined it . 
 Harrison musical biographer Simon Leng describes the tune as " the most extreme example " of its composer 's " circular melodic " style , " seeming to snake through an unending series of harmonic steps " . As reproduced in I , Me , Mine , Harrison 's handwritten lyrics show the opening chord as E minor and the bass line descending through every semitone from E down to B , followed by a change to a B7 chord ; the second part of the verse , beginning on an A minor chord , then follows a descending sequence that he writes as " A – A flat – G – F ♯ – E – A " , before arriving at D major . Harrison acknowledges in his autobiography that the melody and " weird chords " came about through experimentation on a keyboard instrument , which allowed him more harmonic possibilities than are available on a guitar . The song 's time signature is a waltz @-@ like 3 / 4 , similar to the verses of his composition " I Me Mine " , the last track recorded by the Beatles , in January 1970 . 
 Lyrically , former Melody Maker editor Richard Williams describes " Try Some , Buy Some " as " a typically <unk> hymn to his Lord " , in keeping with the religiosity of All Things Must Pass tracks such as " My Sweet Lord " , " Awaiting on You All " and " Hear Me Lord " . Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley writes of " Try Some , Buy Some " delivering Harrison 's Hindu @-@ aligned devotional message " in television evangelist terms " . 
 The song begins with the lines " Way back in time / Someone said try some , I tried some / Now buy some , I bought some ... " before Harrison states that he opened his eyes " and I saw you " . According to Christian theologian Dale Allison , the lyrics are a " reflection on some sort of conversion experience " , in which Harrison provides " before and after " comparisons . Before his spiritual awakening , Harrison sings of variously possessing , seeing , feeling and knowing " [ n ] ot a thing " until , Allison writes , " he called upon God 's love , which then came into him . " 
 As in his later compositions " Simply Shady " and " Tired of Midnight Blue " , Harrison refers to the drug culture prevalent in the music industry , in the verse @-@ two lines " I 've seen grey sky , met big fry / Seen them die to get high ... " Author Joshua Greene writes of Harrison 's concern during the 1970s for friends who " wasted their time chasing sex and drugs and money " , while Allison suggests John Lennon and Eric Clapton as being among the people on whom Harrison " personally witnessed the toll [ that ] drugs and drink took " . 
 In addition to the song echoing the " lost and then found " message of many Christian conversions , Allison writes that " Try Some , Buy Some " demonstrates Harrison 's incarnation among the " twice @-@ born " in Bhagavad Gita terminology . The same theme of salvation through reconciliation with his deity is present in Harrison 's 1968 song " Long , Long , Long " and would continue to feature throughout his solo career , in compositions such as " That Which I Have Lost " and " Heading for the Light " . 
 = = Planned Ronnie Spector solo album = = 
 Following their successful partnership on All Things Must Pass in 1970 , Harrison and co @-@ producer Phil Spector turned their attention to resurrecting the career of Spector 's wife Ronnie , formerly lead singer of the Ronettes . Since the break @-@ up of the Ronettes in 1967 , Ronnie Spector 's only musical release had been " You Came , You Saw , You Conquered " , a 1969 single on A & M Records . Her signing to the Beatles ' Apple record label was a condition of Phil Spector 's deal with the company , one that Harrison and Lennon , as avowed fans of the Ronettes , were happy to honour . The plan was to produce a comeback album , with Harrison providing many of the songs , and issue it on Apple Records . In his book Phil Spector : Out of His Head , Williams quotes music publisher Paul Case as having said during this period : " Phil wants a hit record with Ronnie again more than anything in the world . I think he 'd give up all his worldly possessions for that . " 
 Speaking to Phil Symes of Disc and Music Echo in May 1971 , Ronnie Spector admitted that she had hated being away from the music industry . The situation had been forced on her by her husband 's semi @-@ retirement in 1966 , following the failure in America of Ike & Tina Turner 's single " River Deep – Mountain High " , a production that Phil Spector had considered his masterpiece . Ronnie Spector told Symes : " For four years Phil and I completely detached ourselves from everyone in the business and settled down in California . I was so bored and missed the stage so much I nearly had a nervous breakdown . If I hadn 't had a kid I don 't know what I would have done . " 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Sessions for the proposed album took place at London 's Abbey Road Studios , beginning on 2 February 1971 . In addition to his own contribution as guitarist , Harrison enlisted some of the musicians with whom he had recorded All Things Must Pass : Gary Wright , on keyboards ; Derek and the Dominos drummer Jim Gordon ; Voormann and Carl Radle ( the latter another member of the Dominos ) , alternating on bass ; and Badfinger 's Pete Ham on second guitar and percussion . Another participant was Leon Russell , familiar to Phil Spector as a regular member of the Wrecking Crew during the mid 1960s . Recording continued at Abbey Road on 3 February , during which Lennon joined the proceedings , allegedly on piano . 
 Aside from " Try Some , Buy Some " , the first songs selected were ones that Harrison had <unk> for All Things Must Pass but not used : " You " and " When Every Song Is Sung " . The latter was originally titled " Whenever " and was intended for Shirley Bassey , and Harrison had written " You " as what he called " a Ronettes sort of song " . The other tracks recorded were " Loverly Laddy Day " ; a Harrison – Spector collaboration titled " Tandoori Chicken " ; and , according to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , " I Love Him Like I Love My Very Life " , which they suggest was another Harrison composition . In a 1987 interview with Musician magazine , Harrison spoke of Spector having written some songs for the project , one of which was " very good , in his pop vein " . 
 The planned comeback album ended there , due to the same erratic behaviour from Spector – or " health issues " , as Madinger and Easter have described it – that had hindered work on All Things Must Pass . According to Harrison 's recollection in I , Me , Mine : " we only did four or five tracks before Phil fell over ... " Of those songs , rather than the more obviously commercial " You " , Spector chose " Try Some , Buy Some " to complete for release as a single by his wife . Williams highlights Spector 's role in taking " a pleasant but essentially ordinary tune " and turning it into a " wholly magnificent " example of his Wall of Sound production style , on which " the essence is in the sound of the voice against the orchestra " . The heavy orchestration – including string , brass and woodwind sections , mandolins and cymbals – together with the choral parts , were arranged by John Barham , Harrison 's regular musical arranger during this period . 
 For the single 's B @-@ side , the two producers chose " Tandoori Chicken " , " a friendly impromptu rocker " , Williams writes , which came about after Spector despatched Beatles aide Mal Evans to get food during the session . Just over two minutes in length , " Tandoori Chicken " is in the rockabilly style of Carl Perkins , with Spector playing blues piano and Harrison on overdubbed dobro . Harrison recalled that the performance was recorded in a single take , with " a lot of improvised scat singing in the middle " . 
 = = = Single release = = = 
 Apple Records issued " Try Some , Buy Some " on 16 April 1971 in Britain ( as Apple 33 ) , and three days later in America ( as Apple 1832 ) . Apple 's print advertisement for the release carried the simple tagline : " A New Single " . Among the interviews she gave to the UK music press , Ronnie Spector admitted to Symes that it took a long time to learn the song " as it was hard for me to understand " , but she added : " I love the record . It 's completely different for me ; it 's more of a music thing than vocal . " In America , Billboard magazine 's reviewer described " Try Some , Buy Some " as a " powerful production ballad " that had " all the ingredients to break through big " , while suggesting that Ringo Starr and Eric Clapton had contributed to the recording . 
 Despite Disc and Music Echo endorsing it as a " terrific first solo single " , " Try Some , Buy Some " failed to place on the UK Top 50 . The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 on 8 May and reached number 77 , remaining on the chart for just four weeks . In Canada , it peaked at number 63 on the RPM Top 100 . Williams writes of the reaction to " Try Some , Buy Some " : " although people were awed by it , the radio would hardly touch it ... " In the UK , radio stations opted instead for " Tandoori Chicken " , which author Bruce Spizer praises for its " infectious party @-@ style " quality . 
 As with " River Deep – Mountain High " , the single 's lack of success was one of the " crushing disappointments " of Phil Spector 's career , author Nicholas Schaffner wrote in 1977 , the producer having " [ outdone ] himself to transform it into a masterpiece of his patented ' wall of sound ' production " . Spector had been sure that the song would become " a giant smash " , according to Williams , who describes the outcome as a challenge to " Phil 's eternal trust in his own judgment of excellence " . 
 Spector biographer Mark Ribowsky comments on the single 's commercial failure : " [ The song ] was completely wrong for her – another of George 's mystic chants , it forced Ronnie to try to appeal to the spirit instead of the flesh ... " In his book Tearing Down the Wall of Sound , Mick Brown also notes the unsuitability of Harrison 's " hymn about rejecting materialism and embracing Krishna " and describes the former Ronette 's comeback as being " over before it had begun " . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 Ronnie Spector 's " Try Some , Buy Some " remained out of print for almost 40 years , until its reissue on the 2010 Apple compilation Come and Get It : The Best of Apple Records . In the ensuing years , she filed for divorce in 1973 and resumed her career that year by playing live dates with a new line @-@ up of the Ronettes and recording for Buddah Records . In 1990 , she wrote an autobiography , titled Be My Baby : How I Survived Mascara , <unk> , and Madness , in which she offers a damning verdict of her only Apple single . The song " stunk " , she admits in the book , and its meaning was lost on her . " Religion ? Drugs ? Sex ? I was mystified , " Spector writes . " And the more George sang , the more mystified I got . " In light of this statement , Dale Allison opines of her performance on the 1971 recording : " she didn 't understand the song at all and sang it accordingly . " Reviewing the Come and Get It compilation for BBC Music , Mike Diver commented on the overindulgence behind many of the Beatles ' Apple projects but viewed Spector 's " Try Some , Buy Some " as being " worthy of praise " . 
 Of the other tracks recorded during the Abbey Road sessions , " Tandoori Chicken " remains a rarity , while Spector 's versions of " When Every Song Is Sung " and " You " have never received a release . A bootleg compilation known as The Harri @-@ Spector Show includes " Loverly Laddy Day " , as well as two instrumental versions of " You " . One of these recordings of " You " is the basic track that Harrison later used for his 1975 album Extra Texture , while the other is a slower , alternate take . 
 = = George Harrison 's version = = 
 Following the abandoned Ronnie Spector sessions in 1971 , Harrison 's relief effort for the refugees of the Bangladesh Liberation War kept his musical activities to a minimum for over a year . After starting recording for his second post @-@ Beatles solo album , Living in the Material World , in the autumn of 1972 , he revisited " Try Some , Buy Some " , replacing her vocal with his own , on top of the original instrumental track . He later admitted that the key was higher than he would have preferred , as with " You " . 
 Whereas the mix on the 1971 single had favoured instrumentation such as the mandolins , which Williams views as " the record 's trademark " , Harrison 's treated the balance of backing instruments differently ; Madinger and Easter describe the original version as having a " clearer " sound . John Lennon later said that the descending melody played by the string section was an inspiration behind his 1974 song " # 9 Dream " . Before then , he based the musical backing of his 1971 single " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " ( also co @-@ produced by Spector ) on that of " Try Some Buy Some " , in particular , asking that his acoustic guitarists replicate the mandolin parts of the earlier song . Neither Russell nor Ham were listed in the musician credits for Harrison 's version of " Try Some , Buy Some " – Badfinger having recently signed with Warner Bros. Records , which the band would join in September 1973 upon the expiry of their Apple contract . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 Apple released Living in the Material World in May 1973 , with " Try Some , Buy Some " sequenced on side two of the original LP format . Reflecting the album content , Tom Wilkes 's design for the record 's face labels contrasted a devout spiritual existence with life in the material world , by featuring a painting of Krishna and his warrior prince Arjuna on side one and a picture of a Mercedes stretch limousine on the reverse . 
 The inclusion of " Try Some , Buy Some " on Harrison 's otherwise self @-@ produced 1973 album has confused some critics and reviewers . Writing in 1981 , NME critic Bob Woffinden noted : " This was considered an underhand trick in some quarters . However , since the single had clearly not received the attention it merited , it could be argued that George was simply husbanding his resources carefully . " On release , in an otherwise highly favourable review for Material World , Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone called the song " an overblown attempt to restate the [ album 's ] spiritual message in material terms : ' Won 't you try some / Baby won 't you buy some . ' " In Melody Maker , Michael Watts wrote that the song fitted the album @-@ wide description of Harrison 's personal journey to " musical iconographer " status from his Beatle past . Watts considered the arrangement the " most imaginative " on Material World and described the recording as " a fairground sound , using harpsichord and couched in waltz @-@ time " . 
 Simon Leng dismisses the Ronnie Spector album project as " self @-@ indulgence " on the part of the two producers and views the inclusion of " Try Some , Buy Some " on Material World as having " achieved nothing , except to prove that Spector 's Wall of Sound was an anachronism " by 1973 . Leng writes of Harrison 's " straining " vocal on the track and " banks of trilling ' Long and Winding Road ' mandolins " that are at odds with the more subtle mood found elsewhere on the album . Ian Inglis describes Harrison 's singing as one of his " least impressive performances " and writes of the composition generally : " It may be a love song or a hymn of salvation but , unlike songs where this duality strengthens their impact ( such as ' Isn 't It a Pity ' ) , here it sits uneasily between the two . " With a different musical arrangement and the " melodramatic delivery " of a singer like Shirley Bassey , Inglis suggests , " Try Some , Buy Some " might have found some success . 
 In a 2006 review for Mojo magazine , Mat Snow described the track as " [ a ] n anti @-@ heroin song so seductively melodic it might induce the opposite effect " . Elliot Huntley praises Harrison 's " yearning " vocal as " one of the many highlights " of Living in the Material World . Huntley considers the " hymn @-@ like song cycle " represented by this " superb " track and the album 's final two songs , " The Day the World Gets ' Round " and " That Is All " , the equal of anything on All Things Must Pass . Beatles biographer Chris Ingham pairs " Try Some , Buy Some " with " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " , as two " wry , reasonable digs at symptoms of what Harrison sees as symptoms of a diseased world " . Reviewing the 2014 Apple Years Harrison reissues , for the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader , Walter Tunis includes " Try Some , Buy Some " among the " stunners " on Material World and describes the song as an " achingly beautiful awakening anthem " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 According to Huntley , " Try Some , Buy Some " is " an all @-@ time favourite " of English singer David Bowie . The latter covered the song on his 2003 album Reality , co @-@ produced by his longtime collaborator Tony Visconti . Bowie had originally intended to record it for a planned follow @-@ up to Pin Ups , his 1973 collection of cover versions . Talking to Rolling Stone shortly before the release of Reality , he said of his recording : " We were pretty true to the original arrangement , but the overall atmosphere is somewhat different . It 's a dense piece . " 
 Bowie occasionally performed " Try Some , Buy Some " live on his 2003 – 04 Reality Tour . In a review for the limited @-@ edition box set David Bowie Box ( 2007 ) , critic Thom Jurek described Reality as a " schizophrenic recording " , on which the covers of " Try Some , Buy Some " and the Modern Lovers song " Pablo Picasso " " [ distinguish ] this set more than anything else " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Ronnie Spector – vocals ( 1971 single ) 
 George Harrison – acoustic guitar ; vocals ( 1973 release ) 
 Leon Russell – piano 
 Gary Wright – electric piano 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Gordon – drums , tambourine 
 John Barham – orchestral and choral arrangements 
 = Sunil Kumar Verma = 
 Sunil Kumar Verma ( born 28 September 1974 ) , is an Indian biologist and as of January 2015 the principal scientist at the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology , Hyderabad , India . Verma is primarily known for his contributions to the development of " universal primer technology " , a DNA barcoding method , that can identify any bird , fish , reptile or mammal from a small biological sample , and satisfy legal evidence requirements in a court of law . This technology has revitalised the field of wildlife forensics and is now routinely used across India to provide a species identification service in cases of wildlife crime . 
 Verma received his <unk> in medical oncology from the University of Oxford , and has worked in the areas of signal transduction in cancer and on molecular biology applications in wildlife conservation . He is the recipient of several national awards , including the 2008 CSIR Technology Award , the 2009 NRDC Meritorious Invention Award and the 2009 BioAsia Innovation Award in recognition of his contribution to Indian science and technology . 
 = = Education and research career = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Verma was born in a small village in the northern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh . Verma grew up primarily in Tikri and up to the twelfth standard studied at the government school in Tikri . After completing his twelfth standard in the science group from this school in 1991 , he attended the G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology , Pantnagar to complete his Bachelor of Science in agriculture and animal husbandry . 
 = = = Research career = = = 
 Verma started his research career at G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology , Pantnagar , where he worked on the DNA fingerprinting of Indian scented basmati rice for identification of duplicate accessions . In 1998 , Verma was appointed as a scientist at the Centre for DNA <unk> and Diagnostics ( <unk> ) where he continued his research on the DNA @-@ based identification system , and in 1999 , he received the Emerging Forensic Scientist Continental Award from the International Association of Forensic Sciences at the University of California , USA for his work on DNA microsatellite based identification of wild animals . 
 In 2000 , Verma was appointed as a scientist at the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology , where in 2001 , he and Lalji Singh invented universal primer technology for wildlife identification , for which he later received a number of international patents , and several national awards including the CSIR Technology Award in 2008 ( jointly conferred to Verma and Lalji Singh ) , the 2009 NRDC Award ( jointly conferred on Verma and Singh ) and the BioAsia Innovation Award in 2009 . 
 In 2003 , Verma received a Lindau Fellowship to represent Indian scholars at the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings in physiology and medicine . During the same year , he also received a Commonwealth Scholarship to carry out his doctoral studies at the University of Oxford . Verma completed his <unk> in medical oncology at the University of Oxford in 2007 , and in January 2008 returned to India to continue his work at the CCMB . In 2010 , he subsequently became principal scientist at the CCMB and as of January 2015 , he remains in that position . 
 Verma was a visiting fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology during 2010 – 2013 . Starting in 2010 , as of January 2015 he is a research ambassador for the DAAD to promote bidirectional research collaboration between India and Germany . 
 Along with his team , Verma 's research in the area of wildlife conservation led to the reclassification of the pygmy hog , an endangered endemic species , from Sus <unk> to <unk> <unk> 
 = = Universal primer technology = = 
 In March 2001 , Verma and Lalji Singh claimed to have invented a method that they called " universal primer technology " , which allowed the identification of any unknown biological sample and its assignment to a known species source . 
 Through its ability to work across a large range of animal species , universal primer technology can identify any bird , fish , reptile or mammal and satisfy legal evidence requirements in a court of law . Patents relating to this invention have been filed in several countries and the research papers published in various journals . This technique of CSIR @-@ CCMB revitalised the field of wildlife forensics . It is currently being used routinely in <unk> at the CSIR @-@ CCMB to provide a wildlife forensics service across India in cases pertaining to wildlife crime . 
 Verma 's and Singh 's contribution to the development of universal primer technology has been recognised by the Indian minister of Science and Technology and the Ministry of Earth Sciences in a written report to the Lok Sabha . 
 Universal primer technology was also used by Therion International , an independent animal testing lab in New York , to uncover the noted seafood scandal in Florida and other parts of America . Several undercover investigations carried out by the ABC7 Whistleblower and <unk> <unk> investigators , revealed that almost half of the seafood was inaccurately labelled as a more expensive variety . This method of species identification used by the Therion International to uncover the seafood scam , was cited as " gold standard " by various labs worldwide . 
 = = = Universal primer technology and DNA barcoding = = = 
 In February 2015 , a credit dispute between universal primer technology and DNA barcoding came to light . Verma has argued that DNA barcoding , a technique independently described by zoologist Paul D N Hebert in 2003 , is essentially the same as universal primer technology ( UPT ) and that both utilize standardized , short stretch of DNA from mitochondrial genome , amplified using the specific universal primers , to assign the identity of an unknown biological sample to a particular species . Verma claimed that UPT was described earlier than DNA barcoding in his patents , and publication ; therefore , it should be fairly credited . However , Hebert argued that he was not aware of UPT because its patents were not visible to the broader scientific community due to a substantial interval from its filing in 2001 to grant in 2006 . 
 = = Literature = = 
 Verma has written several collections of Hindi poetry on social issues such as the 2012 Delhi gang rape . In 2014 , his work was showcased in Hyderabad by the Association of British Scholars . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Some notable fellowships and awards conferred to Verma are as follows : 
 ICAR merit Scholarship ( 1991 @-@ 1995 ) 
 DBT national merit scholarship ( 1995 @-@ 1997 ) 
 Emerging Forensic Scientist Continental Award ( 1999 ) from the International Association of Forensics Sciences 
 Lindau Fellowship ( 2003 ) to represent Indian scholars at the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings in Physiology and Medicine in 2003 
 Commonwealth Scholarship ( 2003 ) 
 CSIR Technology Award for Life Sciences " ( 2008 ) , Jointly conferred to Sunil Kumar Verma and Lalji Singh 
 NRDC Societal Invention Award ( 2009 ) , Jointly conferred to Sunil Kumar Verma and Lalji Singh 
 The BioAsia Innovation Award ( 2009 ) 
 Fellowship of Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology Berlin ( 2010 – 2013 ) 
 Research ambassador of DAAD ( 2010 @-@ till date ) 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Goswami , Gajendra ( 2014 ) . " DNA evidence : Current perspective and future challenges in India " . Forensic Science International 241 : 183 – 189 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Ganesan , <unk> S. ; Parker , Peter J. ( 2008 ) . " The tumour suppressor <unk> is a novel substrate of PKC " ( PDF ) . <unk> Letters 582 : <unk> – 2276 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> 
 Funk , Stephan M. ; Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Larson , Greger ; Prasad , Kasturi ; Singh , Lalji ; Narayan , <unk> ; Fa , John E. ( 2007 ) . " The pygmy hog is a unique genus : 19th century taxonomists got it right first time round " . Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 45 ( 2 ) : 427 – 436 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Prasad , Kasturi ; Nagesh , Narayan ; Sultana , <unk> ; Singh , Lalji ( 2003 ) . " Was elusive carnivore a panther ? DNA typing of faeces reveals the mystery " . Forensic Science International 137 ( 1 ) : 16 – 20 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 03 ) <unk> @-@ 9 . PMID <unk> . 
 Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Singh , Lalji ( 2003 ) . " Novel universal primers establish identity of enormous number of animal species for forensic application " . Molecular Ecology Notes 3 : 28 – 31 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1046 / <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 Verma , Sunil Kumar ; Khanna , Vijay ; Singh , Nagendra ( 1999 ) . " Random amplified polymorphic DNA analysis of Indian scented basmati rice ( Oryza sativa L. ) germplasm for identification of variability and duplicate accessions , if any " . Electrophoresis 20 : 1786 – 1789 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1002 / ( <unk> ) 1522 @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) 20 : 8 < 1786 : : aid @-@ <unk> > <unk> ; 2 @-@ 5 . PMID <unk> . 
 = Letter to My Daughter = 
 Letter to My Daughter ( 2009 ) is the third book of essays by African @-@ American writer and poet Maya Angelou . By the time it was published , Angelou had written two other books of essays , several volumes of poetry , and six autobiographies . She was recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women , and had become " a major autobiographical voice of the time " . Angelou had no daughters herself , but was inspired to write Letter as she was going through 20 years of notes and essay ideas , some of which were written for her friend Oprah Winfrey . Angelou wrote the book for the thousands of women who saw her as a mother figure , and to share the wisdom gained throughout her long life . 
 Letter consists of 28 short essays , which includes a few poems and a commencement address , and is dedicated to " the daughter she never had " . Reviews of the book were generally positive ; most reviewers recognized that the book was full of Angelou 's wisdom and that it read like words of advice from a beloved grandmother or aunt . One reviewer found the book 's essays both homespun and " hokey " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Letter to My Daughter is Maya Angelou 's third book of essays . She had published several volumes of poetry , including Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , which was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize . She had recited her poem , " On the Pulse of Morning " , at the inauguration of President Bill Clinton in 1993 , making her the first poet to make an inaugural recitation since Robert Frost at John F. Kennedy 's inauguration in 1961 . In 2009 , when Letter was published , Angelou had published six out of her seven installments of her series of autobiographies . Her sixth autobiography , A Song Flung Up to Heaven ( 2002 ) , was considered her final autobiography until she published her seventh autobiography , Mom & Me & Mom , in 2013 , at the age of 85 . 
 By the time Letter was published , Angelou had become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . She was , as scholar Joanne Braxton has stated , " without a doubt ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . She had also become , as reviewer Richard Long stated , " a major autobiographical voice of the time " . Angelou was one of the first African @-@ American female writers to publicly discuss her personal life , and one of the first to use herself as a central character in her books . Writer Julian Mayfield , who called her first autobiography , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , " a work of art that eludes description " , stated that Angelou 's series set a precedent not only for other Black women writers , but for the genre of autobiography as a whole . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Angelou came up with Letter to My Daughter , which became a New York Times bestseller , while going through old boxes of notes and papers full of concepts for future books and poems , which she called " WIP " ( " Works in Progress " ) . She found twenty years worth of notes written to her friend Oprah Winfrey , and realized that she should put the essays they inspired into a book so that others could read them . Although she had no daughters , and gave birth to a son ( Guy Johnson ) , which she called " the best thing that ever happened to me in my life " , many women in Angelou 's career looked to her as a mother figure . She wrote Letters to speak to those women and to share with them the wisdom she has gained throughout her long life . According to writer Gary Younge of The Guardian , most of the essays " end with the kind of wisdom that , depending on your taste , qualifies as either homespun or hokey " . For example , she uses what has been called her most famous statement , when speaking of Cuban artist Celia Cruz : " We are more alike than unalike " . Although Angelou discounts the idea when he brings it up to her , Younge thinks Letter reads like an extended farewell ; in her 500 @-@ word introduction she mentions death twice . 
 Letter consists of 28 " short epistles " , which includes a few poems and a commencement address , and is dedicated to " the daughter she never had " . Angelou thanks several women on her dedication page , which is divided into three groups . The first group of five women , which includes her grandmother Annie Henderson and her mother Vivian Baxter , she calls " ... some women who mothered me through dark and bright days " . The second group has only one name , Dr. Dorothy Height , " ... one woman who allows me to be a daughter to her , even today " . The final group is the largest , made up of 12 women , whom she calls " women not born to me but who allow me to mother them " . The group includes Winfrey , Gayle King , her niece Rosa Johnson Butler , her assistant Lydia Stuckey , and gospel singer Valerie Simpson . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 In his review of Letter to My Daughter , Younge states , " At moments in the book she sounds like an elderly relative , distraught at the wayward manners of the young , " but also says that Angelou seems to have " outlived the need for social convention " . Kirkus Reviews finds " old fashioned wisdom " in the book , and calls it " a slim volume packed with nourishing nuggets of wisdom " . Reviewer Karen <unk> <unk> says that " Angelou delivers with her signature passion and fire " and that although the essays are " easy to take in during brief moments of quiet " , they have a powerful message . Laura L. Hutchison of The <unk> Free Lance @-@ Star states that Letter is " written in Angelou 's beautiful , poetic style " and called the essays " advice from a beloved aunt or grandmother , whose wisdom you know was earned " . Hutchinson also stated that the book would gain Angelou new readers , and that her current audience would read and reread it . Psychologists <unk> <unk> and Marie J. C. <unk> called the essays in Letter to My Daughter " illuminating " and used it as a non @-@ scientific , interdisciplinary text to teach positive psychology . 
 Victoria Brownworth of The Baltimore Sun , who compares Angelou to populist poets such as Walt Whitman , notes that while reading Letter , " one cannot help but be struck by how much Angelou has overcome and how far she has come " . Brownworth states that despite Angelou 's harrowing and complex experiences , and the barriers she had to overcome , Angelou was " filled with life and generosity and a deep yearning to pass her story on to other young women " . Brownworth calls Angelou 's prose " colloquial and from the heart " . She also compares Angelou 's " fluid narrative " to oral history , and states , " The kernels of insight and , yes , wisdom in this small volume will stay with the reader for a long time " . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = American kestrel = 
 The American kestrel ( Falco sparverius ) is the smallest and most common falcon in North America . It has about a two to one range in size over subspecies and sex , varying in size from about the weight of a blue jay to a mourning dove . It also ranges to South America , and is a well established species that has evolved seventeen subspecies adapted to different environments and habitats throughout the Americas . It exhibits sexual dimorphism in size ( females being moderately larger ) and plumage , although both sexes have a rufous back with noticeable barring . Its plumage is colorful and attractive , and juveniles are similar in plumage to adults . 
 The American kestrel usually hunts in energy conserving fashion by perching and scanning the ground for prey to ambush , though it also hunts from the air . It sometimes hovers in the air with rapid wing beats while homing in on prey . Its diet typically consists of grasshoppers and other insects , lizards , mice , and small birds ( e.g. sparrows ) . This broad diet has contributed to its wide success as a species . It nests in cavities in trees , cliffs , buildings , and other structures . The female lays three to seven eggs , which both sexes help to incubate . 
 Its breeding range extends from central and western Alaska across northern Canada to Nova Scotia , and south throughout North America , into central Mexico and the Caribbean . It is a local breeder in Central America and is widely distributed throughout South America . Most birds breeding in Canada and the northern United States migrate south in the winter . It is an occasional vagrant to western Europe . 
 Based on appearance and behavior it was for many years considered a member of the primarily European and African kestrel clade within the genus falco , but recent DNA analysis shows the American kestrel to actually be genetically more closely related to the larger American falcons such as the <unk> falcon , the Peregrine falcon , and Prairie falcon . Though the species has not been renamed as a result of these genetic analyses , it is not actually a kestrel in the phylogenetic sense . Instead , a process of convergent evolution to fit a similar small prey niche in the ecosystem as the true kestrels has left it with similar physical characteristics and hunting methods . 
 The American kestrel is a common bird used in falconry , especially by beginners . Though not as strong a flyer as many other larger falcons , proper training and weight control by the falconer allows many American kestrels to become effective hunters of birds in the size range of sparrows and starlings , with occasional success against birds up to approximately twice their own weight . 
 = = Description = = 
 Under traditional classification , the American kestrel is the smallest raptor in America . The American kestrel is sexually dimorphic , although there is some overlap in plumage coloration between the sexes . The bird ranges from 22 to 31 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 to 12 @.@ 2 in ) in length with a wingspan of 51 – 61 cm ( 20 – 24 in ) . The female kestrel is larger than the male , though less so than larger falcons , being typically about 10 % to 15 % larger within a subspecies . The more northern subspecies tend to larger sizes , with a large northern female being about twice the size of a small southern male . The male typically weighs 80 – 143 g ( 2 @.@ 8 – 5 @.@ 0 oz ) , and the female 86 – 165 g ( 3 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 8 oz ) . In standard measurements , the wing bone is 16 – 21 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) long , the tail is 11 – 15 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) and the tarsus is 3 @.@ 2 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 Physically , American kestrels are leaner and less muscular than larger falcons . The pectoral flight muscles of the American kestrel make up only about 12 % of its body weight , as compared to about 20 % for the strongest flying falcons such as the peregrine . The wings are moderately long , fairly narrow , and taper to a point . Their less muscular body type is adapted to energy conserving ambush hunting , rather than spending large amounts of energy consuming time on the wing and getting into long tail @-@ chases of bird prey . For their size , they have strong talons and beaks , and can swiftly dispatch prey . Their lean build and energy conserving strategy allows a lower daily food intake than if they were more strongly muscled , yet with enough strength to commonly take bird prey as large as themselves , and occasionally larger . The success of this body style and hunting strategy is reflected in the high success of the species in densely populating a large range throughout the Americas . The flight of the American kestrel is not so dramatic and swift as more muscular falcons such as Merlins and peregrines , but their efficient adaptation to a broader diet of more available smaller prey , and need for less food per day , has resulted in there being many more of them . 
 In contrast to many other raptor species , the sexes differ more in plumage than in size . Males have blue @-@ grey wings with black spots and white undersides with black barring . The back is rufous , with barring on the lower half . The belly and flanks are white with black spotting . The tail is also rufous , with a white or rufous tip and a black <unk> band . The back and wings of the female American kestrel are rufous with dark brown barring . The undersides of the females are creamy to buff with heavy brown streaking . The tail is noticeably different from the male 's , being rufous in color with numerous narrow dark black bars . Juveniles exhibit coloration patterns similar to the adults ' . In both sexes , the head is white with a bluish @-@ grey top . There are also two narrow , vertical black facial markings on each side of the head , while other falcons have one . Two black spots ( ocelli ) can be found on each side of the white or orangish nape . The function of these spots is debated , but the most commonly accepted theory is that they act as " false eyes " , and help to protect the bird from potential attackers . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The American kestrel has three basic vocalizations – the " klee " or " killy " , the " whine " , and the " chitter . " The " klee " is usually delivered as a rapid series – klee , klee , klee , klee when the kestrel is upset or excited . This call is used in a wide variety of situations and is heard from both sexes , but the larger females typically have lower @-@ pitched voices than the males . The " whine " call is primarily associated with feeding , but is also uttered during copulation . The " chitter " is used in activities that involve interaction between male and female birds , including courtship feeding , copulation , and the feeding of nestlings . Nestlings can produce calls similar to those of adults at 16 days old . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Until the sixth edition of the AOU Checklist of North American Birds was published by the American Ornithologists ' Union in 1983 , the most commonly used name for the American kestrel was the sparrow hawk or sparrowhawk . This was due to a mistaken connection with the Eurasian sparrowhawk in the genus Accipiter . The sixth edition of the AOU Checklist corrected this , officially renaming the bird American kestrel . Several other colloquial names for the kestrel are also in use , including grasshopper hawk , due to its diet , and killy hawk , due to its distinct call . 
 As noted in the introduction , DNA analysis shows the American kestrel to actually be genetically more closely related to the larger American falcons than to the true kestrels . However , based on its physical similarity to the kestrels and the established nature of the name American kestrel , there has been little impetus to change its name . This could change in the future if continued genetic research more precisely determines the evolutionary history of the American kestrel within the genus falco . The entire genus is actually a set of species so closely related that most or all can be hybridized by artificial insemination . Significant natural hybridization of species has occurred in the past during the evolution of this closely related set of species , such that precise evolutionary genetic analysis as to which species are more basal to other species or to the genus as a whole is difficult to render . 
 The American kestrel 's scientific name , Falco sparverius , was given by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th century work Systema Naturae . The genus refers to the falcate , or hooked , shape of the beak , and the specific name means " pertaining to a sparrow " , referring to the bird 's small size and hunting of sparrows as a typical prey . 
 Seventeen subspecies of the American kestrel are recognized , generally based upon plumage , size , and vocalizations : 
 F. s. sparverius , described by Linnaeus in 1758 , is the nominate subspecies . It is found in most of the United States , Canada , and Mexico . 
 F. s. paulus , described by Howe and King in 1902 , is found in the Southeast United States , from Louisiana to Florida . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Mearns in 1892 , is found in southern Baja California . 
 F. s. tropicalis , described by <unk> in 1930 , is found from southern Mexico to northern Honduras . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Howell in 1965 , is found in Honduras and Nicaragua . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Vigors in 1827 , is found in Cuba and the Isle of Youth , and southern to central Bahamas . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Gmelin in 1788 , is found in Hispaniola and Jamaica . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Gmelin in 1788 , is found in Puerto Rico through the Lesser Antilles to Grenada . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by <unk> in 1892 , is found in the Netherlands Antilles . 
 F. s. isabellinus , described by Swainson in 1837 , is found from Venezuela to northern Brazil . 
 F. s. ochraceus , described by Cory in 1915 , is found in eastern Colombia and northwest Venezuela . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Chapman in 1915 , is found in western Colombia . 
 F. s. aequatorialis , described by Mearns in 1892 , is found in northern Ecuador . 
 F. s. peruvianus , described by Cory in 1915 , is found in southwest Ecuador , Peru , and northern Chile . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Chapman in 1915 , is found on the Juan Fernández Islands off Chile . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Swainson in 1837 , is found in Peru , Chile , and Argentina . 
 F. s. <unk> , described by Cory in 1915 , is found from northeast Brazil south to eastern Bolivia . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 American kestrels are found in a wide variety of habitats , including grasslands , meadows , deserts , and other open to <unk> regions . They can also be found in both urban and suburban areas . A kestrel 's habitat must include perches , open space for hunting , and cavities for nesting ( whether natural or man @-@ made ) . The American kestrel is able to live in very diverse conditions , ranging from above the Arctic Circle , to the tropics of Central America , to elevations of over 4 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Andes Mountains . The bird is distributed from northern Canada and Alaska to the southernmost tip of South America , Tierra del Fuego . It is the only kestrel found in the Americas , though as mentioned above this classification is genetically inaccurate . It has occurred as a vagrant in the UK , Denmark , Malta and the Azores . 
 American kestrels in Canada and the northern United States typically migrate south in the winter , sometimes going as far as Central America and the Caribbean . Birds that breed south of about 35 ° north latitude are usually year @-@ round residents . Migration also depends on local weather conditions . Wintering kestrels ' choice of habitat varies by sex . Females are found in open areas more often than males during the non @-@ breeding season . A common explanation for this behavior is that the larger females arrive at the preferred habitat first and exclude males from their territory . 
 The American kestrel is not long @-@ lived , with a lifespan of < 5 years for wild birds . The oldest banded wild bird was 11 years and 7 months , while captive kestrels can live up to 14 – 17 years . In a study , humans accounted for 43 @.@ 2 % of 1 @,@ 355 reported deaths , which included direct killing and <unk> , while predation ( including by larger birds of prey ) accounted for 2 @.@ 8 % . This statistic is likely biased , however , as reported deaths are usually found near or in areas populated by humans . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 American kestrels feed largely on small animals such as grasshoppers , dragonflies , lizards , mice , voles , and small birds . The kestrel has also been reported to have killed snakes , bats , and squirrels . The kestrel is able to maintain high population densities , at least in part because of the broad scope of its diet . The American kestrel 's primary mode of hunting is by perching and waiting for prey to come near . The bird is characteristically seen along roadsides or fields perched on objects such as trees , overhead power lines , or fence posts . It also hunts by kiting , hovering in the air with rapid wing beats and scanning the ground for prey . Other hunting techniques include low flight over fields , or chasing insects and birds in the air . 
 Prey is most often caught on the ground , though occasionally they take birds in flight . Before striking , the kestrel characteristically bobs its head and tail , then makes a direct flight toward the prey to grab it in its talons . Much like the red @-@ tailed hawk , American kestrels conserve energy in a hunt and pick their attacks with care as to position and odds of success . During the breeding season , the bird will carry large prey back to its mate or young . One study found that an American kestrel pair " foraged in ways that minimized the costs of energy acquisition in its particular situation " . For example , if the success rate for catching prey decreases significantly in a particular area , the bird will move to a different area . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 American kestrels are sexually mature by their first spring . In migratory populations , the males arrive at the breeding ground before females , then the female selects a mate . Pair bonds are strong , often permanent . Pairs usually use previous nesting sites in consecutive years . This gives birds an advantage over younger or invading individuals , as they would already be familiar with the hunting grounds , neighbors , predators , and other features of the site . Males perform elaborate dive displays to advertise their territory and attract a mate . These displays consist of several climbs and dives , with three or four " klee " calls at their peaks . Females are promiscuous for about one to two weeks after their arrival at the nesting site . This is thought to stimulate ovulation . Food transfers from the male to the female occur from about four to five weeks prior to egg laying to one to two weeks after . 
 American kestrels are cavity nesters , but they are able to adapt to a wide variety of nesting situations . They generally prefer natural cavities ( such as in trees ) with closed tops and tight fitting entrances , as to provide for maximum protection of the eggs and young . Kestrels occasionally nest in holes created by large woodpeckers , or use the abandoned nests of other birds , such as red @-@ tailed hawks , merlins , and crows . They have been recorded nesting on cliff ledges and building tops , as well as in abandoned cavities in cactuses . American kestrels also commonly utilize nesting boxes . 
 Three to seven eggs ( typically four or five ) are laid approximately 24 – 72 hours apart . The average egg size is 32 mm × 29 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in × 1 @.@ 1 in ) , 10 % larger than average for birds of its body size . The eggs are white to cream in color with brown or grey <unk> . Incubation usually lasts 30 days and is mainly the responsibility of the female , although the male incubates 15 – 20 % of the time . Eggs that are lost are typically replaced in 11 – 12 days . Hatching takes place over three to four days . Hatchlings are altricial , and are only able to sit up after five days . They grow very quickly , reaching an adult weight after 16 – 17 days . After 28 – 31 days , their wings develop and they are able to leave the nest . The young adult kestrels may breed from a year old , and the species has approximately a three to five year life expectancy in the wild . 
 In ecological terms the reproductive pattern of the American kestrel leans towards a small bird " r @-@ selection " strategy . In r / K selection theory , selective pressures are hypothesised to drive evolution in one of two generalized directions : <unk> or K @-@ selection . R @-@ selected species are those that place an emphasis on a high growth rate , typically exploiting less @-@ crowded ecological niches , and produce many offspring , each of which has a relatively low probability of surviving to adulthood ( i.e. , high r , low K ) . By contrast , K @-@ selected species display traits associated with living at densities close to carrying capacity , and typically are strong competitors in such crowded niches that invest more heavily in fewer offspring , each of which has a relatively high probability of surviving to adulthood ( i.e. , low r , high K ) . Between these two extremes the American kestrel is one of the few raptor species that lean towards being r @-@ selected . They are able to breed at one year old , have few non @-@ breeding adults in the population , and have larger broods . Their population growth rate is high relative to larger raptors , which typically lean towards being K @-@ selected . 
 = = Stress physiology = = 
 = = = Weather = = = 
 American kestrels are often useful in scientific studies on animal physiology , and are typically captured using the bal @-@ <unk> method or raised in nest boxes for experiments . Kestrel metabolic rate has been found to increase in response to rainfall , and at ambient temperatures below about 25 <unk> C. Kestrel metabolic responses to weather and temperature do not vary , however , with sex . Kestrels will increase their oxygen consumption , and therefore their metabolic rate in cold and wet conditions to counteract heat loss . 
 = = = Environmental disturbance = = = 
 American kestrels ' response to environmental stress is measured as blood concentration of corticosterone ( <unk> , ) a hormone produced by the hypothalamic @-@ pituitary @-@ adrenal ( HPA ) axis that releases stored energy for essential body functions . Extended periods of elevated blood <unk> levels may direct metabolic energy away from growth and reproduction . Thus , high levels of traffic disturbance and human development surrounding American kestrel nests are found to increase stress hormones leading to reproductive failure . Among successful nests , however , nestlings do not typically experience a higher stress response to environmental human disturbance , suggesting that they can tolerate a considerable degree of human activity near the nest . 
 = = = Environmental contaminants = = = 
 Since American kestrels are carnivores , toxic chemical runoff ingested by their prey can concentrate at high levels in their blood . Wild kestrels are subject to <unk> , or an altered immune response , to <unk> <unk> ethers ( PBDEs ) , a group of industrial flame retardants that may leach from factories into the environment . When PBDEs accumulate in body tissues of kestrels , the T @-@ cell mediated immune response decreases in efficiency . As a result , kestrels that ingest PBDEs may not respond sufficiently to viruses or other invading microorganisms . In addition , certain PBDEs may suppress growth and development of the spleen and bursa in American kestrels . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The American kestrel is likely the most abundant falcon in North America , although its total population is difficult to quantify , as local populations can change quickly due to resource availability . Count data from the USGS Breeding Bird Survey ( BBS ) indicate that the North American breeding population is experiencing long @-@ term and gradual but sustained declines , with some regions , such as New England and coastal California , exhibiting more rapid declines . Count data from raptor migration corridors also indicate regional population declines and largely corroborate BBS data . The North American population has been estimated at 1 @.@ 2 million pairs , with the Central and South American populations being as large . A smaller estimate is 236 @,@ 000 birds wintering in North America . A population increase occurred in the 18th and 19th centuries , probably due to deforestation for agriculture . The resulting pastures provided an ideal habitat for kestrels . 
 The southeastern U.S. subspecies ( Falco sparverius paulus ) has declined 82 % since 1940 due to a decrease in nest site availability . This decline is a result of longleaf pines being cleared from agricultural fields . Despite this , the American kestrel is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 The Peregrine Fund , a leading non @-@ profit organization advancing research and conservation of birds of prey worldwide , launched the American Kestrel Partnership in 2012 . The American Kestrel Partnership developed and maintains a web @-@ based network for citizen and professional scientists to enter , manage , and consolidate data from kestrel nest box monitoring programs in the Western Hemisphere . The database is being used by researchers to model and understand relationships between kestrel nesting parameters ( e.g. , phenology , occupancy , survival , productivity , and nestling weight and exposure to environmental toxins ) and environmental factors , such as land use , landscape composition and configuration , climate conditions ( e.g. , drought ) , and point sources of environmental toxins . Each breeding season , the American Kestrel Partnership features a live @-@ streaming video feed from the nest box located at The Peregrine Fund 's campus in Boise , Idaho . 
 = = Use in falconry = = 
 One important use of American kestrels is in falconry . It is often considered a beginner 's bird , though the careful weight control needed to maintain the kestrel 's desire to aggressively hunt takes skill . Falconers experienced in extracting the best performance the species is capable of report they are highly reliable on the normal game of sparrows and starlings . More aggressive individuals are sometimes capable of capturing prey up to approximately twice their own body weight , allowing the occasional capture of true game birds such as quail and dove . However , most falconers interested in the reliable taking of such game do prefer larger falcons or hawks . The advantage the American kestrel offers the experienced falconer is its suitability to simple and urban falconry not requiring large tracts of land or the use of hunting dogs . This form of falconry is sometimes referred to as " micro @-@ falconry " or " micro @-@ hawking . " The other small raptor species commonly used in micro @-@ falconry are the Merlin , the Sharp @-@ shinned hawk ( the smallest accipiter ) , and the European kestrel ( a true kestrel ) . 
 Hawking with the American kestrel requires adapting to the strengths and weaknesses of the bird . It is a very small falcon , and even for its size it is less muscular than than other small falcons such as the athletic and swift Merlin . It is more adapted to ambush hunting and short chases than to the longer aerial chases larger falcons often adopt . Used within it limits , it is effective . Experienced falconer Matthew <unk> , author of the book " American Kestrels in Modern Falconry " , in an article comparing kestrels to merlins , summed their abilities up as follows : 
 1 . " Kestrels are thin @-@ winged , flat @-@ chested , under @-@ powered and lack acceleration compared to merlins . I say that with much affection for them and with thousands of kestrel kills to prove these are not necessarily damning differences . Comparing a red @-@ tailed hawk to a Harris ’ or goshawk will conjure equally negative points of fact , yet we all know how good trained red @-@ tails can be ! " 
 2 . " The chief variable to choosing between a kestrel and a merlin may be your hawking land . If you live in open country , or have access at least to good pasture for cattle , a merlin can excel there . If you plan to hunt mostly in town or suburb , and especially if you plan to hawk from a car , I ’ d recommend the kestrel . The consideration coming in at close second is your intended quarry . To snipe , dove , quail and open @-@ country sparrows , merlins are best suited . For most blackbirds ( <unk> ) , either falcon can prove effective . Starlings in close are extremely vulnerable to kestrels ; but in the open are best prey for merlins . The same holds true for house sparrows , with this exception : sparrows in thick cover are better quarry for kestrels . This is the slip for which I feel the American kestrel is perfect . " 
 3 . " Once committed to an attack , trained kestrels tend to follow through to the end . They will stoop into cover , chase birds on foot , bind to quarry twice their size and never let go voluntarily . They have small feet , but as written elsewhere , also have the strongest feet for their size . It is a simple fact that American kestrels hold starlings better than merlins , on average , and will gladly tackle larger quarry than will any jack ( male merlin ) . " 
 American kestrels do not train so easily as some larger falcons ( particularly the Peregrine falcon ) in the art of " waiting on " to perform a diving stoop on flushed prey . However , some individual kestrels do master this skill . Falconers sometimes train them to climb to a stooping position with <unk> on kites or balloons that the kestrels learn to climb after . More common hunting techniques are to " slip " them after spotted game from the fist , or to release them from a vehicle window close to spotted quarry . These techniques are more of a natural fit to the kestrel 's ambushing methods in the wild . 
 Falconers using the American kestrel should be alert to protect the falcon from larger predators that may attack the kestrel , particularly if it is distracted on the ground with captured prey . Domestic cats and dogs are the greatest threat to attack the falcon on the ground , but the Cooper 's hawk is well known to boldly attack kestrels . This mid @-@ sized American accipiter has sufficient size and strength to carry the kestrel away , though falconers have reported often being successful in recovering the kestrel unharmed by acting quickly to intimidate the larger hawk into releasing the kestrel . 
 American kestrels are bred in captivity for use in falconry , and are among the easier falcons to breed . They are also sufficiently common that " passage " birds in their first year are relatively easy to trap . Wild caught kestrels " tame down " fairly quickly . They will usually be eating from a falconer 's hand the day after capture , be training within a week , and be ready to hunt in three to five weeks . A very tame American kestrel will allow itself to be picked up around the body with one hand , while accepting tidbits from the other hand . Such tameness is very useful when checking or treating the bird for injury or illness . 
 Migratory raptors native to the United States are protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 , so American kestrels are illegal to possess without a permit ( such as a falconry permit ) in the United States , Canada , and Mexico . 
 = = Cited books = = 
 Clark , William S. ; Wheeler , Brian K. ( 2001 ) . A field guide to hawks of North America . New York , NY : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , Jon ; Krabbe , Niels ( 1990 ) . Birds of the High Andes : A Manual to the Birds of the Temperate Zone of the Andes and Patagonia , South America . Svendborg , Denmark : Apollo Books . ISBN 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 16 @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , John L. ; <unk> , Gloria A. ( 2004 ) . " Our Smallest Falcon — American Kestrel : 198 / 1996 " . Our life with birds : a nature trails book . College Station , TX : Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 380 @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Roland H. ( 2005 ) . The American kestrel : falcon of many names . Boulder , CO : Johnson Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 353 @-@ 2 . 
 = Cool ( Gwen Stefani song ) = 
 " Cool " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her debut solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . Written by Stefani and Dallas Austin , the song was released on July 5 , 2005 as the album 's fourth single . It was written by Austin basing the song on No Doubt 's " Simple Kind of Life " , but he did not finish it . He then asked for help from Stefani , and they finished the song in 15 minutes . The single 's musical style and production were inspired by synthpop and new wave arrangements from the 1980s , and its lyrics chronicle a relationship in which two lovers have separated , but remain " cool " with each other as good friends . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , being compared to Cyndi Lauper and Madonna songs from the 1980s . The media have drawn parallels between the song 's lyrical content and the romantic relationship that Stefani had with Tony Kanal , a fellow group member of No Doubt . The song was moderately successful on the charts , reaching the top 10 in Australia , the Czech Republic , and New Zealand , as well as the top 20 in Denmark , Ireland , Norway , the United Kingdom , and the United States . 
 The accompanying music video was filmed by British director Sophie Muller in Lake Como , Italy . It features many flashbacks to when Stefani and her former boyfriend were dating , and currently , both are fine with their friendship . The song was included on the setlist for Stefani 's debut tour Harajuku Lovers Tour and the tour 's video album , as well as in the 2010 drama film Somewhere . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 " Cool " was originally written by Dallas Austin after listening to Stefani 's group No Doubt 's song " Underneath It All " ( 2002 ) . Austin commented that he was trying to write his version of No Doubt 's " Simple Kind of Life " , but he was unable to finish the song . He later asked Stefani if she wanted to co @-@ write lyrics . During a studio session together , they finished " Cool " in 15 minutes . Stefani commented , " When he told me about the track and where it came from for him , it just triggered something in me . " The lyrics of " Cool " reflect Stefani 's former relationship with No Doubt bassist Tony Kanal . Although their romantic relationship ended , the lyrics portray Stefani 's attitude that it is " cool " that they still remain very good friends . Stefani and Kanal 's relationship had provided the inspiration for No Doubt 's " Don 't Speak " ( 1996 ) , and while " Cool " presents an amicable friendship between former lovers , " Don 't Speak " is about a failing relationship and never arrives at a solution for the couple . Stefani said that she had never intended to include " personal " material on Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , and commented , " but no matter what you do , things just come out . It just ended this whole thing for me in my head , and it puts an end to a chapter in a really nice way . " The lyrics of " Cool " sum up the evolution of their relationship with the line " After all that we 've been through , I know we 're cool " . 
 " Cool " is a mid @-@ tempo love song featuring a synthpop and new wave production . The song is composed in D major . It is written in common time , it moves at a moderate tempo of 112 beats per minute , and it has a vocal range from the tone of F ♯ 3 to the note of C ♯ 5 . The song is written in the common verse @-@ chorus form , featuring five instruments : bass guitar , drums , guitar , keyboards , and synthesizer . " Cool " opens with all five instruments , and as Stefani begins singing , the synthesizer is lowered , and the hard @-@ hitting drum beat steadily increases in volume . She performs her highest pitch ( C ♯ 5 ) during the chorus , after which she sings in a softer , almost <unk> voce , and her lowest pitch ( E3 ) at the beginning of the verses . The synthesizer emulates brass and woodwind instruments , while the bass and guitar retain a prominent and regular eighth note pulse , using a I – IV – V chord progression for the verses . In the percussion section a drum kit is used , and the snare is introduced at the beginning of the first chorus , which maintains its beat . During the song 's fade @-@ out , Stefani repeats " I know we 're cool " and " yeah " , and she occasionally emphasizes " cool " . Her vocal range covers close to two octaves . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Cool " received acclaim from music critics . Yahoo ! Music 's Jennifer Nine referred to the song as " a <unk> sweet paean to post @-@ break @-@ up friendships " , while Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called it a " high school anthem @-@ in @-@ waiting " theme ; it also was selected as one of the album 's highlights . Richard Smirke of Playlouder commented that the song successfully used the same production formula as fellow album tracks " Serious " and " What You Waiting For ? " , and described it as a " crisp blend of edgy 21C production and early 80s Madonna @-@ esque pop " . Jason Damas , in a review for PopMatters , characterized it as " a slippery slice of keyboard " New Wave song referring to it as a " pitched halfway between The Go @-@ Go 's and Cyndi Lauper " . 
 Eric Greenwood for Drawer B called " Cool " " a retrofitted [ song ] with stale synths and chugging guitars " with " <unk> lyrics than even Cyndi Lauper would dare " . Sandy Cohen from the Toronto Star called it " the year 's love anthem " . Entertainment Weekly reviewer David Browne described Stefani , in " Cool " and in another song ( " The Real Thing " ) , as " a glacial ' 80s synthpop zombie " . Krissi Murison from NME found Stefani 's performance reminiscent of " Madonna 's breathless purr " . John Murphy wrote for musicOMH that " Cool " would remind No Doubt fans of " Don 't Speak " . Blender magazine editors ranked " Cool " at number 45 on its list of " The 100 Greatest Songs of 2005 " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted at number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated July 16 , 2005 . The next week it rose to number 64 , and it reached its peak position of number 13 on September 3 , 2005 . On other Billboard charts , the single topped the Hot Dance Club Play , reached number four on the Adult Top 40 and number nine on the Pop 100 . In Australia it debuted and peaked at number 10 on September 11 , 2005 , dropping off the chart on November 13 , 2005 at number 49 . In New Zealand " Cool " became the second highest debut of the week ending September 5 , 2005 , at number 11 . It rose to its peak position of number nine the following week , becoming her fifth consecutive top 10 in the country . 
 In European countries the song performed moderately , reaching the top 40 in most of them . It reached number 26 on the European Hot 100 Singles on October 8 , 2005 . On the Czech Airplay Chart , " Cool " entered the chart number 12 , achieving its peak position of number 10 in its 10th week . In Italy , it debuted at number 16 on September 22 , 2005 , peaking at number 15 the week after . The single debuted at number 18 on the Norwegian chart , climbing to number 16 the following week . " Cool " debuted and peaked at number 12 on the Irish Singles Chart during the week ending September 1 , 2005 . In the United Kingdom the single debuted and peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart for the week of September 4 , 2005 , spending 10 weeks on the chart . In Austria " Cool " debuted at number 31 on September 11 , 2005 . Four weeks later , the song reached its peak position of number 15 , and was last seen on December 16 , 2005 , after 15 weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Sophie Muller and filmed in Lake Como , Italy . " It was obvious I was gonna ask her to do it " , Stefani stated in an interview with VH1 's Box Set . The video follows the song 's theme and depicts the relationship that Stefani has with a former boyfriend , who is played by Spanish actor Daniel González . González and his new girlfriend — played by Tony Kanal 's girlfriend , Erin <unk> — are shown walking up to a villa where Stefani answers the door . The villa featured in the video is the Villa <unk> , in the town of <unk> , which Stefani said was " so beautiful " . The three of them are seen in each other 's company , with intercut scenes of Stefani singing on a bed . There are flashbacks to the time when Stefani and her former boyfriend were dating , where she has brunette hair . Flashbacks and present day images are linked with match cut cinematography . The lyrical theme of " Cool " is maintained in the video ; frames are incorporated to portray Stefani feeling " cool " . She is depicted as cool with her former boyfriend and his girlfriend throughout most of the video . 
 The music video for " Cool " premiered on MTV 's top @-@ 10 chart program Total Request Live on June 30 , 2005 , where it reached number three . After its July 8 , 2005 debut on MuchMusic 's Countdown , it reached number one for the week of October 8 , 2005 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In mid @-@ October 2005 , " Cool " was included in the setlist for Stefani 's first concert tour , Harajuku Lovers Tour , performed as the 11th song of the show . The song was added to the tour 's video album Harajuku Lovers Live , released on December 5 , 2005 . It was also used in Sofia Coppola 's 2010 drama film Somewhere , in which Elle Fanning 's character Cleo performs an ice dancing routine to the song . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 5th Parachute Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 5th Parachute Brigade was an airborne forces formation of brigade strength , raised by the British Army during the Second World War . Created during 1943 , the brigade was assigned to the 6th Airborne Division , serving alongside the 3rd Parachute Brigade and the 6th Airlanding Brigade . 
 The brigade first saw action in the British airborne landings on D @-@ Day Operation Tonga , where it was responsible for capturing bridges over the Caen Canal and the River Orne in Operation Deadstick . The brigade remained in Normandy until September 1944 , by which time it had advanced to the mouth of the River Seine . Its next engagement was in reaction to the surprise German offensive in the Ardennes , the Battle of the Bulge . This was followed by Operation Varsity , the last Allied airborne mission of the war . After this , the brigade advanced across Germany , reaching the Baltic Sea by the end of fighting in the European theatre . 
 The brigade was then sent to India as the division 's advance party , but the war ended before it could begin operations . Instead the brigade became involved in disarming the Japanese forces in Malaya and Singapore , to restore British sovereignty . Its last operation was in Java , where it remained until a Dutch force arrived to take over . The brigade then rejoined the 6th Airborne Division , which was serving in Palestine , but was disbanded almost immediately afterwards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Impressed by the success of German airborne operations during the Battle of France in May – June 1940 , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a force of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . As a result , on 22 June 1940 , No. 2 Commando assumed parachute duties , and on 21 November was re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion , with a parachute and glider wing . This later became the 1st Parachute Battalion . 
 On 21 June 1940 the Central Landing Establishment was formed at Ringway airfield near Manchester . Although tasked primarily with training parachute troops , it was also directed to investigate the use of gliders to transport troops into battle . At the same time , the Ministry of Aircraft Production contracted General Aircraft Ltd to design and produce a glider for this purpose . The result was the General Aircraft Hotspur , an aircraft capable of transporting eight soldiers , that was used for both assault and training purposes . 
 The success of the first British airborne raid , Operation Colossus , prompted the War Office to expand the airborne force through the creation of the Parachute Regiment , and to develop plans to convert several infantry battalions into parachute and glider battalions . On 31 May 1941 , a joint Army and RAF memorandum was approved by the Chiefs @-@ of @-@ Staff and Winston Churchill ; it recommended that the British airborne forces should consist of two parachute brigades , one based in England and the other in the Middle East , and that a glider force of 10 @,@ 000 men should be created . 
 = = Formation = = 
 On 23 April 1943 the War Office authorised the formation of a second airborne division , which would be numbered the 6th Airborne Division . Under its command the division would have the existing 3rd Parachute Brigade , along with two airlanding battalions transferred from the 1st Airborne Division to form the nucleus of the new 6th Airlanding Brigade . To fill out the division , a new parachute brigade was raised on 1 July by the redesignation of the 72nd Independent Infantry Brigade . Numbered the 5th Parachute Brigade , it was initially commanded by Brigadier Edwin Flavell , but on 5 July he was given command of the Airborne Forces Depot , and Brigadier Nigel Poett took over the brigade . In 1945 , while the brigade was serving in the Far East , the brigade 's last commander , Brigadier Kenneth Darling , took over from Poett . 
 The parachute battalions in the brigade were the experienced 7th ( Light Infantry ) , which was transferred from the 3rd Parachute Brigade , and two new parachute battalions , the 12th ( Yorkshire ) Parachute Battalion and the 13th ( Lancashire ) . These were standard line infantry converted to parachute duties , and had to undergo airborne forces selection and training at the Airborne Forces <unk> . On formation , each battalion had an establishment of 556 men in three rifle companies ; the companies were divided into a small headquarters and three platoons . Each platoon had three Bren machine guns and three 2 @-@ inch mortars , one of each per section . The only heavy weapons in the battalions were a 3 inch mortar platoon and a Vickers machine gun platoon . By 1944 a headquarters or support company was added to the battalion , comprising five platoons : motor transport , signals , mortar , machine @-@ gun and anti @-@ tank . This company had eight 3 inch mortars , four Vickers machine guns , and ten PIAT anti @-@ tank projectors . 
 The brigade was supported by the 4th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery from the Royal Artillery . This battery had three troops , equipped with four Ordnance QF 6 pounders each , and provided the brigade 's only anti @-@ tank guns . Later in the war , the battery was increased to five troops , three of them retaining the 6 pounder , while the other two had four Ordnance QF 17 pounders each . While the 6 pounder could fit inside the Horsa glider , the size and weight of the 17 pounder and its Morris C8 tractor unit required the larger Hamilcar glider . The 591st ( Antrim ) Parachute Squadron from the Royal Engineers and the 225th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance of the Royal Army Medical Corps completed the brigade formation . 
 'D ' Company , commanded by Major John Howard , from the 2nd Battalion of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry ( OBLI ) , of 6th Airlanding Brigade , also served with the brigade for a one off mission in Normandy . At the end of the war , while serving in the Far East , the pathfinders of the 22nd Independent Parachute Company , and the Parachute Platoon from the Light Composite Company , Royal Army Service Corps , were attached to the brigade . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 From June to December 1943 , the brigade prepared for operations as part of the 6th Airborne Division , training at every level from section up to division by day and night . Airborne soldiers were expected to fight against superior numbers of the enemy , who would be equipped with artillery and tanks . Training was therefore designed to encourage a spirit of self @-@ discipline , self @-@ reliance and aggressiveness , with emphasis given to physical fitness , marksmanship and fieldcraft . A large part of the training consisted of assault courses and route marching . Military exercises included capturing and holding airborne bridgeheads , road or rail bridges and coastal fortifications . At the end of most exercises , the troops would march back to their barracks , usually a distance of around 20 miles ( 32 km ) . An ability to cover long distances at speed was expected ; airborne platoons were required to cover a distance of 50 miles ( 80 km ) in 24 hours , and battalions 32 miles ( 51 km ) . 
 In April 1944 , under the command of 1st Airborne Corps , the brigade took part in Exercise Mush , in the counties of Gloucestershire , Oxfordshire and Wiltshire . This was an airborne military exercise spread over three days involving the 1st and 6th Airborne Divisions . Unknown to the men of the 6th Airborne , it was a full @-@ scale rehearsal for the division 's involvement in the imminent Normandy invasion . During the invasion , the division 's two parachute brigades would land just after midnight on 6 June , while the 6th Airlanding Brigade arrived later in the day just before dark . The division 's objective was to secure the left flank of the invasion area , by dominating the high ground in the area between the rivers Orne and Dives . For their part in the operation , the 5th Parachute Brigade had to capture intact the Caen Canal and the River Orne bridges . To assist the brigade in its mission , ' D ' Company from the 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry was taken under its command to carry out a coup de main operation on the bridges . 
 = = = D @-@ Day = = = 
 Just after midnight on 6 June 1944 , six Halifax bombers towing Horsa gliders , with the reinforced ' D ' Company from the 2nd Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry on board , crossed the French coast . Shortly afterwards , the tow ropes were released and five of the gliders landed in the strip of land between the Caen Canal and the River Orne . Major John Howard commanded the company for the assault , which in short order captured the Benouville and Ranville bridges intact , for the loss of two dead and several wounded . The intention was for this force to hold the bridges until relieved by the 7th Parachute Battalion . Next , Albermarle bombers carrying the 5th Parachute Brigade 's pathfinders , a group from each battalion , and the brigade headquarters started to arrive over the drop zone ( DZ ) . Some planes got lost and failed to reach the DZ or arrived late . Others were damaged before dropping all their paratroops and turned back , and one returned to base after failing to find the drop zone at all . 
 At 00 : 50 the brigade started landing at DZ @-@ N , just north of Ranville . Equipment and navigational failures by the RAF pilots and the division 's pathfinders resulted in the brigade being scattered all over the countryside . By 02 : 40 only around 40 per cent of the 7th Parachute Battalion had reached their assembly point . Unable to wait any longer , the battalion headed for the captured bridges , and established a defensive position in Benouville , the division 's only position west of the Caen Canal . Most of the 12th Parachute Battalion landed on the eastern edge of the DZ , and only around 60 per cent of the battalion arrived at their assembly point . Their objective was to secure the village of Le Bas de Ranville , which was achieved by 04 : 00 . The 13th Parachute Battalion could also only muster around 60 per cent of its strength on the DZ . This battalion had two objectives ; to secure Ranville and to clear the DZ of obstacles for the division 's gliders which were to land next . 
 By daybreak all the brigade 's objectives had been secured . To the west of the Caen Canal , the 7th Parachute Battalion was attacked by tanks and armoured vehicles from the 21st Panzer Division . With no heavy weapons available , one Panzer IV that reached the centre of Benouville had to be destroyed using Gammon bombs . The battalion held out all morning against attacks by German tanks and infantry , and around noon the commandos from the 1st Commando Brigade started arriving from Sword beach . The battalion was still being attacked from the south , but the commandos ' arrival meant their northern flank was now relatively secure . On the eastern side of the bridges , the 12th Parachute Battalion had been under mortar and artillery fire and was then attacked by the 21st Panzer Division 's 125th Panzer Grenadier Regiment , which withdrew after losing a tank ; several German infantry were taken prisoner . A second German attack was also stopped , this time assisted by the 4th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery , which destroyed three self propelled guns and a tank . The 13th Parachute Battalion secured Ranville , which had been held by a company from the German 711th Infantry Division , and was the first French village to be liberated during the landings . This battalion was also attacked by infantry and tanks , three of which were destroyed during the day . At 21 : 00 the 6th Airlanding Brigade arrived at two landing zones , one on each side of the Orne river . By the end of the day the 12th and 13th Parachute Battalions were still holding Le Bas de Ranville and Ranville . The 7th Parachute Battalion , after being relieved by the 3rd Infantry Division , was now in reserve , dug in along the western side of DZ @-@ N. The 3rd Parachute Brigade was holding a ridge of high ground to the east of the 5th Parachute Brigade , and the 6th Airlanding Brigade were moving into position to their south . The north was covered by the 1st Commando Brigade which was now under the 6th Airborne Division 's command . 
 = = = Orne bridgehead = = = 
 Because of their positioning , the 5th Parachute Brigade was largely protected by the 6th Airborne Division 's other units , and did not suffer from the almost constant German attempts to dislodge the division . However , the 12th Parachute Battalion was attacked on 7 June by seven tanks and an infantry company . The attack was beaten off for the loss of three tanks , but caused several casualties amongst ' A ' Company , including the crew of their only supporting 6 pounder anti @-@ tank gun . Later the same day during an attack on the 13th Parachute Battalion , three German self @-@ propelled guns were destroyed , and the next day the battalion destroyed another six attacking tanks . The 12th Battalion , Devonshire Regiment arrived by sea later in the day , and took over the 12th Parachute Battalion 's position . The 7th and 12th Parachute Battalions and the 2nd Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry now formed the divisional reserve . Elements from three German formations were responsible for the attacks on the division ; the 21st Panzer Division and the 346th and 711th Infantry Divisions . 
 . 
 On 10 June a large German force assembled to the south west of Breville and at 09 : 00 attacked across DZ @-@ N towards the bridges and the 13th Parachute Battalion . Waiting until the enemy were only 50 yards ( 46 m ) away , the battalion opened fire . Supported by the mortars and Vickers machine guns of the 7th Parachute Battalion , ' C ' Company from the 13th Parachute Battalion started a counterattack which drove the Germans away . The attack had cost the Germans 400 dead and 100 captured . Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale , commander of the 6th Airborne Division , decided to try to drive the Germans out of the large woods at Le <unk> , which were occupied by the 857th Grenadier Regiment , part of the 346th Infantry Division . The operation would be carried out by the 7th Parachute Battalion , supported by Sherman tanks from ' B ' Squadron 13th / 18th Royal Hussars . Two companies from the battalion entered the woods , while the tanks remained outside giving covering fire . By that evening the woods had been cleared . The cost to the 7th Parachute Battalion was only 10 men wounded , but the Hussars lost seven tanks , with 10 dead and five wounded . The German defenders had 20 men killed , and 100 prisoners were taken . 
 At the same time , the 3rd Parachute Brigade , supported by the 5th Battalion , Black Watch from the 51st ( Highland ) Division , were attempting to capture Breville , the only German held village on the high ground overlooking the British positions . By 12 June Breville was still in German hands , and Gale decided on one more attack , this time at night . This would be carried out by his only reserves ; the 12th Parachute Battalion , now only 350 men strong , supported by the pathfinder company , a company from the 12th Devonshire Regiment , and a squadron of tanks from the 13th / 18th Hussars . The attack would be supported by artillery fire from five regiments of artillery . The assault started at 22 : 00 , and after fighting throughout the night the village was eventually captured . British casualties were heavy ; the 12th Parachute Battalion lost 141 men , the Devons another 35 . The 12th Parachute Battalion was now reduced to only 55 men in its three rifle companies , plus the Headquarters Company . Some casualties were victims of the British artillery falling short . These included the 12th Parachute Battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Johnny Johnson , who was killed . The same shell wounded Brigadiers Hugh Kindersley of the airlanding brigade and Lord Lovat of the commandos . The next day , 13 June , the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division crossed the waterways and took over the defence of the southern sector from the airlanding brigade . This , and the assignment of the 4th Special Service Brigade to the division , allowed one brigade at a time to go into reserve to rest . The first brigade withdrawn was the 3rd , and the 5th Parachute Brigade took over their positions on the ridge of high ground , between the 1st Special Service Brigade in the north and the Highland Division in the south . 
 = = = Advance to the Seine = = = 
 After the capture of Breville the division was not attacked in force again , apart from an almost continuous artillery bombardment between 18 and 20 June . Further reinforcements arrived east of the River Orne on 20 July , when the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division moved into the line between the 6th Airborne and the 51st ( Highland ) Division . On 7 August Gale was ordered to prepare the division to move over to the offensive , with its objective being the mouth of the River Seine . The three divisions east of the Orne together became I Corps ; its commander , Lieutenant General John Crocker , knowing that the 6th Airborne had almost no artillery , vehicles or engineer equipment , did not expect it to advance very quickly . To reach the Seine , the division would have to cross three major rivers . There were two main lines of advance , the road running along the coast and another road further inland from Troarn to Pont Audemer . The commando brigade and the two parachute brigades would use the inland route , with the 3rd Parachute Brigade being responsible for the breakout when the time was right . 
 On 17 August the Germans began to withdraw , and the 3rd Parachute Brigade started their attack at 03 : 00 . By 18 August the brigade had crossed the River Dives and reached the outskirts of Goustranville . Here they halted , and the 5th Parachute Brigade took over the attack , their first objective being the village of Putot en Auge . 
 The 7th Parachute Battalion were to secure the ground to the east of the village . Delayed on the way , they ambushed a column of Germans advancing on them , before securing their objective . The 13th Parachute Battalion , which had been under fire for three hours , dashed across 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) of open land into cover at the base of Hill 13 . Then ' A ' and ' B ' Companies fixed bayonets and charged up the hill . Simultaneously , a German battalion , which had just arrived to reinforce the defenders , counterattacked causing several casualties . The two companies were forced to withdraw , closely followed by the enemy . The German counter @-@ attack was halted by an artillery barrage , and Putot en Auge was captured by the combined forces of the 7th and 12th Parachute Battalions . They also took 120 German prisoners . The 3rd Parachute Brigade then resumed the advance towards Pont @-@ l 'Évêque on the River Touques . They were held up capturing Annebault , and the 5th Parachute Brigade moved to the front again , reaching Pont @-@ l 'Évêque at 12 : 00 on 22 August . 
 The River Touques has two branches running through the town , and the 13th Parachute Battalion were given the objective of establishing a bridgehead across the river . The battalion reached and safely crossed the westernmost branch , but heavy German resistance prevented them from securing the main part of the town . Overnight a patrol managed to cross the eastern branch , using a girder that had been left spanning the river when the bridge had been blown up . The patrol was then reinforced by ' A ' and ' B ' Companies , and fought a three @-@ hour battle trying to form a bridgehead . They were then withdrawn back across the river , where the 7th Parachute Battalion had dug in to form a defensive position . At the same time , the 12th Parachute Battalion had tried to cross the river using fords to secure Saint Julien and the nearby railway embankment . They , too , were stopped by heavy German fire , which pinned them down on the embankment , inflicting significant casualties ; 16 dead and 50 wounded . As they were unable to proceed , brigade headquarters called off their attack , but the battalion had to wait until dark to pull back . The next day , 24 August , a patrol from the 7th Parachute Battalion discovered that the Germans had withdrawn during the night . The whole brigade crossed the river and advanced unopposed to Bourg , which was secured after a brief fight . The brigade was halted again and the commandos of 1st Special Service Brigade took over the lead . On 26 August , to provide some mobility , the Royal Netherlands Motorized Infantry Brigade was placed under the brigade 's command . Together with the 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment , they headed for Pont <unk> , which was the brigade 's final objective . The Dutch were ordered to move with all speed , but arrived 20 minutes after the retreating Germans had blown up the bridge across the River Seine , and just before the 7th Parachute Battalion arrived by foot . 
 In nine days of fighting the 6th Airborne Division had advanced 45 miles ( 72 km ) , despite , as the divisional commander Major @-@ General Gale put it , his infantry units being " quite inadequately equipped for a rapid pursuit , " . They had captured 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of enemy held territory , and taken over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . Since landing on 6 June the division 's casualties were 4 @,@ 457 , of which 821 were killed , 2 @,@ 709 wounded and 927 missing . The 5th Parachute Brigade had 268 killed during the campaign . The division was withdrawn from France , and embarked for England at the beginning of September . 
 = = = Ardennes = = = 
 In England the division went into a period of recruitment and training , concentrating on house @-@ to @-@ house street fighting in the bombed areas of Southampton and Birmingham . The training programme culminated in Exercise Eve , an assault on the River Thames , which was intended to simulate the River Rhine in Germany . 
 By December 1944 the brigade was preparing for Christmas leave , when news of the German offensive in the Ardennes broke . As part of the First Allied Airborne Army , 6th Airborne Division was available as a component of the strategic reserve for the Allied forces in northwest Europe . The other two divisions available in reserve , the American 82nd and 101st Airborne , were already at Rheims in northern France , and the 6th Airborne was sent by sea to Belgium to assist the defence . With 29 German and 33 Allied divisions involved , the Battle of the Bulge was the largest single battle on the Western Front during the war . On Christmas Day the division moved up to take position in front of the spearhead of the German advance ; by Boxing Day they had reached their allocated places in the defensive line between Dinant and Namur . The 3rd Parachute Brigade were on the left , 5th Parachute Brigade on the right , and the 6th Airlanding Brigade in reserve . By the time they arrived in position the German advance had faltered . 
 The 5th Parachute Brigade was ordered towards <unk> , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south of Rochefort , and on 3 January became involved in the division 's only fighting in the Ardennes . By 13 : 30 the 13th Parachute Battalion had covered 8 miles ( 13 km ) and was in position to assault the village of Bure . The battalion had been observed by the Germans , and was met with heavy fire as their attack started . The battalion 's ' A ' Company made for the village , while ' B ' Company attempted to secure the heights overlooking it . ' B ' Company , faced with infantry supported by tanks and artillery , suffered heavy casualties , and was reduced to 21 men by nightfall . By 17 : 00 ' A ' Company had secured around half the village , and were joined by ' C ' Company . Over the following day the Germans launched fifteen separate assaults to try to retake the village , but the battalion held out . With reinforcements from ' C ' Company of the 2nd Ox and Bucks , the remainder of the village was captured . The battalion was then ordered to withdraw ; the battle had cost them 68 dead and 121 wounded . At the same time , the 7th Parachute Battalion was attacking the village of <unk> , which was defended by around a hundred infantry with tank and artillery support . The village was captured with minimal casualties . 
 Over the next days the German advance was halted and forced back , until at the end of January 1945 , the brigade moved into the Netherlands . Here the division was made responsible for the area along the River Maas , between Venlo and Roermond . The brigade carried out patrols , on both sides of the river , against their opponents from the 7th Parachute Division . Near the end of February the division returned to England to prepare for another airborne mission , to cross the River Rhine into Germany . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Whereas all other Allied airborne landings had been a surprise for the Germans , the Rhine crossing was expected and their defences were reinforced in anticipation . The airborne operation was preceded by a two @-@ day round @-@ the @-@ clock bombing mission by the Allied air forces . Then on 23 March 3 @,@ 500 artillery guns targeted the German positions . At dusk Operation Plunder , an assault river crossing of the Rhine by the 21st Army Group , began . For their part in Operation Varsity , the 6th Airborne Division was assigned to the American XVIII Airborne Corps alongside the US 17th Airborne Division . 
 Both airborne divisions began landing at the same time , 10 : 00 on 24 March 1945 . The 6th Airborne were to protect the northern part of the landing area ; they had six drop zones around the town of Hamminkeln . The plan was for them to secure the town , the high ground east of the village of Bergen , and bridges across the river IJssel . The 5th Parachute Brigade would land on the northernmost DZ , DZ @-@ B , and hold the area east of the Wesel railway line . 
 The brigade arrived in the second wave of aircraft , after the 3rd Parachute Brigade , and the German anti @-@ aircraft gunners were waiting for them . The parachute descent was made under fire , and the DZ itself was also subjected to artillery and mortar fire . The 7th Parachute Battalion suffered casualties from air burst artillery shells . Their section of the DZ was only 700 yards ( 640 m ) from a battery of German 88 mm guns , which also targeted the brigade headquarters and the assembly areas of the 12th Parachute Battalion . The 7th Parachute Battalion secured the DZ , while the 12th and 13th Parachute Battalions headed for the brigade objective , the road from the DZ to Hamminkeln . By 15 : 00 , despite fierce opposition , the brigade had secured its objectives , with a large number of prisoners taken , but had suffered around 700 casualties . Casualties for the division as a whole were 347 dead and 731 wounded . That night , the division was ordered to prepare to advance east into Germany from 26 March , when they were to be relieved by troops from the 52nd ( Lowland ) Infantry Division . 
 On 27 March the brigade led the division 's advance . Their first objective , the village of <unk> , was unoccupied , so they pressed on to the next village , Erle , by that evening . The 7th Parachute Battalion was ordered to attack what was believed to be three self @-@ propelled guns on the village outskirts , while the 13th Parachute Battalion captured the nearby high ground . As the 7th Parachute Battalion 's leading platoon approached the guns , they were met with heavy fire from anti @-@ aircraft and anti @-@ tank guns . The battalion was forced to take cover and was unable to move forward ; but when darkness came , they advanced and seized the position , capturing 60 prisoners , one anti @-@ tank gun , 11 anti @-@ aircraft guns and several light machine guns . Elsewhere , the 13th Parachute Battalion had captured the high ground and the 12th Parachute Battalion had moved 20 miles ( 32 km ) across country , and were ready to assault Erle once daylight came . They attacked at dawn , and captured the village after a 15 minute fight . The brigade held these positions while the rest of the division passed through them to continue the advance . They then resumed the lead after the division crossed the Dortmund – Ems Canal towards <unk> , fighting several small engagements on the way . After the River Weser , the brigade again assumed the lead towards Leine . Supported by tanks from the 4th Armoured Battalion , Grenadier Guards , they captured two bridges at <unk> and Neustadt , and fought a small battle at Wunstorf airfield . On 7 April the brigade was informed that they were the lead formation of 21st Army Group , having advanced further into Germany than any of its other units . 
 The 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division then took over from the 6th Airborne Division as the lead formation until 30 April when the airborne division once more resumed the advance , crossing the River Elbe over a bridge captured by the Scottish . The division 's objective was Wismar on the Baltic Sea ; the two parachute brigades advanced on separate routes to <unk> , aware that the brigade to arrive first would continue as the division 's lead formation . By this stage of the war the advance was hampered more by refugees fleeing westwards than by any organised opposition . The 3rd Parachute Brigade won the race and led the division to Wismar , arriving on 1 May only 30 minutes before the lead troops of the Soviet Red Army advancing from the east . While the rest of the brigade remained at Wismar , ' B ' Company of the 13th Parachute Battalion were sent to Denmark to liberate Copenhagen , arriving on 5 May . They remained in Copenhagen until the 1st Parachute Brigade arrived from England to relieve them . 
 = = = Far East = = = 
 Now that the war in Europe was over , plans were made to form an airborne corps comprising the 6th Airborne Division and 44th Indian Airborne Division for service against Japanese forces in the Far East . The corps would be used in operations to recapture Malaya and Singapore . The division 's advance party , based partly on the 5th Parachute Brigade , arrived in India in July 1945 . The brigade travelled ahead of the rest of the division as it had been intended to use them for Operation Zipper , an independent mission in Burma . They would have landed in Malaya , between Singapore and the Japanese forces in Burma . Reinforcements would then arrive by sea and attack northwards and southwards , while the brigade carried out another airborne landing on Singapore itself . However , following the Japanese surrender , all these plans changed , and the remainder of the 6th Airborne Division were sent to Palestine . Instead of carrying out an airborne landing , the 5th Parachute Brigade travelled by sea , leaving Bombay on 9 September and arriving at <unk> in Malaya on 17 September . Only the 7th and 12th Parachute battalions landed , and they re @-@ embarked the next day to sail for Singapore as part of Operation <unk> ; they arrived on 21 September . The brigade , now part of XV Corps , became the island 's garrison . In December the 23rd Indian Infantry Division was sent from Seremban to Java , and the brigade was moved to replace them . 
 By 17 December the situation in Java had worsened , and the brigade was moved again , sent as reinforcements to assist the Indian division . They arrived at Batavia three days later . The brigade 's mission was to restore law and order and disarm the Japanese military forces in the area . They were told to expect to remain in Java until relieved by units of the Royal Netherlands Army . Under the command of the 23rd Indian Infantry Division , the brigade carried out Operation Pounce , clearing the town and surrounding region of dissidents . In January 1946 they were moved to garrison Semarang . 
 At the time Semarang had a population of around 210 @,@ 000 , a mixture of Indonesians , Chinese , Koreans , Dutch and Japanese . During the fighting before the brigade 's arrival considerable damage had been caused to the town 's infrastructure . There were no public utilities or medical services , food or water , so the brigade 's engineers and medics were tasked to rectify the situation . To protect the inhabitants , the brigade 's three battalions established a defensive perimeter around the outskirts of the town . Their main concern was Indonesian nationalists whose stated aim was to " slaughter all the Dutch and Chinese " . To assist with security , a Japanese battalion was rearmed and given a sector of the defences to man . The 4th Anti @-@ Tank Battery carried out patrols inside the town limits , while the Royal Army Service Corps platoon distributed food supplies . The brigade remained in Semarang until relieved by the Dutch ' T ' Brigade Group on 26 April 1946 , and then returned to Singapore . 
 = = = Mutiny and disbandment = = = 
 On their return from Java , the 13th Parachute Battalion was stationed at Muar Camp in Malaya . The camp consisted of tents with no electricity , and no facilities for washing , cooking or recreation . Unhappy with the conditions , at 07 : 00 on 14 May around 260 privates grouped together and refused to disperse when ordered to do so by the orderly officer . The commanding officer then spoke to the men and ordered them to return to duty , which they again refused to do . That afternoon the commanding general arrived and spoke to them . They were then ordered to fall in and when they failed to comply , 258 men were taken into military custody . A Court of Inquiry was held which decided the 258 men were to stand trial for mutiny . In the trial , three men were acquitted , eight were sentenced to five years ' penal servitude and discharged from the army , and the rest were given two years imprisonment with hard labour and discharged . Two days after sentencing , the Secretary of State for War quashed all the convictions , stating that the Judge Advocate @-@ General had advised him that there were , " a number of irregularities of a substantial nature which may well have prejudiced the accused individually . These irregularities in his opinion rendered the trial as a whole so unsatisfactory that the convictions ought not to be allowed to stand . " 
 The brigade spent two months in Malaya , before being ordered to rejoin the 6th Airborne Division in Palestine . The 13th Parachute Battalion was disbanded before leaving Malaya , and the remainder of the brigade arrived at <unk> in Palestine on 5 August 1946 . Shortly after disembarking , orders were received that the brigade was to be disbanded . Of the two remaining parachute battalions , the 7th was amalgamated with the 17th Parachute Battalion , retaining the number of the senior battalion , and the 12th Parachute Battalion was disbanded . Any men not immediately demobbed were distributed among the other battalions in the division . On 13 September , the 22nd Independent Parachute Company , no longer part of the brigade by this time , was also disbanded . 
 = = Territorial Army = = 
 In 1947 , a new 5th Parachute Brigade ( Territorial ) was raised as part of the Territorial Army and assigned to the 16th Airborne Division . It comprised the 12th Battalion Parachute Regiment , the 17th Battalion Parachute Regiment and the 18th Battalion , Parachute Regiment . In 1950 , the brigade was renumbered the 45th Parachute Brigade ( TA ) . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
