 Commanders 
 Brigadier Edwin Flavell 
 Brigadier Nigel Poett 
 Brigadier Kenneth Darling 
 Units – Europe 
 7th Parachute Battalion 
 12th Parachute Battalion 
 13th Parachute Battalion 
 'D ' Company , 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry 
 225th Parachute Field Ambulance , Royal Army Medical Corps 
 4th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery , Royal Artillery 
 591st ( Antrim ) Parachute Squadron , Royal Engineers 
 Units – Far East 
 7th Parachute Battalion 
 12th Parachute Battalion 
 13th Parachute Battalion 
 225th Parachute Field Ambulance , Royal Army Medical Corps 
 4th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery , Royal Artillery 
 22nd Independent Parachute Company , Army Air Corps 
 591st ( Antrim ) Parachute Squadron , Royal Engineers 
 Parachute Platoon , Light Composite Company , Royal Army Service Corps 
 = Noël Coward = 
 Sir Noël Peirce Coward ( 16 December 1899 – 26 March 1973 ) was an English playwright , composer , director , actor and singer , known for his wit , flamboyance , and what Time magazine called " a sense of personal style , a combination of cheek and chic , pose and poise " . 
 Born in Teddington , south @-@ west London , Coward attended a dance academy in London as a child , making his professional stage début at the age of eleven . As a teenager he was introduced into the high society in which most of his plays would be set . Coward achieved enduring success as a playwright , publishing more than 50 plays from his teens onwards . Many of his works , such as Hay Fever , Private Lives , Design for Living , Present Laughter and Blithe Spirit , have remained in the regular theatre repertoire . He composed hundreds of songs , in addition to well over a dozen musical theatre works ( including the operetta Bitter Sweet and comic revues ) , screenplays , poetry , several volumes of short stories , the novel Pomp and Circumstance , and a three @-@ volume autobiography . Coward 's stage and film acting and directing career spanned six decades , during which he starred in many of his own works . 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War Coward volunteered for war work , running the British propaganda office in Paris . He also worked with the Secret Service , seeking to use his influence to persuade the American public and government to help Britain . Coward won an Academy Honorary Award in 1943 for his naval film drama , In Which We Serve , and was knighted in 1969 . In the 1950s he achieved fresh success as a cabaret performer , performing his own songs , such as " Mad Dogs and Englishmen " , " London Pride " and " I Went to a Marvellous Party " . 
 His plays and songs achieved new popularity in the 1960s and 1970s , and his work and style continue to influence popular culture . Coward did not publicly acknowledge his homosexuality , but it was discussed candidly after his death by biographers including Graham Payn , his long @-@ time partner , and in Coward 's diaries and letters , published posthumously . The former Albery Theatre ( originally the New Theatre ) in London was renamed the Noël Coward Theatre in his honour in 2006 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Coward was born in 1899 in Teddington , Middlesex , a south @-@ western suburb of London . His parents were Arthur Sabin Coward ( 1856 – 1937 ) , a piano salesman , and Violet Agnes Coward ( 1863 – 1954 ) , daughter of Henry Gordon Veitch , a captain and surveyor in the Royal Navy . Noël Coward was the second of their three sons , the eldest of whom had died in 1898 at the age of six . Coward 's father lacked ambition and industry , and family finances were often poor . Coward was bitten by the performing bug early and appeared in amateur concerts by the age of seven . He attended the Chapel Royal Choir School as a young child . He had little formal schooling but was a voracious reader . 
 Encouraged by his ambitious mother , who sent him to a dance academy in London , Coward 's first professional engagement was in January 1911 as Prince Mussel in the children 's play The Goldfish . In Present Indicative , his first volume of memoirs , Coward wrote : 
 One day ... a little advertisement appeared in the Daily Mirror .... It stated that a talented boy of attractive appearance was required by a Miss Lila Field to appear in her production of an all @-@ children fairy play : The Goldfish . This seemed to dispose of all argument . I was a talented boy , God knows , and , when washed and <unk> down a bit , passably attractive . There appeared to be no earthly reason why Miss Lila Field shouldn 't jump at me , and we both believed that she would be a fool indeed to miss such a magnificent opportunity . 
 The leading actor @-@ manager Charles Hawtrey , whom the young Coward idolised and from whom he learned a great deal about the theatre , cast him in the children 's play Where the Rainbow Ends . Coward played in the piece in 1911 and 1912 at the Garrick Theatre in London 's West End . In 1912 Coward also appeared at the Savoy Theatre in An Autumn Idyll ( as a dancer in the ballet ) and at the London Coliseum in A Little Fowl Play , by Harold Owen , in which Hawtrey starred . Italia Conti engaged Coward to appear at the Liverpool Repertory Theatre in 1913 , and in the same year he was cast as the Lost Boy Slightly in Peter Pan . He reappeared in Peter Pan the following year , and in 1915 he was again in Where the Rainbow Ends . He worked with other child actors in this period , including Hermione Gingold ( whose mother threatened to turn " that naughty boy " out ) ; Fabia Drake ; Esmé Wynne , with whom he collaborated on his earliest plays ; Alfred Willmore , later known as Micheál <unk> ; and Gertrude Lawrence who , Coward wrote in his memoirs , " gave me an orange and told me a few mildly dirty stories , and I loved her from then onwards . " 
 In 1914 , when Coward was fourteen , he became the protégé and probably the lover of Philip Streatfeild , a society painter . Streatfeild introduced him to Mrs Astley Cooper and her high society friends . Streatfeild died from tuberculosis in 1915 , but Mrs Astley Cooper continued to encourage her late friend 's protégé , who remained a frequent guest at her estate , Hambleton Hall . 
 Coward continued to perform during most of the First World War , appearing at the Prince of Wales 's Theatre in 1916 in The Happy Family and on tour with Amy Brandon Thomas 's company in Charley 's Aunt . In 1917 , he appeared in The Saving Grace , a comedy produced by Hawtrey . Coward recalled in his memoirs , " My part was reasonably large and I was really quite good in it , owing to the kindness and care of Hawtrey 's direction . He took endless trouble with me ... and taught me during those two short weeks many technical points of comedy acting which I use to this day . " 
 In 1918 , Coward was conscripted into the Artists Rifles but was assessed as unfit for active service because of a tubercular tendency , and he was discharged on health grounds after nine months . That year he appeared in the D W Griffith film Hearts of the World in an uncredited role . He sold short stories to several magazines to help his family financially . He also began writing plays , collaborating on the first two ( Ida <unk> ( 1917 ) and Women and Whisky ( 1918 ) ) with his friend Esmé Wynne . His first solo effort as a playwright was The Rat Trap ( 1918 ) which was eventually produced at the Everyman Theatre , Hampstead , in October 1926 . During these years , he met Lorn <unk> , who became his private secretary and served in that capacity for more than forty years , until her death . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war successes = = = 
 In 1920 , at the age of 20 , Coward starred in his own play , the light comedy I 'll Leave It to You . After a tryout in Manchester , it opened in London at the New Theatre ( renamed the Noël Coward Theatre in 2006 ) , his first full @-@ length play in the West End . Neville Cardus 's praise in The Manchester Guardian was grudging . Notices for the London production were mixed , but encouraging . The Observer commented , " Mr Coward ... has a sense of comedy , and if he can overcome a tendency to smartness , he will probably produce a good play one of these days . " The Times , on the other hand , was enthusiastic : " It is a remarkable piece of work from so young a head – spontaneous , light , and always ' brainy ' . " 
 The play ran for a month ( and was Coward 's first play seen in America ) , after which Coward returned to acting in works by other writers , starring as Ralph in The Knight of the Burning Pestle in Birmingham and then London . He did not enjoy the role , finding Francis Beaumont and his sometime collaborator John Fletcher " two of the dullest Elizabethan writers ever known ... I had a very , very long part , but I was very , very bad at it " . Nevertheless , The Manchester Guardian thought that Coward got the best out of the role , and The Times called the play " the jolliest thing in London " . 
 Coward completed a one @-@ act satire , The Better Half , about a man 's relationship with two women . It had a short run at The Little Theatre , London , in 1922 . The critic St John Ervine wrote of the piece , " When Mr Coward has learned that tea @-@ table chitter @-@ chatter had better remain the prerogative of women he will write more interesting plays than he now seems likely to write . " The play was thought to be lost until a typescript was found in 2007 in the archive of the Lord Chamberlain 's Office , the official censor of stage plays in the UK until 1968 . 
 In 1921 , Coward made his first trip to America , hoping to interest producers there in his plays . Although he had little luck , he found the Broadway theatre stimulating . He absorbed its smartness and pace into his own work , which brought him his first real success as a playwright with The Young Idea . The play opened in London in 1923 , after a provincial tour , with Coward in one of the leading roles . The reviews were good : " Mr Noël Coward calls his brilliant little farce a ' comedy of youth ' , and so it is . And youth pervaded the Savoy last night , applauding everything so boisterously that you felt , not without exhilaration , that you were in the midst of a ' rag ' . " One critic , who noted the influence of Bernard Shaw on Coward 's writing , thought more highly of the play than of Coward 's newly found fans : " I was unfortunately wedged in the centre of a group of his more exuberant friends who greeted each of his sallies with ' That 's a <unk> ! ' " The play ran in London from 1 February to 24 March 1923 , after which Coward turned to revue , co @-@ writing and performing in André Charlot 's London Calling ! 
 In 1924 , Coward achieved his first great critical and financial success as a playwright with The Vortex . The story is about a nymphomaniac socialite and her cocaine @-@ addicted son ( played by Coward ) . Some saw the drugs as a mask for homosexuality ; Kenneth Tynan later described it as " a <unk> against narcotics with dialogue that sounds today not so much stilted as high @-@ heeled " . The Vortex was considered shocking in its day for its depiction of sexual vanity and drug abuse among the upper classes . Its notoriety and fiery performances attracted large audiences , justifying a move from a small suburban theatre to a larger one in the West End . Coward , still having trouble finding producers , raised the money to produce the play himself . During the run of The Vortex , Coward met Jack Wilson , an American stockbroker ( later a director and producer ) , who became his business manager and lover . Wilson used his position to steal from Coward , but the playwright was in love and accepted both the larceny and Wilson 's heavy drinking . 
 The success of The Vortex in both London and America caused a great demand for new Coward plays . In 1925 he premiered Fallen Angels , a three @-@ act comedy that amused and shocked audiences with the spectacle of two middle @-@ aged women slowly getting drunk while awaiting the arrival of their mutual lover . Hay Fever , the first of Coward 's plays to gain an enduring place in the mainstream theatrical repertoire , also appeared in 1925 . It is a comedy about four egocentric members of an artistic family who casually invite acquaintances to their country house for the weekend and <unk> and enrage each other 's guests . Some writers have seen elements of Coward 's old mentor , Mrs Astley Cooper , and her set in the characters of the family . By the 1970s the play was recognised as a classic , described in The Times as a " dazzling achievement ; like The Importance of Being Earnest , it is pure comedy with no mission but to delight , and it depends purely on the interplay of characters , not on elaborate comic machinery . " By June 1925 Coward had four shows running in the West End : The Vortex , Fallen Angels , Hay Fever and On With the Dance . Coward was turning out numerous plays and acting in his own works and others ' . Soon , his frantic pace caught up with him , and he collapsed on stage in 1926 while starring in a stage adaptation of The Constant Nymph and had to take an extended rest , recuperating in Hawaii . 
 Other Coward works produced in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1920s included the plays Easy Virtue ( 1926 ) , a drama about a divorcée 's clash with her snobbish in @-@ laws ; The Queen Was in the Parlour , a Ruritanian romance ; This Was a Man ( 1926 ) , a comedy about adulterous aristocrats ; The Marquise ( 1927 ) , an eighteenth @-@ century costume drama ; Home Chat ( 1927 ) , a comedy about a married woman 's fidelity ; and the revues On With the Dance ( 1925 ) and This Year of Grace ( 1928 ) . None of these shows has entered the regular repertoire , but the last introduced one of Coward 's best @-@ known songs , " A Room with a View " . His biggest failure in this period was the play Sirocco ( 1927 ) , which concerns free love among the wealthy . It starred Ivor Novello , of whom Coward said , " the two most beautiful things in the world are Ivor 's profile and my mind " . <unk> hated the play , showing violent disapproval at the curtain calls and spitting at Coward as he left the theatre . Coward later said of this flop , " My first instinct was to leave England immediately , but this seemed too craven a move , and also too gratifying to my enemies , whose numbers had by then swollen in our minds to practically the entire population of the British Isles . " 
 By 1929 Coward was one of the world 's highest @-@ earning writers , with an annual income of £ 50 @,@ 000 , more than £ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in terms of 2007 values . Coward thrived during the Great Depression , writing a succession of popular hits . They ranged from large @-@ scale spectaculars to intimate comedies . Examples of the former were the operetta Bitter Sweet ( 1929 ) , about a woman who elopes with her music teacher , and the historical extravaganza Cavalcade ( 1931 ) at Drury Lane , about thirty years in the lives of two families , which required a huge cast , gargantuan sets and a complex hydraulic stage . Its 1933 film adaptation won the Academy Award for best picture . Coward 's intimate @-@ scale hits of the period included Private Lives ( 1930 ) and Design for Living ( 1932 ) . In Private Lives , Coward starred alongside his most famous stage partner , Gertrude Lawrence , together with the young Laurence Olivier . It was a highlight of both Coward 's and Lawrence 's career , selling out in both London and New York . Coward disliked long runs , and after this he made a rule of starring in a play for no more than three months at any venue . Design for Living , written for Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne , was so risqué , with its theme of bisexuality and a ménage à trois , that Coward premiered it in New York , knowing that it would not survive the censor in London . 
 In 1933 Coward wrote , directed and co @-@ starred with the French singer Yvonne Printemps in both London and New York productions of an operetta , Conversation Piece ( 1933 ) . He next wrote , directed and co @-@ starred with Lawrence in Tonight at 8 : 30 ( 1936 ) , a cycle of ten short plays , presented in various permutations across three evenings . One of these plays , Still Life , was expanded into the 1945 David Lean film Brief Encounter . Tonight at 8 : 30 was followed by a musical , <unk> ( 1938 ) , from which the most famous number is " The Stately Homes of England " , and a revue entitled Set to Music ( 1938 , a Broadway version of his 1932 London revue , Words and Music ) . Coward 's last pre @-@ war plays were This Happy Breed , a drama about a working @-@ class family , and Present Laughter , a comic self @-@ caricature with an egomaniac actor as the central character . These were first performed in 1942 , although they were both written in 1939 . 
 Between 1929 and 1936 Coward recorded many of his best @-@ known songs for His Master 's Voice ( HMV ) , now reissued on CD , including the romantic " I 'll See You Again " from Bitter Sweet , the comic " Mad Dogs and Englishmen " from Words and Music , and " Mrs Worthington " . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Second World War Coward abandoned the theatre and sought official war work . After running the British propaganda office in Paris , where he concluded that " if the policy of His Majesty 's Government is to bore the Germans to death I don 't think we have time " , he worked on behalf of British intelligence . His task was to use his celebrity to influence American public and political opinion in favour of helping Britain . He was frustrated by British press criticism of his foreign travel while his countrymen suffered at home , but he was unable to reveal that he was acting on behalf of the Secret Service . In 1942 George VI wished to award Coward a knighthood for his efforts , but was dissuaded by Winston Churchill . Mindful of the public view of Coward 's flamboyant lifestyle , Churchill used , as his reason for withholding the honour , Coward 's £ 200 fine for contravening currency regulations in 1941 . 
 Had the Germans invaded Britain , Coward was scheduled to be arrested and killed , as he was in The Black Book along with other figures such as Virginia Woolf , Paul Robeson , Bertrand Russell , C. P. Snow and H. G. Wells . When this came to light after the war , Coward wrote : " If anyone had told me at that time I was high up on the Nazi blacklist , I should have laughed ... I remember Rebecca West , who was one of the many who shared the honour with me , sent me a telegram which read : ' My dear – the people we should have been seen dead with ' . " 
 Churchill 's view was that Coward would do more for the war effort by entertaining the troops and the home front than by intelligence work : " Go and sing to them when the guns are firing – that 's your job ! " Coward , though disappointed , followed this advice . He toured , acted and sang <unk> in Europe , Africa , Asia and America . He wrote and recorded war @-@ themed popular songs , including " London Pride " and " Don 't Let 's Be Beastly to the Germans " . His London home was wrecked by German bombs in 1941 , and he took up temporary residence at the Savoy Hotel . During one air raid on the area around the Savoy he joined Carroll Gibbons and Judy Campbell in impromptu cabaret to distract the captive guests from their fears . Another of Coward 's wartime projects , as writer , star , composer and co @-@ director ( alongside David Lean ) , was the naval film drama In Which We Serve . The film was popular on both sides of the Atlantic , and he was awarded an honorary certificate of merit at the 1943 Academy Awards ceremony . Coward played a naval captain , basing the character on his friend Lord Louis Mountbatten . Lean went on to direct and adapt film versions of several Coward plays . 
 Coward 's most enduring work from the war years was the hugely successful black comedy Blithe Spirit ( 1941 ) , about a novelist who researches the occult and hires a medium . A séance brings back the ghost of his first wife , causing havoc for the novelist and his second wife . With 1 @,@ 997 consecutive performances , it broke box @-@ office records for the run of a West End comedy , and was also produced on Broadway , where its original run was 650 performances . The play was adapted into a 1945 film , directed by Lean . Coward toured during 1942 in Blithe Spirit , alternating the piece with his comedy Present Laughter and his working @-@ class drama This Happy Breed . 
 In his Middle East Diary Coward made several statements that offended many Americans . In particular , he commented that he was " less impressed by some of the mournful little Brooklyn boys lying there in tears amid the alien corn with nothing worse than a bullet wound in the leg or a fractured arm " . After protests from both The New York Times and The Washington Post , the Foreign Office urged Coward not to visit the United States in January 1945 . He did not return to America again during the war . In the aftermath of the war , Coward wrote an alternative reality play , Peace In Our Time , depicting an England occupied by Nazi Germany . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 Coward 's new plays after the war were moderately successful but failed to match the popularity of his pre @-@ war hits . Relative Values ( 1951 ) addresses the culture clash between an aristocratic English family and a Hollywood actress with matrimonial ambitions ; South Sea Bubble ( 1951 ) is a political comedy set in a British colony ; Quadrille ( 1952 ) is a drama about Victorian love and elopement ; and Nude with Violin ( 1956 , starring John Gielgud in London and Coward in New York ) is a satire on modern art and critical pretension . A revue , Sigh No More ( 1945 ) , was a moderate success , but two musicals , Pacific 1860 ( 1946 ) , a lavish South Seas romance , and Ace of Clubs ( 1949 ) , set in a night club , were financial failures . Further blows in this period were the deaths of Coward 's friends Charles Cochran and Gertrude Lawrence , in 1951 and 1952 respectively . Despite his disappointments , Coward maintained a high public profile ; his performance as King Magnus in Shaw 's The Apple Cart for the Coronation season of 1953 , co @-@ starring Margaret Leighton , received much coverage in the press , and his cabaret act , honed during his wartime tours entertaining the troops , was a supreme success , first in London at the Café de Paris , and later in Las Vegas . The theatre critic Kenneth Tynan wrote : 
 To see him whole , public and private personalities conjoined , you must see him in cabaret ... he padded down the celebrated stairs ... halted before the microphone on black @-@ suede @-@ clad feet , and , <unk> both hands in a gesture of benediction , set about demonstrating how these things should be done . Baring his teeth as if unveiling some grotesque monument , and cooing like a baritone dove , he gave us " I 'll See You Again " and the other bat 's @-@ wing melodies of his youth . Nothing he does on these occasions sounds strained or arid ; his tanned , leathery face is still an enthusiast 's .... If it is possible to romp fastidiously , that is what Coward does . He owes little to earlier wits , such as Wilde or Labouchere . Their best things need to be delivered slowly , even lazily . Coward 's emerge with the staccato , blind impulsiveness of a machine @-@ gun . 
 In 1955 Coward 's cabaret act at Las Vegas , recorded live for the gramophone , and released as Noël Coward at Las Vegas was so successful that CBS engaged him to write and direct a series of three 90 @-@ minute television specials for the 1955 – 56 season . The first of these , Together With Music , paired Coward with Mary Martin , featuring him in many of the numbers from his Las Vegas act . It was followed by productions of Blithe Spirit in which he starred with Claudette Colbert , Lauren Bacall and Mildred Natwick and This Happy Breed with Edna Best and Roger Moore . Despite excellent reviews , the audience viewing figures were moderate . 
 During the 1950s and 1960s Coward continued to write musicals and plays . After the Ball , his 1953 adaptation of Lady Windermere 's Fan , was the last musical he premiered in the West End ; his last two musicals were first produced on Broadway . Sail Away ( 1961 ) , set on a luxury cruise liner , was Coward 's most successful post @-@ war musical , with productions in America , Britain and Australia . The Girl Who Came to Supper , a musical adaptation of The Sleeping Prince ( 1963 ) , ran for only three months . He directed the successful 1964 Broadway musical adaptation of Blithe Spirit , called High Spirits . Coward 's late plays include a farce , Look After Lulu ! ( 1959 ) , and a tragi @-@ comic study of old age , Waiting in the Wings ( 1960 ) , both of which were successful despite " critical disdain " . Coward argued that the primary purpose of a play was to entertain , and he made no attempt at modernism , which he felt was boring to the audience although fascinating to the critics . His comic novel , Pomp and Circumstance ( 1960 ) , about life in a tropical British colony , met with more critical success . 
 Coward 's final stage success came with Suite in Three Keys ( 1966 ) , a trilogy set in a hotel penthouse suite . He wrote it as his swan song as a stage actor : " I would like to act once more before I fold my bedraggled wings . " The trilogy gained glowing reviews and did good box office business in the UK . In one of the three plays , A Song at Twilight , Coward abandoned his customary reticence on the subject and played an explicitly homosexual character . The daring piece earned Coward new critical praise . He intended to star in the trilogy on Broadway but was too ill to travel . Only two of the Suite in Three Keys plays were performed in New York , with the title changed to Noël Coward in Two Keys , starring Hume Cronyn . 
 Coward won new popularity in several notable films later in his career , such as Around the World in 80 Days ( 1956 ) , Our Man in Havana ( 1959 ) , Bunny Lake is Missing ( 1965 ) , Boom ! ( 1968 ) and The Italian Job ( 1969 ) . Stage and film opportunities he turned down in the 1950s included an invitation to compose a musical version of Pygmalion ( two years before My Fair Lady was written ) , and offers of the roles of the king in the original stage production of The King and I , and Colonel Nicholson in the film The Bridge on the River Kwai . Invited to play the title role in the 1962 film Dr. No , he replied , " No , no , no , a thousand times , no . " In the same year , he turned down the role of Humbert Humbert in Lolita , saying , " At my time of life the film story would be logical if the 12 @-@ year @-@ old heroine was a sweet little old lady . " 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s and early 1970s successful productions of his 1920s and 1930s plays , and new revues celebrating his music , including Oh , Coward ! on Broadway and <unk> Custard in London , revived Coward 's popularity and critical reputation . He dubbed this comeback " Dad 's Renaissance " . It began with a hit 1963 revival of Private Lives in London and then New York . Invited to direct Hay Fever with Edith Evans at the National Theatre , he wrote in 1964 , " I am thrilled and flattered and frankly a little flabbergasted that the National Theatre should have had the curious <unk> to choose a very early play of mine and to give it a cast that could play the Albanian telephone directory . " 
 Other examples of " Dad 's Renaissance " included a 1968 Off Broadway production of Private Lives at the Theatre de Lys starring Elaine Stritch , Lee Bowman and Betsy von Furstenberg , and directed by Charles Nelson Reilly . Despite this impressive cast , Coward 's popularity had risen so high that the theatre poster for the production used an Al Hirschfeld caricature of Coward ( pictured ) instead of an image of the production or its stars . The illustration captures how Coward 's image had changed by the 1960s : he was no longer seen as the smooth 1930s sophisticate , but as the doyen of the theatre . As The New Statesman wrote in 1964 , " Who would have thought the landmarks of the Sixties would include the emergence of Noël Coward as the grand old man of British drama ? There he was one morning , flipping verbal <unk> with reporters about " Dad 's Renaissance " ; the next he was ... beside Forster , T. S. Eliot and the <unk> , demonstrably the greatest living English playwright . " Time wrote that " in the 60s ... his best work , with its inspired inconsequentiality , seemed to exert not only a period charm but charm , period . " 
 = = = Death and honours = = = 
 By the end of the 1960s , Coward suffered from arteriosclerosis and , during the run of Suite in Three Keys , he struggled with bouts of memory loss . This also affected his work in The Italian Job , and he retired from acting immediately afterwards . Coward was knighted in 1969 and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature . He received a Tony Award for lifetime achievement . In 1972 , he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Letters degree by the University of Sussex . 
 Coward died at his home , Firefly Estate , in Jamaica on 26 March 1973 of heart failure and was buried three days later on the brow of Firefly Hill , overlooking the north coast of the island . A memorial service was held in St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields in London on 29 May 1973 , for which the Poet Laureate , John Betjeman , wrote and delivered a poem in Coward 's honour , John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier read verse and Yehudi Menuhin played Bach . On 28 March 1984 a memorial stone was unveiled by the Queen Mother in Poets ' Corner , Westminster Abbey . <unk> by Coward 's partner , Graham Payn , for attending , the Queen Mother replied , " I came because he was my friend . " 
 The Noël Coward Theatre in St Martin 's Lane , originally opened in 1903 as the New Theatre and later called the Albery , was renamed in his honour after extensive refurbishment , re @-@ opening on 1 June 2006 . A statue of Coward by Angela Conner was unveiled by the Queen Mother in the foyer of the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane in 1998 . There are also sculptures of Coward displayed in New York and Jamaica , and a bust of him in the library in Teddington , near where he was born . In 2008 an exhibition devoted to Coward was mounted at the National Theatre in London . The exhibition was later hosted by the Museum of Performance & Design in San Francisco and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills , California . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Coward was homosexual , but , following the convention of his times , this was never publicly mentioned . The critic Kenneth Tynan 's description in 1953 was close to an acknowledgment of Coward 's sexuality : " Forty years ago he was Slightly in Peter Pan , and you might say that he has been wholly in Peter Pan ever since . No private considerations have been allowed to deflect the drive of his career ; like Gielgud and Rattigan , like the late Ivor Novello , he is a congenital bachelor . " 
 Coward firmly believed his private business was not for public discussion , considering " any sexual activities when over @-@ advertised " to be tasteless . Even in the 1960s , Coward refused to acknowledge his sexual orientation publicly , wryly observing , " There are still a few old ladies in Worthing who don 't know . " Despite this reticence , he encouraged his secretary Cole Lesley to write a frank biography once Coward was safely dead . 
 Coward 's most important relationship , which began in the mid @-@ 1940s and lasted until his death , was with the South African stage and film actor Graham Payn . Coward featured Payn in several of his London productions . Payn later co @-@ edited with Sheridan Morley a collection of Coward 's diaries , published in 1982 . Coward 's other relationships included the playwright Keith Winter , actors Louis Hayward and Alan Webb , his manager Jack Wilson and the composer Ned Rorem , who published details of their relationship in his diaries . Coward had a 19 @-@ year friendship with Prince George , Duke of Kent , but biographers differ on whether it was platonic . Payn believed that it was , though Coward reportedly admitted to the historian Michael Thornton that there had been " a little dalliance " . Coward said , on the duke 's death , " I suddenly find that I loved him more than I knew . " 
 Coward maintained close friendships with many women , including the actress and author Esmé Wynne @-@ Tyson , his first collaborator and constant correspondent ; Gladys Calthrop , who designed sets and costumes for many of his works ; his secretary and close confidante Lorn Loraine ; the actresses Gertrude Lawrence , Joyce Carey and Judy Campbell ; and " his loyal and lifelong <unk> amoureuse " , Marlene Dietrich . 
 In his profession , Coward was widely admired and loved for his generosity and kindness to those who fell on hard times . Stories are told of the unobtrusive way in which he relieved the needs or paid the debts of old theatrical acquaintances who had no claim on him . From 1934 until 1956 , Coward was the president of The Actors ' Orphanage , which was supported by the theatrical industry . In that capacity , he befriended the young Peter Collinson , who was in the care of the orphanage . He became Collinson 's godfather and helped him to get started in show business . When Collinson was a successful director , he invited Coward to play a role in The Italian Job . Graham Payn also played a small role in the film . 
 In the 1950s , Coward left the UK for tax reasons , receiving harsh criticism in the press . He first settled in Bermuda but later bought houses in Jamaica and Switzerland ( in the village of Les Avants , near Montreux ) , which remained his homes for the rest of his life . His expatriate neighbours and friends included Joan Sutherland , David Niven , Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor , and Julie Andrews and Blake Edwards in Switzerland and Ian Fleming and his wife Ann in Jamaica . Coward was a witness at the Flemings ' wedding , but his diaries record his exasperation with their constant bickering . 
 Coward 's political views were conservative , but not unswervingly so : he despised the government of Neville Chamberlain for its policy of appeasing Nazi Germany , and he differed sharply with Winston Churchill over the abdication crisis of 1936 . Whereas Churchill supported Edward VIII 's wish to marry " his cutie " , Wallis Simpson , Coward thought the king irresponsible , telling Churchill , " England doesn 't wish for a Queen Cutie . " Coward disliked propaganda in plays : " The theatre is a wonderful place , a house of strange enchantment , a temple of illusion . What it most emphatically is not and never will be is a scruffy , ill @-@ lit , fumed @-@ oak drill hall serving as a temporary soap box for political propaganda . " Nevertheless , his own views sometimes surfaced in his plays : both Cavalcade and This Happy Breed are , in the words of the playwright David Edgar , " overtly Conservative political plays written in the Brechtian epic manner . " In religion , Coward was agnostic . He wrote of his views , " Do I believe in God ? I can 't say No and I can 't say Yes , To me it 's anybody 's guess . " 
 Coward spelled his first name with the <unk> ( " I didn 't put the dots over the ' e ' in Noël . The language did . Otherwise it 's not Noël but <unk> ! " ) . The press and many book publishers failed to follow suit , and his name was printed as ' Noel ' in The Times , The Observer and other contemporary newspapers and books . 
 The papers of Noël Coward are held in the University of Birmingham Special Collections . 
 = = = The Coward image = = = 
 " Why " , asked Coward , " am I always expected to wear a dressing @-@ gown , smoke cigarettes in a long holder and say ' Darling , how wonderful ' ? " The answer lay in Coward 's assiduous cultivation of a carefully crafted image . As a suburban boy who had been taken up by the upper classes he rapidly acquired the taste for high life : " I am determined to travel through life first class . " He first wore a dressing gown onstage in The Vortex and used the fashion in several of his other famous plays , including Private Lives and Present Laughter . George Walden identifies him as a modern dandy . In connection with the National Theatre 's 2008 exhibition , The Independent commented , " His famous silk , polka @-@ dot dressing gown and elegant cigarette holder both seem to belong to another era . But 2008 is proving to be the year that Britain falls in love with Noël Coward all over again . " 
 As soon as he achieved success he began polishing the Coward image : an early press photograph showed him sitting up in bed holding a cigarette holder : " I looked like an advanced Chinese decadent in the last phases of dope . " Soon after that , Coward wrote , " I took to wearing coloured turtle @-@ necked jerseys , actually more for comfort than for effect , and soon I was informed by my evening paper that I had started a fashion . I believe that to a certain extent this was true ; at any rate , during the ensuing months I noticed more and more of our seedier West @-@ End chorus boys parading about London in them . " He soon became more cautious about overdoing the flamboyance , advising Cecil Beaton to tone down his outfits : " It is important not to let the public have a loophole to lampoon you . " However , Coward was happy to generate publicity from his lifestyle . In 1969 he told Time magazine , " I acted up like crazy . I did everything that was expected of me . Part of the job . " Time concluded , " Coward 's greatest single gift has not been writing or composing , not acting or directing , but projecting a sense of personal style , a combination of cheek and chic , pose and poise . " 
 Coward 's distinctive clipped diction arose from his childhood : his mother was deaf and Coward developed his staccato style of speaking to make it easier for her to hear what he was saying ; it also helped him eradicate a slight lisp . His nickname , " The Master " , " started as a joke and became true " , according to Coward . It was used of him from the 1920s onwards . Coward himself made light of it : when asked by a journalist why he was known as " The Master " , he replied , " Oh , you know – Jack of all trades , master of none . " He could , however , joke about his own immodesty : " My sense of my importance to the world is relatively small . On the other hand , my sense of my own importance to myself is tremendous . " When a Time interviewer apologised , " I hope you haven 't been bored having to go through all these interviews for your [ 70th ] birthday , having to answer the same old questions about yourself " , Coward rejoined , " Not at all . I 'm fascinated by the subject . " 
 = = Critical reputation and legacy = = 
 The playwright John Osborne said , " Mr Coward is his own invention and contribution to this century . Anyone who cannot see that should keep well away from the theatre . " Tynan wrote in 1964 , " Even the youngest of us will know , in fifty years ' time , exactly what we mean by ' a very Noel Coward sort of person ' . " In praise of Coward 's versatility , Lord Mountbatten said , in a tribute on Coward 's seventieth birthday , " There are probably greater painters than Noël , greater novelists than Noël , greater librettists , greater composers of music , greater singers , greater dancers , greater comedians , greater tragedians , greater stage producers , greater film directors , greater cabaret artists , greater TV stars . If there are , they are fourteen different people . Only one man combined all fourteen different labels – The Master . " 
 Tynan 's was the first generation of critics to realise that Coward 's plays might enjoy more than ephemeral success . In the 1930s , Cyril Connolly wrote that they were " written in the most topical and perishable way imaginable , the cream in them turns sour overnight " . What seemed daring in the 1920s and 1930s came to seem old @-@ fashioned in the 1950s , and Coward never repeated the success of his pre @-@ war plays . By the 1960s , critics began to note that underneath the witty dialogue and the Art Deco glamour of the inter @-@ war years , Coward 's best plays also dealt with recognisable people and familiar relationships , with an emotional depth and pathos that had been often overlooked . By the time of his death , The Times was writing of him , " None of the great figures of the English theatre has been more versatile than he " , and the paper ranked his plays in " the classical tradition of Congreve , Sheridan , Wilde and Shaw " . 
 A symposium published in 1999 to mark the centenary of Coward 's birth listed some of his major productions scheduled for the year in Britain and North America , including Ace of Clubs , After the Ball , Blithe Spirit , Cavalcade , Easy Virtue , Hay Fever , Present Laughter , Private Lives , Sail Away , A Song at Twilight , The Young Idea and Waiting in the Wings , with stars including Lauren Bacall , Rosemary Harris , Ian McKellen , Corin Redgrave , Vanessa Redgrave and Elaine Stritch . In another tribute , Tim Rice said of Coward 's songs : " The wit and wisdom of Noël Coward 's lyrics will be as lively and contemporary in 100 years ' time as they are today " , and many have been recorded by Damon Albarn , Ian <unk> , The Divine Comedy , Elton John , Valerie Masterson , Paul McCartney , Michael Nyman , Pet Shop Boys , Vic Reeves , Sting , Joan Sutherland , Robbie Williams and others . 
 Coward 's music , writings , characteristic voice and style have been widely parodied and imitated , for instance in Monty Python , Round the Horne and Privates on Parade . Coward has frequently been depicted as a character in plays , films , television and radio shows , for example , in the 1969 Julie Andrews film Star ! ( in which Coward was portrayed by his godson , Daniel Massey ) , the BBC sitcom Goodnight Sweetheart and a BBC Radio 4 series written by Marcy Kahan in which Coward was dramatised as a detective in Design For Murder ( 2000 ) , A Bullet at Balmain 's ( 2003 ) and Death at the Desert Inn ( 2005 ) , and as a spy in Blithe Spy ( 2002 ) and Our Man In Jamaica ( 2007 ) , with Malcolm Sinclair playing Coward in each . On stage , characters based on Coward have included Beverly Carlton in the 1939 Broadway play The Man Who Came to Dinner . A play about the friendship between Coward and Dietrich , called Lunch with Marlene , by Chris Burgess , ran at the New End Theatre in 2008 . The second act presents a musical revue , including Coward songs such as " Don 't Let 's Be Beastly to the Germans " . 
 Coward was an early admirer of the plays of Harold Pinter and backed Pinter 's film version of The Caretaker with a £ 1 @,@ 000 investment . Some critics have detected Coward 's influence in Pinter 's plays . Tynan compared Pinter 's " elliptical patter " to Coward 's " stylised dialogue " . Pinter returned the compliment by directing the National Theatre 's revival of Blithe Spirit in 1976 . 
 = = Plays = = 
 For plays that were written more than two years before the original production , a date of composition is given and the second date given is the year when first produced ( fp ) . 
 = = <unk> , musicals , operetta and songs = = 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Coward wrote more than three hundred songs . The Noël Coward Society 's website , drawing on performing statistics from the publishers and the Performing Rights Society , names " Mad About the Boy " ( from Words and Music ) as Coward 's most popular song , followed , in order , by : 
 In the society 's second tier of favourites are : 
 Coward was no fan of the works of Gilbert and Sullivan , but as a songwriter was nevertheless strongly influenced by them . He recalled : " I was born into a generation that still took light music seriously . The lyrics and melodies of Gilbert and Sullivan were hummed and strummed into my consciousness at an early age . My father sang them , my mother played them ... my aunts and uncles , who were legion , sang them singly and in unison at the slightest provocation . " His colleague Terence Rattigan wrote that as a lyricist Coward was " the best of his kind since W. S. Gilbert . " 
 = = Films = = 
 Coward 's plays adapted for film include : 
 Films in which he participated as actor , screenwriter , director or producer are as follows : 
 = Cyclone Bejisa = 
 Cyclone Bejisa was a tropical cyclone that affected the islands of Réunion and Mauritius in early January 2014 . In late December 2013 , a tropical disturbance developed to the north of Madagascar . With favorable conditions , the low developed into a disturbance and soon into a depression on December 28 . The system continued to develop and intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Bejisa on December 29 , with rapid intensification occurring . It developed into an Intense Tropical Cyclone on December 30 , reaching peak maximum sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . Due to an eyewall replacement cycle , Bejisa weakened , but re @-@ intensified to a secondary peak of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) on January 1 . Increased wind shear weakened the eyewall , which passed within 15 km ( 9 mi ) of Réunion . After having moved generally south @-@ southeastward for much of its duration , Bejisa turned to the southwest on January 3 , by which time it had weakened to tropical storm status . It became a post @-@ tropical cyclone on January 5 after the convection weakened over the center , and Bejisa became extratropical the next day as it meandered southwest of Madagascar . 
 In its formative stages , Bejisa brought heavy rainfall to Seychelles , and it also dropped rainfall in Mauritius and Madagascar . Effects were worst on Réunion , where wind gusts were around 130 – 150 km / h ( 80 – 90 mph ) along the coast . The storm also dropped torrential rainfall , peaking at 800 mm ( 31 in ) at a volcano in Cilaos . The winds and rains downed many trees and power lines , which blocked roads and left 181 @,@ 000 people without power . About 49 % of the island also lost water supply . Bejisa left heavy damage to the agriculture industry , mainly to vanilla and sugar cane , totaling € 63 million ( US $ 85 @.@ 2 million ) in losses . The commune of Saint @-@ Paul sustained moderate damage , with losses estimated at € 3 million ( US $ 4 million ) . Bejisa killed one person on the island due to head trauma , and there were 16 injuries . Later , the cyclone produced high waves in South Africa . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late December 2013 , computer forecast models began to predict the development and cyclogenesis of a disturbance within the monsoon trough north of Madagascar . At 1800 UTC on December 27 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) noted a discrete area of disturbed weather approximately 1 @,@ 350 km ( 840 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Réunion that corresponded with model forecasts and had the potential to develop . Accompanied by a low @-@ level circulation center , the monitored storm complex developed rainbands about its southern periphery the following day . At 1200 UTC on December 28 , Météo @-@ France deemed the system sufficiently organized to be considered a tropical disturbance , the fourth system to be given such a classification by the agency that season . Upon its designation , the disturbance was analyzed to have an unusually high barometric pressure , based on nearby weather station observations . Météo @-@ France projected for the system to peak as a tropical cyclone before slightly weakening and impacting the Mascarene Islands . 
 Tracking southward , the disturbance steadily organized following December 28 . As a result of wind shear , the system 's low @-@ level circulation center remained partially exposed , though the shearing conditions were expected to lessen At 0000 UTC on December 29 , the disturbance was upgraded to a tropical depression . At 1800 UTC that day , the depression intensified to moderate tropical storm intensity , thus receiving the name Bejisa by the Mauritius Meteorological Services . This coincided with the improving satellite appearance of the storm 's central dense overcast . Intensification subsequently quickened , and at 0600 UTC the next day Bejisa was considered to be a severe tropical storm . Concurrently a strengthening ridge in the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere began to steer the storm towards the south @-@ southeast . Following the development of a small pinhole eye , Bejisa was upgraded to tropical cyclone status at 1200 UTC on December 30 , followed by intense tropical cyclone status six hours thereafter , with peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . In addition , the JTWC estimated 1 – minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) , utilizing the Dvorak technique to estimate the intensity . The agency noted that decreasing wind shear , favorable outflow , and warm sea surface temperatures allowed for the intensification . At that time of the peak winds , Bejisa was located about 825 km ( 515 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Réunion . 
 The intensification phase of Bejisa was short @-@ lived , as an eyewall replacement cycle resulted in a slight deterioration and fluctuation of the storm 's organization and structure . On December 31 , the system weakened below intense tropical cyclone status as the eye became less organized . When the eyewall replacement cycle completed , the eye became larger and the winds increased . Late on December 31 , Bejisa passed about 125 km ( 75 mi ) west of Tromelin Island . On the next day , the cyclone attained a secondary peak intensity of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . However , increasing wind shear eroded the eyewall , which opened the eyewall in the northern periphery . Despite Météo @-@ France assessing that Bejisa had weakened , at the same time the JTWC estimated that the cyclone had intensified further to reach peak 1 – minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) on January 2 . That day , the storm 's center passed within 155 km ( 95 mi ) of Réunion while continuing to the southeast , and the eyewall passed within 15 km ( 9 mi ) of the island . Continued wind shear stripped the convection , coupled with cooler water temperatures , and early on January 3 , Bejisa weakened below tropical cyclone status . By that time , the ridge to the southeast turned the storm to the southwest . A slight decrease in wind shear was expected to allow the convection to rebuild on January 4 , and the storm strengthened slightly . By January 5 , Bejisa began evolving into a post @-@ tropical cyclone , with weaker convection over the center . That day , Météo @-@ France reclassified Bejisa as a post @-@ tropical depression , noting that the radius of maximum winds had expanded . On the same day , the JTWC discontinued warnings after assessing that the storm had become a subtropical cyclone . Increasing wind shear displaced the remaining convection west of the center , and Météo @-@ France discontinued advisories on Bejisa on January 6 after the exposed turned more to the south . The storm became extratropical and turned to the northeast , and was last noted on January 7 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon designation as a tropical disturbance , the predecessor to Cyclone Bejisa dropped heavy rainfall across the Seychelles . A weather station on Mahé observed 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 46 in ) of rain over a 24 @-@ hour period beginning on December 27 . The Farquhar Group were particularly affected , as the storm 's incipient central region of convection remained over the area for an extended period of time . 
 Before the storm affected Réunion , Bejisa passed west of Tromelin Island , producing winds of 80 km / h ( 49 mph ) . The storm also produced heavy rainfall on Mauritius . Rainfall and gusty winds also affected portions of Madagascar . Later , Bejisa produced high waves along the coast of KwaZulu @-@ Natal in South Africa . 
 = = = Réunion = = = 
 In advance of the storm striking Réunion , officials advised residents to remain inside . Officials ordered residents in Saint @-@ Leu along the coast to evacuate inland , and at least 300 people evacuated island @-@ wide . The airport at Saint @-@ Denis was closed , but reopened after the storm passed the island ; several flights were canceled as a result . The main port was also closed , as were most childcare facilities , and mail service was suspended . Officials issued a red alert for the island , the first since Cyclone <unk> a year prior . 
 On Réunion , Bejisa produced strong wind gusts , averaging 130 – 150 km / h ( 80 – 90 mph ) along the coast , and peaking in Saint @-@ Louis . The winds downed numerous trees and power lines , leaving an estimated 181 @,@ 000 people without electricity , and closing roads due to debris . All eight of the island 's high tension lines were affected . Thirty percent of cell phone service was temporarily lost due to the outages . Torrential rains impacted much of the island , with a 24 hour total of 800 mm ( 31 in ) measured at a volcano in Cilaos and 600 mm ( 24 in ) measured in a nearby town . The rains caused rivers to rise , resulting in flooding . About 49 percent of homes lost their water supply . Tremendous agricultural damage occurred across Réunion , with some areas reporting 80 – 100 percent losses . Damage in the sector reached € 63 million ( US $ 85 @.@ 2 million ) alone , mostly to sugar cane and vanilla . The <unk> of Saint @-@ Paul sustained moderate damage , with losses estimated at € 3 million ( US $ 4 million ) . Approximately € 1 million of this stemmed from wind and water damage to homes ; 121 residences qualified for relief aid . Along the coast , a pier was destroyed , several boats were damaged , and roads were impacted . One person died from head trauma while 16 people were injured in various incidents . Two of the injuries were severe due to falling off ladders while attempting to secure their homes during the high winds . 
 In the wake of Bejisa , Électricité de France ( EDF ) deployed 500 personnel and 6 helicopters to restore power on the island . Within three days , roughly 160 @,@ 000 residences were restored , considerably faster than previous restoration efforts in previous cyclones . By January 9 , all but a few dozen homes had power . In addition , water supply was largely restored within four days . A state of national disaster was declared for Réunion on January 17 , by Overseas Minister of France , Victorin <unk> . This declaration covered 16 towns on the island : Les <unk> , Cilaos , L <unk> @-@ Deux , L 'Étang @-@ Salé , Petite @-@ Île , La Plaine @-@ des @-@ Palmistes , Le Port , La Possession , Saint @-@ Joseph , Saint @-@ Leu , Saint @-@ Louis , Saint @-@ Paul , Saint @-@ Pierre , Salazie , Le Tampon , and Trois @-@ <unk> . Insurance estimates indicated that € 25 million ( US $ 33 @.@ 8 million ) was needed for relief funding . Farmers were eligible for compensation under the disaster declaration ; however , many voiced their skepticism following a lack of follow @-@ through by the government to supply funds after Tropical Cyclone <unk> in January 2013 . Ultimately , the affected farmers had to indicate their taxed losses by February 26 to receive the assistance . By April 2014 , all farmers affected by the declaration were compensated . 
 = Virtual camera system = 
 In 3D video games , a virtual camera system aims at controlling a camera or a set of cameras to display a view of a 3D virtual world . Camera systems are used in videogames where their purpose is to show the action at the best possible angle ; more generally , they are used in 3D virtual worlds when a third person view is required . 
 As opposed to film makers , virtual camera system creators have to deal with a world that is interactive and unpredictable . It is not possible to know where the player 's character is going to be in the next few seconds ; therefore , it is not possible to plan the shots as a film maker would do . To solve this issue , the system relies on certain rules or artificial intelligence to select the most appropriate shots . 
 There are mainly three types of camera systems . In fixed camera systems , the camera does not move at all and the system displays the player 's character in a succession of still shots . Tracking cameras , on the other hand , follow the character 's movements . Finally , interactive camera systems are partially automated and allow the player to directly change the view . To implement camera systems , video game developers use techniques such as constraint solvers , artificial intelligence scripts , or autonomous agents . 
 = = Third @-@ person view = = 
 In video games , " third @-@ person " refers to a graphical perspective rendered from a fixed distance behind and slightly above the player character . This viewpoint allows players to see a more strongly characterized avatar , and is most common in action games and action adventure games . Games with this perspective often make use of positional audio , where the volume of ambient sounds varies depending on the position of the avatar . 
 There are primarily three types of third @-@ person camera systems : the " fixed camera systems " in which the camera positions are set during the game creation ; the " tracking camera systems " in which the camera simply follows the player 's character ; and the " interactive camera systems " that are under the player 's control . 
 = = = Fixed = = = 
 In this kind of system , the developers set the properties of the camera , such as its position , orientation or field of view , during the game creation . The camera views will not change dynamically , so the same place will always be shown under the same set of views . An early example of this kind of camera system can be seen in Alone in the Dark . While the characters are in 3D , the background on which they evolve has been pre @-@ rendered . The early Resident Evil games are notable examples of games that use fixed cameras . The God of War series of video games is also known for this technique . One advantage of this camera system is that it allows the game designers to use the language of film . Indeed , like filmmakers , they have the possibility to create a mood through camerawork and careful selection of shots . Games that use this kind of technique are often praised for their cinematic qualities . 
 = = = Tracking = = = 
 As the name says , a tracking camera follows the characters from behind . The player does not control the camera in any way - he / she cannot for example rotate it or move it to a different position . This type of camera system was very common in early 3D games such as Crash Bandicoot or Tomb Raider since it is very simple to implement . However , there are a number of issues with it . In particular , if the current view is not suitable ( either because it is occluded by an object , or because it is not showing what the player is interested in ) , it cannot be changed since the player does not control the camera . Sometimes this viewpoint causes difficulty when a character turns or stands face out against a wall . The camera may jerk or end up in awkward positions . 
 = = = Interactive = = = 
 This type of camera system is an improvement over the tracking camera system . While the camera is still tracking the character , some of its parameters , such as its orientation or distance to the character , can be changed . On videogame consoles , the camera is often controlled by an analog stick to provide a good accuracy ; whereas on PC games it is usually controlled by the mouse . This is the case in games such as Super Mario Sunshine or The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker . Fully interactive camera systems are often difficult to implement in the right way . Thus Gamespot argues that much of the Super Mario Sunshine ' difficulty comes from having to control the camera . The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker was more successful at it - IGN called the camera system " so smart that it rarely needs manual correction " . 
 One of the first games to offer an interactive camera system was Super Mario 64 . The game had two types of camera systems between which the player could switch at any time . The first one was a standard tracking camera system except that it was partly driven by artificial intelligence . Indeed , the system was " aware " of the structure of the level and therefore could anticipate certain shots . For example , in the first level , when the path to the hill is about to turn left , the camera automatically starts looking towards the left too , thus anticipating the player 's movements . The second type allows the player to control the camera relatively to Mario 's position . By pressing on the left or right buttons , the camera rotates around Mario , while pressing up or down moves the camera closer or away from Mario . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 There is a large body of research on how to implement a camera system . The role of a constraint solver software is to generate the best possible shot given a set of visual constraints . In other words , the constraint solver is given a requested shot composition such as " show this character and ensure that he covers at least 30 percent of the screen space " . The solver will then use various methods to try creating a shot that would satisfy this request . Once a suitable shot is found , the solver outputs the coordinates and rotation of the camera , which can then be used by the graphic engine renderer to display the view . 
 In some camera systems , if no solution can be found , constraints are relaxed . For example , if the solver cannot generate a shot where the character occupies 30 percent of the screen space , it might ignore the screen space constraint and simply ensure that the character is visible at all . Such methods include zooming out . 
 Some camera systems use predefined scripts to decide how to select the current shot for commonly seen shot scenarios called film idioms . Typically , the script is going to be triggered as a result of an action . For instance , when the player 's character initiates a conversation with another character , the " conversation " script is going to be triggered . This script will contain instructions on how to " shoot " a two @-@ character conversation . Thus the shots will be a combination of , for instance , over the shoulder shots and close @-@ up shots . Such script @-@ based approaches may switch the camera between a set of predefined cameras or rely on a constraint solver to generate the camera coordinates to account for variability in scene layout . This scripted approach and the use of a constraint solver to compute virtual cameras was first proposed by Drucker . Subsequent research demonstrated how a script @-@ based system could automatically switch cameras to view conversations between avatars in a realtime chat application . 
 Bill Tomlinson used a more original approach to the problem . He devised a system in which the camera is an autonomous agent with its own personality . The style of the shots and their rhythm will be affected by its mood . Thus a happy camera will " cut more frequently , spend more time in close @-@ up shots , move with a bouncy , swooping motion , and brightly illuminate the scene " . 
 While much of the prior work in automated virtual camera control systems has been directed towards reducing the need for a human to manually control the camera , the Director 's Lens solution computes and proposes a palette of suggested virtual camera shots leaving the human operator to make the creative shot selection . In computing subsequent suggested virtual camera shots , the system analyzes the visual compositions and editing patterns of prior recorded shots to compute suggested camera shots that conform to continuity conventions such as not crossing the line of action , match placement of virtual characters so they appear to look at one another across cuts , and favors those shots which the human operator had previously used in sequence . 
 = = In mixed @-@ reality applications = = 
 In 2010 , the Kinect was released by Microsoft as a 3D scanner / webcam hybrid peripheral device which provides full @-@ body detection of Xbox 360 players and hands @-@ free control of the user interfaces of video games and other software on the console . This was later modified by Oliver Kreylos of University of California , Davis in a series of YouTube videos which showed him combining the Kinect with a PC @-@ based virtual camera . Because the Kinect is capable of detecting a full range of depth ( through computer stereo vision and Structured light ) within a captured scene , Kreylos demonstrated the capacity of the Kinect and the virtual camera to allow free @-@ viewpoint navigation of the range of depth , although the camera could only allow a video capture of the scene as shown to the front of the Kinect , resulting in fields of black , empty space where the camera was unable to capture video within the field of depth . Later , Kreylos demonstrated a further elaboration on the modification by combining the video streams of two <unk> in order to further enhance the video capture within the view of the virtual camera . Kreylos ' developments using the Kinect were covered among the works of others in the Kinect hacking and homebrew community in a New York Times article . 
 = = Real @-@ time recording and motion tracking = = 
 Virtual cameras have been developed which allow a director to film motion capture and view the digital characters movements in real time in a pre @-@ constructed digital environment , such as a house or spaceship . Resident Evil 5 was the first video game to use the technology , which was developed for the 2009 film Avatar . The use of motion capture to control the position and orientation of a virtual camera enables the operator to intuitively move and aim the virtual camera by simply walking about and turning the virtual camera rig . A virtual camera rig consists of a portable monitor or tablet device , motion sensors , optional support framework , and optional joystick or button controls that are commonly used to start or stop recording and adjust lens properties . In 1992 , Michael McKenna of MIT 's Media Lab demonstrated the earliest documented virtual camera rig when he fixed a <unk> magnetic motion sensor and a 3 @.@ 2 inch portable LCD TV to a wooden ruler . The <unk> Project at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill produced a number of physical input devices for virtual camera view control including dual three @-@ axis joysticks and a billiard @-@ ball shaped prop known as the UNC Eyeball that featured an embedded six @-@ degree of freedom motion tracker and a digital button . 
 = Manchester City F.C. in European football = 
 Manchester City , an English professional association football club , has gained entry to Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) competitions on several occasions . They have represented England in the European Cup ( now the Champions League ) on five occasions , the UEFA Cup ( now the Europa League ) on seven separate occasions , and the now @-@ defunct Cup Winners ' Cup twice . Manchester City are one of twelve English football clubs to have won a European title , in City 's case the 1969 – 70 Cup Winners Cup . 
 The club 's first entry into European competition occurred in 1968 , as a result of winning the 1967 – 68 Football League Championship . However , the participation was short @-@ lived , as the club suffered a surprise defeat at the hands of Fenerbahçe in the first round . Entry into the Cup Winners ' Cup the following season was more successful ; Manchester City won the competition , defeating Górnik Zabrze 2 – 1 at the Prater Stadium in Vienna . The club reached the semi @-@ final of the same competition the following year , and continued to play European football regularly during the 1970s . The club then endured a period of decline , and did not play in Europe again until 2003 , a gap of 24 years . Since then the club has qualified for European competition on a regular basis . 
 In the 1970s Manchester City also had a track record of repeated entry into several of the non @-@ UEFA sanctioned European competitions which were run in the era , including the Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup and the Texaco Cup . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First entries into European competition = = = 
 European club football competitions began in the mid @-@ 1950s . Though Manchester City were moderately successful domestically in this period , the club did not play in Europe . City were not invited to play in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , and the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup did not begin until 1960 . When eight players from neighbours Manchester United lost their lives in the Munich air disaster when returning from a European Cup match in February 1958 , UEFA wished for City to take United 's place in the competition . City rejected the idea out of hand . 
 Manchester City 's first appearance in European competition occurred in the 1968 – 69 season . City played in the European Cup , by virtue of having won the 1967 – 68 league championship . <unk> Manchester City coach Malcolm Allison made a number of grandiose statements predicting how the team would fare , saying that City would " terrify Europe " , and that " City will attack these people as they have not been attacked since the days of the old Real Madrid " . The opposition in the first round was Turkish club Fenerbahçe . The City management did not scout Fenerbahçe in advance of the game , opting to rely on a report from Oscar Hold , an Englishman who had managed Fenerbahçe between 1965 and 1967 . In the first leg at Maine Road , City had what the Guardian 's Albert Barham called " overwhelming territorial advantage " . However , to the frustration of the home crowd City were denied by a strong defensive performance by Fenerbahçe , most notably by goalkeeper Yavuz <unk> , and the match finished 0 – 0 . The return leg in Istanbul was played in front of a Turkish record crowd . City took an early lead through Tony Coleman , but conceded two goals in the second half and were eliminated . 
 Manchester City won the 1969 FA Cup Final to earn a place in the 1969 – 70 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup . Their first tie was against Atletico of Bilbao , in Spain 's Basque Country . Atletico were themselves managed by an Englishman , Ronnie Allen . In the first leg , City recovered from a two @-@ goal deficit to secure a 3 – 3 draw . The home leg was a routine 3 – 0 win . Post @-@ match reports alleged that a scuffle had taken place at half @-@ time between Mike Doyle and José Ramón <unk> , The referee spoke to both managers , but did not take any further action . 
 In the second round City travelled to Belgians Lierse S.K. , and won the first leg 3 – 0 , with two goals from Francis Lee and one from Colin Bell . The home leg produced a 5 – 0 win , a club record for European competition that as of 2012 has still not been exceeded . The first leg of the quarter @-@ final , at Académica de Coimbra , took place three days before Manchester City were due to play in the League Cup final . Malcolm Allison rejected the prevailing British football orthodoxy , in which domestic competitions took priority , by saying he would rather win in Portugal than in the League Cup final . The match finished goalless . At Maine Road , extra @-@ time was required for Manchester City to break down the stubbornly defensive Coimbra . Tony Towers scored the only goal of the tie with a minute of extra @-@ time remaining . 
 The draw for the semi @-@ finals meant Manchester City played the away leg first in every round , this time in Germany , where Schalke 04 were the opposition . Manchester City lost the first leg by a single goal . Needing to win at Maine Road by at least two goals , Manchester City used a very attacking approach . It worked ; City led 3 – 0 at half @-@ time , and won the match 5 – 1 . In the final , City faced Górnik Zabrze of Poland , who had progressed via a coin toss after three matches with AS Roma could not produce a winner in the other semi @-@ final . 
 = = = 1970 Cup Winners ' Cup final = = = 
 The final was held at a neutral venue , Prater Stadium in Vienna . The match took place in torrential rain , adversely affecting the attendance . The official figure was 7 @,@ 968 , though sources vary , with a number of figures between 7 @,@ 968 and 15 @,@ 000 reported . Of those , approximately 5 @,@ 000 were Manchester City supporters . Due to Eastern bloc travel restrictions , only 300 supporters , relatives and officials were permitted to travel from Poland . 
 Manchester City started the match strongly , particularly Francis Lee ; The Guardian correspondent wrote " Lee , indefatigable and nigh irresistible continually embarrassed the Górnik defence in the early stages " . Lee had the first chance of the match , a close range shot which was saved by Kostka . Manchester City took the lead in the 12th minute . Lee cut in from the left wing , escaping a tackle from Alfred Olek , and struck a fierce shot . Goalkeeper Hubert Kostka parried the ball , only for it to land at the feet of Neil Young for a simple finish . Shortly after City defender Mike Doyle sustained an ankle injury after colliding with Stefan <unk> . Manchester City played on with ten men for a period as Doyle received treatment from trainer Dave Ewing , but the defender was unable to continue . Substitute Ian Bowyer replaced him . The change prompted an alteration in formation , in which Colin Bell switched to a deeper position . Shortly before half @-@ time , Young won the ball after loose play from <unk> , which put him clear on goal . As Young moved into the penalty area Kostka rushed out of his goal and upended him , leaving the referee no option but to give a penalty . Lee struck the spot @-@ kick with power into the centre of the goal . Kostka 's legs made contact with the ball , but the force of the shot carried it into the net to make it 2 – 0 . Górnik got a goal back midway through the second half , but there were no more goals and the match finished 2 – 1 . 
 After the match City manager Joe Mercer said " the heavy rain in the second half ruined the game " and that he was " quite happy with the performance of our team , although the technical level was rather low in the second half " . Górnik manager Michał <unk> blamed his side 's poor start , saying the " first goal came too early for us and we never recovered from this shock . " The trophy was Manchester City 's fourth major honour in three seasons . It made them the third English club to win the Cup Winners ' Cup , after Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham United . 
 = = = Regular participation in the 1970s = = = 
 As title holders , Manchester City were entitled to defend the Cup Winners ' Cup in the 1970 – 71 season . Had they not won the trophy , they would still have been qualified for European competition , as City 's victory in the 1970 League Cup granted a place in the Fairs Cup . As a UEFA @-@ organised competition , the Cup Winners ' Cup took precedence over the Fairs Cup , and so the club took a place in the former . In the first round Manchester City almost suffered an upset at the hands of Linfield , from Belfast . City held a one @-@ goal lead after the first leg , but Linfield twice took the lead in the second leg . The match finished 2 – 1 to Linfield , and Manchester City progressed on the away goals rule . Honvéd were the opposition in the second round . Manchester City won both legs , the score 3 – 0 on aggregate . 
 The quarter @-@ final saw a rematch with Górnik Zabrze , who City had beaten in the previous year 's final . Both legs finished 2 – 0 to the home team , so to separate the sides a third match was played on neutral ground , in Copenhagen . Despite having several players unavailable through injury , City won this match 3 – 1 , and were drawn to play fellow English club Chelsea in the semi @-@ final , to date the only time Manchester City have drawn another English club in European competition . Further injuries occurred in domestic fixtures in the run @-@ up to the game , to the extent that goalkeeper Joe Corrigan played the first leg of the Chelsea tie unable to fully open his left eye because of a facial injury . City lost the first leg at Stamford Bridge 1 – 0 . Corrigan was unable to play in the second leg , in which stand @-@ in goalkeeper Ron Healey conceded an own goal , resulting in another 1 – 0 defeat . 
 A mid @-@ table finish in 1970 – 71 meant that for the first time in four years Manchester City did not qualify for Europe . The following year , a fourth @-@ placed league finish gave the club a berth in the UEFA Cup for the first time . The UEFA Cup had replaced the Fairs Cup in 1971 , when control of the competition transferred to UEFA . City 's debut in the competition was a short one . Drawn against a Valencia side managed by Alfredo Di Stéfano , City were bounced out in the 2nd leg at the Mestalla 3 @-@ 2 , despite producing a pulsating 2 – 2 draw at Maine Road in the 1st leg . 
 Triumph in the 1976 League Cup final gave Manchester City a place in the UEFA Cup after a four @-@ year absence . City drew Juventus in the first round . Drawn at home first , City won the first leg 1 – 0 , Brian Kidd scoring his first goal for the club . The second leg in Turin resulted in a 2 – 0 defeat and elimination . Juventus went on to win the competition . As league runners @-@ up in 1976 – 77 , Manchester City again qualified for the UEFA Cup . Drawn against Widzew Łódź , City drew the first leg at Maine Road 2 – 2 . In the late 1970s , hooliganism was becoming a more prominent part of English football . Following an incident where a fan invaded the pitch and attacked Widzew 's Zbigniew Boniek , City were fined by UEFA , and fencing was erected between the pitch and the stands . A 0 – 0 draw in Łódź resulted in City 's elimination on the away goals rule . 
 A league finish of fifth in 1977 – 78 proved sufficient to qualify for Europe . Dutchmen FC Twente were the first opposition . In Enschede , Dave Watson gave City the lead . Twente equalised in the second half from a free kick . In the second leg City ran up a 3 – 1 lead , but a second Twente goal meant a nervy finish . City held on , preserving their 3 – 2 lead to win the tie . This was the first time the club had progressed past the first round of the UEFA Cup in four attempts . Further opposition from the Low Countries awaited in the second round , in the form of Standard Liège . A flurry of late goals gave Manchester City a 4 – 0 lead after the first leg . The large lead meant that despite a 2 – 0 defeat in Liège , in which Gary Owen received a red card , City progressed with ease . Owen 's sending off resulted in a five match ban . 
 In the third round City faced four @-@ time European trophy winners A.C. Milan . The first leg , held at the San Siro , was initially postponed due to fog , and was instead played the following day . City took a 2 – 0 lead and came close to becoming the first English team to beat Milan at the San Siro , but conceded twice ; the equaliser scored eight minutes from time . City won the home leg 3 – 0 , with goals from Booth , Hartford and Kidd . City 's first European quarter @-@ final since 1971 was against Borussia Mönchengladbach . The club received advice from Bob Paisley , whose Liverpool had met Mönchengladbach several times . City opened the scoring in the first leg , but while attempting to extend their lead were caught on the counter @-@ attack and conceded an equaliser . After failing to win the home leg , having conceded an away goal in the process , City travelled to Germany with few expecting them to progress . So it proved , as City lost 3 – 1 at the Bökelbergstadion . 
 = = = Return to Europe in the 2000s = = = 
 Manchester City 's fortunes declined during the 1980s and 1990s . For a single season , 1998 – 99 , the club fell as far as English football 's third tier . The club did not qualify for European competition in this period . In ordinary circumstances , the club 's fifth @-@ placed finish in 1991 and 1992 would have granted a UEFA Cup place . However , English clubs had recently returned from a ban issued after the Heysel Stadium disaster . As the UEFA coefficient that determines the number of places per country is based upon performances in European competition over the previous five years , England had a reduced allocation until 1995 . 
 By the 2002 – 03 season , Manchester City were back in the Premier League . An unusual route into European competition for the 2003 – 04 season was provided by the UEFA Respect Fair Play ranking , which provided extra UEFA Cup qualifying round places for the leagues with the best records for discipline and positive play . This marked Manchester City 's first European participation for 24 years . In the qualifying round City played Welsh club Total Network Solutions . The first leg was the first @-@ ever competitive match at Manchester City 's new ground , the City of Manchester Stadium . Trevor Sinclair became the first ever goalscorer at the stadium in a 5 – 0 win . In the hope of attracting a large crowd , TNS switched the second leg to Millennium Stadium , the national stadium of Wales . With the tie effectively won , City made 10 changes to their team . The match finished 2 – 0 to City . Against Sporting Lokeren in the first round proper , City won the home leg 3 – 2 , and the away leg 1 – 0 . A tie against <unk> <unk> followed . Both legs were drawn , and just as in 1976 , City were eliminated on away goals after a 0 – 0 draw in Poland . 
 In 2008 Manchester City once again qualified for the UEFA Cup through the Fair Play rankings . As City had to play the qualifying rounds , it meant a very early start to the season , in mid @-@ July . Their first match was a trip to the remote Faroe Islands to play EB / <unk> . As <unk> 's ground had a capacity of only 1 @,@ 000 , the match was moved to <unk> , the Faroese national stadium . Two early goals gave City a 2 – 0 win . The home leg was unusual in that it was played outside Manchester . The pitch at the City of Manchester Stadium had been relaid following a Bon Jovi concert , and was not ready in time . Instead , the match was played at Barnsley 's Oakwell ground . Another 2 – 0 win resulted in a 4 – 0 aggregate scoreline . In the second qualifying round City played FC Midtjylland . The first leg ended in a 1 – 0 defeat , only City 's second ever home defeat in European competition . In the second leg City looked to be heading out of the competition until an 89th minute cross was diverted into his own net by Midtjylland 's Danny <unk> . The tie then went to extra time , and City progressed on penalties . In the first round proper Cypriots AC Omonia took the lead , but City overcame the deficit and won 2 – 1 , and also won the second leg by the same scoreline . 
 A five team group stage then followed , in which each team played the others once . Manchester City were drawn with Twente , Schalke 04 , Racing de Santander and Paris Saint @-@ Germain . City topped the group , after wins against Twente and Schalke , a draw with Paris Saint @-@ Germain and a defeat in a dead rubber in Santander . The knockout stages then resumed , with a visit to F.C. Copenhagen in freezing conditions . City took the lead twice but could only draw 2 – 2 . The home leg was more comfortable , and ended in a 2 – 1 victory . Another Danish club , Aalborg , awaited in the next round . Both matches finished 2 – 0 to the home side , and the tie was decided by a penalty shootout , which Manchester City won . City then faced Hamburger SV , in their first European quarter @-@ final since 1979 . The away leg was played first , and started exceptionally well for Manchester City , as Stephen Ireland scored after just 35 seconds . However , Hamburg soon equalised , and won the match 3 – 1 . A difficult task in the home leg soon became even harder , when Hamburg scored an away goal early in the match . City scored twice , the first by Elano , who also hit the woodwork on two occasions with free @-@ kicks . However , City could not produce the third goal that would have taken the tie into extra time . 
 UEFA rebranded and restructured the UEFA Cup in 2009 , resulting in it becoming the UEFA Europa League . By finishing fifth in the 2009 – 10 Premier League , Manchester City qualified for this competition . A play @-@ off round took place before the four team group stage , in which Manchester City beat Timișoara of Romania home and away . City 's group stage opponents were Juventus , Red Bull Salzburg and Lech Poznań . Each team played the others twice . City 's opener was in Salzburg , and resulted in a 2 – 0 win . A 1 – 1 draw at home to Juventus then followed . A 3 – 1 win at home to Lech Poznań is remembered primarily not for the action on the pitch , in which Emmanuel Adebayor scored a hat @-@ trick , but for the actions of the Polish supporters , whose backs to the pitch dance was later adopted by Manchester City fans , for whom it became known as The Poznań . The return match with Lech Poznań resulted in a 3 – 1 defeat , but a 3 – 0 home victory over Red Bull Salzburg ensured qualification with a match to spare . The dead rubber against Juventus ended 1 – 1 , and Manchester City won the group . In the knockout stages City then beat Aris Thessaloniki 3 – 0 on aggregate , and met Dynamo Kyiv in the last 16 . City lost 2 – 0 in Kyiv , and had to play most of the second leg with ten men after Mario Balotelli was sent off . A 1 – 0 win was insufficient to overcome the deficit , as City lost 2 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Manchester City finished third in the 2010 – 11 Premier League , to qualify for the rebranded version of the European Cup , the UEFA Champions League , for the first time . The club 's league finish granted direct entry into the group stages without qualification . Their group stage opponents were Bayern Munich , Villarreal and Napoli . City 's first group match was at home to Napoli . The Italians took the lead in the second half following a counter @-@ attacking move , but five minutes later Aleksandar Kolarov scored from a free @-@ kick to equalise , and the match finished 1 – 1 . City then lost 2 – 0 at Bayern Munich , a match most notable for the refusal of Carlos Tevez to come on as substitute , which resulted in an exile from the first team lasting nearly six months . A double @-@ header with Villarreal resulted in two Manchester City wins . Sergio Agüero scored a last @-@ minute winner in the first , which finished 2 – 1 ; the second was a comfortable 3 – 0 victory . A 2 – 1 defeat at Napoli then took qualification out of Manchester City 's hands , and despite a 2 – 0 win against group winners Bayern Munich , City finished third in the group and failed to qualify for the knockout stages . 
 As a third placed team the club then entered the Europa League in the round of 32 , where they faced Europa League holders Porto . Manchester City won both legs . Agüero 's goal after 19 seconds of the second leg was the second fastest in the history of the competition . City returned to Portugal in the next round , against Lisbon club Sporting CP . Each team won their home leg ; the first leg finished 1 – 0 to Sporting , and the second leg 3 – 2 to Manchester City . Sporting won the tie on away goals . 
 = = UEFA competitions = = 
 = = Non @-@ UEFA competitions = = 
 In addition to the major UEFA competitions , Manchester City have also played a number of first team fixtures in other , more minor multi @-@ national competitions . As winners of the 1970 League Cup , Manchester City played against the Coppa Italia winners Bologna in the Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup . The competition started the previous year , as a way of enabling 1969 League Cup winners Swindon Town to play European opposition . For the first leg in Bologna , the City team stayed over 100 km ( 60 miles ) away in the coastal resort of Rimini , and took a relaxed attitude to proceedings . City lost the match 1 – 0 , and drew 2 – 2 at home , losing the competition . 
 After missing out on a UEFA berth for 1971 – 72 , Manchester City were invited to play in the Texaco Cup , a competition for English , Scottish and Irish teams . City fielded a weakened side for the second leg of their tie against Airdrieonians . As punishment Manchester City had their £ 1 @,@ 000 prize money withheld and were banned from the competition for two years . Upon the expiry of the suspension in 1974 , the club entered the competition again , but exited in the group stage . The tournament saw Denis Law play his final matches as a professional . The withdrawal of Irish teams saw the competition renamed the Anglo @-@ Scottish Cup the following year . Again , City failed to progress beyond the group stage . 
 = = Overall record = = 
 = = = By country = = = 
 = = = = UEFA competitions = = = = 
 = = = = Non @-@ UEFA competitions = = = = 
 = Battle off Texel = 
 The Battle off Texel , also known as the Action off Texel or the Action of 17 October 1914 , was a naval battle off the coast of the Dutch island of Texel during the First World War where a British squadron consisting of one light cruiser and four destroyers on a routine patrol encountered the remnants of the German 7th Half Flotilla of torpedo boats , which was en route to the British coast on a mission to lay minefields . The British forces attacked and sank the German flotilla of four torpedo boats . Outgunned , the German force attempted to flee and then fought a desperate and ineffective action against the British force . 
 The battle resulted in the loss of the German torpedo boat squadron and prevented the mining of busy shipping lanes , such as the mouth of the River Thames . The British had few casualties and little damage to their vessels . The outcome of the battle also greatly influenced the tactics and deployments of the remaining German torpedo boat flotillas in the North Sea area , as the loss greatly shook the faith of the commanders in the effectiveness of the force . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the opening naval Battle of Heligoland Bight , the German High Seas Fleet was ordered to avoid confrontations with larger opposing forces , to avoid costly and demoralizing reverses . Apart from occasional German raids , the North Sea was dominated by the Royal Navy which regularly patrolled the area , although German light forces operated regularly in North Sea . At 13 : 50 on 17 October 1914 , a routine patrol by the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla ( Harwich Force ) consisting of the light cruiser HMS Undaunted ( Captain Cecil Fox ) and four Laforey @-@ class destroyers , HMS Lennox , Lance , Loyal and Legion , was cruising off the island of Texel , when they encountered a waiting German squadron of torpedo boats , comprising the remaining vessels of the 7th Half Flotilla ( Korvettenkapitän Georg Thiele in S119 ) SMS S115 , S117 , S118 . The German ships made no hostile move British ships , nor did they try to flee the scene and it was assumed by the British that they had mistaken the British ships for friendly vessels . The German flotilla had been sent out of the Ems River to mine the southern coast of Britain including the mouth of the Thames and had been intercepted before reaching its objective . 
 The British squadron out @-@ gunned the German 7th Half Flotilla , the Undaunted ( Captain Cecil Fox , squadron commander ) — an Arethusa @-@ class light cruiser — was armed with two BL 6 inch Mk XII naval guns and seven QF 4 inch Mk V naval guns , in single mounts ( most without gun shields ) and eight torpedo tubes . Undaunted was experimentally armed with a pair of 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft guns , something most of her class lacked and at best speed could make 28 @.@ 5 kn ( 32 @.@ 8 mph ; 52 @.@ 8 km / h ) . The four Laforey @-@ class destroyers were armed with two torpedo tubes , three 4 @-@ inch guns and a 2 @-@ pounder gun . The destroyers were slightly faster than the cruiser and could make about 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) at full power . The German vessels were inferior to the British in other areas , the 7th Half Flotilla was composed of ageing <unk> Torpedoboot 1898 class and had been completed in 1904 . The German boats were nearly equal in speed to the British at 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . Each of the German vessels was armed with three 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 97 in ) guns , that were of shorter range and throw @-@ weight than the British guns . The biggest danger to the British squadron was the three 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes carried by each of the German boats , with five torpedoes per boat . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Upon closer approach , the German vessels realized the nearby vessels were British and scattered , while Undaunted — which was closer to the Germans than the destroyers — opened fire on the nearest torpedo boat . This German vessel managed to dodge the fire from Undaunted by changing course but lost speed and the British force caught up . To protect Undaunted from torpedo attack and to destroy the Germans as quickly as possible , Fox ordered the squadron to divide . Lance and Lennox chased S115 and S119 as Legion and Loyal pursued S117 and S118 . Fire from Legion , Loyal and Undaunted damaged S118 so badly that its bridge was blown off the deck , sinking her at 15 : 17 . Lance and Lennox engaged S115 , disabling her steering gear and causing the German vessel to circle . Lennox 's fire was so effective that the bridge of S115 was also destroyed but the German torpedo @-@ boat did not strike her colours . 
 The two central boats in the German flotilla , S117 and the flotilla leader S119 , tried to hit Undaunted with torpedoes ; despite the torpedoes , Undaunted outmanoeuvred the German boats and remained unscathed . When Legion and Loyal had finished off S118 , they came to Undaunted 's aid and engaged it 's two attackers . Legion attacked S117 , but it fired its last three torpedoes and continued to engage with gunfire . Legion pulverized S117 , damaging her steering mechanism which forced her to circle before she was sunk at 15 : 30 . At the same time , Lance and Lennox had damaged S115 to the point where only one of the destroyers was needed . Lance <unk> Loyal in bombarding S119 with <unk> shells . S119 managed to fire a torpedo run at Lance and hit the destroyer amidships but the torpedo failed to detonate . S119 was sunk at 15 : 35 by gunfire from Lance and Loyal , taking the German flotilla commander down with it . S115 stayed afloat despite constant attacks from Lennox , which sent a boarding party , who found a wreck with only one German on board who happily surrendered . Thirty members of the crew were eventually rescued from the sea by the British vessels . The action ended at 16 : 30 , with gunfire from Undaunted finishing off the abandoned hulk of S115 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The battle was seen as a great boost of morale for the British as two days previous , they had lost the cruiser HMS Hawke to a U @-@ boat . The effect on British morale the battle had is reflected in its fictionalized and nationalistic inclusion in the 1915 dime novel The Boy Allies Under Two Flags , by Robert L. Drake . Some controversy arose in Germany from the battle , because the German hospital ship Ophelia , which had been sent out to rescue survivors from the sunken boats , was seized by the British for violating the Hague Convention rules on the use of hospital ships . The loss of a squadron of German torpedo boats , led to a drastic change in tactics in the English Channel and along the coast of Flanders . There were few sorties into the Channel and the torpedo boat force was relegated to coastal patrol and rescuing downed pilots . The British received a bonus on 30 November , when a British fishing trawler pulled up the sealed chest thrown off S119 by Captain Thiele . The chest contained a German codebook used by the German light forces stationed on the coast , allowing the British to decipher German communications for long afterwards . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The four ships of the German Seventh Half Flotilla were sunk by Harwich Force and over two hundred sailors were killed including the commanding officer . Despite the odds no German vessel struck her colours and the Flotilla fought to the end . Only four British sailors were wounded , along with superficial damage to three of the destroyers . Legion had one 4 lb ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) shell hit and one man was wounded by machine @-@ gun fire . Loyal was hit twice and had three or four men wounded as a result . Lance had superficial machine @-@ gun damage and the other vessels were unscathed . Thirty @-@ one German sailors were rescued from the water and the sinking ships and taken prisoner ; a captured officer died of wounds soon after . Two more German sailors were later rescued by a neutral vessel . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 HMS Undaunted , light cruiser , flagship 
 HMS Lennox , destroyer 
 HMS Lance , destroyer 
 HMS Loyal , destroyer 
 HMS Legion , destroyer 
 = = = German Navy = = = 
 SMS S119 , torpedo boat , flagship 
 SMS S118 , torpedo boat 
 SMS S117 , torpedo boat 
 SMS S115 , torpedo boat 
 = Cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device = 
 The cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device is the earliest known interactive electronic game . The device simulates an artillery shell arcing towards targets on a cathode ray tube ( CRT ) screen , which is controlled by the player by adjusting knobs to change the trajectory of a CRT beam spot on the display in order to reach plastic targets overlaid on the screen . Thomas T. Goldsmith , Jr. and Estle Ray Mann constructed the game from analog electronics and filed for a patent in 1947 , which was issued the following year . The gaming device was never manufactured or marketed to the public , so it had no effect on the future video game industry . Under most definitions , the device is not considered a video game , as while it had an electronic display it did not run on a computing device . Therefore , despite its relevance to the early history of video games , it is not generally considered a candidate for the title of first video game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device consists of a cathode ray tube connected to an oscilloscope with a set of knobs and switches . The device uses purely analog electronics and does not use any digital computer or memory device or execute a program . The CRT projects a spot on the oscilloscope display screen , which traces a parabolic arc across the screen when a switch is activated by the player . This beam spot represents the trajectory of an artillery shell . Overlaid on the screen are transparent plastic targets representing objects such as airplanes . At the end of the spot 's trajectory , the beam <unk> , resulting in the spot expanding and blurring . This represents the shell exploding as if detonated by a time fuze . The goal of the game is to have the beam <unk> when it is within the bounds of a target . Prior to the beam spot beginning its arc , the player can turn the control knobs to direct the beam spot 's trajectory and adjust the delay of the shell burst . The machine can be set to fire a " shell " either once or at a regular interval , which is adjustable by the player . This gives the player the goal of hitting one of the overlay targets with the shell burst within a time limit . The player was recommended to make the trajectory far removed from a straight line " so as to require an increased amount of skill and care " . 
 = = History = = 
 The cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device was invented by physicists Thomas T. Goldsmith , Jr. and Estle Ray Mann . The pair worked at television designer DuMont Laboratories specializing in the development of cathode ray tubes that used electronic signal outputs to project a signal onto television screens . Goldsmith , who had received a Ph.D. in physics from Cornell University in 1936 with a focus on oscilloscope design , was at the time of the device 's invention the director of research for DuMont Laboratories in New Jersey . The two inventors were inspired by the radar displays used in World War II , which Goldsmith had worked on during the war . The patent for the device was filed on January 25 , 1947 and issued on December 14 , 1948 . The patent , the first for an electronic game , was never used by either the inventors or DuMont Laboratories , and the device was never manufactured beyond original handmade prototype . Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers historian Alex Magoun has speculated that Goldsmith did not make the prototype with the intent for it to be the basis of any future production , but only designed the device as a demonstration of the kind of commercial opportunities DuMont could pursue . Goldsmith did not work on games after the invention of the device ; he was promoted to vice president in 1953 and left DuMont — by then split up and sold to other firms — to become a professor of physics at Furman University in 1966 . Goldsmith kept the device and brought it with him to Furman ; in a 2016 interview fellow physics professor Bill Brantley recalled Goldsmith demonstrating the game to him . 
 Despite being a game that used a graphical display , the cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device is generally not considered under most definitions to be a candidate for the first video game , as it used purely analog hardware and did not run on a computing device ; some loose definitions may still consider it a video game , but it is still usually disqualified as the device was never manufactured . Nevertheless , it is the earliest known interactive electronic game as well as the first to incorporate an electronic display , thus making it a forerunner to other games in the early history of video games . As the device was never manufactured or widely shown , however , it did not directly inspire any other games and had no impact on the future video game industry . 
 = Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Don Bradman toured England in 1948 with an Australian cricket team that went undefeated in their 34 tour matches , including the five Ashes Tests . Bradman was the captain , one of three selectors , and overall a dominant figure of what was regarded as one of the finest teams of all time , earning the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 Generally regarded as the greatest batsman in the history of cricket , the right @-@ handed Bradman played in all five Tests as captain at No. 3 . Bradman was more influential than other Australian captains because he was also one of the three selectors who had a hand in choosing the squad . He was also a member of the Australian Board of Control while still playing , a privilege that no other person has held . At the age of 40 , Bradman was by far the oldest player on the team ; three @-@ quarters of his team were at least eight years younger , and some viewed him as a father figure . Coupled with his status as a national hero , cricketing ability and influence as an administrator , this associated the team more closely to him than other teams to their respective captains . Bradman 's iconic stature as a cricketer also led to record @-@ breaking public interest and attendances at the matches on tour . 
 Bradman ended the first @-@ class matches atop the batting aggregates and averages , with 2428 runs at 89 @.@ 92 , and eleven centuries , the most by any player . Despite his success , his troubles against Alec Bedser 's leg trap — he fell three consecutive times in the Tests and twice in other matches to bowlers using this ploy — were the subject of much discussion . 
 Bradman scored 138 in the first innings of the First Test at Trent Bridge , laying the foundation for Australia 's 509 , which set up a lead of 344 and eventual victory . In the Fourth Test at Headingley , he scored an unbeaten 173 on a deteriorating pitch on the final day , combining in a triple @-@ century partnership with Arthur Morris as Australia scored 3 / 404 in the second innings to win by seven wickets . This set a world record for the highest ever successful run @-@ chase in Test history . The tour was Bradman 's international farewell , and when needing only four runs for a Test career average of exactly 100 , he bowed out with a second ball duck in the Fifth Test at The Oval , bowled by an Eric Hollies googly . Australia nevertheless won the Test to complete a 4 – 0 series win , and Bradman ended the series with 508 runs at 72 @.@ 57 , with two centuries . Only Morris — with three centuries — scored more runs in the five Tests . Bradman 's Test average for the series was the third @-@ highest among the Australians , behind that of Sid Barnes and Morris . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bradman had almost opted out of the tour , citing business commitments in Australia ; at the time , it was not possible to make a living from cricket . Prior to the campaign in England , Australia hosted India for a five @-@ Test series during the southern hemisphere summer of 1947 – 48 . Australia easily defeated the tourists 4 – 0 , and Bradman and his fellow selectors Chappie Dwyer and Jack Ryder thus began planning for the tour of England . Bradman made it publicly known that he wanted his team to become the first to play an English summer without defeat . England had agreed to make a new ball available every 55 overs , instead of the previous rule of after 200 runs had been scored . As the run rate was generally much slower than 3 @.@ 64 , 55 overs would usually elapse long before 200 runs were scored . This meant that the ball was in a shiny state more often , and thereby more conducive to fast and swing bowling . Bradman and his colleagues thus chose the team with an emphasis on strong batting and fast bowling , basing his strategy on an intense speed attack against England 's batsmen . His 17 @-@ man squad sailed for England and arrived in mid @-@ April . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire at the end of April . Bradman thus captained against Worcestershire with Australia bowling first and dismissing the hosts for 233 . After Sid Barnes and Arthur Morris put on a partnership of 79 runs in 99 minutes , Bradman came in at No. 3 and put on a stand of 186 in 152 minutes with Morris , before falling for 107 , having hit 15 fours . Morris narrowly beat Bradman to score Australia 's first century on tour , reaching triple figures while Bradman 's score was on 99 . Bradman declared Australia 's innings at 7 / 462 and the hosts fell for 212 to complete an Australian victory by an innings and 17 runs . 
 In the next match , against Leicestershire , Bradman won the toss and elected to bat , promoting Keith Miller ahead of himself to No. 3 . As Miller came out to bat , the large crowd mobbed the players ' entrance only to see that Bradman was not batting in his customary position . Bradman came to the crease at 2 / 157 , and after initially being troubled by the left @-@ arm unorthodox spin of Australian expatriate Jack Walsh , added 159 with Miller before falling for 81 . Australia compiled 448 and bowled out the home side for 130 and 147 to win by an innings , with Bradman taking one catch . 
 The Australians then proceeded to play Yorkshire , on a damp pitch that suited slower bowling . Bradman rested himself and returned to London , so his deputy Lindsay Hassett led the team . Yorkshire were bowled out in difficult batting conditions for 71 , before Australia replied with 101 . The hosts were then bowled out for 89 . Chasing 60 for victory , the Australian top order collapsed to 6 / 31 . Neil Harvey and Don Tallon survived a dropped catch and a stumping opportunity , before seeing Australia home by four wickets . It was the closest Australia came to defeat for the whole tour . 
 Bradman then returned in the next match against Surrey at The Oval in London , winning the toss and electing to bat . The last time Australia had played at the ground was the Fifth Test in 1938 , when England declared at a world record score of 7 / 903 ; Bradman had hurt his ankle , and was unable to bat as Australia fell to the largest defeat in Test history . This match was a far different experience for the Australians . Barnes and Morris put on 136 before Bradman came in to join Barnes ; together they added another 207 before Barnes fell for 176 . Bradman started slowly and was heckled by the crowd for taking 80 minutes to reach 50 , but accelerated and went on to score 146 before being dismissed at 3 / 403 , with Australia proceeding to be all out for 632 . He had attacked the medium pacers with his pull shot , but had some difficulties reading the left arm wrist spin of Australian expatriate John McMahon , nearly being caught behind the wicket on multiple occasions . Australia then bowled Surrey out for 141 and 195 to win by an innings . 
 Bradman rested himself for the next match against Cambridge University , leaving Hassett to orchestrate another innings victory . Bradman returned for the following match against Essex , and batted first after winnings the toss . Bill Brown opened with Barnes and they put on 145 in 97 minutes before Barnes hit his own wicket and was out . Bradman came in and seized the initiative , reaching 42 in the 20 minutes before lunch , including five fours from one over by Frank <unk> which subsequently entered Essex club folklore , as Australia passed 200 . Bradman and Brown put on a second @-@ wicket partnership of 219 in 90 minutes before Brown was out for 153 from three hours of batting , with the score at 2 / 364 . After Miller fell without scoring on the next ball , Ron Hamence joined Bradman and they put on another 88 before the Australian skipper was out for 187 at 4 / 452 . Bradman had added his last 87 runs in 48 minutes , hitting a total of 32 fours . Australia was out for 721 at stumps , setting a world record for the most runs in a single day 's play in first @-@ class cricket ; the record still stands . The tourists completed victory by an innings and 451 runs , their biggest winning margin for the tour . Bradman rested himself for the next match against Oxford University , which resulted in another innings victory . 
 The next match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord 's in late @-@ May . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , as were Australia , who fielded their first @-@ choice team . Bradman captained the team and batted at No. 3 . Barring one change in the bowling department , the same team would line up for Australia in the First Test , with the top six batsmen playing in the same positions . It was a chance for both teams to gain a psychological advantage . Australia won the toss and batted but stumbled early . Morris was out for five and Bradman came in to join Barnes at 1 / 11 . The pair added 160 before Barnes fell and Hassett came in to join his captain . They took the score to 200 before the Bradman fell for 98 , leaving Australia at 3 / 200 . It was Bradman 's highest score under 100 in first @-@ class cricket and in his disappointment , he was slow to leave the ground after his dismissal . Bradman 's men went on to amass 552 and bowled out the hosts for 189 and 205 to win by an innings , with Bradman catching his opposite number Norman Yardley in the second innings . Up to this point , Bradman had played in five of the first eight matches , all of which were won , seven by an innings . He had scored 107 , 81 , 146 , 187 and 98 , yielding a total of 619 runs at an average of 123 @.@ 80 . 
 The MCC match was followed by Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the tour , against Lancashire . Australia were sent in to bat and dismissed for 204 , with Bradman bowled by an arm ball from Malcolm Hilton for 11 , his first score on the tour below 80 . The hosts replied with 182 and in the second innings , Bradman was again dismissed by Hilton , this time for 43 as the tourists reached 4 / 259 at the end of play . When Hilton came on , Bradman attempted to seize the initiative and hit him out of the attack , but missed his first two balls . On the third ball , he charged out of his crease and swung across the line , missed , fell over and was stumped . Hilton 's achievement garnered widespread press attention , particularly in Lancashire . 
 In the following match against Nottinghamshire , the hosts batted first and made 179 . Bradman joined Brown at 1 / 32 and they took the score to 197 when Bradman fell for 86 . The tourists reached 400 and the hosts ended at 8 / 299 in the second innings to hang on for a draw . Bradman rested himself for the next fixture against Hampshire , and Australia were dismissed for 117 on a drying pitch in reply to the home side 's 195 , the first time they had conceded a first innings lead in the tour . Australia would have been in deeper trouble but for a flurry of sixes by Miller . Hampshire were then bowled out for 103 to leave Australia a target of 182 , and this time the tourists batted with much more authority to seal an eight @-@ wicket win . The tourists had survived another tight battle under the leadership of Hassett . The final match before the First Test was against Sussex . Australia skittled the hosts for 86 before Morris and Brown put on an opening stand of 153 . Bradman then joined Morris , and gave two early chances . He was dropped on two and escaped a stumping on 25 . He and Morris put on 189 before the latter fell for 184 . Bradman then ended his Test preparation by reaching 109 , in 124 minutes with 12 fours , and declaring at 5 / 549 , before completing another innings victory . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Australia headed into the First Test at Trent Bridge starting on 10 June with ten wins and two draws from twelve tour matches , with eight innings victories . It was thought that Bradman would play a specialist leg spinner , but he changed his mind on the first morning when rain was forecast . Bill Johnston , a left @-@ arm paceman and orthodox spinner , was played in the hope of exploiting a wet wicket . This was the only change from the teams that Australia had fielded in the matches against Worcestershire and the MCC . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . Pundits predicted that the pitch would be ideal for batting apart from some assistance to fast bowlers in the first hour , as the surface of the pitch had become moist following overnight rain , assisting seam bowling . Australia 's selection policy meant that their reserve opener Brown would bat out of position in the middle order while Barnes and Morris opened , while Neil Harvey was dropped despite making a century in Australia 's most recent Test against India . 
 Despite an injury to pace spearhead Ray Lindwall , Bradman 's fast bowlers reduced England in their first innings to 8 / 74 before finishing them off for 165 . Bradman dropped two catches in this innings . English gloveman Godfrey Evans came to the crease with the score at 6 / 60 , and hit Johnston hard to cover , where the ball went through Bradman for a boundary . The second chance went through Bradman 's hand and struck him in the abdomen . However , these missed catches did not cost Australia much , as Evans was soon caught at short leg by Morris close in , leaving England at 7 / 74 . England managed to recover somewhat after Laker and Bedser added 89 runs in only 73 minutes for the ninth wicket . At first , Bradman did not appear concerned by the partnership , and it was surmised that he may have been happy for England to continue batting so that his top order would not have to bat in fading light towards the end of the afternoon , but he became anxious as the total continued to mount and both Bedser and Laker appeared comfortable . 
 On the second day , Morris fell at 1 / 73 and Bradman came in to join Barnes . Yardley set a defensive field , employing leg theory to slow the scoring . He packed the leg side with fielders and ordered Alec Bedser to bowl at leg stump . Bradman almost edged the second ball onto his stumps , before defending uneasily for a period . While Jim Laker stopped the scoring at the other end , Bradman managed only four runs in his first 20 minutes . The Australian captain regarded Bedser as the finest seam bowler he faced in his career , and he batted in a circumspect manner as he sought to establish himself . At the other end , Bradman misjudged a ball from Laker and an incorrectly executed cut shot narrowly went wide of the slip fielder . Now aged 40 , Bradman 's reflexes had slowed and he no longer started his innings as confidently as he had done in the past . 
 The score progressed to 121 when Barnes fell to Laker . Miller came in and was dismissed for a duck without further addition to Australia 's total . The hard @-@ hitting Miller had come in at No. 4 , a position usually occupied by the more sedate Hassett , indicating that Bradman may have been looking to attack , but the change in batting order failed . All the while , Australia had been scoring slowly , as they would throughout the day . Brown came in , but he looked unaccustomed to batting in the middle order . The Australian captain decided to hasten the new ball by using his feet to get to the pitch of the ball to attack the spinners , hitting them through the off side . Yardley took the second new ball , but this move backfired as Bradman struck his first boundary in over 80 minutes , and in the first 40 minutes after lunch , 43 runs were added . Yardley then took the second new ball . Bradman struck his first boundary in more than 80 minutes but the run rate remained low . Australia passed England 's total before Yardley brought himself on to bowl and removed Brown . This ended a 64 @-@ run stand with Bradman in 58 minutes , and Hassett came in at 4 / 185 . Following the departure of Brown , the Australian scoring slowed as Bradman changed the team strategy to one of attempting to bat only once . 
 Yardley continued to employ a leg side field , as he and Barnett bowled outside leg stump . During one over , Bradman did not attempt a single shot and then put his hands on his hips . During the 15 minutes before the tea break , Bradman did not add a single run and was heckled by the crowd for his lack of scoring . The Australian captain reached the tea break on 78 ; 55 minutes after the resumption of play he played a cover drive against Bedser to reach his century in 218 minutes . It was his 28th Test century , and his 18th in Ashes Tests ; the last 29 runs took 70 minutes . It was one of his slower innings as Yardley focused on stopping runs rather than taking wickets . Nevertheless , Bradman had appeared comfortable after the early stages of his innings , and patiently scored most of his runs between mid @-@ off and mid @-@ on , often from the back foot . After the Australian captain had reached his milestone , many of the spectators began to leave the ground , content with what they had seen . Bradman added a further 30 in the last hour to end with 130 . Australia batted to stumps on the second day without further loss , ending at 4 / 293 , a lead of 128 . 
 After the day 's play , former Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly and former teammate of Bradman , now a journalist , consulted Bedser on his use of leg theory . O 'Reilly had much experience in attacking leg stump in his career and helped Bedser refine his leg trap plan to ensnare Bradman . 
 On the third morning , amid sunshine , Bradman resumed on 130 , before progressing to 132 and becoming the first player to pass 1 @,@ 000 runs for the English season . The Australian captain was not aware of the reason for the spontaneous crowd applause until notified by wicket @-@ keeper Evans . Bedser was bowling and soon implemented O 'Reilly 's variation of the leg trap . Hutton was moved from leg @-@ slip to a squarer position at short fine leg , around 11 metres from the bat . Two short legs and a mid on were put in place . Bradman drove Bedser through cover for a boundary , but on the next ball , his innings was terminated at 138 when he glanced an inswinger from Bedser to Hutton at short fine leg , where he caught the ball without having to move . Bradman had batted for 290 minutes and faced 321 balls and Johnson replaced him with Australia at 5 / 305 . Bedser waved to O 'Reilly in the press box . When former Australian Test cricketer and journalist Jack Fingleton reported what his friend and former team @-@ mate O 'Reilly had done , there was some debate in the media as to whether O 'Reilly 's actions in advising Bedser were treacherous . Australia went on to end on 509 and take a 344 @-@ run first innings lead . 
 Although Lindwall was able to run between the wickets during Australia 's innings , he did not take the field in the second innings and the 12th man Neil Harvey replaced him . However , Yardley was sceptical as to whether Lindwall was sufficiently injured to be forced from the field , but did not approach Bradman to object to Harvey 's presence on the field . O 'Reilly said that as Lindwall demonstrated his mobility during his innings , he was in no way " incapacitated " and that the English captain " must be condemned for carrying his concepts of sportsmanship too far " when no substitute was justified . 
 After lunch on day four , with England on 3 / 191 , the light was poor with clouds gathering , although England did not appeal against it . Yardley wanted to bat in poor visibility so that he could build a lead , so that if a shower came later and turned the pitch into a sticky wicket , Australia would have to chase a target on an erratic surface . Bradman thought that rain might come so he utilised Ernie Toshack and Ian Johnson to bowl defensively with a leg side field so that England would not have a lead should rain and a sticky wicket arise . Wisden opined that " rarely can a Test Match have been played under such appalling conditions as on this day " . Fingleton said the conditions were " pitiable " and " utmost gloom in which batsmen and fieldsmen had intense difficulty in sighting the ball " . Australia eventually finished off the hosts ' second innings for 441 , leaving them a target of 98 on the final afternoon . Late in England 's innings , Bradman raised eyebrows by deliberately giving centurion Denis Compton easy singles by spreading his fielders in order to bring Evans on strike so that he could be targeted . Compton thought that Evans could be relied upon and readily accepted the runs gifted to him by the Australian captain , and Evans continued to play confidently , eventually reaching 50 . 
 Australia proceeded steadily to 38 from 32 minutes before Morris fell . Bradman came to the crease and stayed 12 minutes without getting off the mark . He was out for a duck from the 10th ball that he faced , caught again by Hutton at short fine leg in Bedser 's leg trap . Bradman showed obvious displeasure at allowing himself to be dismissed by the same trap in consecutive innings , and his departure left Australia at 48 / 2 . It was the first time in four tours to England that Bradman had made a duck in a Test . This left Australia 2 / 48 , but they reached the target without further loss after 87 minutes of batting . 
 Between Tests , Bradman rested himself during the match against Northamptonshire , which started the day after the Test , as Hassett led Australia to victory by an innings . He returned for the match against Yorkshire . Bradman came in at 1 / 0 when Barnes fell for a duck and top @-@ scored with 54 as Australia made 249 . Bradman pulled many short balls and reached 50 in 76 minutes . After the hosts replied with 209 , Bradman came in at 1 / 17 and put on 154 for the second wicket with Brown , ending with 86 as the match petered into a draw . His innings ended when Hutton caught him in the leg trap . Not wanting to tire his bowlers before the Second Test that started the day after next , Bradman showed little intent to win the match . The batsmen batted unhurriedly and set Yorkshire 329 for victory with only 70 minutes of play remaining and the hosts ended at 4 / 85 . Yardley expressed his displeasure by allowing his part @-@ timers to bowl and then promoting tail @-@ enders to the upper half of the batting order in the second innings . The Australians were booed from the field by the spectators . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 Bradman opted to field an unchanged lineup for the Second Test , which started on 24 June at Lord 's . Following his injury in the previous Test , Lindwall was subjected to a thorough fitness test on the first morning . Bradman was not convinced of Lindwall 's fitness , but the bowler 's protestations were sufficient to convince his captain to gamble on his inclusion . Bradman won the toss and elected to bat , allowing Lindwall further time to recover . Miller played , but was unfit to bowl . 
 Barnes fell for a duck in his second over , bringing Bradman to the crease at 1 / 3 . Bradman received a loud reception from the crowd as he came out to bat in his final Test at Lord 's . Bradman initially struggled against the English bowling . He faced his first ball from Alec Coxon and inside edged it past his leg stump , before missing the third ball from Coxon and surviving an appeal for leg before wicket ( lbw ) . Bowling from the other end , Bedser beat Bradman with seam movement off the pitch and the ball narrowly skimmed past the stumps . Standing up to the stumps , wicket @-@ keeper Godfrey Evans removed the bails as Bradman leaned forward , but his foot had stayed firmly behind the crease . In another close call , Bradman inside edged a ball towards Yardley at short leg , but the English captain was slow to react and the ball landed in front of him . The Australian captain managed only three runs in the first twenty minutes as Australia had only 14 after the first half @-@ hour . Coxon consistently moved the ball into a cautious Bradman , and the Australians scored only 32 runs in the first hour . 
 Edrich came on and bowled a bouncer , which Bradman tried to swing to the leg side , but instead the edge went in the air and landed behind point . On 13 , Bradman played a Bedser ball from his legs , narrowly evading Hutton in the trap at short fine leg . After one hour he was on 14 . Bradman and Morris settled down as Coxon and Doug Wright operated . The Australian captain drove the debutant Coxon through the covers for two fours , and Yardley made frequent rotations of his bowlers . At the lunch break , Australia were 1 / 82 with Morris on 45 and Bradman 35 . Shortly afterwards , in the third over after the resumption of play , with the score at 87 , Bradman was caught for 38 for the third consecutive time in Tests by Hutton off Bedser at short fine leg , just two days after falling the same way in the second innings against Yorkshire . According to O 'Reilly , this was evidence that Bradman was no longer the player he was before World War II , as he had been unable to disperse the close @-@ catching fielders by counter @-@ attacking , before eventually being dismissed . O 'Reilly said that this was the first time that Bradman had fallen to the same trap three times in succession . Australia reached 7 / 258 at the end of day one , before a lower order burst took them to 350 on the second morning . 
 England then started their reply , and Lindwall took the new ball and felt pain in his groin again after delivering his first ball to Hutton . Despite this , Lindwall persevered through the pain . Seeing that Lindwall was able to bowl through the pain , Bradman tossed the ball to Miller for the second over to see if Miller could bowl . However , Miller threw the ball back , indicating that his body would not be able to withstand it . This resulted in media consternation that Bradman and Miller had quarrelled . 
 Although Bradman claimed that the exchange had been amicable , others disputed this . Teammate Barnes later claimed that Miller had retorted by suggesting that Bradman — a very occasional slower bowler — bowl himself . Barnes said that the captain " was as wild as a battery @-@ stung brumby " and warned his unwilling bowler that there would be consequences for his defiance . According to unpublished writings in Fingleton 's personal collection , Bradman chastised his players in the dressing room at the end of the play , saying " I 'm 40 and I can do my full day 's work in the field . " Miller reportedly snapped " So would I — if I had fibrositis " ; Bradman had been discharged from the armed services during World War II on health grounds , whereas most of the team had been sent into battle . Miller had crash @-@ landed while serving as a fighter pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force in England and had suffered chronic back trouble since then . 
 On the second afternoon , Bradman delayed the taking of the second new ball until after tea so that Lindwall and Johnston could have an extra period of recuperation before a new attack . This proved dividends as the bowlers took a wicket apiece within three overs of the new ball being taken , leaving England at 6 / 134 . England were bowled out for 215 on the third morning , as Lindwall took 5 / 70 . In later years , Bradman told Lindwall that he pretended not to notice Lindwall 's pain . Lindwall was worried that Bradman had noticed his injury , but Bradman later claimed that he feigned ignorance to allow Lindwall to relax . Australia batted much more productively in the second innings in ideal weather on the third day . Morris and Barnes put on 122 before the former fell for 62 . Bradman joined Barnes at the crease for his last Test innings at the home of cricket . Yardley surrounded the Australian captain with fielders and Laker then beat his bat thrice in an over . Bedser was then introduced with the leg trap ploy again in place as he bowled on Bradman 's pads . The Australian captain decided to negate the danger of being caught glancing at short fine leg by padding the ball away with his front leg . Bedser responded by changing his tactics by bowling a series of outswingers , beating the outside edge of Bradman 's bat three times in a row , narrowly missing the off stump on one occasion . Barnes then manipulated the strike to shield his captain from Bedser . The Australian opener had little trouble against the leg trap , and negated the danger Bedser was posing . Bradman accelerated after tea and took two consecutive boundaries from Wright to bring up his fifty , with Barnes on 96 and Australia at 1 / 222 . 
 Barnes passed his century and began accelerating before finally falling for 141 , leaving Australia at 2 / 296 in 277 minutes , after a 174 @-@ run partnership with Bradman . Hassett was bowled first ball off the inside edge , but Miller survived a loud lbw appeal on Yardley 's hat @-@ trick ball . Bradman was on 89 and heading towards a century in his last Test innings at Lord 's when he fell to Bedser again , this time because of a one @-@ handed diving effort from Edrich . Bradman had been worried by Bedser 's angle into his pads and the leg trap , but Bedser then moved the ball the other way towards the slips and caught Bradman 's outside edge . It was the fourth time out of four innings in the series that Bedser had dismissed Bradman . This left Australia at 4 / 329 and the next day , Bradman was expected to declare just before lunch so that he could attack the English openers for a short period before the adjournment , but a shower at this time deterred him from doing so , as his bowlers would have struggled to grip the ball ; Lindwall had also been injured on a slippery surface in earlier times . The Australian captain declared on the following day of play at 7 / 460 , 595 runs ahead . It would take a world record chase from England to win the match . England lost wickets regularly and fell for 186 to lose by 409 runs . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Test . Australia elected to field and the hosts made 221 . Brown injured a finger while fielding , and was not able to bat in Australia 's first innings . Ron Hamence filled in as an opener but was out for a duck , so Bradman joined Hassett at 1 / 6 . Bradman made 128 and put on 231 with Hassett ( 139 ) as Australia replied with 389 . Bradman 's innings took only 140 minutes with 15 fours and was described by Jack Fingleton as " lovely " . In the second innings , Australia 's makeshift openers Harvey and Sam Loxton chased down the 122 runs for victory to complete a 10 @-@ wicket win . Australia wanted to finish the run @-@ chase quickly so they could watch the Australian tennis player John Bromwich compete at Wimbledon and after Bradman had accepted Harvey 's offer to open , Australia made the runs in only one hour . Bradman rested himself in the following match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test . Hassett led the team as Australia reached 7 / 774 declared , its highest of the tour , underpinning an innings victory . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 The teams reassembled at Old Trafford on 8 July for the Third Test . Australia dropped Brown , who had scored 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in three innings ; he was replaced by the all rounder Sam Loxton , who had made 47 not out against Surrey and an unbeaten 159 against Gloucestershire . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . 
 On the second day , Bradman was involved in effecting a run out . Denis Compton hit a ball into the covers and Bradman and Loxton collided in an attempt to prevent a run . Compton called Bedser through for a run on the misfield , but Loxton recovered and threw the ball to the wicket @-@ keeper 's end with Bedser a long way short of the crease . It ended an innings of 145 minutes , in which Bedser scored 37 and featured in a 121 @-@ run partnership with Compton . Compton hit several boundaries and Bradman responded by spreading his field to offer Compton a single so that the tail @-@ enders would be on strike and could be attacked . This worked , as Compton was unable to farm the strike as he desired , and wickets fell at the other end . Bradman caught Jack Young to end England 's innings at 363 . Having dropped Brown , Barnes was hit in the ribs by a Dick Pollard pull shot and taken to hospital , leaving Australia with only Morris as a specialist opening batsman . Ian Johnson was deployed as Australia 's makeshift second opener . He fell for one to bring Bradman to bat . O 'Reilly criticised the use of Johnson to partner Morris , as Hassett had transformed himself into a defensive batsman with little backlift and a guarded approach , a style typical of an opener . The Australian captain thus had to face Bedser , who had already dismissed him three times in the Tests with a new ball , and Pollard , who had troubled him in the match against Lancashire . Pollard then trapped Bradman for seven with an off cutter that struck the Australian captain on the back foot to leave Australia at 2 / 13 . Australia were eventually out for 221 , yielding a 142 @-@ run lead . 
 When Bill Edrich came to the crease , Bradman advised Lindwall not to bowl any bouncers at Edrich , fearing that it would be interpreted as retaliation for Edrich 's bouncing of Lindwall in the first innings and lead to a negative media and crowd reaction . Although Lindwall did not retaliate , Miller did so with four consecutive bouncers , earning the ire of the crowd . He struck Edrich on the body before Bradman intervened and ordered him to stop , before apologising to Edrich . England reached 3 / 174 , a lead of 316 , at the end of day three , but declared on the fifth morning after the fourth day was washed out . Bradman chose the light roller and play was supposed to begin after lunch . However , play did not begin until after tea and the pitch played very slowly because of the excess moisture . With Australia not looking to chase the runs , Yardley often had seven men in close catching positions . Australia showed little attacking intent and Bradman joined Morris with Australia at 1 / 10 after 32 minutes . 
 Bradman then played 11 balls from Young without scoring . Yardley used the spin of Young and Compton for an hour , while Morris and Bradman made little effort to score . For 105 minutes , Morris stayed at one end and Bradman at the other ; neither looked to rotate the strike with singles . Bradman only played eight balls from Morris 's main end , and at one point was so startled that Morris wanted a single that he sent him back . The tourists thereafter batted safely in a defensive manner to ensure a draw . They ended at 1 / 92 in 61 overs , a run rate of 1 @.@ 50 , with 35 maidens , which was the slowest innings run rate to date in the series . Bradman finished unbeaten on 30 from 146 balls when the oft @-@ interrupted match was finally terminated by a series of periodic rain interruptions . O 'Reilly criticised the approach taken by the Australians in the closing stages of the match , attributing it to Bradman 's orders . He said that the pitch was made so tame by the heavy rain that they could have played in a natural and attractive manner to entertain the spectators , rather than defending carefully . He said that Bradman 's " unwillingness to take a risk or to accept the challenging call of some particular phase of the game is one of the greatest flaws " in his leadership . 
 After the Test , Bradman managed only six as Australia scored 317 and 0 / 22 to defeat Middlesex by ten wickets in their only county match between Tests . He was again caught in the leg trap by Denis Compton . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 The Fourth Test was played at Headingley , starting on 22 July , and Australia made two changes . Harvey replaced the injured Sid Barnes , while Ron Saggers replaced Don Tallon , who had a finger injury , as wicket @-@ keeper . Brown was not recalled for the Fourth Test to open ; instead , Hassett was promoted to open with Morris , while the teenaged Harvey came into the middle @-@ order . As Australia were leading 2 – 0 after three Tests , England needed to win the last two Tests to square the series . England won the toss and elected to bat on an ideal batting pitch . 
 At the start of the innings , Bradman used off theory , but left a large gap square of the wicket in an attempt to coax England 's out @-@ of @-@ form top @-@ order to play risky shots into the inviting gap . However , Bradman 's offer was spurned as Hutton and Washbrook played cautiously . Meanwhile , Australia 's attack appeared unsettled . Bradman set defensive fields for most of the first day as England 's openers put on 168 for the first wicket . O 'Reilly said that Bradman 's defensive field settings " made the sorry admission of impotency " . England 's batsmen dominated to reach stumps at 2 / 268 . Jack Fingleton said that Australia 's day went " progressively downhill " and was its worst day of bowling since the Second World War , citing the proliferation of full tosses . O 'Reilly criticised the display as the worst by the Australians on tour and said that no bowler could be excused . He said that the attack " functioned without object — hopelessly and meaninglessly " throughout the day . He lambasted the bowlers for performing at a standard akin to county cricket . O 'Reilly criticised the players for having a casual and lethargic manner , speculating that Bradman had been allowed them to become complacent . 
 On the second day , Bradman continued to use defensive tactics for most of the day as England continued to dominate . Australia had trouble removing night @-@ watchman Bedser , who helped take the score to 2 / 423 . Bradman gave his leading bowler Lindwall a heavy workload as the other bowlers appeared unthreatening . O 'Reilly decried the use of Lindwall as excessive and potentially harmful to his longevity . The hosts were eventually out for 496 , their largest score of the series , after a largely self @-@ inflicted collapse late on the second day . Bedser removed Morris for six to leave Australia at 1 / 13 . This brought Bradman to the crease and he was mobbed by the spectators on a ground where he had previously scored two triple centuries and another century in three Tests at the venue . He had made a Test world record of 334 in 1930 , scoring 309 in one day 's play . Many spectators walked onto the playing arena to greet the arrival of Bradman and he doffed his baggy green and raised his bat to greet them . Fingleton opined that " on this field he [ Bradman ] has won his greatest honours ; nowhere else has he been so <unk> acclaimed " . Bradman got off the mark from his first ball , which Compton prevented from going for four with a diving stop near the boundary . Hassett was restrained , while Bradman attacked , taking three fours from one Edrich over . Bradman was 31 and Hassett 13 as the tourists reached stumps at 2 / 63 . Bradman did the majority of the scoring in the late afternoon , scoring 31 in a partnership of 50 . 
 On the third morning , Bradman resumed proceedings by taking a single from a Bedser no ball . In same over , one ball reared from the pitch and moved into Bradman , hitting him in the groin , causing a delay as he recovered from the pain and recomposed himself before play resumed . In the second over bowled by Pollard , Hassett fell for 13 on the second ball , which lifted suddenly after bouncing . Miller came to the crease and drove his first ball for three runs , bringing Bradman on strike for the fourth ball of the over . Pollard then pitched a ball in the same place as he did to Hassett , but this time it skidded off the pitch and knocked out Bradman 's off stump for 33 . According to O 'Reilly , Bradman backed away from the ball as it cut off the pitch with a noticeable flinch . O 'Reilly attributed Bradman 's unwillingness to get behind the ball to the blow inflicted on him by Bedser in the previous over and the rearing ball that dismissed Hassett . The crowd , sensing the importance of the two quick wickets , in particular that of Bradman , who had been so productive at Headingley , erupted . This left Australia struggling at 3 / 68 , but a rapid counterattack by the middle and lower order took them to 9 / 457 at stumps and eventually 458 on the fourth morning . 
 England batted for the second time , and after lunch on the fourth afternoon , Bradman set fields to restrict the scoring , as England passed 100 without loss . Washbrook then hooked Johnston and top edged it , but Bradman failed to take the catch . He repeated the shot soon after and Harvey took the catch at 1 / 129 , so the Australian captain 's miss cost little . Johnson then removed Hutton for 57 without further addition to the total , caught by Bradman on the run , leaving England at 2 / 129 . During most of the afternoon , Bradman used a strategy of rotating his bowlers in short spells , and set a defensive , well @-@ spread field for Johnson , who had been repeatedly attacked by the batsmen . England then reached 8 / 362 at the close , a lead of 400 . England batted on for five minutes on the final morning , adding three runs in two overs before Yardley declared at 8 / 365 . As the batting team is allowed to choose which ( if any ) roller can be used at the start of the day 's play , this ploy allowed Yardley to ask the groundsman to use a heavy roller , which would help to break up the wicket and make the surface more likely to spin . Bradman had done a similar thing during the previous Ashes series in Australia in order to make the batting conditions harder for England . At the start of any innings , the batting captain also has the choice of having the pitch rolled . Bradman elected to not have the pitch rolled at all , demonstrating his opinion that such a device would disadvantage his batsmen . This left Australia to chase 404 runs for victory . At the time , this would have been the highest ever fourth innings score to result in a Test victory . Australia had only 345 minutes to reach the target , and the local press wrote them off , predicting that they would be dismissed by lunchtime on a deteriorating spinners ' wicket . Morris and Hassett started slowly , with only six runs in the first six overs on a pitch that offered spin and bounce . Only 44 runs came in the first hour , leaving 360 runs needed in 285 minutes . Both players survived close calls before Hassett fell at 1 / 57 . 
 Bradman joined Morris with 347 runs needed in 257 minutes . After receiving another rapturous welcome from the Headingley spectators , Bradman signalled his intentions by hitting a boundary from Compton ; and then , on his first ball from Laker , cover driving against the spin for a boundary . He reached 12 in six minutes . Yardley then called upon the occasional leg spin of Hutton in an attempt to exploit the turning wicket . Morris promptly joined Bradman in the counter @-@ attack , and 20 runs in two Hutton overs , which Fingleton described as " rather terrible " due to the errant length . Bradman took two fours off Hutton 's second over before almost holing out to Yardley . This let Australia reach 1 / 96 from 90 minutes . 
 In the next over , Compton deceived Bradman with a googly . Bradman expected the ball to turn in , but it went the other way , took the outside edge and ran away past slip for four . Bradman leg @-@ glanced the next one for another boundary , before again failing to read a googly on the third ball . This time the edge went to Crapp , who failed to hold on . The sixth ball of Compton 's over beat Bradman and hit him on the pads . At the other end , Morris continued to plunder Hutton 's inaccurate leg breaks , and Australia reached lunch at 1 / 121 , with Morris on 63 and Bradman on 35 . Hutton had conceded 30 runs in four overs , and in the half @-@ hour preceding the interval , Australia had added 64 runs . Both players had been given lives . Although Australia had scored at a reasonable rate , they had also been troubled by many of the deliveries and were expected to face further difficulty if they were to avoid defeat . 
 After the break , Morris added 37 runs in 14 minutes from a series of Compton full tosses and long hops , while Bradman had only added three . This prompted Yardley to take the new ball . Bradman reached 50 in 60 minutes and then aimed a drive from Ken Cranston , but sliced it in the air to point . Yardley dived and got his hands to the ball , but failed to hold on . Australia reached 202 — halfway to the required total — with 165 minutes left , after Morris dispatched consecutive full tosses from Laker . Bradman then hooked two boundaries , but suffered a fibrositis attack , which put him in significant pain . Drinks were then taken , and Morris had to farm the strike until Bradman 's pain had subsided . Australia then reached 250 shortly before tea with Morris on 133 and Bradman on 92 . Bradman then reached his century in 147 minutes as the second @-@ wicket stand passed 200 . 
 Bradman was given another life at 108 when he advanced two metres down the pitch to Jim Laker and missed , but Evans fumbled the stumping opportunity . Australia reached tea at 1 / 292 having added 171 during the session . Morris was eventually dismissed for 182 , having partnered Bradman in a stand of 301 in 217 minutes . This brought Miller to the crease with 46 runs still required . He struck two boundaries and helped take the score to 396 before falling with eight runs still needed . Harvey came in and got off the mark with a boundary that brought up the winning runs . This sealed an Australian victory by seven wickets , setting a new world record for the highest successful Test run @-@ chase , with Bradman unbeaten on 173 with 29 fours in only 255 minutes . 
 Immediately after the Fourth Test , Bradman scored 62 , before being bowled attempting a pull shot to a ball that kept low , as Australia compiled 456 and defeated Derbyshire by an innings . Bradman rested himself in the next match against Glamorgan , a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . He then scored 31 and 13 not out , bowled by Eric Hollies as Australia defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets . Hollies 's 8 / 107 was the best innings bowling figures against the Australians for the summer and earned him selection for the Fifth Test , where he famously dismissed Bradman in his final Test innings for a duck . Australia proceeded to face and draw with Lancashire for the second time on the tour . Bradman made 28 after being dropped twice in Australia 's 321 , before taking two catches as the tourists took a 191 @-@ run lead . He then came in at 1 / 16 and put on 161 for the second wicket with Barnes , and was unbeaten on 133 when he declared at 3 / 265 . The home side hung on for a draw at 7 / 199 when time ran out . Bradman then rested himself during the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , a rain @-@ affected draw that was washed out after the first day . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 After the match against Durham , Australia headed south to The Oval for the Fifth Test , which started on 14 August . Barnes and Tallon returned from injury , while Ernie Toshack was omitted with knee troubles , and the leg spin of Doug Ring replaced Johnson 's off spin . Overnight , hundreds of spectators had slept on wet pavements in rainy weather to queue for tickets . Bradman had already announced that he would retire at the end of the season , and the public were anxious to witness his last Test appearance . 
 English skipper Norman Yardley won the toss and elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . Yardley 's decision was regarded as a surprise ; although The Oval had traditionally been a batting paradise , weather conditions suggested that bowlers would have the advantage . Jack Fingleton speculated that Australia would have bowled first if Bradman had won the toss . Propelled by Lindwall 's 6 / 20 , England were dismissed for 52 in 42 @.@ 1 overs on the first afternoon . 
 In contrast , Australia batted much more fluently as the overcast skies cleared and the sun came out . Australia had reached 100 at 17 : 30 with Barnes on 52 and Morris on 47 . The score had reached 117 before Barnes was removed by Hollies for 61 . This brought Bradman to the crease shortly before 18 : 00 , late on the first day . As Bradman had announced that the tour was his last at international level , the innings would be his last at Test level if Australia batted only once . The crowd gave him a standing ovation as he walked out to bat . Yardley led the Englishmen in giving his Australian counterpart three cheers before shaking Bradman 's hand . With 6996 Test career runs , he only needed four runs to average 100 in Test cricket . Bradman took guard and played the first ball from Hollies from the back foot . Hollies pitched the next ball up , bowling Bradman for a duck with a googly that went between bat and pad as the batsman leaned forward . Bradman appeared stunned by what had happened and slowly turned around and walked back to the pavilion , receiving another large round of applause . Australia went on to make 389 and then bowled England out for 188 to win by an innings and 149 runs . 
 This result sealed the series 4 – 0 in favour of Australia . The match was followed by a series of congratulatory speeches . 
 Bradman said 
 No matter what you may read to the contrary , this is definitely my last Test match ever . I am sorry my personal contribution has been so small ... It has been a great pleasure for me to come on this tour and I would like you all to know how much I have appreciated it ... We have played against a very lovable opening skipper ... It will not be my pleasure to play ever again on this Oval but I hope it will not be the last time I come to England . 
 Yardley said 
 In saying good @-@ bye to Don we are saying good @-@ bye to the greatest cricketer of all time . He is not only a great cricketer but a great sportsman , on and off the field . I hope this is not the last time we see Don Bradman in this country . 
 Bradman was then given three cheers and the crowd sung " For he 's a jolly good fellow " before dispersing . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to complete an English season without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and Bradman made 65 , putting on 104 with Brown as Australia made 361 and won by an innings . In the next match against the Gentlemen of England , Bradman came to the crease at 1 / 40 and featured in a 180 @-@ run second wicket partnership with Brown , before adding another 110 with Hassett . He was out for 150 at 3 / 331 before declaring at 5 / 610 against a team that included eight Test players . Australia went on to win by an innings . He then rested himself as Australia defeated Somerset by an innings and 374 runs . Bradman returned to make 143 against the South of England , adding 188 for the third wicket with Hassett . Australia declared at 7 / 522 and bowled out the hosts for 298 before rain ended the match . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI starting on 8 September , its last first @-@ class match for the tour . During the last tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit and had defeated Australia , but this time Bradman insisted that only six current Test players be allowed to represent the hosts . Bradman then fielded a full @-@ strength team ; the only difference from the Fifth Test team was Johnson 's inclusion at the expense of Ring . His bowlers skittled the hosts for 177 , and Morris and Barnes put on an opening stand of 102 before Morris was out for 62 . Bradman joined Barnes and they put on 225 runs for the second wicket . Bradman top @-@ scored with 153 as Australia declared at 8 / 469 late on the final day . Upon reaching 153 , he threw away his wicket with a lofted cover drive , having decided to attempt sixes to give Alec Bedser his wicket . He was already running towards the pavilion before the catch was taken , ending his last first @-@ class innings in England . The hosts were 2 / 75 when the match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . When it became obvious that Australia would not lose , Bradman bowled his only over of the tour , conceding two runs . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . In the first match , Bradman made 27 of Australia 's 236 as the tourists took an innings victory . In the second match , Bradman top @-@ scored with 123 not out batting at No. 6 , hitting 17 fours and two sixes in 89 minutes as Australia declared at 6 / 407 . Australia ended the tour with another innings victory . Once Australia were in an unassailable position during Scotland 's second innings , Bradman relaxed and allowed nine players to bowl , including the wicket @-@ keeper Tallon , who took two wickets , while Johnson stood in as the wicket @-@ keeper . When the victory was sealed on 18 September , Bradman 's men became the first side to go through an English season without defeat . 
 = = Role = = 
 Along with Chappie Dwyer and Jack Ryder , Bradman was one of the three selectors who chose the squad to tour England . This gave Bradman more power than other Australian captains , who did not have an explicit vote in team selection . This was further magnified by Bradman being a member of the Board of Control while an active player , a threefold combination that he alone has occupied in Australian cricket history . According to Gideon Haigh , he " was the dominant figure in Australian cricket " , who went on to become an " unimpeachable figure " . 
 Turning 40 in August during the tour , Bradman was by far the most senior and oldest player on the team . Bill Brown was the next oldest , making his third tour of England at 36 . His vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett was the third @-@ oldest player , at the age of 35 . Ernie Toshack was born in December 1914 , and the remaining 13 players were born in 1916 or later . Five players , including Ray Lindwall , Bill Johnston and Morris , his two most prolific Test bowlers and batsman respectively , were more than 12 years younger than he was . Neil Harvey , the youngest player at the age of 19 , was only two months old when Bradman made his Test debut . Bradman was viewed as a father figure by players such as Harvey and Sam Loxton . Before the tour , Bradman had played 47 Tests ; Brown , the only other member who had played regularly before the Second World War , had appeared in 20 Tests . For Bradman , it was the most personally fulfilling period of his playing days , as the divisiveness within the team of the 1930s had passed . He wrote : 
 Knowing the personnel , I was confident that here at last was the great opportunity which I had longed for . A team of cricketers whose respect and loyalty were unquestioned , who would regard me in a fatherly sense and listen to my advice , follow my guidance and not question my handling of affairs ... there are no longer any fears that they will query the wisdom of what you do . The result is a sense of freedom to give full reign to your own creative ability and personal judgment . 
 However , some players expressed displeasure at Bradman 's ruthless obsession towards annihilating the opposition . The all rounder Keith Miller , who was one of two bowling spearheads , deliberated allowed himself to be bowled first ball for duck during the match against Essex , while Bradman was his batting partner , in a protest against Australia 's world record of scoring 721 runs in one day . Miller also deplored Bradman 's hard @-@ nosed attitude in the match against Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , which was traditionally regarded as a " festival match " . Feeling that Bradman was needlessly batting Australia far beyond impregnability , Miller played with reckless aggression , rather than a measured style in line with Bradman 's aim of remaining undefeated . Bradman 's later letter revealed his hostility towards Miller . Sid Barnes later criticised Bradman for his reluctance to allow Ron Hamence — one of the reserve batsmen — to partake in meaningful matchplay ; due to Bradman 's reluctance to risk Australia 's unbeaten run , Hamence usually batted low in the order and had limited opportunities because the senior batsmen were rarely dismissed cheaply . Along with fringe bowlers Doug Ring and Colin McCool , Hamence called himself " Ground Staff " due to the trio 's lack of on @-@ field duties , and they often sang ironic songs about their status . 
 Bradman 's relentless use of his pace attack and fieldsmen also raised eyebrows . At the time , Lindwall and Miller were groundbreaking fast bowlers , with high pace and the ability to deliver menacing short @-@ pitched bowling at the upper body of the English batsmen . Prior to the Second World War , pace bowlers were generally much slower and did not often bowl at the body . England had yet to develop bowlers such as Lindwall and Miller , and as a result , Australia were able to pepper the upper body of the opposition without fear of retaliation . At times , the public found Lindwall and Miller 's short @-@ pitched bowling to be excessive and booed the Australians . On the fielding front , Barnes was deployed as close to the bat as possible at either forward short @-@ leg or point , with one foot on the pitch . This had an intimidatory effect on the batsmen and led many to question whether it was in the spirit of the game . 
 Bradman 's dominant cricketing stature was also a key platform of his team 's popularity with the public . The leading English writer R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow said " we want him to do well . We feel we have a share in him . He is more than Australian . He is a world batsman . " Haigh opined that " perhaps no touring cricketer ... has been as feted as Bradman in that northern summer " . The Australians were invariably greeted by record crowds and gate receipts across the country . The attendance at the Fourth Test remains a record for a Test on English soil . The Australian journalist Andy Flanagan said that " cities , towns and hotels are <unk> , carpets set down , and dignitaries wait to extend an official welcome . He is the Prince of Cricketers . " Haigh said that " cricket approached the 50s at the peak of its popularity , albeit , after Bradman 's final Test ... without the player chiefly responsible for it " . Bradman received hundreds of personal letters every day , and one of his dinner speeches was broadcast live , causing the British Broadcasting Corporation to postpone the news bulletin . Of Bradman 's retirement , Robertson @-@ Glasgow said " ... a miracle has been removed from among us ... So must ancient Italy have felt when she heard of the death of Hannibal . " 
 Bradman ended the first @-@ class matches atop the batting aggregates and averages , with 2428 runs at 89 @.@ 92 , and eleven centuries , the most by any player . The next most prolific scorer was Morris with 1922 runs , and Hassett had the next best average with 74 @.@ 42 . His highest score of the tour was 187 against Essex , and he reached 150 on four occasions . Despite his success , he also gained attention for his troubles against Alec Bedser 's leg trap ; Bradman was dismissed three consecutive times in the Tests in this manner , and twice outside the Tests to other bowlers using the same ploy . Robertson @-@ Glasgow said " at last his batting showed human fallibility . Often , especially at the start of the innings , he played where the ball wasn 't , and spectators rubbed their eyes " . In the Tests , Bradman finished with 508 runs at 72 @.@ 57 and two centuries . Only Morris and Barnes averaged higher and only Morris and Denis Compton of England aggregated more . Apart from the match against Leicestershire , when he batted at No. 4 , and the two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland , Bradman always batted at No. <unk> He bowled only one over during the tour , against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI when the result of the match was beyond doubt . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = New York State Route 386 = 
 New York State Route 386 ( NY 386 ) is a north – south state highway located in the western suburbs of the city of Rochester in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . Its southern terminus is at an intersection with NY 383 in the village of Scottsville . The northern end of the highway is located at a junction with NY 104 in the town of Greece . NY 386 meets Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) in Chili and NY 531 in Gates and has short overlaps with NY 33A in Chili and NY 33 in Gates . The portion of the route south of NY 33A passes through mostly rural areas while the section north of NY 33A serves areas of mostly residential nature . 
 The portion of NY 386 between Scottsville and Chili was originally designated as part of Route 16 , an unsigned legislative route , in 1908 . This section of Route 16 became part of Route 15 in 1921 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , this segment of Route 15 was incorporated into NY 251 , a new route established as part of the renumbering . NY 386 was assigned by the following year to the portion of its modern routing north of NY 31 . It was extended south to Scottsville over former NY 251 in the late 1970s . In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of most of NY 386 between NY 33A and NY 104 was transferred from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 386 begins at a three @-@ way intersection with NY 383 on the west side of the village of Scottsville . From this junction , NY 383 heads south and east while NY 386 takes the west exit , passing under the Rochester and Southern Railroad and turning to the northwest as it encircles the village . At North Road , which acts as a westward extension of NY 253 , NY 386 passes the middle and high schools of the Wheatland – Chili Central School District and becomes Scottsville – Chili Road . The route continues onward , leaving Scottsville and entering an open , rural area of the town of Wheatland . NY 386 remains on a northwesterly track to the Chili town line , where it curves to the north as it approaches and crosses over the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) . 
 The highway continues generally northward through Chili , traversing open fields and crossing over Black Creek ahead of an intersection with NY 252 . Roughly 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 6 km ) to the northwest , NY 386 intersects NY 33A . NY 386 turns east here , overlapping NY 33A for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east to the hamlet of Chili Center . The amount of development along the overlap remains low until the highway crosses the CSX Transportation @-@ owned West Shore Subdivision , at which point the fields that had surrounded the route are replaced with homes and businesses . In Chili Center , the commercial center of the town of Chili , the concurrency ends at an intersection that also includes the former western terminus of NY 252A . NY 386 takes the north path out of the junction , becoming Chili Center – Coldwater Road . At this point , ownership and maintenance of NY 386 shifts from NYSDOT to Monroe County . 
 About 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Chili Center , NY 386 connects to I @-@ 490 at exit 5 . North of the exit , Chili Center – Coldwater Road comes to an end at West Side Drive , forcing NY 386 to turn east onto West Side Drive for 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before returning north and entering the town of Gates on Coldwater Road . While on Coldwater Road , NY 386 crosses the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision as it heads northward to a junction with NY 33 . NY 386 turns east , sharing Buffalo Road with NY 33 for one block to Elmgrove Road , where it turns northward once again . 
 Proceeding north on Elmgrove Road , NY 386 passes the sprawling Rochester Tech Park and the Total Sports Experience prior to intersecting NY 531 by way of an interchange . This exit , the final on NY 531 eastbound before it merges with I @-@ 490 , is also the starting point for the two service roads that parallel the expressway between Elmgrove and Manitou Roads . Past NY 531 , NY 386 enters the hamlet of Elmgrove , centered around the junction between NY 31 and NY 386 . The route continues onward , passing through mostly residential areas as it proceeds into the town of Greece . In Greece , the surroundings remain unchanged as NY 386 heads northward to an area of town known as South Greece , where it crosses over the Erie Canal . The route ends 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) later at a junction with NY 104 near Elm Ridge Plaza . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of NY 386 between Scottsville and NY 33A in Chili was originally designated as part of Route 16 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Cuba to Rochester , in 1908 . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 16 was truncated to end at Route 6 ( modern NY 5 ) in Le Roy as part of a partial renumbering of New York 's legislative route system . The portion of former Route 16 north of Caledonia became part of Route 15 . The section of Route 15 between Scottsville and Chili became part of NY 251 , a new route stretching from NY 33 in Gates to then @-@ NY 15 in Victor , in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 386 , meanwhile , was assigned by the following year to the portion of Elmgrove Road between NY 31 in Gates and U.S. Route 104 ( now NY 104 ) in Greece . 
 NY 251 was truncated to its present terminus in Scottsville in the late 1970s , at which time NY 386 was extended south along the former routing of NY 251 to Scottsville . Reference markers for NY 251 are still posted along its former routing . NY 386 utilized a previously unnumbered portion of Elmgrove Road between NY 31 and NY 33 to reach NY 251 's former alignment . This part of NY 386 is maintained by Monroe County as the unsigned County Route 158 ( CR 158 ) . 
 In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of the remainder of the Elmgrove Road portion of NY 386 and the section of NY 386 between NY 33 and NY 33A were transferred from the state of New York to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . 
 As a result of the swap , all of NY 386 north of NY 33A — except for the section that overlaps NY 33 — is overlapped by unsigned county routes . The portion of NY 386 on Chili Center – Coldwater Road is co @-@ designated as CR 256 . Along Westside Drive , NY 386 is part of CR 119 , the designation for all of Westside Drive . The Coldwater Road segment , meanwhile , is also CR 198 while CR 158 was extended north to cover all of Elmgrove Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = The Fairy @-@ Queen = 
 The Fairy @-@ Queen ( 1692 ; Purcell catalogue number <unk> ) is a masque or semi @-@ opera by Henry Purcell ; a " Restoration spectacular " . The libretto is an anonymous adaptation of William Shakespeare 's wedding comedy A Midsummer Night 's Dream . First performed in 1692 , The Fairy @-@ Queen was composed three years before Purcell 's death at the age of 35 . Following his death , the score was lost and only rediscovered early in the twentieth century . 
 Purcell did not set any of Shakespeare 's text to music ; instead he composed music for short masques in every act but the first . The play itself was also slightly modernised in keeping with seventeenth @-@ century dramatic conventions , but in the main the spoken text is as Shakespeare wrote it . The masques are related to the play metaphorically , rather than literally . Many critics have stated erroneously that they bear no relationship to the play , but recent scholarship has shown that the opera , which ends with a masque featuring Hymen , the God of Marriage , was actually composed for the fifteenth wedding anniversary of William and Mary . 
 Growing interest in Baroque music and the rise of the countertenor contributed to the work 's re @-@ entry into the repertoire . The opera received several full @-@ length recordings in the latter part of the 20th century and several of its arias , including " The Plaint " ( " O let me weep " ) , have become popular recital pieces . 
 In July 2009 , in celebration of the 350th anniversary of Purcell 's birth , The Fairy @-@ Queen was performed by Glyndebourne Festival Opera using a new edition of the score , prepared for the Purcell Society by Bruce Wood and Andrew Pinnock . 
 = = Original production = = 
 The Fairy @-@ Queen was first performed on 2 May 1692 at the Queen 's Theatre , Dorset Garden in London by the United Company . The author or at least co @-@ author of the libretto was presumably Thomas Betterton , the manager of Dorset Garden Theatre , with whom Purcell worked regularly . This belief is based on an analysis of Betterton 's stage directions . A collaboration between several playwrights is also feasible . Choreography for the various dances was provided by Josias Priest , who also worked on Dioclesian and King Arthur , and who was associated with Dido and Aeneas . 
 A letter describing the original performance shows that the parts of Titania and Oberon were played by children of eight or nine . Presumably other fairies were also played by children ; this affects our perspective on the staging . 
 = = Context and analysis = = 
 Following the huge success of his operas Dioclesian ( 1690 ) and King Arthur ( 1691 ) , Purcell composed The Fairy @-@ Queen in 1692 . Purcell 's " First " and " Second Music " were played while the audience were taking their seats . The " Act Tunes " are played between acts , as the curtain was normally raised at the beginning of a performance and not lowered until the end . After Act I , each act commences with a short symphony ( 3 – 5 minutes ) . 
 The English tradition of semi @-@ opera , to which The Fairy @-@ Queen belongs , demanded that most of the music within the play be introduced through the agency of supernatural beings , the exception being pastoral or drunken characters . All the masques in The Fairy @-@ Queen are presented by Titania or Oberon . Originally Act I contained no music , but due to the work 's enormous success it was revived in 1693 , when Purcell added the scene of the Drunken Poet and two further songs later on in the work ; " Ye gentle spirits of the air " and " The Plaint " . As noted above , each masque is subtly related to the action in the play during that particular act in a metaphorical way . In this manner we have Night and Sleep in Act II , which is apt as that act of the play consists of Oberon 's plans to use the power of the " love @-@ in @-@ idleness " flower to confuse various loves , and it is therefore appropriate for the allegorical figures of Secrecy , Mystery et al. to usher in a night of enchantment . The masque for Bottom in Act III includes metamorphoses , songs of both real and feigned love , and beings who are not what they seem . The Reconciliation masque between Oberon and Titania at the end of Act IV prefigures the final masque . The scene changes to a Garden of Fountains , denoting King William 's hobby , just after Oberon says " bless these Lovers ' Nuptial Day " . The Four Seasons tell us that the marriage here celebrated is a good one all year round and " All Salute the rising Sun " / ... The Birthday of King Oberon " . The kings of England were traditionally likened to the sun ( Oberon = William . Significantly , William and Mary were married on his birthday , 4 November . ) . The Chinese scene in the final masque is in homage to Queen Mary 's famous collection of china . The garden shown above it and the exotic animals bring King William back into the picture and Hymen 's song in praise of their marriage , plus the stage direction bringing ( Mary 's ) china vases containing ( William 's ) orange trees to the front of the stage complete the symbolism . 
 = = The music = = 
 Written as he approached the end of his brief career , The Fairy @-@ Queen contains some of Purcell 's finest theatre music , as musicologists have agreed for generations . In particular , Constant Lambert was a great admirer ; from it he arranged a suite and in collaboration with Edward Dent arranged the work to form the then new Covent Garden opera company 's first postwar production . It shows to excellent effect Purcell 's complete mastery of the pungent English style of Baroque counterpoint , as well as displaying his absorption of Italian influences . Several arias such as " The Plaint " , " Thrice happy lovers " and " Hark ! the echoing air " have entered the <unk> repertory of many singers outside their original context . 
 The orchestra for The Fairy @-@ Queen consists of two recorders , two oboes , two trumpets , kettledrums , string instruments and harpsichord continuo . 
 = = Performance history = = 
 Following Purcell 's premature death , his opera Dioclesian remained popular until well into the eighteenth century , but the score of The Fairy @-@ Queen was lost and only rediscovered early in the twentieth century . Other works like it fell into obscurity . Changing tastes were not the only reason for this ; the voices employed had also become difficult to find . The list of singers below shows the frequent employment of the male alto , or countertenor , in the semi @-@ opera , a voice which , after Purcell , essentially vanished from the stage , probably due to the rise of Italian opera and the attendant castrati . After that Romantic opera emerged , with the attendant predominance of the tenor . Until the early music revival , the male alto survived mainly in the ecclesiastical tradition of all @-@ male church choirs and twentieth @-@ century American vocal quartets . 
 However , Purcell 's music ( and with it The Fairy @-@ Queen ) was resuscitated by two related movements : a growing interest in Baroque music and the rise of the countertenor , led by pioneers such as Alfred Deller and Russell Oberlin . The former movement led to performances of long @-@ neglected composers such as Purcell , John Dowland , John Blow and even George Frideric Handel , while the latter complemented it by providing a way of making such performances as authentic as possible as regards the original music and the composer 's intentions ( less true for Handel , where countertenors appear as castrati replacements ) . This has led to The Fairy @-@ Queen 's increased popularity , and numerous recordings have been made , often using period instruments . The format of the work presents problems to modern directors , who must decide whether or not to present Purcell 's music as part of the original play , which uncut is rather lengthy . Savage calculated a length of four hours . The decision to curtail the play is usually taken together with the resolution to modernise to such an extent that the cohesion between music , text and action sketched above is entirely lost , a criticism levelled at the English National Opera 's 1995 production directed by David Pountney . The production was released on video the same year , and revived by the company in 2002 . A bold approach was taken at the Brazilian Opera Company 's 2000 staging by Luiz <unk> , with the libretto becoming unstuck in time . 
 In July 2009 , two months before the 350th anniversary of Purcell 's birth , The Fairy @-@ Queen was performed in a new edition , prepared for The Purcell Society by Bruce Wood and Andrew Pinnock , which restored the entire theatrical entertainment as well as the original pitch used by Purcell . The performance by Glyndebourne Festival Opera with the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment conducted by William Christie was repeated later that month at the Royal Albert Hall as part of the BBC Proms . 
 = = Roles = = 
 The role of Mopsa was originally performed by a soprano ; however , a later revision by Purcell stated that it was to be performed by " Mr. Pate in woman 's habit " , presumably to have a grotesque effect and highlight the refrain " No , no , no , no , no ; no kissing at all " in the dialogue between Corydon and Mopsa . Also , it is not entirely clear what the word " countertenor " means in this context . The record is ambivalent as to whether Purcell ( himself a countertenor ) used a tenor with a particularly high range ( though lighter at the top ) and tessitura ( known sometimes as a haute @-@ contre , the descendants of the <unk> <unk> of medieval polyphony ) or a falsettist . It seems that throughout his career he used both . However , purely for reasons of dramatic verisimilitude , it is more likely than not that the travesty role of Mopsa was taken by a falsettist , and the presence of a duet for two male altos ( " Let the fifes and the clarions " ) makes it seem more probable that for this work <unk> were employed . 
 For a list of non @-@ singing characters see A Midsummer Night 's Dream , with the exception of Hippolyta . That character was cut by Purcell 's librettist . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 For the plot of the play see A Midsummer Night 's Dream . Only a synopsis of scenes provided with music is given here . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 The first scene set to music occurs after Titania has left Oberon , following an argument over the ownership of a little Indian boy . Two of her fairies sing of the delights of the countryside ( " Come , come , come , come , let us leave the town " ) . A drunken , stuttering poet enters , singing " Fill up the bowl " . The stuttering has led many to believe the scene is based on the habits of Thomas d 'Urfey . However , it may also be poking fun at Elkanah Settle , who stuttered as well and was long thought to be the librettist , due to an error in his 1910 biography . 
 The fairies mock the drunken poet and drive him away . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 It begins after Oberon has ordered Puck to anoint the eyes of Demetrius with the love @-@ juice . Titania and her fairies merrily revel ( " Come all ye songsters of the sky " ) , and Night ( " See , even Night " ) , Mystery ( " Mystery 's song " ) , Secrecy ( " One charming night " ) and Sleep ( " Hush , no more , be silent all " ) lull them asleep and leave them to pleasant dreams . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 Titania has fallen in love with Bottom ( now equipped with his ass ' head ) , much to Oberon 's gratification . A Nymph sings of the pleasures and torments of love ( " If love 's a sweet passion " ) and after several dances , Titania and Bottom are entertained by the foolish , loving banter of two <unk> , Corydon and Mopsa . 
 = = = Act 4 = = = 
 It begins after Titania has been freed from her enchantment , commencing with a brief divertissement to celebrate Oberon 's birthday ( " Now the Night " , and the abovementioned " Let the fifes and the clarions " ) , but for the most part it is a masque of the god Phoebus ( " When the cruel winter " ) and the Four Seasons ( Spring ; " Thus , the ever grateful spring " , Summer ; " Here 's the Summer " , Autumn ; " See my many coloured fields " , and Winter ; " Now Winter comes slowly " ) . 
 = = = Act 5 = = = 
 After Theseus has been told of the lovers ' adventures in the wood , it begins with the goddess Juno singing an epithalamium , " Thrice happy lovers " , followed by a woman who sings the well @-@ known " The Plaint " ( " O let me weep " ) . A Chinese man and woman enter singing several songs about the joys of their world . ( " Thus , the gloomy world " , " Thus happy and free " and " Yes , <unk> " ) . Two other Chinese women summon Hymen , who sings in praise of married bliss , thus uniting the wedding theme of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , with the celebration of William and Mary 's anniversary . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Audio 
 Bruno Maderna , ( Excerpts ) Orchestra dell <unk> of Milan , ( 1 LP ) - 1957 - <unk> Angelicum <unk> . This was also the first recording of Cathy Berberian mentioned on the cover as Catherine Berio . 
 Benjamin Britten , English Chamber Orchestra , Ambrosian Opera Chorus , ( 2 CDs ) - 1970 - Decca <unk> 
 Alfred Deller , The Deller Consort , Stour Music Chorus ( 2 CDs ) — 1972 — Harmonia Mundi 
 John Eliot Gardiner , The English Baroque Soloists The Monteverdi Choir , ( 2 CDs ) — 1982 — Archiv Produktion 419 221 – 2 
 William Christie , Les Arts Florissants ( 2 CDs ) — 1989 — Harmonia Mundi HMC 90 1308 / 0 
 David van Asch , The Scholars Baroque Ensemble ( 2 CDs ) - 1992 - Naxos 8 @.@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Roger Norrington , The London Classical Players , The Schütz Choir of London ( 2 CDs ) — 1994 — EMI Classics <unk> 5 <unk> 2 6 
 Harry Christophers , The Sixteen , ( 2 CDs ) - 1993 - ( Coro <unk> 
 Ton Koopman , Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir , ( 2 CDs ) — 1994 — Erato <unk> 
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt , Concentus Musicus Wien , Arnold Schoenberg Chor ( 2 CDs ) — 1995 — Teldec Classics <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Antony Walker , <unk> , Orchestra of the Antipodes , ( 2 CDs ) - 2005 - ABC Classics <unk> 
 Christopher Monks , <unk> Consort , ( 1 CD ) - 2006 - Deux @-@ Elles <unk> 
 Ottavio <unk> , Accademia <unk> & New English Voices , ( 2 CDs ) - 2012 - Brilliant Classics <unk> 
 Video 
 Nicholas Kok , David Pountney ( stage director ) , English National Opera , ( 1 DVD ) - 1995 - <unk> Musik <unk> 
 William Christie , Jonathan Kent ( stage director ) , The Glyndebourne Chorus & Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment , ( 2 DVDs ) - 2010 - Opus Arte <unk> 
 = Historic Michigan Boulevard District = 
 The Historic Michigan Boulevard District is a historic district in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States encompassing Michigan Avenue between 11th ( 1100 south in the street numbering system ) or Roosevelt Road ( 1200 south ) , depending on the source , and Randolph Streets ( 150 north ) and named after the nearby Lake Michigan . It was designated a Chicago Landmark on February 27 , 2002 . The district includes numerous significant buildings on Michigan Avenue facing Grant Park . In addition , this section of Michigan Avenue includes the point recognized as the end of U.S. Route 66 . This district is one of the world 's best known one @-@ sided streets rivalling Fifth Avenue in New York City and Edinburgh 's Princes Street . It lies immediately south of the Michigan – Wacker Historic District and east of the Loop Retail Historic District . 
 = = History = = 
 Michigan Avenue is named after Lake Michigan , which it once ran alongside at 100 east in the city 's street numbering system until land reclamation for Grant Park ( then Lake Park ) pushed the shoreline east . The one @-@ sided street feature is due in large part to the legal battles of Aaron Montgomery Ward with the city over cleaning up the park and removing most of the structures in it . Ward opposed the development of Grant Park with public buildings along the lakefront except for the Art Institute of Chicago Building . Eventually , Ward 's ideas were adopted by Daniel Burnham in his Plan of Chicago , which called for " insured light , air , and an agreeable outlook " along the Grant Park street frontage . The preservation of the lakefront view has inspired architects to create an architectural cornucopia of designs along the " streetwall " . 
 At no point is Michigan Avenue currently called Michigan Boulevard , but prior to the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 , the street was officially known as Michigan Boulevard and often referred to as " Boul Mich " . As recently as the 1920s , North Michigan Avenue ( especially the Magnificent Mile ) was referred to as " Upper Boul Mich " . Paris ' Boulevard Saint @-@ Michel is the original Boul Mich . 
 The district has changed over the years as various architectural designs have evolved to compliment it . The boulevard was widened between 1909 and 1910 causing the Art Institute of Chicago Building to have to move the lions guarding its entrance back 12 feet . At that time , the Jackson Boulevard and Michigan Avenue intersection ( the end of route 66 ) was known as " route center " . Also at that time , the boulevard had no streets crossing it and extending eastward , and thus , the Jackson intersection was a T intersection . This was still true in 1920 when the Michigan Avenue Bridge opened and increased traffic by connecting this boulevard with the Magnificent Mile and the community north of the Chicago River a quarter mile to the north of this district . The Fountain of the Great Lakes ( installed in 1913 ) was highly visible from route center . Today , four streets cross Michigan Avenue within the district ( in addition to its northern and southern endpoints at crossing streets ) . Three of the four change names as they cross Michigan : eastbound East Monroe Street ( 100 south ) becomes East Monroe Drive ; eastbound East Jackson Boulevard ( 300 south ) becomes East Jackson Drive ; and two @-@ way East Congress Parkway ( 500 south ) becomes East Congress Drive as it crosses into Grant Park to the east . East Balbo Drive ( 700 south ) does not change names as it crosses Michigan . 
 = = Today = = 
 Today the only building on the eastern side of Michigan Avenue in the Historic District hosts the Art Institute of Chicago . However , several interesting structures have been added to the northern part of the eastern side of Michigan Avenue in Millennium Park such as Crown Fountain and McCormick Tribune Plaza . The current " End Historic US 66 " marker is now located along Michigan Avenue in this district to mark the official end of U.S. Route 66 in Illinois , but this and several others traverse Michigan Avenue within Grant Park because landfill has created two blocks of real estate between Michigan Avenue and the Lake Michigan shoreline . Also , the Fountain was relocated and is no longer easily seen from Michigan Avenue . 
 Among the current issues today is the trend to redevelop properties by constructing grand towers behind the facades of historic structures along Michigan and Wabash Avenues ( the parallel street one block to the west ) . The most recent examples of this have been The Heritage at Millennium Park , Legacy at Millennium Park and the 80 @-@ story tower proposed as part of the YWCA building redevelopment at 830 S. Michigan Avenue . This trend is now endangering the Chicago Athletic Association Annex , which has been proposed for demolition to make way for a <unk> to eighty @-@ story condominium tower across from Millennium Park . As a result , the building is listed first on the 2006 @-@ 07 Chicagoland Watch List of the Landmarks Preservation Council of Illinois . On the other hand , many were concerned that the landmark district designation would stagnate development of the area . The purpose of the designation was to " keep the architecture there and encourage architecture like it and keep the wall of the park , " according to the City 's Department of Planning and Development . Thus , <unk> for new uses will be part of the ongoing concerns for the neighborhood . Thus , buildings being renovated for condos and dormitories is a part of the present and future for the district . 
 = = Buildings in the District = = 
 Several of the buildings listed below have played a prominent role in the cultural history of Chicago . 
 The Blackstone has become part of Chicago 's history as the city that has hosted more United States presidential nominating conventions ( 26 ) than any other two American cities , The Blackstone Hotel has hosted almost every 20th century U.S. President , and it has contributed the phrase “ in a smoke @-@ filled room " to American political parlance . 
 The Chicago Symphony Orchestra debuted on October 16 , 1891 and made its home in the Auditorium Theatre until moving to Orchestra Hall in 1904 . Theodore Roosevelt gave his famous Bull Moose speech in 1912 at the Auditorium and was nominated for President of the United States by the independent National Progressive Party . The Auditorium has hosted Jimi Hendrix , The Who , the Grateful Dead , and many others . The Auditorium Building is considered a milestone in the development of modern architecture . 
 The Chicago Cultural Center serves as the city 's official reception venue where the Mayor of Chicago has welcomed Presidents and royalty , diplomats and community leaders . According to Crain 's Chicago Business , the Chicago Cultural Center was the eighth most @-@ visited cultural institution in the Chicago area in 2004 , with 767 @,@ 000 visitors . The interior includes ornate mosaics , marbles , bronze , and stained @-@ glass domes designed by the Tiffany Glass and Decorating Company . 
 The Art Institute of Chicago is a fine @-@ art museum well known for its Impressionist and American art . 
 North to south : 
 <unk> 
 CL @-@ Chicago Landmark 
 NHL @-@ National Historic Landmark 
 NRHP @-@ National Register of Historic Places 
 = The Haunted Mask = 
 The Haunted Mask is the eleventh book in Goosebumps , the series of children 's horror fiction novellas created and authored by R. L. Stine . The book follows Carly Beth , a girl who buys a Halloween mask from a store . After putting on the mask , she starts acting differently and discovers that the mask has become her face ; she is unable to pull the mask off . R. L. Stine says he got the idea for the book from his son who had on a mask that he had trouble getting off . 
 The Haunted Mask was featured on the USA Today and Publishers Weekly bestseller list , and cited by one reviewer as " ideal for reluctant readers and Halloween @-@ themed sleepovers . " In the mid @-@ 1990s , the book was adapted for television and released on VHS on March 12 , 1996 . The Haunted Mask has three published sequels ; The Haunted Mask II , The Scream of the Haunted Mask and a stand @-@ alone story , Wanted : The Haunted Mask . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Haunted Mask was authored by R. L. Stine and originally illustrated by Tim Jacobus . The author says the idea for the book came from his son Matthew Stine , who had on a Halloween mask that he had trouble getting off . Stine also says that he incorporated a duck costume his parents got him for trick @-@ or @-@ treating in the book . 
 The book was first published in September 1993 by Scholastic , and reissued on September 1 , 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Carly Beth Caldwell is a naive , timid and gullible 11 @-@ year @-@ old girl who is afraid of pretty much everything . Thus , she is a constant target for pranks , jokes and tricks , most of them being inflicted on her by Steve Boswell and Chuck Greene at Walnut Avenue Middle School . In the opening chapter , Carly Beth and Sabrina discuss what costumes they are going to wear for Halloween , and Carly Beth is tricked by Steve into eating a sandwich containing a live worm . Horrified , Carly Beth flees and vows revenge . After school , she goes home and finds her mother has made her a silly duck costume for Halloween , and also a very realistic plaster of Paris model of Carly Beth 's head . When she goes to her room , the duck costume seemingly comes alive and attacks Carly Beth . It turns out it is her younger brother , Noah , playing another trick on her . Sabrina calls , and they discuss the school science fair . 
 At the science fair , Steve causes a panic by announcing his pet tarantula has escaped , and Carly Beth is terrified of tarantulas . Steve creeps up behind her during the chaos , and pinches her leg to make it seem that the tarantula is biting her . Carly Beth flies into a frenzied panic , destroys her and Sabrina 's project and is again humiliated in front of her teachers and classmates . Carly Beth vows that she will definitely make Steve pay for what he did to her . She plots to go to a new store that has opened , which sells frightening costumes , and plans to scare Steve and Chuck as payback . 
 On Halloween day , she goes to the party store , but it is closed . However , the store manager appears and allows her into the shop . She dismisses the masks she sees on display as not good enough for scaring anyone . But she sneaks into a back room and discovers a row of hideously deformed masks . She is startled to find that the masks feel warm and like human skin , not rubber or plastic . The store owner reluctantly sells her one of the masks and Carly Beth goes home in delight . Later that day , after she takes the mold of her head that her mother made , she puts on the mask and goes in search of Chuck and Steve , determined to get revenge on them . She starts acting more and more aggressively as the night goes on : she chokes Sabrina , throws apples at a house , and frightens children she doesn 't know . When she manages to scare Chuck and Steve , she loses the head her mother made , but no longer cares . 
 While at Sabrina 's house , Carly Beth is shocked to find she is unable to remove the mask and that the mask has , in fact , become her face . She returns to the store and finds the owner waiting for her . The store owner tells her that the " mask " is actually a real living face . All the masks in the back room are deformed , monstrous , living faces . The store owner made them , but they started out beautiful but then became hideous . Every so often , a person puts one on and the mask possesses them . It can only be removed by a " symbol of love " , but if it attaches itself to her or another person again , it will be forever . Carly Beth screams in horror , and the other masks begin to pursue her . While running away from the masks , she realizes that the mold her mother made is a symbol of love . Carly Beth finds the mold and uses it to deter the masks and remove the mask from her face . She returns home to her mother , tossing the mask away . Noah later bursts in and asks her , " How do I look in your mask ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Haunted Mask was featured on USA Today 's Top 150 Best @-@ Selling Books database for 43 weeks , attaining a peak position of 107 . In 2001 , it was listed as the 249th bestselling children 's paperback book of all time by Publishers Weekly , having sold 1 @.@ 42 million copies . 
 <unk> Clarke from Common Sense Media rated the book three stars out of five , commenting that it " is ideal for reluctant readers and Halloween @-@ themed sleepovers " and " is one of the better books in the Goosebumps series " . <unk> 's Kevin Pires listed the book as one of his ten favorite Goosebumps books , stating " Tim Jacobus ’ [ ... ] gripping illustration and Stine ’ s straightforward plot made The Haunted Mask an emblem for the series . " Nathan Reese from Complex.com ranked it as the best Goosebumps book , stating the book was very thrilling , and the twist ending caused the right amount of horror . Author and librarian Herbert N. <unk> stated it was " perhaps the most famous Goosebumps book " . 
 = = Television adaptation and VHS release = = 
 Filming for The Haunted Mask television special began in 1995 in Toronto , Ontario , Canada . The special first aired on October 27 , 1995 on the Fox Network as the series premiere of the Goosebumps TV series . In the United States , The Haunted Mask obtained an 8 @.@ 2 rating and was viewed by 14 @.@ 1 million people . In Canada , the special aired on YTV and became the network 's highest rated episode up to that point , with nearly three million viewers . 
 It was subsequently released on VHS on March 22 , 1996 . The video was listed 75th in Billboard 's list of Top Video Sales in their 1996 Year @-@ In @-@ Video charts , the only Goosebumps video on the list . Complex.com 's Frazier Tharpe named it the 12th best Halloween themed TV episode and called it one of the scariest Goosebumps episodes . However , Michelle Erica Green from <unk> thought that the video had stereotypical characters , a corny feel @-@ good message , and hokey special effects . In 1997 , Kathryn Long , who played Carly Beth , received a Gemini Award nomination for " Best Performance in a Children ’ s or Youth Program or Series " . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Three sequels of the book were published , The Haunted Mask II in October 1995 ( the thirty @-@ sixth book in the Goosebumps series ) , The Scream of the Haunted Mask on August 1 , 2008 ( the fourth book in the Goosebumps HorrorLand series ) and a stand @-@ alone story in June 2012 , Wanted : The Haunted Mask . Wanted : The Haunted Mask was published as a celebration of the 20th anniversary of Goosebumps . Another book , The Haunted Mask Lives ! , was listed on illustrator Tim Jacobus 's website , but was not released . 
 = Planet Ladder = 
 Planet Ladder ( Japanese : <unk> · <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is a science fantasy shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) manga written and illustrated by Yuri Narushima . Appearing as a serial in the Japanese manga magazine Crimson from the March 1998 issue to the May 2003 issue , the chapters of Planet Ladder were published by <unk> / Shueisha in seven tankōbon volumes from December 1998 to May 2004 . Based on the Japanese folktale The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter in which a girl is discovered to be the princess of the moon , the story focuses on a teenager named Kaguya , who is prophesied to save only one of the nine parallel worlds , and her quest to bring peace to a <unk> universe while finding her true identity . 
 Planet Ladder was licensed for an English @-@ language translation in North America by Tokyopop , and released from April 2002 to March 2005 after being serialized in Tokyopop 's manga anthology Smile . Planet Ladder was part of Tokyopop 's line @-@ up of manga in its original right @-@ to @-@ left format ; previously , the majority of manga licensed in the United States was " flopped " to read left @-@ to @-@ right for a Western audience . Planet Ladder was positively received by English @-@ language readers , with two volumes placing in ICv2 's list of best @-@ selling graphic novels . The series received generally positive reviews from English @-@ language critics . On April 2 , 2007 , it went out of print in North America . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series focuses on Kaguya <unk> , a teenager who has lived with a Japanese foster family since she was found as an abandoned , amnesiac four @-@ year @-@ old . One night , two men — <unk> , a monk , and Seeu , an emotionless prince — appear in her home and fight over her . Gold , Seeu 's robot modeled after Kaguya 's deceased brother Kagami , brings her to a world parallel to Earth on Seeu 's orders . After exploring the world with Gold , she encounters Shiina Mol <unk> who believes Kaguya is the " Girl of Ananai " , destined to save only one of the nine parallel worlds from collision . Shiina explains that nine worlds exist : Ancient , the first civilized world that was mysteriously destroyed ; Asu , Seeu 's disintegrated world ; Eden , present @-@ day Earth ; <unk> , a small world allied with Geo ; Fifth World , a politically neutral world ; <unk> , a peaceful world under the control of Geo ; Geo , the most powerful of the worlds ; <unk> , Geo 's rival ; and the Ninth World , destroyed before the start of the series . 
 Shiina and Waseda , a Tokyo University student trapped in the body of a giant rooster , join her and Gold in traveling across <unk> . After learning that Seeu watched his people die from an incurable virus spread around Asu , Kaguya decides to change the fate of the worlds by confronting Kura , Geo 's indulgent emperor who ordered her kidnapping . Instead , while en route to Geo , Gold brings her to Seeu 's floating castle in Asu and Kura captures and recruits Shiina into his army . 
 Kaguya later makes an interplanetary broadcast , announcing her refusal to save only one world . Instead , she plans to find a person to help her save most of the worlds and people . Kura begins to destroy other worlds to increase Geo 's survival chances . Deciding to use Kaguya as a political figurehead , Kura sends Shiina to abduct her ; once there , Kaguya refuses to help him . Angered , Kura divulges that the " Girl of Ananai " legend is a myth elaborated on and spread around by him and Kagami . After a brief battle with Shiina , Seeu arrives to rescue Kaguya and she realizes her love for him . Transforming into a dragon , Gold teleports everyone to Ancient ; there <unk> , Seeu , Kura , and Shiina are persuaded to combine their magical weapons with Gold to fix the rift in the universe , the cause of the eventual collision between the worlds . The series ends with an epilogue seven years later ; Kaguya explains the fate of everyone and meets Seeu and their young son with a picnic basket . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to manga artist Yuri Narushima , she began the manga with " a dramatic feeling in mind " and wanted to " start off with a comic book for young girls ( shōjo manga ) . " Narushima planned to have the plot progress quickly so the reader remembers the events and can " ' digest ' the foreshadowed events " . Planet Ladder was based on the Japanese folktale The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter , which focuses on a girl named Kaguya @-@ Hime who is discovered to be the princess of the moon . Additionally , the protagonist takes her name from the folktale . 
 After discovering that a North American version of Planet Ladder was being simultaneously released , Narushima designed the cover of volume 6 to be " export friendly " , describing it as " like Japanese style , but slightly off " . Additionally , she considered serializing Planet Ladder in another magazine , but decided against it since the series was close to ending . 
 = = Release = = 
 Written and illustrated by Yuri Narushima , Planet Ladder appeared as a serial in the Japanese manga magazine Crimson from the March 1998 issue to the May 2003 issue . <unk> / Shueisha later published the chapters in seven tankōbon volumes from December 1998 to May 2004 . Shueisha re @-@ released Planet Ladder in four bunkoban volumes from July 18 , to August 8 , 2008 . 
 Tokyopop licensed Planet Ladder for an English @-@ language release in North America and serialized it in its manga magazine Smile . The first volume was released on April 23 , 2002 ; the final volume was published on March 8 , 2005 . Planet Ladder belonged to Tokyopop 's line @-@ up of manga in its original right @-@ to @-@ left format ; previously , the majority of manga licensed in the United States was " flopped " to read left @-@ to @-@ right for a Western audience . As a result , it was displayed in a case with the eight other " <unk> " manga — Chobits , Dragon Knights , Marmalade Boy , GTO , Real Bout High School , The Skull Man , Mars and Cowboy Bebop — and heavily advertised in anime magazines and on fan sites . Planet Ladder went out of print on April 2 , 2007 in North America . 
 Only the last two volumes were given titles in the English @-@ language release : The Fate of the Dark Planet for volume six and Ananai of the Puzzled Star for the seventh volume . 
 = = = Volume list = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Planet Ladder was positively received by English @-@ language readers . The fifth volume placed in the 44th spot on the list of the 50 best @-@ selling graphic novels of February 2003 , with an estimated 1 @,@ 176 copies sold . The sixth volume reached the 71st place on the list of the 100 best @-@ selling graphic novels of February 2004 , with an estimated 984 copies sold . 
 Critical reaction to Planet Ladder was generally positive . In Manga : The Complete Guide , Jason Thompson wrote that the manga reminded him of " prose science fiction " , citing A Wrinkle in Time by Madeleine L 'Engle ( 1962 ) and Nine Princes in Amber by Roger Zelazny ( 1970 ) as examples . His criticism of the series centered on Narushima 's " inconsistent designs , crude faces , and too much greasy looking screentone " . While stating that Planet Ladder is a " difficult title to warm to , since it feels like we 're in the middle of the story , rather than the beginning " , Mike Dungan of Mania Entertainment considered the effort " worthy " , and wrote that it made Kaguya more sympathetic at the cost of the other characters . Dungan enjoyed the " pleasant though not especially unique " art , the " attractively designed and well @-@ drawn " characters , the occasional humor , and the overall adaptation , especially the " natural sounding dialogue " . However , he criticized Tokyopop 's inconsistent handling of the sound effects . Sequential Tart 's Sheena McNeil praised the plot as original and noted elements from fairytales and fantasy in the series . In follow @-@ up reviews , she praised the manga as " turning out to be one of the best fantasy manga out there ; it stands apart from the rest with its uniqueness " but expressed her surprise that Sheena 's name changed to Shiina halfway through the series with no explanation . 
 = SMS Schwaben = 
 SMS Schwaben ( " His Majesty 's Ship Swabia " ) was the fourth ship of the Wittelsbach class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the German Imperial Navy . Schwaben was built at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven . She was laid down in 1900 , and completed in April 1904 , at the cost of 21 @,@ 678 @,@ 000 marks . Her sisters were Wittelsbach , Zähringen , Wettin and Mecklenburg ; they were the first capital ships built under the Navy Law of 1898 , brought about by Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz . Schwaben was armed with a main battery of four 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns and had a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Schwaben spent the majority of her career as a gunnery training ship from 1904 to 1914 , though she frequently participated in the large scale fleet exercises during this period . After the start of World War I in August 1914 , the ship was mobilized with her sisters as the IV Battle Squadron . She saw limited duty in the North Sea as a guard ship and in the Baltic Sea against Russian forces . The threat from British submarines forced the ship to withdraw from the Baltic in 1916 . For the remainder of the war , Schwaben served as an engineering training ship for navy cadets . She was retained by the Reichsmarine after the war and reactivated in 1919 . During this period , she served as a depot ship for F @-@ type minesweepers in the Baltic until June 1920 . The ship was stricken from the navy list in March 1921 and sold for scrapping in that year . 
 = = Description = = 
 Schwaben was 126 @.@ 8 m ( 416 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 8 m ( 74 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 95 m ( 26 ft 1 in ) forward . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines that drove three screws . Steam was provided by six water @-@ tube and six cylindrical coal @-@ fired boilers . Schwaben 's powerplant was rated at 14 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 13 @,@ 808 ihp ; 10 @,@ 297 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . She had a crew of 30 officers and 650 enlisted men . 
 Schwaben 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of eighteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns . The armament system was rounded out with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all submerged in the hull ; one was in the bow , one in the stern , and the other four were on the broadside . Her armored belt was 225 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) thick in the central portion that protected her magazines and machinery spaces , and the deck was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Schwaben 's keel was laid 15 September 1900 , at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , under construction number 27 . She was ordered under the contract name " G " , as a new unit for the fleet . The vessel was a member of the first class of battleships built under the direction of Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the State Secretary of the Reichsmarineamt ( RMA — Imperial Navy Office ) , according to the terms of the Navy Law of 1898 . Schwaben was launched on 19 August 1901 ; during the launching ceremony , King Wilhelm II of Württemberg gave a speech and his wife Queen Charlotte of Württemberg christened the ship . She was commissioned on 13 April 1904 , the last ship of her class to enter active service . The ship 's cost totaled 21 @,@ 678 @,@ 000 marks . 
 There was a dispute over where Schwaben should be assigned after her commissioning in April 1904 . Admiral Hans von Koester , the fleet commander , wanted the ship to be assigned to the active duty squadron , but Tirpitz wanted to use the new battleship as a training vessel , since the Training Squadron only possessed cruisers and obsolescent ships . Tirpitz won the debate , and so Schwaben was to replace the ancient ironclad frigate Friedrich Carl in the Training Squadron . There , she was to serve as a torpedo training ship . On 18 May , Schwaben departed Wilhelmshaven and passed through the Skagerrak to the Baltic Sea , arriving in Kiel on 22 May . 
 While on sea trials , she struck an uncharted shoal off the northern tip of the island of Fehmarn . The impact damaged a 30 @-@ meter ( 98 ft ) length of the ship 's hull and holed it in several places . After repairs were completed , she resumed her trials , which lasted until the end of 1904 . The trials were interrupted by the annual autumn maneuvers , during which Schwaben joined the active fleet in the North Sea . On 11 January 1905 , she was formally assigned to the Training Squadron , but as an artillery training ship to replace the old vessel Mars . The ship was based in Sonderburg in the Baltic , along with the armored cruisers Prinz Heinrich and Prinz Adalbert , and several other training ships . She began an annual routine of gunnery training in the western Baltic that was interrupted only by yearly gunnery drills with the entire High Seas Fleet in October . During these fleet exercises , Schwaben was supported by the tender Ulan . Schwaben also went into drydock from the end of October to the middle of December every year for periodic maintenance . 
 Schwaben participated in exercises in the Swinemünde Bay in April and May 1906 , and the annual fleet gunnery drills took place off Helgoland in August . Her annual overhaul was completed early , in November . In March 1907 , Schwaben participated in gunnery training with the fleet . She joined the flagship of the Reserve Squadron , the coastal defense ship Frithjof , for maneuvers off the coast of Farther Pomerania in July . The following month , Schwaben served as the flagship of Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Hugo Zeye for a training squadron during the fleet maneuvers in the North Sea . Directly after the conclusion of the fleet maneuvers in mid @-@ September , Schwaben participated in fleet gunnery drills off Helgoland . The year was concluded with an overhaul in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven . 
 In 1908 , the training ships based in the Baltic were placed under the command of Rear Admiral Hugo von Pohl , who would go on to command the High Seas Fleet in 1915 during World War I. That year followed the same pattern as the previous year , but Schwaben did not participate in the autumn fleet maneuvers . She instead remained at Sonderburg and <unk> during the exercises . In 1909 , after the autumn maneuvers , Schwaben was assigned as the flagship of the Reserve Fleet , again under the command of Admiral Zeye . During her yearly overhaul at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , her guns were fitted with new motors produced in Germany to test their reliability over foreign @-@ manufactured motors . The tests proved to be successful . While steaming in the Flensburg Firth on 10 – 12 December , she had to assist the training ship Württemberg in heavy fog . 
 In 1910 , after the normal training routine in the first half of the year , Schwaben was assigned to the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the autumn maneuvers , which lasted from 19 August to 11 September . She served in this role to replace the battleships Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm and Weissenburg , which had been sold to the Ottoman Empire just before the start of the maneuvers . On 14 October , she joined up with the battleship Elsass and steamed through the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal to Kiel for her yearly overhaul at the Imperial Dockyard there . These repairs lasted until 4 January 1911 . Schwaben served in the III Battle Squadron during the autumn maneuvers again in 1911 . By 1911 , the eight Nassau and Helgoland classes of dreadnought battleships had entered service ; these ships were assigned to the I Battle Squadron , which displaced the newer pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the Deutschland and Braunschweig classes to the II and III Battle Squadrons . As a result , Schwaben was decommissioned in Wilhelmshaven on 30 December 1911 and assigned to the Reserve Division in the North Sea . She was briefly placed back in service briefly from 9 to 12 May 1912 to move the ship to Kiel . Schwaben returned to service again to participate in the autumn maneuvers from 14 August to 28 September , as the flagship of then @-@ Konteradmiral Maximilian von Spee . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Schwaben and the rest of her class were mobilized to serve in the IV Battle Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral Ehrhard Schmidt . After it reached full combat readiness , the Squadron was employed both as a defense force in the German Bight — usually stationed in the mouth of the Elbe — and for operations in the Baltic . Starting on 3 September , the IV Squadron , assisted by the armored cruiser Blücher , conducted a sweep into the Baltic . The operation lasted until 9 September and failed to bring Russian naval units to battle . In May 1915 , IV Squadron , including Schwaben , was transferred to support the German Army in the Baltic Sea area . Schwaben and her sisters were then based in Kiel . During this period , she served as the flagship of the second command admiral of the Squadron , Konteradmiral Alberts . 
 On 6 May , the IV Squadron ships were tasked with providing support to the assault on Libau . Schwaben and the other ships stood off Gotland in order to intercept any Russian cruisers that might try to intervene in the landings , which the Russians did not attempt . On 10 May , after the invasion force had entered Libau , the British submarines HMS E1 and HMS E9 spotted the IV Squadron , but were too far away to make an attack . The increasingly active British submarines forced the Germans to employ more destroyers to protect the capital ships . As a result , Schwaben and her sisters were not included in the German fleet that assaulted the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 , due to the scarcity of escorts . On 29 August , Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Walter Engelhardt replaced Alberts aboard Schwaben . She was then used as a guard ship in Libau , starting on 24 September . On 10 – 11 November , Schwaben , her sisters Wittelsbach and Wettin , and Prinz Heinrich left Libau , bound for Kiel . 
 By late 1915 , the increasing threat from British submarines in the Baltic convinced the German navy to withdraw the elderly Wittelsbach @-@ class ships from active service . On 20 November Schwaben steamed to Wilhelmshaven , where she replaced Kaiser Karl der Grosse as a training ship for engineers , a role she held for the remainder of the war . After the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June , in which Schwaben did not take part , Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper , the commander of the German battlecruiser squadron , sent his four surviving battlecruisers to dock for repairs . Hipper made Schwaben , which was stationed in Wilhelmshaven , his temporary command ship while his force was being repaired . In 1916 , Schwaben was partially disarmed ; the four 24 cm guns were removed , her battery of 15 cm guns was reduced to six weapons , and only four 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were left aboard . 
 = = = Postwar service = = = 
 The ship was briefly retained by the Reichsmarine after the end of the war , and was reactivated for service on 1 August 1919 . According to Articles 182 and 193 of the Treaty of Versailles , Germany was obliged to keep sufficient vessels in commission to sweep mines from large areas in the North and Baltic Seas . Schwaben was therefore converted into a depot ship for F @-@ type minesweepers to assist in meeting Germany 's treaty obligations , which entailed removal of her remaining weaponry and construction of platforms to hold the minesweepers . She was assigned to the 6th Baltic Minesweeping Half @-@ Flotilla , though this service did not last long , as the minesweeping work was completed by 19 June 1920 . The old battleship was stricken from the naval register on 8 March 1921 . She was sold for 3 @,@ 090 @,@ 000 marks and broken up for scrap that year in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 = 1914 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1914 Atlantic hurricane season was the least active Atlantic hurricane season on record , with only one known tropical storm . Although hurricane season typically encompasses a much larger time @-@ span , actual activity was confined to the middle of September . The only tropical cyclone of the year developed in the region of The Bahamas on September 15 and drifted northwestward , moving inland over Florida and Georgia . Thorough warnings before the storm prevented any major damage . The 1914 season is one of only two that did not produce any hurricanes ( the other being the 1907 season ) . Due to the lack of modern technology , including satellite imagery , information is often sparse , and an additional tropical depression may have existed in late October . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 With only one official tropical cyclone , the 1914 season was the least active Atlantic hurricane season on record . It is one of only two Atlantic seasons without a storm of hurricane intensity ( winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) or stronger ) , the other being the 1907 season . The sole tropical storm 's formation on September 14 represents the latest start to a hurricane season since officials records began in 1851 . 
 Information on the 1914 season is chiefly based on data from the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) , which undertook a thorough reanalysis of hurricanes from 1911 through 1914 in 2005 . Several changes , mostly of a minor nature , were made to the September tropical storm . Additionally , two other systems during the year were formally considered for inclusion into the hurricane database ; one of them was deemed a potential tropical depression , but considered too weak to be classified a tropical storm . The other was assessed as a non @-@ tropical system . The 2005 HURDAT reanalysis relied largely on historical weather maps and ship reports in place of modern technology , including satellite imagery . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first and only tropical storm of the season originated in a westward @-@ moving tropical wave denoted on weather maps from September 13 . Decreases in air pressure occurred throughout the Bahamas , providing " strong indications of a disturbance " . The system became a tropical depression at 00 : 00 UTC on September 15 , approximately 200 mi ( 320 km ) east of Miami , Florida . It strengthened into a tropical storm about 12 hours later , leading to the issuance of storm warnings from the east coast of Florida to as far north as Hatteras , North Carolina . 
 The system drifted northwest while gradually intensifying , and was situated south of the Georgia coast late on September 16 . While most tropical systems in the vicinity tend to continue northward along the Eastern Seaboard , the cyclone curved westward and moved ashore near the Florida – Georgia state border after achieving a peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . It progressed inland over southern Georgia as it quickly weakened , but its intensity leveled off after around 18 : 00 UTC on September 17 . The storm skirted the northern Gulf of Mexico as it swerved slightly south of due west , weakening to a tropical depression over southeastern Louisiana . By early September 19 , the depression had further deteriorated into an open trough — a poorly defined , elongated area of low pressure . 
 The storm produced widespread rainfall in the Southeastern United States , accompanied by gale @-@ force winds along the coast , and ships reported severe conditions at sea . High tides occurred around St. Augustine , Florida , washing over the South Street Causeway . Winds from the storm dispersed large amounts of dead grass from marshes in the area . No significant damage was reported due to thorough warnings before the cyclone . A 2005 reanalysis of the storm made some minor changes to its listing in the official hurricane database , setting back the time of formation and raising the peak intensity . 
 = = = Tropical depression = = = 
 In addition to the September tropical storm , a possible depression that remained below tropical storm intensity developed in late October . On October 24 , a broad area of low pressure was present over the western Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea . A possible center of low pressure , attached to a cold front extending southward , had formed within the larger system and moved toward the east . Another center of low pressure formed in the northwestern Caribbean on October 25 and is considered a tropical depression in contemporary research . The depression had weak winds due to the light pressure gradient in the region and , at its peak , it had a minimum central pressure of 1 @,@ 004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . On October 26 , the cold front associated with the extratropical cyclone to the north absorbed the tropical system . The next day , the extratropical system deteriorated into an open trough . Although the tropical low was reviewed for inclusion into the hurricane database as a tropical storm in 2005 , it was deemed too weak . 
 = Campbell 's dwarf hamster = 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamster ( Phodopus campbelli ) is a species of hamster in the genus Phodopus . It was given its common name by Oldfield Thomas in honour of W.C. Campbell , who collected the first specimen in Mongolia on July 1 , 1902 . It is distinguished from the closely related Djungarian hamster as it has smaller ears and no dark fur on its crown . Campbell 's dwarf hamster typically has a narrow dorsal stripe compared to the Djungarian hamster and grey fur on the stomach . 
 In the wild , the breeding season for Campbell 's dwarf hamster varies by location . For example , the breeding season begins towards the middle of April in Tuva and towards the end of April in Mongolia . However , in captivity , there is no fixed breeding season and they can breed frequently throughout the year . Females are usually sexually mature at two months of age and the gestation period is typically 20 days . Campbell 's dwarf hamster is crepuscular , along with all species of Phodopus and is active throughout the year . Campbell 's dwarf hamsters are omnivores , and so feed on both plant and insect material . Campbell 's dwarf hamster inhabits burrows with four to six horizontal and vertical tunnels in the steppes and semi deserts of central Asia , the Altai mountains , autonomous areas of Tuva and the Hebei province in northeastern China . 
 This hamster is listed as of Least Concern by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . It is native to China , Kazakhstan , Mongolia and Russian Federation . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The binomial name of Campbell 's dwarf hamster is Phodopus campbelli . This species is the type species of Phodopus , and is named after W. C. Campbell , who first described it on July 1 , 1902 , in Inner Mongolia . The exact location was given as " <unk> " ( a Mongolian word for a dry lake ) and so the exact co @-@ ordinates are not clear . Thomas described the type specimen in 1905 as <unk> campbelli . 
 Synonyms for this species are Phodopus <unk> and Phodopus <unk> . Common names have been applied to Campbell 's dwarf hamster , including the striped hairy @-@ footed hamster , the Djungarian hamster , the Siberian hamster , and Campbell 's hamster . Campbell 's dwarf hamster is commonly confused with the Djungarian hamster ( Phodopus sungorus ) due to some of the common names , such as the " Siberian hamster " also being used to describe the Djungarian hamster . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 American biologist Ned Hollister described a subspecies in 1912 : 
 P. c. <unk> : Found in the Altai Mountains of Siberia 
 = = Physical description = = 
 A typical wild Campbell 's dwarf hamster is 13 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 53 in ) long , with a tail length of 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) . In captivity , they are proportionally larger , as commercial pet food and fruits provide more nutrition than food found commonly in the wild . The lips and cheeks have white fur and the rest of the fur around the face can be either grey or brown . A dark and narrow dorsal stripe runs along the center of the back from the nape of the neck to about 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) above the tail . The surface of the hands and feet are white to ensure the animal stays warm in colder climates in countries 
 such as Mongolia . 
 In both the wild and captivity , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters scent @-@ mark around their territories using <unk> glands , skin glands located behind the ears . They use urine and feces for communication . 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamster is distinguished from the similar looking Djungarian hamster by its smaller ears and no dark patch on the crown of its head , in certain colourations . The dorsal stripe of Campbell 's dwarf hamster is narrower , shorter , and darker than that of the Djungarian hamster , and the fur on the stomach of Campbell 's dwarf hamster is grey , but it is white on the Djungarian hamster . Campbell 's dwarf hamster does not turn white in the winter and has a grey tint to its fur . It has a smaller interorbital breadth , but has a larger auditory bulla . Campbell 's dwarf hamster is much less tolerant to lower temperatures than the Djungarian hamster . A laboratory experiment showed Campbell 's dwarf hamster can resist temperatures as low as − 31 @.@ 8 ° C ( − 25 @.@ 2 ° F ) , where the Djungarian hamster can withstand temperatures as low as − 44 @.@ 7 ° C ( − 48 @.@ 5 ° F ) . Campbell 's dwarf hamster reacts to lower temperatures by constantly exercising and tries to find a sheltered location , unlike the Djungarian hamster , which curls up and relies on its autonomic thermoregulation . 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamster has cheek pouches , which are an extension of the mouth , extending from the mouth all the way to the rear legs . Food is transferred into these pouches through the diastema . The inside of the pouch contains a large number of folds of dermal papillae . When the pouch is full , it extends and becomes part of the structure of the skin . By 11 days of age , the cheek pouches are fully grown and can carry objects up to the size of a sunflower seed . When the cheek pouches become full , they extend back to the shoulder blades , which restrict movement . 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamster is prone to genetic abnormalities in the metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids . They can develop tumours of the mammary glands , lungs , uterus , and ovaries . <unk> can also develop if the animal is exposed to chemical carcinogens . Due to having slow locomotion and an insignificant response to bright lights and humans , as well as having a low population density , field studies allow scientists to study entire populations in the wild . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 In a laboratory experiment , the average lifespan for a male Campbell 's dwarf hamster in captivity was 278 days and for a female was 356 days . In a different experiment , hamsters kept in captivity born in the summer lived for an average of 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 5 years . Young hamsters provided widely varied diets early in life are less likely to suffer digestive problems as they mature , but this is not always possible in the wild due to lack of food ; this causes the life expectancy of captive hamsters to be greater than that of wild hamsters . 
 = = Diet = = 
 As omnivores , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters eat a variety of different foods . A balanced diet for a hamster consists of 16 @-@ 24 % protein , 60 @-@ 65 % carbohydrates , and 5 – 7 % fat , with constant access to fresh water . In their natural habitats , dwarf hamsters feed almost exclusively on plant materials . In captivity , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters can get the required nutrition from commercially available food designed specifically for hamsters , which typically contain a mix of dry grains , nuts , and seeds that may be fortified with vitamins and minerals . An excess of any one particular seed or nut can lead to digestive problems , obesity , and forms nutritional deficiency . 
 In addition to a commercially prepared seed mix , a balanced diet for a Campbell 's dwarf hamster in captivity includes a regulated variety of fresh vegetables and fruits . Dark greens such as kale are rich in vitamins and minerals . Wild vegetables such as yarrow , chickweed , and dandelion and raspberry leaves , are also good sources of protein that helps prevent obesity . 
 A hamster in captivity can occasionally eat mealworms or earthworms , which have high protein contents . Boiled egg whites and small pieces of clean , cooked chicken are also sources of extra protein . They can also eat wheat grain , sunflower seeds , and locusts . The teeth of Campbell 's dwarf hamster never stop growing . Like all rodents , they must therefore gnaw regularly to keep their incisors from growing into the skin of the mouth and causing pain and irritation . Smooth , young wood from nontoxic trees , such as apple and willow , is readily used by most species in the genus . Most pet stores sell nontoxic wooden chews designed for rodents in captivity . 
 Certain food items commonly consumed by humans are toxic to hamsters and should be avoided completely in captivity . After they are completely weaned at around 21 days of age , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters are lactose intolerant and cannot digest milk . Onions and garlic are very dangerous and can cause severe haemolytic anemia . Leafy green vegetables such as cabbage and celery contain a large amount of water , so can have severe laxative effects on small animals . Grapes and raisins may contribute to acute renal failure , due to their high level of acidity . Chocolate and other sticky foods such peanut butter may solidify in a hamster 's cheek pouches and lead to infections , which can lead to death . 
 In the wild , the diets of Campbell 's dwarf hamsters vary across the population range . A total of 51 different species of plants were identified to be consumed by the <unk> population , the most common being Stipa <unk> and species of Allium . However , in Tuva , only 10 species of plant were identified to be consumed by the population , the most common being Potentilla . Campbell 's dwarf hamster is a natural predator of burrowing worms and grubs . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 In Tuva , the breeding season of Campbell 's dwarf hamster begins in April , and in Mongolia , it begins in at the end of April or the beginning of May . However , in all distribution ranges , it ends in late September or early October . In captivity , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters breed throughout the year , with no fixed breeding season , but a large number are born in the summer months . In the wild , three to four litters are produced each year , with an average of eight offspring per litter . In captivity , females can have between one and 18 litters per year , with one to nine offspring per litter . In captivity , the gestation period for Campbell 's dwarf hamster is between 18 and 20 days , and the shortest gestation period recorded for a captive female was 13 days . The male hamster is likely to assist the female during birth . The male may pull the offspring from the birth canal , clean them , or collect food for the mother and offspring . 
 When the offspring are born , they are hairless and have a body mass of approximately 1 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 053 oz ) . Incisors and claws are already formed , but the digits , eyes , and pinnae are closed and cannot be used . The rate at which the young develop differs depending on the distribution range . However , the differences are usually no longer than a day . In Tuva , the pinnae open on the first day of birth and are completely open after three days of development . However , in Mongolia , the same process occurs between two and four days of development . Fur first grows on the crown , back , and abdomen . The young are usually have a full coat of fur after seven days of development . Offspring born in captivity have a shorter development time than those born in the wild . Specifically , the growth and development of the head and body , tail , hind feet , and pinnae can be up to a day sooner than those found in the wild . After 28 days of development in captivity , the young are already around half the mass of their parents . 
 In captivity , females become sexually mature at two months of age . The ovarian follicle forms about 16 days prior to the birth of the offspring . After mating , female hamsters typically have larger uteri , ovaries , and adrenal glands compared to females which live alone , with other females or those that have not mated . The females and males may fight each other when getting to know their partner . Also , these females have a shorter gestation period , around four to five days . 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 In captivity , only Campbell 's dwarf hamsters and Djungarian hamsters are able to interbreed and produce live offspring or hybrids . Although hybrids make suitable pets , the breeding of hybrids and cloning can cause health problems , due to inherited diseases . Because genetic information can be very similar , genetic health problems or vulnerabilities can easily be inherited by the offspring . The widespread breeding and distribution of hybrids could threaten the existence of both pure species and subspecies of the ecosystem . This could ultimately lead to the extinction of the subspecies . Each litter becomes smaller as more generations are produced and the young commonly begin to inherit many congenital problems . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamsters inhabit burrows in the steppes and semideserts of central Asia , the Altai mountains , autonomous areas of Tuva , and the Hebei province in northeastern China . A burrow can contain four to six horizontal and vertical tunnels . The tunnels leading to the nesting area can be as deep as 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) below the ground , but are usually 20 – 30 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) deep . The burrows are lined with either dry grass or sheep 's wool . They may sometimes share burrows with Daurian pikas , but only in the steppes and semideserts of northern Manchuria . In parts of Mongolia , the hamsters may also share burrows with species of Meriones to save them from digging their own . In Tuva , Campbell 's dwarf hamsters have been found living with other hamsters , such as the Chinese striped hamster , the <unk> hamster , and the long @-@ tailed dwarf hamster . The diets of the three types of hamsters are different to avoid fighting over the same type of food , which is why they live together . 
 Campbell 's dwarf hamsters may also live near areas of human civilization . In Mongolia , they may be found in yurts to keep warm during the winter , as they do not have thermoregulation like the Djungarian hamster . They have five main predators : the Eurasian eagle owl , the steppe eagle , the corsac fox , the common kestrel , and the saker falcon . All distribution areas have more females than males , because males are at higher risk from predators , as they cannot move as quickly . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 This hamster is listed as of Least Concern by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . The population and distribution size are large , and no major or widespread threats to the species are known . However , the increasing number of livestock in the areas of distribution , such as the steppes of central Asia , some burrows are at a small risk of being destroyed . In arid areas of distribution , the reduction in the amount of water sources is also a minor concern . These hamsters are conserved in protected areas . 
 = Battle of Concepción = 
 The Battle of Concepción was fought on October 28 , 1835 , between Mexican troops under Colonel Domingo Ugartechea and Texian insurgents led by James Bowie and James Fannin . The 30 @-@ minute engagement , which historian J. R. Edmondson describes as " the first major engagement of the Texas Revolution " , occurred on the grounds of Mission Concepción , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of what is now Downtown San Antonio in the U.S. state of Texas . 
 On October 13 , the newly created Texian Army under Stephen F. Austin had marched towards Bexar , where General Martín Perfecto de Cos commanded the remaining Mexican soldiers in Texas . On October 27 , Austin sent Bowie and Fannin , with 90 soldiers , to find a defensible spot near Bexar for the Texian Army to rest . After choosing a site near Mission Concepción , the scouting party camped for the night and sent a courier to notify Austin . After learning that the Texian Army was divided , Cos sent Ugartechea with 275 soldiers to attack the Texians camped at Concepción . The Texians took cover in a horseshoe @-@ shaped gully ; their good defensive position , longer firing range , and better ammunition helped them to repel several Mexican attacks , and the Mexican soldiers retreated just 30 minutes before the remainder of the Texian Army arrived . Historians estimate that between 14 and 76 Mexican soldiers were killed , while only one Texian soldier died . 
 = = Background = = 
 The newly organized Texian Army , determined to put a decisive end to Mexican control over Texas , began marching towards San Antonio de Bexar on October 13 , 1835 . Days earlier , General Martín Perfecto de Cos , brother @-@ in @-@ law of the Mexican president , had arrived in Bexar to take command of all the Mexican forces in Texas . By October 20 the Texians — led by Stephen F. Austin , the first empresario to bring English @-@ speaking settlers to Texas — had reached Salado Creek and initiated a siege of Béxar . To keep the Texians from examining Mexican defensive measures , Mexican troops attempted to restrict access to and from the city . Despite those efforts , several people were able to leave their homes and join the Texians . Among those was James Bowie , who was well known for his fighting prowess ; stories of his exploits in the Sandbar Fight and his search for the lost San Saba mine had been widely reported . 
 On October 22 , Austin named Bowie a colonel and gave him joint command of the 1st Battalion with Captain James W. Fannin . Before nightfall the 1st Battalion began a reconnaissance mission to evaluate the former missions around San Antonio as potential campsites . Locals familiar with the area , Juan Seguín and his Texians , would guide the men along the river . After investigating three of the missions , Bowie and Fannin selected Mission San Francisco de la Espada as the most promising campsite . The rest of the Texian Army joined them there early on October 27 . Eager to move closer to Bexar , Austin immediately sent Bowie and Fannin to find a good defensive spot for the army to rest that night . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Bowie and Fannin were accompanied by ninety soldiers , divided into four companies led by Captains Andrew Briscoe , Robert Coleman , Michael Goheen , and Valentine Bennet . The group took a northerly route , following the San Antonio River past Missions San Juan and San José . Along the way they encountered a small party of Mexican scouts , who retreated to Bexar after a brief skirmish . 
 Approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from San Antonio de Bexar and 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from the Texian camp at Espada , the Texian scouting party stopped at Mission Concepción . Five hundred yards ( 460 m ) west of the mission , the San Antonio River curved in a small horseshoe shape , with the two sides of the river 's curve approximately 100 yards ( 91 m ) apart . According to historian Alwyn Barr , " trees shaded both sides of the broad riverbottom which lay about six feet below the level of the rolling <unk> [ sic ? ] nearby " . Rather than return immediately to Austin , as their orders specified , Bowie and Fannin instead sent a courier to bring Austin directions to Concepción . The next day , an angry Austin issued a statement threatening officers who chose not to follow orders with court @-@ martial . 
 The Texian scouting party divided into two camps . Fannin supervised 49 men at the south part of the horseshoe bend , while Bowie and the remaining men camped at the northern part of the bend . Any Mexican force coming from the north would be caught in their cross @-@ fire . Pickets were stationed around the area and in the mission tower , which offered greater visibility . As they settled down for the evening , the Texians were surprised to see a Mexican cannonball , fired from one of the church towers in Bexar , hit just beyond their camp . Many of the Texian soldiers believed that a priest from the mission had informed the Mexican Army of their position . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Hoping to neutralize the Texian force at Concepción before the remainder of the Texian Army arrived , Cos ordered Colonel Domingo Ugartechea to lead an early @-@ morning assault on October 28 . At 6 : 00 a.m. , Ugartechea left Bexar with 275 Mexican soldiers and 2 cannons . Heavy fog delayed their approach , and the Mexican soldiers did not reach Concepción until 7 : 30 or 8 : 00 a.m. A Mexican cavalry scout fired at Texian picket Henry Karnes ; after returning fire , Karnes ran back to his company , frustrated because , as he put it , " Boys , the scoundrels have shot off my powder horn " . The Texians took refuge in the gully , firing from its edge before dropping the 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) down to the river level to reload . As the remaining Texian sentries hurried to join the main body of Texian soldiers , Pen Jarvis was struck by a Mexican bullet and fell down the river bank . The bullet hit a knife Jarvis had slipped through the front of his belt , and he suffered only bruises . 
 The Texian position was surrounded by trees , leaving the Mexican cavalry no room to maneuver . The 200 members of the cavalry remained on the west bank of the river , behind the Texians , to foil any escape attempts . Lieutenant Colonel José Maria <unk> brought the Mexican infantry and artillery across the river to a position below that of the Texians . In response , Texians trimmed undergrowth near their camp to provide better visibility and dug steps into the embankment so that they could more easily climb up to fire . The two sides skirmished desultorily for two hours , until the fog began to lift . At that point , 50 – 60 Mexican infantrymen crossed the prairie to surround the Texians . Seeing their approach , Bowie shouted to his Texian forces , " Keep under cover , boys , and reserve your fire ; we haven 't a man to spare ! " At 300 yards ( 270 m ) from the Texian position , the Mexican infantry halted and formed a line with the cannon in the middle . They began firing as they advanced toward the Texian positions , to little effect . For the most part , the Mexican volleys passed over the heads of the Texians . According to Texian Noah Smithwick , " grapeshot and canister thrashed through the pecan trees overhead , raining a shower of ripe nuts down on us , and I saw men picking them up and eating them with as little concern as if they were being shaken down by a norther . " In his official report to Austin , Bowie remarked that " The discharge from the enemy was one continued blaze of fire , whilst that from our lines , was more slowly delivered , but with good aim and deadly effect . " The Mexican infantry were assigned Brown Bess muskets , which had a maximum range of only 70 yards ( 64 m ) , compared to the 200 @-@ yard ( 180 m ) effective range of the Texian long rifles . The Texians were short of ammunition , however , and although Mexican ammunition was plentiful , it was poor quality . In several cases , Mexican musket balls bounced off Texian soldiers , causing little damage other than a bruise . 
 When Mexican officers ordered a charge on the south bend held by Fannin , Bowie sent Coleman 's company to help . Most of the Texian reinforcements maneuvered to their new position from below the river bank , but several rose from cover and dashed across the prairie . One of them , Richard Andrews , was hit in the side with grapeshot and died several hours after the battle . 
 As the reinforcements reached the southern part of the horseshoe , the Mexican infantry fell back , leaving the cannon within 100 yards ( 91 m ) of the Texians . Texians redirected their fire to the cannoneers . After three different sets of gunners were killed or wounded , the cannons were abandoned . The Mexican infantry attempted three attacks ; all were repulsed . As the Mexican buglers called for a retreat , the infantry fell back beyond Texian rifle range . The Mexican cavalry was sent to retrieve wounded men and the cannon . As the cavalry approached , Bowie led a charge onto the prairie . The Texians quickly captured the cannon and turned it on the fleeing Mexican soldiers . Grapeshot killed one of the mule drivers , causing his caisson to go out of control and " careen [ ... ] through the shattered Mexican ranks " . The battle had lasted only 30 minutes . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Austin had intended to reunite the two parts of his army early on October 28 , but the group camping at Mission Espada had delayed their departure to unsuccessfully pursue a company that had deserted . Lieutenant Colonel William Barret Travis and his company of cavalry rode ahead of the main body of the army . When they reached Concepción , the Mexican Army was still visible in the distance . The small band of Texian cavalry pursued but the Mexican soldiers reached Bexar safely . 
 Less than 30 minutes after the battle ended , the rest of the Texian Army arrived . Austin felt that the Mexican morale must be low after their defeat and wanted to proceed immediately to Bexar . Bowie and other officers refused , as they believed Bexar was too heavily fortified . The Texians searched the area for any Mexican equipment which had been abandoned during the retreat . They found several boxes of cartridges . Complaining that the Mexican powder was " little better than pounded charcoal " , the Texians emptied the cartridges but kept the bullets . 
 That evening , Austin allowed a local priest and men from Bexar to retrieve the bodies of the Mexican soldiers who had died in battle . Barr estimated that at least 14 Mexican soldiers were killed , with an additional 39 wounded , several of whom died later . Timothy Todish et al . , in their book The Alamo Sourcebook , estimated that 60 Mexican soldiers were killed , while historian Stephen Hardin claimed that 76 Mexican soldiers died . The only Texian to die in battle was Andrews , and Jarvis was the only Texian classified as wounded . 
 This battle , which historian J. R. Edmondson describes as " the first major engagement of the Texas Revolution " , was the last offensive against the Texians that Cos would order . Barr attributed the Texian victory to " able leadership , a strong position , and greater firepower " . The Mexican cavalry was unable to fight effectively in the wooded , riverbottom terrain , and the weapons of the Mexican infantry had a much lower range than that of the Texians . Although Barr continues that the battle " should have taught ... lessons on Mexican courage and the value of a good defensive position " , Hardin believes that " the relative ease of the victory at Concepción instilled in the Texians a reliance on their long rifles and a contempt for their enemies " . A soldier who later served under Fannin complained that Fannin 's " former experience in fighting Mexicans [ at Concepción ] had led him to neglect to take such precautionary measures as were requisite " , which may have contributed to his defeat at the Battle of Coleto in March 1836 . 
 = The Usual Suspects = 
 The Usual Suspects is a 1995 American neo @-@ noir mystery crime thriller film directed by Bryan Singer and written by Christopher McQuarrie . It stars Stephen Baldwin , Gabriel Byrne , Benicio del Toro , Kevin Pollak , Chazz Palminteri , Pete Postlethwaite and Kevin Spacey . 
 The film follows the interrogation of Roger " Verbal " Kint , a small @-@ time con man who is one of only two survivors of a massacre and fire on a ship docked at the Port of Los Angeles . He tells an interrogator a convoluted story about events that led him and his partners in crime to the boat , and about a mysterious mob boss known as Keyser Söze who commissioned their work . Using flashback and narration , Kint 's story becomes increasingly complex . 
 The film , shot on a $ 6 million budget , began as a title taken from a column in Spy magazine called The Usual Suspects , after one of Claude Rains ' most memorable lines in the classic film Casablanca . Singer thought it would make a good title for a film , the poster for which he and McQuarrie had developed as the first visual idea . 
 The film was shown out of competition at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival , and then initially released in a few theaters . It received favorable reviews , and was eventually given a wider release . McQuarrie won an Academy Award for Best Writing ( Original Screenplay ) and Spacey won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance . The Writer 's Guild of America ranks the film as having the 35th greatest screenplay of all time . It is now remembered for having one of the most definitive and popular plot twists in cinematic history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with criminal Dean Keaton lying badly wounded on a ship docked in the San Pedro Bay . He is confronted by a mysterious figure whom he calls " Keyser " , who shoots him dead and sets fire to the ship , 
 The bloodbath on the ship leaves only two survivors : <unk> <unk> , a Hungarian mobster hospitalized with severe burns ; and Roger " Verbal " Kint , a con artist with cerebral palsy . Customs agent Dave Kujan flies in from New York City to interrogate Verbal , who describes in flashback the events that led him and four other criminals - Keaton , Michael McManus , Fred Fenster and Todd Hockney - onto the ship . 
 Verbal explains that , six weeks earlier in New York , he and the other criminals were arrested on a trumped @-@ up hijacking charge , and decided to pull another heist to get back at the police . Led by Keaton , a former corrupt policeman , they robbed a group of corrupt cops who transported smugglers in a police convoy . They then went to California to fence the stolen jewels with a criminal named Redfoot . Redfoot turned them on to another jewel heist , but the quarry turned out to be heroin , and the five had to shoot their way out . Soon after , a lawyer named Kobayashi contacted them and told them that Keyser Söze , a Turkish crime lord with a mythical reputation from whom all of the thieves had unwittingly stolen , had offered them a job : invade a ship manned by a gang of Argentinian drug dealers with whom Söze was competing and destroy the $ 91 million worth of cocaine that they were transporting . 
 When Kujan learns of Söze from FBI agent Jack Baer , he questions Verbal about him . Verbal tells Kujan an underworld legend about Söze : that he had murdered his own family after they had been attacked by a gang of Hungarian criminals , and then massacred the Hungarians and everyone they held dear . He then went underground , never to be seen again , and did business only through underlings who did not know for whom they were working . He became a fearsome urban legend , " a spook story that criminals tell their kids at night " . 
 Verbal goes on to explain that , after Fenster had bailed on the group , Kobayashi gave them a location at which to find their compatriot 's dead body . They tried to kill Kobayashi , but he strong @-@ armed them into performing the heist by threatening their loved ones . They staked out the ship and killed several Argentinian and Hungarian gangsters , but found no drugs on board . McManus , Hockney and a man locked aboard the ship were killed by an unseen person , who also killed Keaton and set the ship on fire as Verbal looked on . 
 Verbal concludes his story , but Kujan does not believe it . He insists that Keaton must be Söze , as one of the murder victims on the boat was Arturo Marquez , a drug dealer who escaped prosecution by claiming he could identify Söze — and who was represented by Edie Finneran , Keaton 's lawyer and girlfriend . Kujan claims that the Argentinians were selling Marquez to Söze 's Hungarian rivals and Keaton used the heist as a distraction to let him kill Marquez . Kujan also informs Verbal that Finneran has been murdered . Verbal says that the entire plan was Keaton 's idea , but refuses to testify in court . Verbal 's bond is posted and he is released . 
 Moments later , Kujan realizes that Verbal 's entire story was a lie , pieced together from details on a crowded bulletin board in his office . Meanwhile , Verbal walks outside , gradually dropping his limp and flexing his supposedly withered hand . As Kujan runs after Verbal , a fax comes in from California : a police sketch artist 's rendering of Söze , dictated by <unk> , that looks exactly like Verbal . Kujan misses Verbal by moments , as the latter disappears into a car driven by " Kobayashi " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Stephen Baldwin as Michael McManus . The actor was tired of doing independent films where his expectations were not met ; when he met with director Bryan Singer , he went into a 15 @-@ minute tirade telling him what it was like to work with him . After Baldwin was finished , Singer told him exactly what he expected and wanted , which impressed the actor . 
 Gabriel Byrne as Dean Keaton . Kevin Spacey met Byrne at a party and asked him to do the film . He read the screenplay and turned it down , thinking that the filmmakers could not pull it off . Byrne met screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie and Singer and was impressed by the latter 's vision for the film . However , Byrne was also dealing with some personal problems at the time and backed out for 24 hours until the filmmakers agreed to shoot the film in Los Angeles , where the actor lived , and make it in five weeks . 
 Benicio del Toro as Fred Fenster . Spacey suggested del Toro for the role . The character was originally written with a Harry Dean Stanton @-@ type actor in mind . Del Toro met with Singer and the film 's casting director and told them that he did not want to audition because he did not feel comfortable doing them . 
 Kevin Pollak as Todd Hockney . He met with Singer about doing the film , but when he heard that two other actors were auditioning for the role , he came back , auditioned , and got it . 
 Kevin Spacey as Roger " Verbal " Kint . Singer and McQuarrie sent the screenplay for the film to the actor without telling him which role was written for him . Spacey called Singer and told them that he was interested in the roles of Keaton and Kujan but was also intrigued by Kint who , as it turned out , was the role McQuarrie wrote with the actor in mind . 
 Chazz Palminteri as U.S. Customs Special Agent Dave Kujan . Singer had always wanted the actor for the film , but he was always unavailable . The role was offered to Christopher Walken and Robert De Niro , both of whom turned it down . The filmmakers even had Al Pacino come in and read for the part , but he decided not to do it because he had just played a cop in Heat . Palminteri became available , but only for a week . When he signed on , this persuaded the film 's financial backers to support the film fully because he was a sufficiently high @-@ profile star , thanks to the recent release of A Bronx Tale and Bullets Over Broadway . 
 Pete Postlethwaite as Mr. Kobayashi , Söze 's right @-@ hand man . 
 Suzy Amis as Edie Finneran , an influential criminal lawyer and Keaton 's girlfriend . 
 Giancarlo Esposito as FBI Special Agent Jack Baer ; investigates the boat explosion on the pier . 
 Dan Hedaya as Sergeant Jeffrey " Jeff " Rabin ; assists in Kujan 's interrogation of Verbal 
 Peter Greene ( uncredited ) as Redfoot the Fence ; he not only sets up a job for the five criminals in Los Angeles , but also puts them in touch with Kobayashi . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Bryan Singer met Kevin Spacey at a party after a screening of the young filmmaker 's first film , Public Access , at the 1993 Sundance Film Festival . Spacey had been encouraged by a number of people he knew who had seen it , and was so impressed that he told Singer and McQuarrie that he wanted to be in whatever film they did next . Singer read a column in Spy magazine called " The Usual Suspects " after Claude Rains ' line in Casablanca . Singer thought that it would be a good title for a film . When asked by a reporter at Sundance what their next film was about , McQuarrie replied , " I guess it 's about a bunch of criminals who meet in a police line @-@ up , " which incidentally was the first visual idea that he and Singer had for the poster : " five guys who meet in a line @-@ up , " Singer remembers . The director also envisioned a tagline for the poster , " All of you can go to Hell . " Singer then asked the question , " What would possibly bring these five felons together in one line @-@ up ? " McQuarrie revamped an idea from one of his own unpublished screenplays — the story of a man who murders his own family and disappears . The writer mixed this with the idea of a team of criminals . 
 Söze 's character is based on John List , a New Jersey accountant who murdered his family in 1971 and then disappeared for almost two decades , assuming a new identity before he was ultimately apprehended . McQuarrie based the name of Keyser Söze on one of his previous supervisors , Kayser <unk> , at a Los Angeles law firm that he worked for , but decided to change the last name because he thought that his former boss would object to how it was used . He found the word <unk> in his roommate 's English @-@ to @-@ Turkish dictionary , which translates as " talk too much " . All the characters ' names are taken from staff members of the law firm at the time of his employment . McQuarrie had also worked for a detective agency , and this influenced the depiction of criminals and law enforcement officials in the script . 
 Singer described the film as Double Indemnity meets Rashomon , and said that it was made " so you can go back and see all sorts of things you didn 't realize were there the first time . You can get it a second time in a way you never could have the first time around . " He also compared the film 's structure to Citizen Kane ( which also contained an interrogator and a subject who is telling a story ) and the criminal caper The Anderson Tapes . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 McQuarrie wrote nine drafts of his screenplay over five months , until Singer felt that it was ready to shop around to the studios . None were interested except for a European financing company . McQuarrie and Singer had a difficult time getting the film made because of the non @-@ linear story , the large amount of dialogue and the lack of cast attached to the project . Financiers wanted established stars , and offers for the small role of Redfoot ( the L.A. fence who hooks up the five protagonists with Kobayashi ) went out to Christopher Walken , Tommy Lee Jones , Jeff Bridges , Charlie Sheen , James Spader , Al Pacino and Johnny Cash . However , the European money allowed the film 's producers to make offers to actors and assemble a cast . They were only able to offer the actors salaries that were well below their usual pay , but they agreed because of the quality of McQuarrie 's script and the chance to work with each other . That money fell through , however , and Singer used the script and the cast to attract PolyGram to pick up the film negative . 
 About casting , Singer said , " You pick people not for what they are , but what you imagine they can turn into . " To research his role , Spacey met doctors and experts on cerebral palsy and talked with Singer about how it would fit dramatically in the film . They decided that it would affect only one side of his body . According to Byrne , the cast bonded quickly during rehearsals . Del Toro worked with Alan <unk> to develop Fenster 's distinctive , almost unintelligible speech patterns . According to the actor , the source of his character 's unusual speech patterns came from the realization that " the purpose of my character was to die . " Del Toro told Singer , " It really doesn 't matter what I say so I can go really far out with this and really make it <unk> . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The budget was set at $ 5 @.@ 5 million , and the film was shot in 35 days in Los Angeles , San Pedro and New York City . Spacey said that they shot the interrogation scenes with Palminteri over a span of five to six days . These scenes were also shot before the rest of the film . The police lineup scene ran into scheduling conflicts because the actors kept blowing their lines . Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie would feed the actors questions off @-@ camera and they improvised their lines . When Stephen Baldwin gave his answer , he made the other actors break character . Byrne remembers that they were often laughing between takes and " when they said , ' Action ! ' , we 'd barely be able to keep it together . " Spacey also said that the hardest part was not laughing through takes , with Baldwin and Pollak being the worst culprits . Their goal was to get the usually serious Byrne to crack up . They spent all morning trying unsuccessfully to film the scene . At lunch a frustrated Singer angrily scolded the five actors , but when they resumed the cast continued to laugh through each take . Byrne remembers , " Finally , Bryan just used one of the takes where we couldn 't stay serious . " Singer and editor John Ottman used a combination of takes and kept the humor in to show the characters bonding with one another . 
 While Del Toro told Singer how he was going to portray Fenster , he did not tell his cast members , and in their first scene together none of them understood what Del Toro was saying . Byrne confronted Singer and the director told him that for the lockup scene , " If you don 't understand what he 's saying maybe it 's time we let the audience know that they don 't need to know what he 's saying . " This led to the inclusion of Kevin Pollak 's improvised line , " What did you say ? " 
 The stolen emeralds were real gemstones on loan for the film . 
 Singer spent an 18 @-@ hour day shooting the underground parking garage robbery . According to Byrne , by the next day Singer still did not have all of the footage that he wanted , and refused to stop filming in spite of the bonding company 's threat to shut down the production . 
 In the scene in which the crew meets Redfoot after the botched drug deal , Redfoot flicks his cigarette at McManus ' face . The scene was originally to have Redfoot flick the cigarette at McManus 's chest , but the actor missed and hit Baldwin 's face by accident . Baldwin 's reaction is genuine . 
 Despite enclosed practical locations and a short shooting schedule , cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel " developed a way of shooting dialogue scenes with a combination of slow , creeping zooms and dolly moves that ended in tight close @-@ ups , " to add subtle energy to scenes . " This style combined dolly movement with " imperceptible zooms " so that you ’ d always have a sense of motion in a limited space . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 During the editing phase , Singer thought that they had completed the film two weeks early , but woke up one morning and realized that they needed that time to put together a sequence that convinced the audience that Dean Keaton was Söze — and then do the same for Verbal Kint because the film did not have " the punch that Chris had written so beautifully . " According to Ottman , he assembled the footage as a montage but it still did not work until he added an overlapping voice @-@ over montage featuring key dialogue from several characters and had it relate to the images . Early on , executives at Gramercy had problems pronouncing the name Keyser Söze and were worried that audiences would have the same problem . The studio decided to promote the character 's name . Two weeks before the film debuted in theaters , " Who is Keyser Söze ? " posters appeared at bus stops , and TV spots told people how to say the character 's name . Despite these efforts , all the actors in the film consistently mispronounce his name as " <unk> " instead of " Söze " . 
 Singer wanted the music for the boat heist to resemble Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky 's Piano Concerto No. 1 . The ending 's music was based on a k.d. lang song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Gramercy ran a pre @-@ release promotion and advertising campaign before The Usual Suspects opened in the summer of 1995 . Word of mouth marketing was used to advertise the film , and buses and billboards were plastered with the simple question , " Who is Keyser Söze ? " 
 The film was shown out of competition at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival and was well received by audiences and critics . The film was then given an exclusive run in Los Angeles , where it took a combined $ 83 @,@ 513 , and New York City , where it made $ 132 @,@ 294 on three screens in its opening weekend . The film was then released in 42 theaters where it earned $ 645 @,@ 363 on its opening weekend . It averaged a strong $ 4 @,@ 181 per screen at 517 theaters and the following week added 300 locations . It eventually made $ 23 @.@ 3 million in North America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a rating of 88 % , based on 69 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " <unk> shot and edited , The Usual Suspects gives the audience a simple plot and then piles on layers of deceit , twists , and violence before pulling out the rug from underneath . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 77 out of 100 , based on 22 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert , in a review for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , gave the film one and a half stars out of four , considering it confusing and uninteresting . He also included the film in his " most hated films " list . USA Today rated the film two and a half stars out of four , calling it " one of the most densely plotted mysteries in memory — though paradoxically , four @-@ fifths of it is way too easy to predict . " However , Rolling Stone praised Spacey , saying his " balls @-@ out brilliant performance is Oscar bait all the way . " In his review for The Washington Post , Hal Hinson wrote , " Ultimately , The Usual Suspects may be too clever for its own good . The twist at the end is a corker , but crucial questions remain unanswered . What 's interesting , though , is how little this intrudes on our enjoyment . After the movie you 're still trying to connect the dots and make it all fit — and these days , how often can we say that ? " 
 In her review for The New York Times , Janet Maslin praised the performances of the cast : " Mr. Singer has assembled a fine ensemble cast of actors who can parry such lines , and whose performances mesh effortlessly despite their exaggerated differences in demeanor ... Without the violence or obvious bravado of Reservoir Dogs , these performers still create strong and fascinatingly ambiguous characters . " The Independent praised the film 's ending : " The film 's coup de grace is as elegant as it is unexpected . The whole movie plays back in your mind in perfect clarity — and turns out to be a completely different movie to the one you 've been watching ( rather better , in fact ) . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 McQuarrie was nominated for the Best Original Screenplay and Kevin Spacey was nominated for Best Supporting Actor at the Academy Awards . They both won , and in his acceptance speech Spacey memorably said , " Well , whoever Keyser Söze is , I can tell you he 's gonna get gloriously drunk tonight . " 
 The film was nominated as the best film at the 1996 British Academy Film Awards ( BAFTA awards ) . McQuarrie won the BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay , and John Ottman won the BAFTA Award for Best Editing . The film was nominated for three Independent Spirit Awards — Best Supporting Actor for Benicio del Toro , Best Screenplay for Christopher McQuarrie and Best Cinematography for Newton Thomas Sigel . Both Del Toro and McQuarrie won in their categories . 
 Bryan Singer won the Best Debut award at the 1st Empire Awards . 
 The Usual Suspects was screened at the 1995 Seattle International Film Festival , where Bryan Singer was awarded Best Director and Kevin Spacey won for Best Actor . The Boston Society of Film Critics gave Spacey the Best Supporting Actor award for his work on the film . Spacey went on to win this award with the New York Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review , which also gave the cast an ensemble acting award . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 On June 17 , 2008 , the American Film Institute revealed its " AFI 's 10 Top 10 " — the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1 @,@ 500 people from the creative community . The Usual Suspects was acknowledged as the tenth @-@ best mystery film . Verbal Kint was voted the # 48 villain in " AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains " in June 2003 . 
 Entertainment Weekly cited the film as one of the " 13 must @-@ see heist movies " . Empire ranked Keyser Söze # 69 in their " The 100 Greatest Movie Characters " poll . 
 In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay # 35 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written . 
 American Film Institute Lists : 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Keyser Söze / Verbal Kint — # 48 Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " The greatest trick the Devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn 't exist . " — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) — Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 : # 10 Mystery Film ( also Nominated Gangster Film ) 
 = Rukia Kuchiki = 
 Rukia Kuchiki ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Kuchiki Rukia ) is a fictional character in the anime and manga series Bleach created by Tite Kubo . In the series , Rukia Kuchiki is a Soul Reaper in charge of slaying evil spirits known as Hollows . At the beginning , after a brief meeting with the protagonist of the series , Ichigo Kurosaki , who can see supernatural beings such as Soul Reapers , she is forced to give him her powers in order to fulfill her duties as a Soul Reaper . Rukia has appeared in several other pieces of Bleach media , including the four featured films in the series , the two original video animations , and several video games . 
 Rukia was the first character of the series created by Kubo , her design being the one he decided to use for all the other Soul Reapers . Reaction to her character is generally positive . Her differences from typical shōnen heroines is praised , as is her interaction with other characters . Additionally , she usually ranks second in Weekly Shōnen Jump 's Bleach popularity polls , and is consistently the most popular female character in those polls . Several pieces of merchandise have been released in Rukia 's likeness , including a plush doll and several figurines . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Bleach was first conceived from Tite Kubo 's desire to draw a shinigami in a kimono , which formed the basis for the design of the Soul Reapers . Because of this , Kuchiki was one of the first characters of the series to be created . Before deciding that every Soul Reaper had swords , Kubo thought that they all should use guns , while only Rukia used a scythe . However , this was changed as he created the Soul Reaper kimono . Kubo also mentioned that Rukia did not seem like a lead character , so he created Ichigo Kurosaki to be the series protagonist . Ichigo 's initial design had black hair like Rukia ; Kubo had to modify Ichigo 's appearance to contrast with hers , giving Ichigo orange hair and a trademark scowl . 
 As for her name , Kubo stated that , because Kuchiki " looks like a shinigami " , he wanted her name to sound like a something a shinigami would have as a name . When deciding upon her family name he considered using " <unk> " ( <unk> , lit . " to rot " ) because it sounded like a name a shinigami would have , and then decided to use " Kuchiki " ( <unk> , lit . " rotten wood " ) . He adds that he once heard something that sounded like " Kuchiki Rukia " on Japanese television , and liked it enough to use it as a name . Her first name was conceived as a result of Kubo hearing the Latin name for cosmos on television , and later decided that the name really suited her since the Latin word from which her name is derived means " light " and Kubo sees her as " a ray of light for Ichigo . " Shonen Jump asked in an interview if Kubo had any plans to make Ichigo and Rukia a couple , but Kubo chose neither to confirm nor deny it . After designing Rukia 's zanpakutō , Kubo noted he liked it a lot and made it to be the most beautiful one from the series . 
 When Kubo was asked to make a cover with a female character during Christmas , Kubo initially thought of using Rukia ; he later changed to use Orihime Inoue as he thought Orihime was more suitable for such role . However , Kubo commented he previously made a Christmas illustration with Rukia , and that he received request by several fans wanting to see the image . In contrast to this , Kubo has found he liked Rukia more in the illustrations in which her face expresses pain such as when she is going to be executed in the manga . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Bleach = = = 
 Kuchiki first meets Ichigo Kurosaki in the midst of a hollow attack . After she is heavily injured by the hollow , Rukia is forced to transfer her Soul Reaper powers to Kurosaki so that he can kill the hollow and save their lives and his family . While he succeeds , Kuchiki is left too weak to return to Soul Society , and lives with Ichigo in the human world , intending to stay until her powers are restored . Therefore , her only ability then is her kidō spells , which are severely limited in strength and variety . She uses her kidō for such purposes as restraining , healing , or attacking others . Because of the amount of time she spends with Kurosaki , Kuchiki has been able to gain a keen understanding of his inner workings . Rukia 's relationship with Ichigo is unique , for despite the relatively short amount of time they have known each other , Ichigo can easily confide in her and considers her a true friend because she is encouraging and understands what he is feeling . During her time in the human world , Rukia remains unaccounted for in Soul Society , so Byakuya Kuchiki and Renji Abarai are sent to find her and return her to the Soul Society . They succeed , and upon their return Rukia is sentenced to death for giving her Soul Reaper powers to a human . Kurosaki ultimately arrives in Soul Society in time to stop her execution , and tries to get her to safety . 
 During the arc , Rukia 's past is explored . She died as an infant and was sent to Soul Society with her older sister , Hisana . Though Hisana initially tried to protect and provide for Rukia , she could not ensure her own survival while caring for a baby as well , and thus abandoned Rukia . As Rukia grew up , she befriended Renji Abarai , and entered the Soul Reaper academy , where she was adopted into the Kuchiki family . One year prior to the adoption , Hisana died after asking her husband , Byakuya Kuchiki , to find and adopt Rukia as his sister . This remains unknown to Rukia until Byakuya confesses it to her . When she was accepted into the 13th Division , Rukia befriended the lieutenant of her division , Kaien Shiba , and trained under him . During the course of a mission Kaien was possessed by a hollow and Rukia killed Kaien to protect herself . 
 During Rukia 's bid for freedom , she is stopped by Sōsuke Aizen and his accomplices . Aizen , having singlehandedly orchestrated Rukia 's execution , reveals to her that within her soul is stored the Hōgyoku ( " breakdown sphere " ) , a powerful artifact created and placed there by Kisuke Urahara that gives hollows Soul Reaper powers and vice versa . Wanting the Hōgyoku for himself , Aizen hoped that her death would give him access to it , but settles for a <unk> alternative . The Hōgyoku is removed from her body , Aizen and his men flee Soul Society , and Rukia is acquitted of all charges . With the Hōgyoku , Aizen is able to create an army of arrancar , which he uses to attack Ichigo and his friends once they return to the human world . Rukia and a group of other Soul Reapers are sent to assist in fighting the arrancar , though after Aizen captures Orihime Inoue they are recalled to Soul Society . Rukia 's zanpakutō , Sode no Shirayuki ( <unk> , literally " <unk> white snow " ) , is also revealed as a completely white blade , earning it the recognition as the most beautiful zanpakutō in Soul Society . Sode no Shirayuki utilizes ice to attack , each of its abilities being labeled as " dances " by Rukia . During the anime 's 13th season , Sode no Shirayuki manifests in a <unk> @-@ like form , voiced by Mie Sonozaki . 
 Unwilling to give up Orihime to Aizen , Rukia goes to Hueco Mundo with Ichigo to rescue her . While there , Rukia encounters the Espada , <unk> <unk> , who is revealed to have possession of Kaien 's body . Saddened that she had not saved her mentor from the control of a hollow as she had previously thought , Rukia manages to kill <unk> . Rukia is badly injured during the battle , and it is not until Soul Society sends reinforcements to Hueco Mundo that she is revived and her wounds are healed . She later assists Ichigo in his rescue to save Orihime from the Espada Ulquiorra <unk> by engaging the remaining Arrancars until requiring support . Following Aizen 's defeat and the loss of Ichigo 's Soul Reaper powers , Rukia and Ichigo bid one another farewell as Ichigo loses the ability to sense Rukia 's presence . 
 Seventeen months later , Rukia , now lieutenant of Squad 13 , returns to aid in restoring Ichigo 's Soul Reaper powers before engaging the Fullbringer <unk> <unk> . When the Soul Society is abruptly invaded by the Wandenreich , an organization made up of Quincy who has survived their genocide one thousand years before , Rukia senses Byakuya being left near dead by <unk> <unk> and is knocked out before she can come to her brother 's aid . Rukia is taken to the Royal Dimension so she could be healed , and is then taught by <unk> <unk> to achieve her bankai , Hakka no <unk> ( <unk> , literally " Censure of the white haze " ) . Returning to the Soul Society when the Wandenreich resume their attack , Rukia utilizes her newly acquired bankai to finally kill <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Rukia has made several appearances outside of the Bleach anime and manga . She appears in all of the featured films in the series : she fights the Dark Ones with other Soul Reaper comrades in Bleach : Memories of Nobody and aids in the search for Tōshirō Hitsugaya in Bleach : The DiamondDust Rebellion . Rukia is also given the main focus role in the third movie , Bleach : Fade to Black where she is kidnapped and mind @-@ wiped by two mysterious rogues , and later transformed into ' Dark Rukia ' . In the fourth movie , Bleach : Hell Verse , Rukia helps Ichigo in rescuing his sister <unk> from the depths of Hell . She is also present in both of the original video animations produced in the series , helping Ichigo in Memories in the Rain and combating the rogue Soul Reaper Baishin in The Sealed Sword Frenzy . In Rock Musical Bleach , a musical based on the Bleach series , she is played by Miki Satō . In the Bleach video games , Rukia is a playable character in every game , including the Heat the Soul and Blade Battlers series . In some games , her human form and Soul Reaper state are available as separate characters , while Dark Rukia is playable in Heat the Soul 6 and Heat the Soul 7 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rukia has ranked highly in the Weekly Shōnen Jump popularity polls for the series , placing in the top five most popular characters in all four polls . She was ranked as the second most popular character after Ichigo in the first two polls , and fell to third place in the third poll , being replaced by Tōshirō Hitsugaya . In early 2008 , she was voted the second most popular character in Bleach , receiving 383 votes less than the front runner , Tōshirō Hitsugaya . Her zanpakutō , Sode no Shirayuki , ranked 2nd in the zanpakutō popularity poll of the series . In 2009 , Rukia ranked 4th in a survey of the Japanese music distributor Recochoku titled " The Character I Want to Be My Bride " . In a 2007 character poll from the Japanese magazine Newtype magazine character polls , Rukia has been featured as one of the most popular female characters from any anime . She has also appeared twice in the Anime Grand Prix polls , ranking as one of the most popular female anime characters . NTT customers voted her as their eighth favorite black haired female anime character . 
 Merchandise based on Rukia 's appearance has been released , including a key chain , a plush doll , and a figurine . Fumiko <unk> , Rukia 's Japanese voice actor , liked how Rukia was developed while fighting against the arrancar , noting her to be a hero during her introductions . However , she was saddened by how after Rukia defeats the first arrancar , ( Di Roy Rinker ) she is instantly stabbed by the arrancar <unk> . Michelle Ruff , Rukia 's English voice actress , found Rukia to be a " survivor " , due to how lonely she initially was and how she has been developed through the anime series as she had to start trusting people . She also liked how cool Rukia is when she is fighting but noted it challenging how to voice Rukia due to her various attitudes . Ruff was the winner in the category " Best Voice Actress ( English ) " from the 2009 <unk> Industry Awards for her work as Rukia . Rukia also won in the category " Best Female Character " based on her appearances on Bleach : Memories of Nobody . 
 Several publications for manga , anime , video games , and other related media have provided praise and criticism on Rukia 's character . Although Chris Beveridge from Mania Entertainment noted Rukia 's introduction in Bleach was typical in several others series , he praised how she interacted with her schoolmates and Ichigo . Anime News Network 's ( ANN ) Melissa Harper praised the differences between Rukia and stereotypical shōnen heroines , asserting that Rukia 's loss of her powers and subsequent dependence on Ichigo were " a great source of both drama and comedy in the show . " However , the removal of the humor from Rukia 's scenes as a schoolgirl due to the English translation was lamented , although Ruff was extolled for doing an " excellent job . " Carlos Alexandre from <unk> regarded her as " less of a foil to Ichigo and more like the other side of the same coin " . Her actions and words were also commented by <unk> to make Rukia deserve the respect she commands . IGN called the scene where Rukia is forced to leave Ichigo Kurosaki and return to Soul Society as " touchingly beautiful " and celebrated Rukia 's character development during her time in the human world . Her subsequent appearances in Soul Society were criticized by ANN 's Theron Martin due to her lack of activity making them " irritating given how strong a character she was in the series ' early going " . 
 = Broken Home ( Body of Proof ) = 
 " Broken Home " is the ninth and final episode of the first season of the American medical drama Body of Proof . It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on 17 May 2011 . The episode was directed by Nelson McCormick and written by Andrew Dettman . 
 In this episode , Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) stops the funeral of Nikki Parkson ( Mary <unk> ) after seeing irregularities in her death . Nikki 's mother Lillian ( Jill Eikenberry ) , and siblings Sara ( Jo <unk> ) and Bill ( Eric Sheffer Stevens ) , all say that Nikki was suicidal , with evidence at the scene suggesting this , but when Megan and Peter Dunlop ( Nicholas Bishop ) do an autopsy , the evidence suggests otherwise . Meanwhile , Megan finds out from daughter Lacey ( Mary Mouser ) that her ex @-@ husband Todd ( Jeffrey Nordling ) is in a relationship with her boss Kate Murphy ( Jeri Ryan ) . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews , and was watched by 10 @.@ 33 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , on the Sunday night it aired in the United States . Christine Orlando of TV Fanatic was unsure whether the episode was good enough to be the season finale , however she did praise this " solid " episode , saying it had an " intriguing murder , lots of suspects , and an interesting personal twist for Megan " . This episode was nominated at the 21st Annual Environmental Media Awards , however lost out to the CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Fracked " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) and Todd Fleming ( Jeffrey Nordling ) are called to Lacey 's ( Mary Mouser ) school when she is seen looking at photos of a young woman , Nikki Parkson ( Mary <unk> ) who died , after battling a terminal illness . When Megan looks at a photo , she sees irregularities and without permission from Kate Murphy ( Jeri Ryan ) , Megan and Peter Dunlop ( Nicholas Bishop ) stop Nikki being buried , so they can look at her body , much to the horror of Nikki 's mother Lillian ( Jill Eikenberry ) . Although Nikki 's family say that she committed suicide , Megan finds evidence to suggest otherwise ; Nikki 's neck has bruising on the bottom , showing that she was strangled . Nikki was being given pills to help her illness by Lillian , though these made her worse , but this kept Lillian in the social limelight , getting sympathy from friends ; however Lillian did not kill her . Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) , Megan , Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) and Curtis Brumfield ( Windell Middlebrooks ) find out that Nikki 's boyfriend Shane ( Charlie <unk> ) was actually working together with Nikki 's sister Sara ( Jo <unk> ) . It is revealed that Shane and Sara killed Nikki , as in Nikki 's will she was giving all her money to a fake wildlife foundation which Sara had set up . However , Nikki wanted to switch charities , so Sara killed her to stop her from doing this , with Shane helping her to stage it as suicide , so they could both get the money . 
 The two are arrested , and Nikki 's funeral takes place . However , Samantha arrives to arrest Lillian , as Nikki 's brother Billy ( Eric Sheffer Stevens ) found the pills Lillian wasn 't giving Nikki , and Lillian is charged with interfering with her daughter ’ s medical care . Bill assures Megan that Nikki 's money in her will , will be put to a good use and thanks her and the team for investigating . Throughout the investigation Lacey thinks that Megan and Todd are getting back together , as Todd has made many calls to Megan 's work . Lacey is shocked to find out that Todd is not phoning Megan , but Kate , and the two are in a relationship . Megan is angry at Kate , but tells Lacey to respect her , even if she does not like her yet . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Broken Home " was written by Andrew Dettman and directed by Nelson McCormick , this being his third episode he directed , having directed the season premiere " Pilot " and the subsequent episode " Letting Go " . McCormick has directed many television series such as Third Watch , Nip / Tuck , ER and more recently , Criminal Minds . Daniel Licht , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . Actress Jill Eikenberry – best known for her role in L.A. Law – and actor Eric Sheffer Stevens – best known for his role in As the World Turns – both guest starred in this episode , as Lillian and Bill Parkson , respectively . Sheffer Stevens later reprised his role as Bill in season two 's fifth episode " Point of Origin " . Recurring cast members Jeffrey Nordling and Mary Mouser returned in this episode , with this being both Mouser 's and Nordling 's first appearance since seasons one 's seventh episode , " All in the Family " . Regular cast member John Carroll Lynch who plays Detective Bud Morris , did not appear in this episode , although he was credited . 
 " Broken Home " , along with the eight episodes from Body of Proof 's first season , were released on a two @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 20 , 2011 . The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episode 's , a preview of season 2 and a 10 @-@ minute " featurette " on the making of the show , with commentaries from the medical consultants who helped with the script , as well as a " Contaminated Evidence " blooper reel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 17 , 2011 , " Broken Home " was seen by 10 @.@ 33 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 9 share . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode achieved a much higher number of viewers than the previous episode , " Buried Secrets " , and a significant higher number than subsequent episode " Love Thy Neighbor " , which is season two 's premiere . Body of Proof came fifth in the ratings on Tuesday night , being outperformed by the season finales of CBS 's NCIS and of The Good Wife as well as two airings of ABC 's Dancing with the Stars . " Broken Home " was watched by 1 @.@ 75 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 This episode received mixed to positive reviews . Christine Orlando of TV Fanatic said that the plot of the episode had a " nice story arc when the cause of death ranged from disease , to suicide , and finally murder " . She added that Nikki 's family was a " nightmare " . She was surprised that Bill was not involved in killing Nikki , saying that he " came across as a bit of a jerk for most of the episode " , adding that Nikki had a " short , sad life " . Orlando praised the detail of Nikki 's neck , noticing the bruising to show she was strangled . She said , " I generally hate gore yet I found myself fascinated by the autopsy of the girl 's neck . Maybe it was the detail of the muscle and the lack of blood but I 've never seen such a procedure portrayed with that level of specificity " . Orlando carried on saying , " Is there some rule that we can 't have both detectives every week ? Detective Baker 's definitely growing on me but I missed Bud . He and Megan had some great chemistry and I was hoping for more of that by the end of the season " . Orlando understood Megan 's reaction to the fact that Kate was dating Todd , calling it " justified " , saying it was a " odd position to be in " , but summarized ; " she 'll just have to get over it " . Orlando was worried whether Todd deserved Kate saying that ; " the jury is still out on Todd " . She praised how this storyline turned out to be a " great bonding moment " between Megan and Lacey , saying she " liked " that Megan was honest with Lacey adding , " I like it when adults actually act like adults " . 
 This episode was nominated at the 21st Annual Environmental Media Awards , an " organization dedicated to harnessing the power of the entertainment industry and the media to educate the global public on environmental issues and motivate sustainable lifestyles " . Under the category " Television Episodic Drama " , " Broken Home " was nominated alongside the The Good Wife episode " Real Deal " and the winner , the CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Fracked " . 
 = Paul Conrad = 
 Paul Francis Conrad ( June 27 , 1924 – September 4 , 2010 ) was an American political cartoonist and winner of three Pulitzer Prizes for editorial cartooning . In the span of a career lasting five decades , Conrad provided a critical perspective on eleven presidential administrations in the United States . He is best known for his work as the chief editorial cartoonist for the Los Angeles Times during a time when the newspaper was in transition under the direction of publisher Otis Chandler , who recruited Conrad from the Denver Post . 
 At the conservative Times , Conrad brought a more liberal editorial perspective that readers both celebrated and criticized ; he was also respected for his talent and his ability to speak truth to power . On a weekly basis , Conrad addressed the social justice issues of the day — poverty in America , movements for civil rights , the Vietnam War , the Israeli – Palestinian conflict , and corporate and political corruption were leading topics . His criticism of president Richard Nixon during the Watergate scandal landed Conrad on Nixon 's Enemies List , which Conrad regarded as a badge of honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Conrad was born to Robert and Florence Conrad . He was raised in a conservative , Catholic family with his identical twin brother James and older brother Bob in Cedar Rapids , Iowa . He attended St. Augustin Elementary School in Des Moines , where he first began to show interest in art by writing on the bathroom wall . He was left @-@ handed , but was forced by teachers to favor his right hand . Up until the age of 12 , Conrad stuttered . At an early age , Conrad was exposed to the work of Jay Norwood Darling , more popularly known as " Ding Darling " , whose conservative cartoons were featured in local newspapers and who became a " childhood role model " for Conrad . 
 After graduating Roosevelt High School , he and his brother spent time working construction jobs in Valdez , Alaska . Conrad also honed his talent as a musician while playing piano in a bordello . With World War II raging , Conrad and his brother enlisted . Because of his poor eyesight , Conrad was initially found to be unfit for military service , but he later served as a truck driver with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in the Pacific Theater of Operations at Guam and Okinawa , where he was given the nickname of " Con " . He originally planned to attend Iowa State University after the war in 1945 , but instead taught himself to play bass and joined a big band . 
 When the band did not work out , Conrad enrolled at the University of Iowa in 1946 , where he studied art . He first got the idea to become a cartoonist while hanging out at a local bar in Iowa City . At the bar , his friend Charlie Carroll , then the editor for the school 's newspaper , the Daily Iowan , told Conrad that they needed a cartoonist , and he invited Conrad to give it a try . One of his first cartoons for the Daily Iowan depicted Herbert Hoover , the 31st President of the United States . Conrad was soon creating six cartoons a week . Impressed with Conrad 's cartoons , his professors sent the Denver Post copies of his work . 
 = = Denver Post = = 
 After graduating from the University of Iowa with a degree in art in 1950 , Conrad joined the Denver Post , where he drew cartoons for the next 14 years . Early in his career , Conrad sought out the then retired Ding Darling in Florida for advice , and showed him copies of his work from the Daily Iowan . Unimpressed , Ding told Conrad to " get into another line of work " . This discouragement from his childhood role model pushed Conrad to work harder at the Post . At the newspaper he received support and encouragement from his editor , Palmer Hoyt , although he occasionally ran into trouble , especially when he attracted attention for creating critical , unflattering cartoons of Dwight D. Eisenhower , the 34th President of the United States . In 1960 , Time magazine recognized Conrad 's talent , saying that he was " probably the nation 's hottest new cartooning property " . Conrad received the Pulitzer Prize for editorial cartooning in 1964 . His cartoons for the Post were distributed through the Register and Tribune Syndicate in 81 newspapers . 
 Previously , in December 1963 , lead cartoonist Bruce Russell of the Los Angeles Times died of a heart attack . Russell had worked for the conservative paper since 1927 . Publisher Otis Chandler , in an attempt to replace Russell and to improve the reputation of the Times , recruited Paul Conrad with the help of editor Nick Boddie Williams . Conrad took the offer of an initial three @-@ year contract and was later replaced at the Post in August 1964 by Australian cartoonist Pat Oliphant from the Adelaide Advertiser . Conrad also lectured at the Denver Art Museum in 1964 under a sponsorship from the Cooke @-@ Daniels Lecture Fund . 
 = = Los Angeles Times = = 
 Conrad moved his family to southern California , and for three decades , from 1964 to 1993 , he worked as the chief editorial cartoonist for the Los Angeles Times . His cartoons were now syndicated to hundreds of newspapers worldwide . In April 1967 , Conrad drew the cover for Time magazine in an issue about the potential candidates for the 1968 United States presidential election . The cover art depicts the upcoming election as a horse race with the candidates as jockey 's weighing @-@ in . <unk> of Lyndon B. Johnson , Bobby Kennedy , Hubert Humphrey , Richard Nixon , Ronald Reagan , George Romney , Nelson Rockefeller , and Charles Percy grace the cover . 
 During the Watergate scandal , Conrad drew numerous cartoons about Richard Nixon 's downfall . One cartoon showed Nixon , during his last days as president , nailing himself to a cross . Conrad later described the cartoon as one of his all @-@ time favorites . In 1973 , the Associated Press contacted Conrad to inform him that he had been added to Nixon 's Enemies List . Unperturbed , Conrad considered his place on this list as a badge of honor , but members of the list were exposed to greater scrutiny by the government and subject to investigation . His tax returns were subsequently audited by the IRS several times , but no changes were made . 
 Conrad accepted an early retirement from the Times on April 1 , 1993 , but continued to draw four cartoons a week in syndication for the Los Angeles Times Syndicate . Editorial cartoonist Michael Ramirez replaced Conrad at the Times with a conservative approach . 
 = = Sculptures = = 
 Conrad first became interested in sculpture in the mid @-@ 1970s . After working on a drawing of a crucifix depicting the Christian doctrine of the Trinity , he decided to use steel to create it . He spent time at the public library learning to make welded sculpture and three months later emerged with a 272 @-@ kilogram ( 600 lb ) sculpture titled The Trinity , which was installed at Marymount College . Although it was made from steel , Conrad gave The Trinity a verde patina to give it the appearance of copper . The sculpture was restored in 2012 . 
 After working with large sculpture , Conrad began creating small bronze sculptures of famous Americans , beginning with Richard Nixon . Additional sculptures followed , including caricatures of Jerry Brown , Ronald Reagan , Jimmy Carter , Gerald Ford , John F. Kennedy , Ted Kennedy , and Martin Luther King Jr . Six of these sculptures were featured in an exhibition at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art in 1979 . In the 1980s , Conrad often donated smaller bronze sculptures for fundraisers . Later sculptures included Golda Meir , Abraham Lincoln , Bill Clinton , and George W. Bush . Writer Grady Miller of the Canyon News , who met and visited with Conrad at his home in the late 1990s , recalled that Conrad " was specially proud of his bronze sculptures , which could be taken as a illustration of both his artistic range and his political beliefs " . 
 Conrad also created several other works of public art : Risen Christ , an altar piece located at Saint John Fisher Catholic Church in Rancho Palos Verdes , California ; Otis Chandler , a bust of the publisher installed in the Los Angeles Times building ; and Chain Reaction , a peace monument in the shape of a mushroom cloud located in the Santa Monica Civic Center . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Conrad earned the Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning three times , once for his work at the Denver Post in 1964 , and twice more for his work at the Los Angeles Times , in 1971 and 1984 . The Society of Professional Journalists / Sigma Delta Chi ( <unk> ) honored him seven times with the Distinguished Service Awards for Editorial Cartooning , in 1962 , 1968 , 1970 , 1980 , 1981 , 1987 , and 1996 . Conrad also won two Overseas Press Club awards ( 1981 and 1970 ) and received the Robert F. Kennedy Journalism Award four times , in 1985 , 1990 , 1992 , and 1993 . He received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Association of American Editorial Cartoonists in 1998 , and the Lifetime Public Service Award from the Edmund G. " Pat " Brown Institute of Public Affairs at California State University , Los Angeles in 2000 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 As an editorial cartoonist who openly editorialized from a liberal point of view on the issues of the day , Conrad was involved in many publicized political and religious disputes over his cartoons . In one dispute , he angered conservatives when he compared them to white supremacist Buford Furrow in a cartoon . Conrad 's cartoons often made fun of the governorship of Ronald Reagan , leading his wife , Nancy Reagan , to phone publisher Otis Chandler and complain about how the cartoons were ruining her husband 's breakfast . The calls were so frequent , Chandler had no choice but to stop taking them . In another dispute , members of the Jewish community of Los Angeles took issue with Conrad 's portrayal of the Israeli – Palestinian conflict . 
 In the late 1970s , Pope Paul VI expressed his opinion against the ordination of women , saying that priests must represent the image of Christ . This led Conrad to draw a cartoon of the pope holding a baby who resembled a miniature version of the pope in his image . Cardinal Timothy Manning complained to Conrad , but Conrad defended his work , arguing that what the " human soul " has in common is far more important that its appearance in the form of a man or woman . Conrad also criticized the Catholic church for not letting priests marry and for treating their nuns poorly . " This is the type of church Christ had in mind ? " he asked the National Catholic Reporter in 2001 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Conrad was an imposing man with a powerful voice who was often seen smoking a pipe while working on his cartoons . James Rainey of the Los Angeles Times described Conrad as a " towering , practically invulnerable figure " standing at " 6 feet 2 , [ with ] his large head framed by thick , black @-@ rimmed glasses " , his demeanor " loud and often profane in person " . The Library of Congress described him as " a tall <unk> with long hair swept straight back from his forehead [ who ] displayed a trait that he said he often wished for in his subjects : the ability to laugh at oneself " . 
 Conrad married Kay King , the Post 's society editor , in 1953 . As his wife , Kay became one of only two people ( along with his editor at the Times , Edwin O. Guthman ) who could influence his work . 
 Although he was raised as a Republican and a Catholic , his views changed as he aged . By 1960 , the media was comparing his point of view to an " Adlai Stevenson Democrat " . Conrad voted for only one Republican in his life , Dwight D. Eisenhower , but said he later regretted it . He remained a devout Catholic and his belief in social justice informed his work . According to Matt <unk> of The Washington Post , " Conrad considered himself an unabashed political liberal , except for his long @-@ held opposition to abortion . He changed his views in the 1980s , when he came to believe that it was a matter of private choice . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Conrad died at home in Rancho Palos Verdes at the age of 86 . His funeral was held at Saint John Fisher Catholic Church in Rancho Palos Verdes on September 11 , 2010 , with eulogies delivered by journalist Robert Scheer and editorial cartoonist Tony Auth . Conrad was survived by his wife , Kay King , two sons , two daughters , and one grandchild . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Many publishers and journalists describe Conrad as one of the finest political cartoonists of the 20th century . According to the Associated Press , " Southern California political junkies for decades would start their day either outraged or delighted at a Conrad drawing . " He was one of only several post @-@ war cartoonists to have won a total of three Pulitzers for his work and he was the only cartoonist named on Nixon 's Enemies List . From 1977 – 1978 , Conrad held the Richard M. Nixon Chair at Whittier College , Nixon 's alma mater . 
 Conrad 's editorial cartoons later appeared in exhibitions at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism . He authored several books about his work and donated many of his original editorial cartoons to the Prints and Photographs Division of the United States Library of Congress . 
 His influence and legacy as an editorial cartoonist are explored in the documentary film Paul Conrad : Drawing Fire ( 2007 ) . In honor of this legacy , the " Paul Conrad Scholarship " is annually awarded to journalism and mass communication students by the University of Iowa . The Huntington Library , which hosts the Conrad Collection papers , calls his body of work " a powerful record of key issues that have confronted [ the United States ] in the second half of the twentieth century " . 
 = = Public sculptures = = 
 Trinity ( Statue , Marymount California University ) 
 Risen Christ ( Altar piece , St. John Fisher Church , Rancho Palos Verdes , CA ) 
 Otis Chandler ( Bust , Los Angeles Times building ) 
 Chain Reaction , ( Monument , Santa Monica Civic Center ) 
 = = Publications = = 
 When in the Course of Human Events ( 1973 ) 
 The King and Us ( 1974 ) 
 Pro and Conrad ( 1979 ) 
 Drawn and <unk> ( 1985 ) 
 <unk> ( 1993 ) 
 Drawing The Line ( 1999 ) 
 = History of Burnside = 
 The history of Burnside , a local government area in the metropolitan area of Adelaide , South Australia , spans three centuries . Burnside was inhabited by the Kaurna Indigenous people prior to European settlement , living around the creeks of the River Torrens during the winter and in the Adelaide Hills during the summer . The area was first settled in 1839 by Peter Anderson , a Scots migrant , who named it Burnside after his property 's location adjacent to Second Creek ( in Scots , ' Burn ' means creek or stream ) . The village of Burnside was established shortly after , and the District Council of Burnside was gazetted in 1856 , separating itself from the larger East Torrens Council . 
 The mainstays of the early Burnside economy were viticulture , mining and olive groves ; Glen Osmond boasted substantial mineral deposits , and vineyards were established at Magill . The present council chambers were built in 1926 in Tusmore ; the council became a municipality in 1935 . With strong growth and development throughout the region , Burnside was then proclaimed a city in 1943 . The 1960s brought to Burnside a community library and a swimming centre ; both were further expanded and upgraded between 1997 and 2001 . Today , Burnside is one of Adelaide 's most upper @-@ class and sought @-@ after regions in which to live . 
 = = Early villages = = 
 The village of Kensington was established in May 1839 , only 29 months after the foundation of the colony . The village was primarily agricultural and had a close relationship with the nearby village of Norwood . The two villages formed one of Adelaide 's first municipalities in 1853 as Norwood and Kensington , evolving into today 's City of Norwood Payneham St Peters . Parts of Kensington that are now included in Burnside are the suburbs of Kensington Gardens and Kensington Park . The village of Makgill ( later Magill ) was first established as the 524 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 1 km2 ) Makgill Estate , owned by two Scots — Robert Cock and William Ferguson — who met on board the Buffalo en route to the newly founded colony . It was named after Mrs Cock 's trustee , David M Makgill . Ferguson , who was charged with farming the estate , built the estate 's homestead in 1838 . Soon after farming started , the two were short of funds , and thus Magill became the first foothills village to be subdivided . The village of Glen Osmond was closely associated with the discovery of silver and lead on the slopes of Mount Osmond by two Cornish immigrants . Their discovery of minerals provided the colony with valuable export income , at a time when the early South Australian economy was not yet established and facing bankruptcy . Governor Gawler visited the early discovery and the first mine , Wheal Gawler , was named in his honour . South Australia 's first mine exported overseas throughout the 1840s , providing employment to early Cornish and then German immigrants after several mines were bought by a German businessman . The early village assumed a strong Cornish , and later a German character . Mining declined after an exodus of workers when a gold rush began in 1851 in the neighbouring colony of Victoria . 
 The Anderson family was the first to settle the land that was to become the village of Burnside . They brought with them good character testimonials from Scotland , valuable farming experience and 3000 pounds ; however , the farming patterns in Scotland differed greatly from those in the antipodes , and the family failed to adapt . The Andersons moved on to Morphett Vale in 1847 , selling their land and abandoning their homestead . The buyer of the Anderson land , William Randell , soon decided to build a village in his new property in 1849 . He hired surveyor and planner Nathan Hailes to lay out the new village . Hailes was both surprised and disappointed when he found that it had already been settled and left — especially since the growth and adaptation of European foliage to the area . The first villages to be established in the region , those of Glen Osmond , Magill and Kensington had existed for some time when the new village of Burnside was proclaimed . The new village was in a good position to grow ; it was bounded by two major thoroughfares , Burnside ( now Glynburn ) and Greenhill Roads , and had the advantage of lying on Second Creek . The village was soon attracting residents ; some of whom were wealthy Adelaide folk building an estate in the foothills , and others who were more concerned with working the land . The village was described in advertisements by Hailes in 1850 as " Burnside the Beautiful " with advantages of " perpetual running water , extensive and diversified view , rich garden soil and good building stone ... " with a " ... direct , newly @-@ opened and unblemished route to Adelaide " . 
 = = District councils = = 
 Originally , all the villages in what was to become the Burnside District Council were in the then District Council of East Torrens of 159 km2 ( 61 sq mi ) . East Torrens bordered the River Torrens in the north , the Adelaide Hills to the east , Mount Barker Road to the south , and the Adelaide Parklands to the west . East Torrens was gazetted in 1853 by the District Councils Act 1852 ; the Act stipulated that there be five elected members to the council , each representing a ward . Dr David Wark ( St Bernards ) , James Cobbledick ( Uraidla ) , Charles Bonney ( Norwood ) , Daniel Ferguson ( <unk> ) and George Müller ( Stepney ) were the council 's first representatives . Bonney , in addition to being a councillor , was the Commissioner of Crown Lands . The councillors met for the first time at World 's End Hotel in Magill on 12 June 1853 . Initial plans were put in place to first survey and evaluate the council area and to collect licence fees and taxes as provided for by the Councils Act . 
 TB Penfold of Magill , a former captain , was to become the first District Clerk and Collector on 1 January 1854 . On 4 January 1854 there was a vote in which ratepayers decided on how much they would pay to the council ( one shilling to a pound ) ; it was also decided at this point to exempt charitable organisations , schools and churches from rates . In 1855 the population of the council area was 3 @,@ 705 , higher by a thousand than the adjacent Corporate Town of Kensington and Norwood . The huge East Torrens was not to prove as stable as Kensington and Norwood . Ratepayers were frustrated as to where their money was going ; councillors did not have the administration or funds to operate effectively and the interests of the area were hugely varied . The area was split into three on 14 August 1856 . The District Council of Payneham separated and formed to the north @-@ west and the District Council of Burnside was formed in the south @-@ eastern corner in an area of 15 @.@ 9 km2 ( 6 @.@ 1 sq mi ) . East Torrens council was further divided in 1858 with the secession of the District Council of Crafers . 
 = = Lone Burnside = = 
 After shedding the burden of less profitable and unwieldy land with its angry residents , Burnside was on its own . The new Burnside District Council held its first meeting at the Greengate Inn , Tusmore on 19 August 1856 . Due to the time it took to elect new councillors , it was not until 29 December that the council met again . Dr Christopher Penfold , chairman , met the rest of the representatives there : Daniel Ferguson of <unk> , Alexander Ferguson of <unk> , John Townsend of Magill and James Grylls of Belle Vue . It was during this time that Kent Town decided against becoming a part of Burnside and instead applied to enter the Corporate Town of Kensington and Norwood . The council was to meet at the Inn or at Ferguson 's home right up until December 1869 , when the first council chambers were built . However , it was still able to operate and fulfill its obligations under the Local Government Act 1852 . These included the management of minor roads , the administration of abattoir licences and public houses , and the prevention of the spread of the noxious Scotch thistle . The council was also obliged , under a different act of 1851 , to encourage education . Much road and bridgework activity happened after the council had been formed — early residents were amazed at the influx of development and construction that occurred . At the same time , the council was almost overwhelmed by the amount of work requested , and was forced to ask individual ratepayers for monetary assistance when building bridges in their area . 
 Much of Burnside 's history has been observed and documented by institutions that have remained an important part of the lives of its residents : the school and the church . The first school to open in the area was in Magill during 1846 , preceding a proper statewide education system . Magill Primary School was enlarged in November 1855 , when 38 boys and 29 girls enrolled ; they were taught reading , writing , arithmetic , grammar , geography , history , drawing and singing by a sole teacher . By 1865 there were two teachers . Glen Osmond Primary School was established in October 1858 , preceding the Glen Osmond Institute , a centre for community debate and learning . Burnside Primary School was built in 1872 , taking over from a small private institution . These primary schools , in the absence of proper libraries and similar institutions , received large collections of books and writings from the town 's residents . Residents also took advantage of schools for frequent and heated debates on the future of the state and region , and these discussions often drew large crowds . However , even with this intellectual spirit , the adult population was still relatively disadvantaged in the sphere of education . The drive for learning continued until the Boer War placed more emphasis on physical activity and merit within society . Somewhat strangely , this development of learned activity was not replicated in Burnside 's traditional centre near Tusmore , where the present Council Chambers , Community Centre and Library are located . 
 By 1871 Burnside had grown significantly ; it was now a mix of villages supporting a modest population of 1 @,@ 557 . By comparison , Kensington @-@ Norwood , though smaller in area , had grown to 5 @,@ 132 persons . Glen Osmond , still affected by its immense growth following the expansion of mining , was the largest single population centre with 343 residents . The District Council had also constructed its first council chambers in December 1869 , finally concluding the haphazard meeting agreement . Two villages , Beulah Park ( North Kensington ) and Eastwood experienced booms in population growth and development between 1870 and 1880 , providing both housing to new immigrants and investments for the wealthy Adelaide Establishment . Parkside Hospital ( now Glenside ) , a mental health asylum was constructed in 1866 to replace a crowded building in the Parklands . Built on beautifully tended grounds and with an elaborate façade , it was an early Burnside architectural monument . In 1881 Thomas Cooper started brewing South Australia 's first branded beer , ' Coopers ' , at <unk> . During this era , <unk> saw economic expansion as well ; its large quarry changed hands in 1867 and the <unk> Olive Co was founded in 1873 . The late 19th century was a significant time of development in Burnside . This development , however , was brought to an abrupt end in the last decade , the 1890s , when depression stuck the economies of Australasia after decades of reckless expansion , hitting Burnside hard . 
 = = New era = = 
 By the turn of the 20th century , Burnside was becoming more urbanised . Paddocks were still scattered throughout the area but the villages were steadily growing . Toorak Gardens , Dulwich and other near @-@ city villages were gazetted and made open to settlements and advertised now as suburbs , moving on from earlier times . By 1920 , the District Council had a population of 17 @,@ 000 , living in 4 @,@ 000 houses . Ten per cent of the £ 60 @,@ 000 budget consisted of commercial enterprise payments , while the rest was made up of ratepayer fees . The South Australian Government had enacted more laws in relation to local government , in particular , the Town Planning Act 1920 and the Building Act 1923 . These assigned more responsibility to councils , but at a time of necessity ; Adelaide was gradually expanding . Burnside councillors advised the State Government to acquire and manage pleasure resorts ; a kiosk was opened at Waterfall Gully and the Morialta Conservation Park established on this advice . Burnside was treated with high regard by Adelaide newspapers in response to its elaborate greening and tree planting schemes . " Beautiful Burnside : Picturesque Streets " was the headline of The Chronicle on 24 March 1928 . The council was preserving old trees and planting approximately 500 a year . A Burnside councillor , HES Melbourne , was adored in this period ; he spent his own money acquiring reserves and land for residents due to a lack of funds during the Great Depression . He presided over lean but reasonable budgets and oversaw the planting of trees and foliage to beautify the city . Gordon Allen , a local resident who succeeded Melbourne as a councillor , described Melbourne : " No Council ever had a better man . " Melbourne also oversaw the building of the Mount Osmond golf course , but his vision of constructing a Country Club was never realised . 
 Development restrictions preceding the Hills Face Zone were established in the 1920s ; the council was obligated to adhere to strict guidelines . 1928 saw the building of grand new Council Chambers at the corner of Greenhill and Portrush Roads ; they are still in use today . Floods devastated Waterfall Gully in 1931 . Burnside continued to grow ; in 1935 the District Council of Burnside became the Municipality of Burnside . By 1941 , only 401 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 km2 ) remained under cultivation . In 1945 , much of the area that forms today 's Cleland Conservation Park was purchased by the State Government , in large part because of the lobbying efforts of Professor Sir John Cleland . Most of this land , including the Waterfall Gully area , was later combined in 1963 to create the park that extends eastwards up into the hills to the summit of Mount Lofty and northwards to Greenhill Road . During 1943 , the Municipality of Burnside was proclaimed the City of Burnside . 
 Many of Burnside 's sons fought in World Wars I and II ; on their return they were honoured with memorials , and in particular , the name of Burnside 's first community hospital . The Burnside War Memorial Hospital was opened in April 1949 in Toorak Gardens , built in a house donated by a local resident , Otto van Reiben . The present name was adopted in 1956 . Memorials to the fallen can be found all over Burnside ; in Hazelwood Park opposite the swimming centre , at schools and churches , in reserves . Like much of Australia , Burnside held true to the phrase " Lest We Forget " , which is emblazoned on many of the community @-@ erected memorials . In Rose Park on Alexandra Avenue , there is a large monument and statue of an Australian Imperial Force soldier with its plaque stating : " In Memory of the Fallen : World War II , Korea , Vietnam " . Upon their arrival home the servicemen formed several Returned Services League clubs in the City of Burnside . 
 = = Centennial = = 
