 When Australia celebrated the Golden Jubilee of the Federation of Australia in 1951 , Burnside residents joined in the celebrations , and in 1956 commemorated the centennial of their own town . A post @-@ war economic and baby boom under the Playford Government saw Burnside grow at a spectacular rate ; from a population of 27 @,@ 942 in 1947 , it grew to 38 @,@ 768 in 1961 . As suburbs devoured the remaining paddocks , 1953 saw the building of a public ballroom , 1965 saw an Olympic Grandstand ; both in Kensington Park . In 1963 the Cleland Conservation Park was founded on Burnside 's eastern borders . 
 Burnside 's road system was completely <unk> during the 1960s and 1970s through government @-@ sponsored roadworks programmes . Plans were also laid out to replace the winding and dangerous Mount Barker Road . One of these proposals was the Burnside @-@ Crafers Highway , which was strongly supported by council ; it envisaged leaving Greenhill Road once reaching Hazelwood Park . It was then to pass through Hazelwood Park and Beaumont , wind around the hills of Waterfall Gully and then go over Eagle on the Hill to meet Crafers . The Burnside Council put much effort into this proposal , widening Linden Avenue ( which runs north @-@ west to south @-@ east ) in preparation for the highway . The proposal was eventually rejected in favour of upgrading Mount Barker Road and Linden Avenue remained a huge out @-@ of @-@ place road running through an otherwise peaceful suburb . 
 Burnside gained a public library with a collection of 7 @,@ 800 books in 1961 after it was first suggested in February 1959 ; the cost of establishing a library for the residents was more affordable since the Libraries Act 1955 had been passed . The Burnside Swimming Centre opened in 1966 ; the swimming centre was a pet project of then @-@ Mayor George Bolton , who had a grand vision of what he wanted Hazelwood Park , where the centre was to be located , to become . Bolton met unprecedented public opposition in 1964 when the idea was first unveiled . The substantial elderly population of Burnside ( 15 % ) was wholly opposed to the idea , suggesting the influx of troublemakers and noise was hardly worth the effort . The cost was estimated at £ 75 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 370 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . While architects were resigning over the scale of the proposed development and a number of residents were up in arms , the Adelaide newspapers had a ball ; cartoonists throughout 1964 spent many of their daily cartoons covering the debacle . With the failure of a poll to decide the fate of the idea on 24 March the Sunday Mail published the headline " Burnside Says NO to Swim Pool " . Mayor Bolton was not dismayed by the result ; he pushed ahead with his idea and announced new plans in December . After a strong public campaign and minor changes to the project a poll in February 1965 voted strongly in favour of the idea . The Mayor had won his battle and it was named the George Bolton Swimming Centre in his honour upon opening . 
 The Burnside Council decided on an ambitious goal in 1967 : for every 1 @,@ 000 in population , five hectares of reserves were to be set aside . Setting out to achieve this the council purchased Hazelwood Park from the State Government , the control of Beaumont Common was obtained by a 1973 amendment to the Local Government Act and parts of Mount Osmond were attained from the Highways Department . Before coming into the ownership of the council , Hazelwood Park was destined to be subdivided under a government initiative . When council heard of this , motions were put into place to take ownership and the deed was transferred in 1964 . The council only managed this after discussions were held with Premier Playford himself . 
 = = Modernity = = 
 A community centre was built alongside the council chambers in 1982 , adjoining the library . The entire council complex was upgraded first in 1996 , together with an upgrade of the Burnside Swimming Centre . There is also a modern shopping centre called Burnside Village that attracts people from other areas to visit Burnside . Further upgrades took place in 2001 , resulting in a modern library and community centre for residents . Burnside developed a new council logo in 1993 , utilising the colours of green and purple . Green represents the lush parks and reserves in Burnside , and purple represents the prominent Jacaranda trees . The adjacent suburbs of Skye and <unk> were merged into Burnside in 1999 . Formerly part of the Adelaide Hills Council they had a lengthy association with Burnside dating back to the days of East Torrens . Coopers Brewery moved out of <unk> in 2001 , relocating to Regency Park . The former premises of Coopers was converted into a retirement village . 
 Burnside will have to adapt to deal with an ageing population ; the largest age group in the area is that of the 35 – 49 group , who will soon retire . Already 23 @.@ 7 % of the population is over 60 and more people die every year than are born . Almost all population growth is from inter @-@ Adelaide as well as overseas migration . A portion of the population emigrates to other Australian states and cities . Consistent since the 1960s , there is a huge gap in the 18- to 25 @-@ year @-@ old group which is unlikely to change . 
 = Hollywood Undercover = 
 Hollywood Undercover : Revealing the Sordid Secrets of Tinseltown is a non @-@ fiction book about the culture of Hollywood society , written by investigative journalist and author Ian Halperin . Halperin poses as a gay man trying to become a successful actor in Hollywood , and informs individuals he is from the non @-@ existent " Israeli royal family " . He investigates rumors that the Church of Scientology reportedly claims to have a " cure " for homosexuality through " auditing " , and speaks with a former Scientologist about his experiences . He also explores the casting couch phenomenon , the pornography industry , and the Oscars . Halperin meets with famous actors and celebrities , successfully obtains a talent agent , and a role in the film The Aviator . 
 The book was published in 2007 in the United Kingdom by Mainstream Publishing , and on January 15 , 2008 in the United States . Hollywood Undercover received generally positive reviews in The Herald , New York Daily News , The Saturday Star , and Contactmusic.com ; and a critical review in The Independent . Halperin later released a documentary film on the same topic , His Highness Hollywood , which premiered in New York City in April 2008 . His Highness Hollywood is a companion documentary to the book . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Halperin pretends to be an individual trying to become a successful actor in Los Angeles , and gains access to exclusive celebrity parties . He informs individuals in the entertainment industry that he is a " member of the Israeli royal family " ( which does not exist ) . 
 The book takes a critical look at the Church of Scientology and its influence in Hollywood . Halperin posed as a gay man looking for a " cure " for homosexuality from Scientology in order to expose what he felt were inherent prejudices in the organization . He investigates rumors that Scientology claims to have a cure for homosexuality through a special " auditing " process . Halperin interviews former Scientologist Michael Pattinson , who sued the Church of Scientology claiming fraudulent activities after spending US $ 500 @,@ 000 over 18 years in attempts to cure his homosexuality . 
 Halperin states that he told a Scientology official he wanted to have a successful career in Hollywood but was afraid that if his homosexuality was revealed it would stymie his career . He states that the Scientology official said the organization would " cure him of his sexuality through auditing " . According to Halperin the Scientology organization has arranged " cover " marriages as part of a " cure " for homosexuality , and notes that actor and Scientologist John Travolta married Kelly Preston two days after a male porn star told the National Enquirer of an alleged relationship he had with Travolta . According to Halperin , Anna Nicole Smith had wanted to become a Scientologist , but decided against it after she was informed by a friend of the organization 's stance on homosexuality . 
 Halperin concludes that the Scientology organization is more focused on money than on other issues : " I pretty much found that everything about the church is about making as much money as possible , which doesn 't really make them much different from most other religions . I have to be honest and admit I also met some nice people in the church . It 's just that I have a huge problem with their discriminatory attitude toward gays . " Halperin disputes Andrew Morton 's claim in his book Tom Cruise : An Unauthorized Biography that actor Tom Cruise is second in command of the organization , instead asserting Cruise is actually in the top position of leadership . 
 Halperin also explores the pornography industry , the Oscars , and the travails of the casting couch phenomenon . Links to YouTube videos by Halperin are given throughout the book , to illustrate encounters he had with various entertainment personalities . Halperin meets with famous actors and celebrities including Barbra Streisand , George Clooney and Leonardo DiCaprio , and asks them to share their advice with him about the workings of the entertainment industry . Halperin eventually lands a talent agent , and a role in the film The Aviator . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cheryl <unk> , Rosemary Goring and Anne Johnstone reviewed the book for The Herald , and describe Halperin 's experiences in the book as " certainly entertaining , and at times scandalous " . Ben <unk> of New York Daily News notes Halperin " received the most offensive response imaginable " when he asked a Scientology official who Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard would have voted for in the 2008 United States presidential election ; according to Halperin , he asserted he spoke with a recruiter for Scientology , " He said , ' I can tell you who shouldn 't be President - Barack Obama , Condoleezza Rice and the Rev. Al Sharpton . They should not be allowed to run for office , they should be sweeping the office . ' " A review of the book in The Independent comments that the YouTube links provided throughout the book " have the effect of making virtually everyone who tries to help him seem nice while presenting Halperin as an unscrupulous creep " . 
 In a review in The Saturday Star , Angelique Serrao writes that Halperin " interviews insiders who spill scandalous information that will leave you gasping at the audacity of the movie world " . Adam Adshead of Contactmusic.com writes : " Hollywood undercover is a candid and intelligent look at the fame game from an insider 's point of view . " Marc <unk> reviewed the book for Eye Weekly , and comments : " Cynical reporting about the Hollywood system isn ’ t hard to come by , but Halperin has the audacity to get involved with his subjects , attracting empathy even while claiming that he ’ s a royal scion craving fame that his homeland cannot facilitate . " 
 = Search Committee = 
 " Search Committee " is the hour @-@ long finale of the seventh season of the American television comedy series The Office . It comprises the 151st and 152nd episodes of the series overall and the 25th and 26th episodes of the seventh season . It originally aired on NBC on May 19 , 2011 in the United States . In the episode , Deangelo 's new replacement is sought out through a search committee process led by Jim ( John Krasinski ) . Meanwhile , Angela becomes engaged to her state senator boyfriend , Robert ( Jack Coleman ) , while the rest of the office believes he is gay . 
 The episode was written by show runner and executive producer Paul Lieberstein and was directed by Jeffrey Blitz . The episode featured several guest appearances including one from The Office co @-@ creator Ricky Gervais , his second appearance on the series . The episode also marks the first appearance of James Spader and Catherine Tate , the former of whom was a series regular in the eighth season while the latter had a recurring appearance in the eighth season and was a series regular in the ninth and final season . 
 " Search Committee " received mixed reviews from critics with multiple critics commenting on the multiple guest stars . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Search Committee " was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 29 million viewers and earned a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 10 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , marking a rise in the ratings from the previous episode and the previous season finale . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 With Deangelo Vickers still in a coma , Dunder Mifflin – Sabre Scranton is left with Creed ( Creed Bratton ) as interim regional manager . Jo Bennett ( Kathy Bates ) puts Jim ( John Krasinski ) , Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) and Gabe ( Zach Woods ) into a committee to interview candidates for the manager position , including Andy ( Ed Helms ) , Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) and a number of outsiders , including a personal friend of hers , Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) , who suggests various strange methods for running an office , including a " zen garden " theme and removal of all official titles for Dunder Mifflin Scranton . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) takes it upon herself to protect the office and their clients from Creed 's haphazard and potentially catastrophic managerial style ( he keeps trying to call major clients and tell them the office is about to go out of business ) by distracting him with activities and posing as various clients when Creed has Jordan ( Cody Horn ) contact them . 
 Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , still upset over being demoted by Jo , stops taking care of himself and openly looks through want ads in the office . His attitude changes when he speaks with applicant Robert California ( James Spader ) , who disparages the position and the office . Merv ruins his interview , and Dwight becomes incensed that the position might go to someone who doesn 't take it seriously . He demands to be interviewed , and while Jim balks , after Dwight 's persistent efforts to acquire an interview , Jo instructs Jim to grant him one , as she likes " a little bit of crazy . " Jim had earlier firmly shot down Dwight 's extensive bribe list for Jim 's support , and quickly ends his formal interview . 
 Darryl thinks his popularity with the staff will make him a shoo @-@ in , so he thinks he doesn 't have to do an interview like everyone else . He is caught off @-@ guard when he actually must do an interview and they ask for his resume . Darryl writes up an overly extensive four @-@ page resume , which Jo quickly derides , though Jim encourages Darryl by saying that the interview and resume are mere formalities for him . When Andy interviews for the manager position , Gabe hijacks the meeting in an attempt to sabotage him by asking random trivia questions , which Andy successfully parries , but Gabe ends up screaming at him and acting like a lunatic . Gabe is also dismissive of Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) during her interview , saying she 's not a " real candidate " . Kelly exacts revenge by telling Jo about Gabe 's relationship with Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) and his harassing behavior after their breakup . In response , Jo sends Gabe back to Sabre 's Florida headquarters , and installs Kelly in Gabe 's position on the search committee . Kelly then says she has accepted Dwight 's bribery and looks forward to the benefits of his return to the manager 's chair , as Toby haltingly says they could give Dwight another trial run and Jim looks on in horror . After Phyllis tells Jim that Kelly and Dwight have pre @-@ fired her , Jim tells Dwight he is not and will not be the manager , and the office begins arguing about who will be selected . When the discussion gets out of control , with Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) preferring a homeless man , Andy declaring he wants the job , and Darryl 's daughter Jada asking out loud if Jim is the guy making him manager , Jim cuts it short and brings the committee back to the conference room to make up their minds . 
 Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) and Erin await the results of a DNA test to see if Erin is the daughter previously given up by Phyllis in high school . The results are negative , but Phyllis holds off on telling Erin after Andy rejects Erin 's proposal to start dating again , and continues to show maternal affection toward her . 
 Meanwhile , Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) becomes engaged to her state senator boyfriend , Robert . Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) , who strongly believes that Robert is gay , shares his feelings with Pam . Ryan overhears them and confirms that Robert is gay , in his opinion . When the rest of the office thinks so as well , they must decide whether or not to tell Angela . They eventually decide not to tell Angela for a wide range of reasons — not everyone is sure Robert is gay , Oscar is looking forward to the elegant wedding , and Pam doesn 't think it 's anyone 's right to blurt out that information . Angela is then typically rude about her nuptial plans — first sing @-@ <unk> to an indifferent Stanley that they might not have room to invite him to the wedding , and then asking Pam if she can borrow the plans for the dream wedding Pam never got to have , before mocking the ceremony where Pam and Jim got married at Niagara Falls . Pam is sorely tempted to spill the beans about Robert 's sexuality , but ends up smiling sweetly and wishing Angela " a very happy wedding " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Search Committee " was written by show runner and executive producer Paul Lieberstein , who also plays Toby Flenderson on the show , his 14th writing credit of the series . The episode was directed by Jeffrey Blitz , the ninth episode he has directed for the series . The episode features special guest appearances from Ricky Gervais ( as his character David Brent from the original British version of The Office ) , Catherine Tate , Will Arnett , Ray Romano , James Spader , Jim Carrey , Cody Horn and Warren Buffett . Gervais previously appeared in the episode " The Seminar " , and co @-@ wrote the episodes " Pilot " and " The Convict " ; he also serves as an executive producer for the series . In addition to appearing in " Search Committee " , Gervais contributed to the episode script . Initially the guest stars were planned to be a secret , before all were revealed to the media . Lieberstein described the moments with the guest stars in the episode as " more than a montage . It 's a number of scenes . We fit it in . We stuff it in " . 
 The episode script was initially 75 pages long , 10 pages too long to stay within the episode 's time slot ; this led to several cuts , a common problem for episodes of the series according to writer , B.J. Novak . The script received several laughs from the cast and producers specifically for lines read by Creed Bratton and Kathy Bates . " Search Committee " was one of the first episodes not to feature former Office lead actor Steve Carell ; the feeling during filming was " weird " according to Lieberstein . Carell 's departure made it possible for more scenes with secondary characters , and also allowed for the " very long group scene " , described as " observational and conversational " by Novak . The episode features a storyline hinted in " Goodbye , Michael " in which it is hinted that Phyllis is Erin 's birth mother . The rumor was started during an interview with executive producer Greg Daniels with Entertainment Weekly in which he stated " A tiny mystery story – which I 'm not sure anyone ’ s going to catch and will come out a few episodes from now – is being set up here " . 
 The episode also marks the third and final appearance of Cody Horn as Jordan Garfield , Deangelo 's executive assistant , and the first of three new roles since Carell 's departure . The role was originally said to be recurring at first with a chance of her becoming a series regular in the eighth season . She eventually did not return for the eighth season . Immediately after " Search Committee " first aired , NBC posted Andy , Dwight and Darryl 's resume on their official website and allowed fans to vote for who they believed should be the manager . Spader would later join the cast as CEO of Sabre in the eighth season while Tate is currently set to return in the second half of the eighth season as romantic interest for Robert California . In the eighth season premiere , " The List " , Andy was revealed to be the new manager . Arnett was considered a high possibility to appear on the series , but could not due to his commitment to the NBC comedy series Up All Night . This also marks the eighth and final appearance of Kathy Bates as Jo Bennett , of whom later episodes in the eighth season would refer to Jo later stepping down from her position as Sabre CEO and hiring Robert California to replace her , and later dissolving the company entirely as chairman . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Darryl calls Microsoft and asks whether they still have <unk> , an unpopular feature from Microsoft Office . Phyllis mentions that many babies were born in 1982 due to the release of the comedy film Porky 's . Ryan insults Pam , saying that she would prefer Rachael Ray or the hosts of The View as the new manager . At one point in the episode , Angela says " It 's a little flashy . I mean , what am I , Naomi Judd ? " , a reference to the country music singer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 19 , 2011 , " Search Committee " was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 29 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager , and a rise from the sixth season finale , " Whistleblower " . The episode became the highest rated scripted program on Thursday and ranked first in its timeslot , beating the season finales for Grey 's Anatomy , Bones and The Mentalist . " Search Committee " was the seventh most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews from critics . Myles McNutt from review website A.V. Club gave the episode a B- , saying that it was " a funny episode that managed to be only fitfully satisfying . " IGN reviewer Cindy White commented that " it 's more apparent than ever that ' Goodbye , Michael ' should have ended the season , if not the series , " and that " the show is just spinning its wheels now " . Despite this , she praised the scenes featuring Creed Bratton and James Spader , believing Bratton 's performance consisted of " the funniest scenes of the episode " , and that Spader " was given the meatiest part , gamely channeling his dominating boss role from Secretary " . White ultimately gave the episode a 6 @.@ 5 / 10 , calling it " Okay " . TV Squad writer Joel Keller criticized the episode for not featuring a true plot , writing that " this felt like a series of sketches in search of a plot . " The Office co @-@ creator Ricky Gervais also commented on the outlandishness , particularly Warren Buffett 's appearance , saying " If you 're going to jump a shark , jump a big one . " He also compared the episode to the Chris Martin episode of Gervais 's other series , Extras . The shark quote was repeated multiple times on other media outlets ; Gervais eventually commented that " I fucking didn 't [ diss The Office ] , that 's for sure . " 
 Alan Sepinwall of HitFix referred to the episode as a " bumpy , awkward , great big mess of a finale " and a " very poorly @-@ executed sweeps stunt " . He also wrote that the guest stars " did not fit comfortably into the world of the show " . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis called the episode a " major cop out " and criticized the writers for having a whole year to figure out how to end the season , but instead waiting to announce the new manager in the fall . She ultimately concluded that " I don 't love some of the choices the show has made recently " and that " the show has just been spinning its wheels for the past several weeks " . Many critics expressed relief that Erin and Phyllis were not mother and daughter . " Search Committee " was voted the fourth lowest @-@ rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 6 @.@ 93 out of 10 . In another poll , " Search Committee " was voted the thirteenth @-@ highest rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season , according to a " Survivor " poll by OfficeTally . Jim Carrey later received a nomination for " Favorite TV Guest Star " at the 38th People 's Choice Awards . 
 = Charles Domery = 
 Charles Domery ( c . 1778 – after 1800 ) , later also known as Charles <unk> , was a Polish soldier serving in the Prussian and French armies , noted for his unusually large appetite . Serving in the Prussian Army against France during the War of the First Coalition , he found that the rations of the Prussians were insufficient and deserted to the French Army in return for food . Although generally healthy , he was voraciously hungry during his time in the French service , and ate any available food . While stationed near Paris , he was recorded as having eaten 174 cats in a year , and although he disliked vegetables , he would eat 4 to 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 3 kg ) of grass each day if he could not find other food . During service on the French ship Hoche , he attempted to eat the severed leg of a crew member hit by cannon fire , before other members of the crew wrestled it from him . 
 In February 1799 , the Hoche was captured by British forces and the crew , including Domery , were interned in Liverpool . Domery shocked his captors with his voracious appetite , and despite being put on ten times the rations of other inmates remained ravenous , eating the prison cat , at least 20 rats which had come into his cell , and regularly eating the prison candles . Domery 's case was brought to the attention of The Commissioners for taking Care of Sick and Wounded Seamen and for the Care and Treatment of Prisoners of War , who performed an experiment to test his eating capacity . Over the course of a day , Domery was fed a total of 16 pounds ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) of raw cow 's udder , raw beef and tallow candles and four bottles of porter , all of which he ate and drank without defecating , urinating , or vomiting at any point . 
 Almost everything known about Domery comes from a 1799 account in the Medical and Physical Journal , written by Dr. J. Johnston , based largely upon information provided by Dr. Thomas Cochrane . 
 = = Appearance and behaviour = = 
 Charles Domery ( later also known as Charles <unk> ) was born in <unk> , Poland , in around 1778 . From the age of 13 , Domery had an unusually large appetite . He was one of nine brothers , all of whom Domery said suffered from the same condition . Domery recalled that his father was a hearty eater and generally ate his meat half @-@ boiled , but was too young to recall the quantity . The only illness Domery was aware of in the family was an outbreak of smallpox in his youth , which was survived by all the family . 
 Despite his unusual diet and behaviour in the presence of food , doctors described Domery as of a normal build , and tall for the period at 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) . He had long , brown hair and grey eyes , was smooth @-@ skinned , and was described as having a " pleasant countenance " . Doctors observing Domery saw no signs of mental illness and although illiterate , he was considered of normal intelligence by his crewmates and by the prison doctors who studied him . Despite eating vast amounts of food , it was noted by the doctors studying him that he never vomited , other than when fed large amounts of roasted or boiled meat . He showed no outward signs of ill health , and doctors observing him noted that his eyes were lively and his tongue clean . His pulse was regular at around 84 BPM , and his body temperature normal . His muscles were normally formed , but observed by doctors to be weaker than usual , although during his time in the army he had marched 14 French leagues ( approximately 25 mi / 42 km ) in a day with no ill effects . 
 It was observed that immediately after going to bed , generally at about 8 : 00 pm , Domery would begin to sweat profusely . After one to two hours lying awake and perspiring , he would fall asleep before waking at around 1 : 00 am extremely hungry , regardless of what he had eaten before going to bed . At this time , he would eat any available food , or if no food was available would smoke tobacco . At around 2 : 00 am he would go back to sleep , and wake again at between 5 : 00 and 6 : 00 am , sweating heavily ; as soon as he got out of bed , the sweating would cease , starting again whenever he ate . 
 = = Military service = = 
 By the age of 13 , Domery had enlisted in the Prussian Army , and became part of an army besieging Thionville during the War of the First Coalition . The Prussian Army was suffering from food shortages which Domery found intolerable ; he entered the town and surrendered to the French commander who rewarded him with a large melon , which Domery immediately ate , including the rind . He was then given a wide variety of other foodstuffs by the French general , all of which he ate straight away . 
 Domery then enlisted with the French Revolutionary Army , and shocked his new comrades with his unusual eating habits and voracious appetite . Granted double rations , and using his pay to buy additional food whenever possible , he nonetheless suffered from extreme hunger ; while based in an army camp near Paris , Domery ate 174 cats in a single year , leaving only the skins and bones , and ate 4 to 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 3 kg ) of grass each day if other food was unavailable . 
 He preferred raw meat to cooked ; while his favourite dish was a raw bullock 's liver , he would eat any available meat . While in service on board the French ship Hoche , a sailor 's leg was shot off by cannon fire , and Domery grabbed the severed limb and began to eat it until a crew member wrestled it from him and threw it into the sea . 
 = = Capture = = 
 In October 1798 a Royal Navy squadron under the command of Sir John Borlase Warren captured the Hoche off the coast of Ireland , and those on board , including Domery , were interned in a prison camp near Liverpool . The British guards were shocked by Domery 's appetite , and agreed to place him on double rations . These were insufficient , and his rations were increased until eventually he was granted the rations of ten men each day . Rations for prisoners of war in this period were paid for by the country in whose army the prisoners had served . The standard daily ration for a French prisoner of war was 26 ounces ( 740 g ) of bread , half a pound ( 230 g ) of vegetables and 2 ounces ( 57 g ) of butter or 6 ounces ( 170 g ) of cheese . 
 Domery remained hungry , and was recorded as having eaten the prison cat and at least 20 rats which had strayed into his cell . Domery also ate the medicines of those prisoners in the camp 's infirmary who refused to take them , suffering no apparent adverse effects as a result . It was also recorded that he would regularly eat the prison 's candles , and that if his ration of beer was exhausted , he would resort to drinking water to wash down his food . ( In this period , with poor sanitation standards and infrastructure damaged through war , the risk of water @-@ borne disease meant drinking water was strongly discouraged in European armed forces . Rations of mildly alcoholic beverages such as small beer and diluted rum were issued to troops , along with drinks such as tea and coffee which involved boiling water before drinking . ) 
 = = Experimental subject = = 
 The prison commander brought his unusual captive to the attention of The Commissioners for taking Care of Sick and Wounded Seamen and for the Care and Treatment of Prisoners of War , the body then responsible for all medical services in the Royal Navy and for overseeing the welfare of prisoners of war . Dr J. Johnston , a member of the Commission , and Dr Cochrane , Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh , performed an experiment to test Domery 's eating capacity and tolerance for unusual foods . At 4 : 00 am , Domery was awakened and fed 4 lbs ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) of raw cow 's udder , which was eaten without hesitation . At 9 : 30 am he was given a meal of 5 lbs ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) of raw beef , twelve large tallow candles totalling one pound ( 453 g ) , and a bottle of porter , all of which were consumed . At 1 : 00 pm Domery was given another meal of a further 5 lbs of beef , a pound ( 453 g ) of candles , and three large bottles of porter , all of which were also eaten and drunk . During the course of the experiment he did not defecate , urinate or vomit at any point , his pulse remained regular and his skin did not change temperature . Upon Domery 's return to his quarters at 6 : 15 pm following the conclusion of the experiment , he was recorded as being of " particularly good cheer " , and danced , smoked his pipe and drank a further bottle of porter . 
 The cause of Domery 's appetite is not known . While there are other documented cases of similar behaviour from this period none of the subjects other than Domery 's contemporary Tarrare were autopsied , and there have been no modern documented cases of polyphagia ( excessive appetite ) as extreme as Domery . Hyperthyroidism can induce an extreme appetite and rapid weight loss , while Bondeson ( 2006 ) speculates that Domery possibly suffered from a damaged amygdala or ventromedial nucleus ; it is known that injuries to the amygdala or ventromedial nucleus in animals can induce polyphagia . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 It is not recorded what became of Domery , or of the other Hoche captives , following their internment , and it is not known if he returned to France or Poland or remained in Liverpool . The case of Charles Domery briefly returned to public notice in 1852 when it came to the attention of Charles Dickens , who wrote of Domery that " Now , it is my opinion , that a man like this , dining in public on the stage of Drury Lane , would draw much better than a mere tragedian , who chews unsubstantial words instead of wholesome beef " . 
 = Darren Osborne = 
 Darren Osborne is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks . He was introduced by executive producer Phil Redmond as part of the Osborne family , and played by Adam Booth , made his first on @-@ screen appearance on 18 November 1996 . Booth left the role in 1997 , but the character was recast in 1999 with current portrayer Ashley Taylor Dawson . Dawson decided to leave Hollyoaks in 2000 to concentrate on his band , <unk> * , but returned in 2003 and has since remained in the role . 
 Darren was initially characterised as a " bad boy " who has matured throughout his tenure . One of Darren 's more notable storylines included his battle with a gambling addiction which led him to lose his share in The Dog in the Pond , be disowned by his father and have his family reject him . Darren later helped his father , Jack ( Jimmy McKenna ) , to fake his own death as part of a scam , which drew comparisons to the John Darwin disappearance case . Other storylines have included a relationship with Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) , a " shotgun " marriage to Hannah Ashworth ( Emma Rigby ) and a brief affair with his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Suzanne Ashworth ( Suzanne Hall ) . More recently Darren 's storylines have seen him form a relationship with Nancy Hayton ( Jessica Fox ) that " came out of nowhere " but was kept long term as the pairing was popular with the serial 's audience . Pressure was then put on Darren and Nancy 's relationship when Suzanne returned pregnant with Darren 's twins , leading to Darren and Nancy splitting up when he became a father . The pair soon after reunited and married in early 2012 after Darren planned a surprise wedding for Nancy , discover his real mother and half @-@ brothers is , and found out that Celia Osborne ( Carol Noakes ) was not his real mother , but Sandy Roscoe ( Gillian Taylforth ) . 
 Dawson has received numerous awards and nominations for his portrayal of Darren . Dawson has been praised by both the British press and his colleagues for his portrayal . The character has been both praised and criticised by the British press , for his " bad boy " status , his relationships , his storylines centring on his money troubles , his fashion sense and his growth as a long @-@ term character . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Darren Osborne was born as the result of an affair between Sandy Roscoe and Jack Osborne . Sandy , married to Alan Roscoe at the time , was forced into giving Darren up by her husband , so she could save her marriage . 
 = = = 1996 – 2000 = = = 
 Darren arrives in Hollyoaks with parents Celia ( Carol Noakes ) and Jack from America . Celia discovers that Jack has been having an affair with Dawn Cunningham ( Lisa Williamson ) and returns to America , taking Darren with her . Darren returns to live with his father two years later . Darren becomes friends with Luke ; together they stand up to bully Mark . When Mark 's bullying of Luke becomes more severe , Darren decides to befriend Mark in the hope he will go easy on Luke . His attempts do not succeed and Mark rapes Luke . After the attack , Luke 's relationship with Mandy begins to fail , so Darren takes advantage of the situation and begins a relationship with Mandy . Darren suggests that Luke might be gay and that he was responsible for his own rape . Mandy breaks up with Darren . Darren trashes his sister Ruth 's ( Terri Dwyer ) flat and is evicted ; he leaves the village soon afterwards . 
 = = = 2003 – = = = 
 Shortly after Darren returns to Hollyoaks village from America three years later , Darren begins a skimming scam which is found out by his boss Scott who refuses to give him time off work . In retaliation he plants incriminating evidence on Scott 's computer before calling the police . Scott sets fire to The Loft with Darren inside , but Scott becomes trapped and Darren leaves him for dead . Darren is told no trace of Scott has been found , but Scott is alive and sends threatening postcards to Darren . Scott attacks Darren , who pleads with Scott not to kill him , but the police arrive shortly after . 
 Debbie and Darren have a brief relationship , but it ends when her boyfriend Dan Hunter ( Andrew McNair ) returns from prison . He later begins a relationship with Steph , but ends it when she has an epileptic seizure , and he begins dating Zoe . Darren begins gambling , and becomes addicted . The relationship ends when Darren has sex with Zoe 's best friend Jessica after he and Zoe fight over his gambling addiction . Darren steals Frankie Osborne 's ( Helen Pearson ) jewellery to settle a debt with a loan shark , and blames Newt ( Nico Mirallegro ) , who is sent back to care . Jack , unaware of Darren 's addiction , gives him half The Dog in recognition of how much he has matured . Darren begins counselling for his gambling addiction , but later plays poker with Warren and loses his half of The Dog to him . Jack and Frankie discover that Darren has stolen Frankie 's jewellery and lost his half of The Dog . Jack then has a heart attack which Darren blames himself for . 
 Warren offers to sell his share of The Dog back if Darren came pay him ₤ 100 @,@ 000 within 48 hours . Darren and Jessica steal ₤ 3000 from <unk> which they take to they casino . Darren wins £ 200 @,@ 000 which Jessica steals before leaving . When Warren causes Jack trouble , Jack blames Darren and later disowns him . Jack , Frankie , Newt and Louise Summers ( Roxanne McKee ) are held hostage at The Dog . Darren tries to help them , but is shot in a confrontation with their captor . Darren is taken to hospital where he recovers . Warren later gives Jack his share of the Dog . Warren bribes Darren with £ 100 @,@ 000 to help frame Jake for the murder of Sean Kennedy ( Matthew Jay Lewis ) . Darren takes the money to the casino , where he loses all of it overnight . To solve the families ' financial problems Darren and Jack fake Jack 's death . Darren and Cindy begin a casual relationship . Upon learning the McQueens are in danger Darren and Jack leave to try to rescue them from Niall Rafferty ( Barry Sloane ) . The church is blown up and Darren helps rescue the McQueens from the rubble . Darren turns himself in to the police after Jack refuses to leave the scene and the insurance scam is discovered . He is released 4 months later . 
 Frankie and Jack discover that Darren took a £ 100 @,@ 000 bribe from Warren to get Jake to confess to Sean 's murder , and then gambled the money away despite the family being in debt . Jack banishes his son . Darren becomes depressed when his family ignore him and begins staying in his flat , refusing to leave . Cindy convinces Tony to give Darren a job at a charity event at Il Gnosh . Darren and Hannah drunkenly marry . Darren begins scheming with Cindy to scam The Dog . Darren and Hannah have sex , but Darren ends his relationship with Hannah and with Cindy begins planning to scam Hannah and Tony . Darren and Cindy have sex and are caught by Tony . During Hollyoaks Later , Darren attempts to convince Cindy not to marry Tony . They marry despite Darren 's attempts to stop the ceremony . Hannah moves into Darren 's flat after she and her parents argue . Darren is stabbed by Jamie ( Finn Jones ) while protecting Hannah . Darren recovers and offers to leave Hollyoaks with Hannah but she rejects his offer and leaves alone . 
 Darren and Cindy have sex after she is neglected by Tony , who uncovers the pair in a romantic clinch . Darren and Suzanne have sex and begin an affair . Rhys exposes their affair and Suzanne moves in with Darren . Suzanne later moves to Spain with Neville . Darren moves in with Jack after they reconcile . Darren fails to win back Cindy 's affections as she marries Alistair , but she gives him a brooch before leaving . Darren sells the brooch for ₤ 50 @,@ 000 and uses it as a deposit to help his dad buy his house . Darren begins having sex with Nancy and shortly after , Darren begins a relationship with Nancy . Darren proposes and she accepts before Suzanne returns , and announces that she 's pregnant with Darren 's twins . She gives birth on 21 January 2011 to Jack and Francine . Suzanne and the twins move into Nancy 's flat which leads Nancy to end her relationship with Darren . When Cindy returns , she pays Suzanne to leave the village , so she can have Darren to herself . Her plan fails , when Nancy and Darren reconcile . 
 Darren begins secretly planning his wedding to Nancy . Darren is tempted to gamble at a casino by Brendan Brady ( Emmett J. Scanlan ) but resists . Nancy 's mother , Margaret , makes Nancy doubt her relationship with Darren . Nancy believes Darren is having an affair with Cindy and decides to leave Hollyoaks village to live in Canada . Darren tells Nancy about the wedding he has been planning . She forgives him and the pair marry . Nancy later discovers she is pregnant with Darren 's child but she later suffers a miscarriage . Nancy later discovers she is again pregnant with Darren 's child . Nancy later suffers a miscarriage . Nancy and Darren later discover she is again pregnant . Nancy goes in to premature labour and gives birth to their son three months early by emergency caesarean . Darren and Nancy are told that their son may suffer brain damage . During her pregnancy Nancy helped her friend Mitzeee ( Rachel Shenton ) after she escaped from prison , making Nancy stressed . Darren blames Nancy for their son 's premature birth and tells her he will not forgive her if their son dies . Darren and Nancy name their son Oscar , who turns out to be deaf . This causes problems in Darren and Nancy 's relationship , with Darren wanting their son to go through an operation for his hearing but Nancy not wanting to . The stress results in Nancy becoming addicted to painkillers . Darren eventually finds out about Nancy 's painkiller addiction leaving him furious and Nancy moves away for a short time . Darren and Nancy become friends with Sienna Blake ( Anna <unk> ) , and let her move in with them as a full @-@ time nanny . 
 Sienna grows feelings for Darren and they kiss , although Darren later reunites with Nancy after she recovers . Desperate to get rid of Nancy , Sienna frames Nancy for several dilemmas , including leaving Oscar trapped in a fire , in order to make it look like she is still addicted to painkillers . Tom catches Sienna trying to breast feed Oscar , although Sienna accuses Tom of trying to take topless pictures of her . Darren believes Sienna 's lies that Nancy is still a painkiller addict , resulting in Nancy moving out and Darren and Sienna beginning a relationship . Sienna begins faking a pregnancy although is devastated when she overhears Darren saying he doesn 't want the baby . In order to get Darren closer , Sienna attempts to officially get rid of Nancy and she frames Nancy for trying to kill Oscar , Charlie and herself . Nancy is taken to a mental institute because of this . Darren later finds out that Sandy Roscoe ( Gillian Taylforth ) is his mother and disowns Jack for lying to him for years . Darren , Sienna and Oscar move out because of this . Tom realizes what Sienna has done to Nancy and attempts to expose her by putting a video camera in her bedroom . Darren finds the video camera , however , and assumes that Tom had been trying to film Sienna topless again leaving Darren furious with Tom . Darren later makes up with Jack when he is nearly killed in an explosion . 
 When Tom goes missing , Darren is desperate to find him . Thinking that Tom has run away , he assumes that he will come home if Nancy is there and convinces Sienna to change her statement about Nancy . Nancy is released from the mental institute because of this . However , it is revealed that Sienna actually kidnapped Tom and kept him hostage in a basement . Tom is able to escape and along with Nancy , they expose Sienna for everything . Sienna attacks Nancy causing her to have temporary brain damage and attempts to kill Tom , Charlie and Oscar although they are saved and Nancy recovers . Following Darren 's treatment of Nancy , things are hard between them and get even worse when Nancy attempts to get revenge on Darren . However , they eventually reconcile and get engaged again . However , things only get worse when Sienna blackmails Darren to get Tom to change his statement or she 'll create even more problems for the Osbornes . Following a heart attack , Darren is given angina spray however Sienna takes this while Darren is on a camping trip and Nancy leaves him on his own on the trip following an argument . Darren starts to have a heart attack and Sienna , realizing what she 's done , saves him at the last minute . 
 Nancy then starts to think that Darren and Sienna are having an affair , and sleeps with Robbie Roscoe ( Charlie Wernham ) and his father Rick Spencer ( Victor Gardener ) . Things are eventually sorted between Darren and Nancy , however as their wedding gets closer , they start to argue again as Nancy believes that Darren is not taking the wedding seriously . Nancy sleeps with Rick again although the next morning she has regrets . On the night of her hen do , Nancy is attacked by Finn O 'Connor ( Keith Rice ) following an argument , and he attempts to rape her while wearing a mask . However , she is saved by Phoebe McQueen ( Mandip Gil ) , and Darren and Nancy get remarried anyway . Finn is arrested and Darren stands by Nancy in court , however due to the DNA tests , Nancy is forced to admit her affair and that she slept with Rick within 24 hours before the attack . This creates more strife between Darren and Nancy ; Darren sleeps with his ex @-@ fiancee Sienna Blake . Darren cannot forgive Nancy for her affair , they realise that married life has not been right for a long time and they agree to get divorced again . Darren offers to buy Nancy 's half of The Dog In The Pond Pub in order to give her enough money to restart her life . The deed of transfer for The Dog has been signed and Darren is now the sole owner of The Dog In The Pond . 
 On New Year 's Eve after bringing Esther and her girlfriend Kim Butterfield to a club he is mistaken for a taxi @-@ man giving him the idea to start up his own taxi company ' Daz Cabs ' . His company got off to a rocky start as he was unable to know where he was going and got Dr. S <unk> late for two important meetings . However Darren teamed up with Kim to force Dr. S <unk> to give him the hospital taxi contract and recruited Tony to work as his receptionist . However they came to blows over the name and design of the company , but resolved their differences with Darren moving into the boarding house , Tony working as a taxi driver and Maxine <unk> takes over as receptionist . 
 Darren and Maxine start to develop feeling for each as Darren supports her getting custody of daughter Minnie from her abusive ex @-@ partner Patrick Blake . They later start up a relationship which Patrick tries to wreck so Darren retaliates by trying to frame Patrick . On Freddie Roscoe and Lindsey Butterfield 's wedding day , Darren witnesses Joe Roscoe try to shoot Freddie with Grace Black gun . Trevor Royale orders Darren to get rid of the gun but Patrick records him burying it and blackmails him into saying Maxine is an alcoholic and she loses custody of Minnie . Darren later finds Maxine on top of a church roof and pleads with her not to jump as Minnie needs her . Later when they are alone he reveals that Patrick blackmailed him and he couldn 't go to prison as he needs to be there for Oscar and Charlie . Maxine forgives him and they remain together . Darren helps Maxine set up her own cab business ' Minnie Cabs ' so she stands a chance at getting Minnie back . When Darren finds out that Patrick is dying he tells Patrick that he is sticking by Maxine and that when he 's dead he 'll be dancing on his grave . 
 When Ben Bradley daughter Carly is found dead , Ben initially blames Darren as he was supposed to drive her up to Scotland to a rehab center that day but cancelled the job so he could support Maxine through a dinner party with Patrick . Patrick later manipulates Darren and Maxine 's relationship causing Maxine to break up with Darren as she doesn 't believe his claims that he 's still controlling her . 
 Some of his <unk> storylines have included his becoming estranged from Nancy and then married to her again , beginning a relationship with Maxine , a feud with Patrick and helping Maxine to hide Patrick 's body in a wall after his death . 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 Darren was created by Hollyoaks producer Phil Redmond in 1996 . He was created along with his father Jack Osborne and step @-@ mother Celia ; they arrived from America to join Darren 's older sister Ruth , who was already living in the village . He moved back to America and later returned until the current time . Darren has been referred to as " one of the most popular and longest serving Hollyoaks characters " . 
 Auditions were held for the part of Darren with Adam Booth securing the part in 1996 ; his first appearance was on 18 November . Booth left Hollyoaks in 1997 , so the role was recast in 1999 with Ashley Taylor Dawson . Other actors that auditioned while in the stages of recasting included fellow castmember Alex Carter who went on to secure the part of Lee Hunter , two years after auditioning for the part of Darren . While at the National Youth Theatre aged 17 Dawson joined the cast of Hollyoaks . He went on to secure the part of Darren following an audition . Dawson has said that his first day at Hollyoaks was " daunting " . Dawson left in 2000 to pursue a pop career in the UK pop band <unk> * . <unk> * split up and Dawson later re @-@ joined Hollyoaks in August 2003 . 
 Dawson has said , regarding playing the role of Darren , " I love playing the bad lad . He 's my alter ego " . In 2010 speaking of his ten @-@ year tenure on the serial Dawson said he felt he like he was " turning a bit into Ken Barlow " and added that he enjoyed playing Darren more each year . Dawson added that he was " still learning " and did not take his role for granted . He stated , " I ’ m not ignorant enough to think I can just go off and be a Hollywood star ! I ’ d like to take on some more challenges for Darren " . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Darren 's personality has developed over the character 's duration . At first , according to Dawson , Darren was " very manipulative " and willing to " do anything to get his own way " . Dawson added that some of Darren 's actions were " blatantly horrible " although he felt that this made Darren " such a fun character to play " . Dawson also commented on Darren 's " luck with girls " ; Dawson felt that Darren " tends to take girls for granted " and is " out for all he can get " . Dawson also called Darren " an opportunist " and a " male chauvinist pig " . 
 On the character 's transformation Dawson told Digital Spy that when Darren was younger he was " just a horrible child and he had nothing nice to say about anyone " before Darren matured and softened . Dawson added that it was nice to see a different side to the character . Dawson later added that the character 's change was good as " everyone goes through changes in their life and Darren just hit that time . It was good timing for him " . He also explained that his character becoming a father led him to develop and mature further , stating that Darren accepted his responsibilities as a father and " tries hard to be the father that he wants to be " . He felt that Darren enjoyed being a father and that it made him feel " complete and like he has a purpose in life , whereas before he was always chasing his tail " . Dawson felt that as time went on , Darren became more helpful , sympathetic and more empathetic towards other characters , especially Jake Dean ( Kevin Sacre ) . Dawson stated , " It 's very uncharacteristic but Darren is softening up " . Dawson added that Darren 's difficult life has led him to mature and act like a " bit of a saint " , but that Darren was still greatly misunderstood . 
 E4 's official Website described Darren in this way : " For a long time Darren found it easier making enemies than he did friends , what with his constant scheming and dangerous gambling habit ... Darren 2 @.@ 0 is a reformed man though " . Hollyoaks international broadcaster BBC America described the character as a " relentless schemer and ne 'er @-@ do @-@ well " . Darren has been described as the " village hunk " , an " outcast " , a " bad boy " , a " twisted hunk " , " heartless " , " hapless " , " devious " and " sly " by various media sources . 
 Dawson stated that when he first auditioned he had " <unk> " which he was asked to keep for the part . Darren 's dress sense has gone undergone changes in recent years . He often wore string vests and gold jewellery but he later changed his style which became more mature . On his character 's change in style and the reasons for it Dawson said the producers were right to make the changes and opined that Darren has " moved on now and grown up a bit " . 
 = = = Earlier storylines = = = 
 One of Darren 's earliest storylines saw him and friend Luke Morgan ( Gary Lucy ) stand up to bully Mark Gibbs ( Colin Parry ) . Darren becomes friends with Mark in an attempt to deter Mark 's bullying but Mark soon after rapes Luke . Darren takes advantage of the situation and begins a relationship with Luke 's girlfriend Mandy Richardson ( Sarah Jayne Dunn ) . Dawson commented on this saying , " Darren liked Mandy even before he went to America so he was gutted when he came back to discover she had started going out with Luke . And all along , Luke knew that Darren wanted to get together with Mandy ... Luke has other things on his mind and seems to be ignoring Mandy , so Darren thinks it is the perfect opportunity to make his move " . Before Darren asks Mandy out he confronts Luke who " gives him the green light " . Dawson opined that although viewers may think Mandy and Darren are being " heartless " they don 't know about Luke 's attack so are not to blame . Dawson felt that initially the relationship is a " flirty kind of friendship " although Mandy realises she likes Darren and plans to use Darren as a means of reuniting with Luke . As Darren and Mandy spend more time together their relationship " develops " . If Darren were to find out about Luke 's rape , Dawson felt Darren would help Luke get " revenge " on Mark . He said Mandy would either be " shocked and turn to Darren for support " or " feel guilty about what she 's done " and reunite with Luke . Dawson felt if this were to happen Darren would " try to shrug it off " although " deep down , he cares for Mandy " . Dawson felt that Darren should become a " hero " to Luke , fixing all his problems which would rectify him beginning a relationship with Mandy . 
 Darren becomes embroiled in a feud with Scott Anderson ( Daniel Hyde ) , and Scott sets fire to The Loft with Darren inside . Dawson said these scenes were some of his favourite because of the good scripts , and that he enjoyed working with Hyde . The scenes required a pyrotechnics specialist to come in and assist Dawson and Hyde through the scenes . While Darren is feuding with Scott he and Debbie Dean ( Jodi Albert ) have a brief relationship . Dawson said Darren 's relationship with Debbie and feud with Scott were his " favourite " storylines as they were " more in @-@ depth and show both sides of the character " . Darren has a brief relationship with Steph Dean ( Carley Stenson ) , with Stenson commenting that Steph " really loved him " even though he was a " dirty dog to her " . 
 = = = Gambling addiction = = = 
 Darren begins gambling in 2008 and later his addiction causes him a great deal of trouble , leading him to steal from his family and ultimately losing everything . On his character 's addiction , Dawson commented that Darren is initially on a " winning streak " but quickly begins to " lose everything , including Zoe Carpenter ( Zoë Lister ) " . He felt that Darren is torn about his addiction because although he is aware of his problem he believes " his next big win is just around the corner " . When talking to What 's on TV about Darren 's addiction , Dawson said it began slowly but spiralled out of control , thinking that gambling is easy after a few big wins . Eventually , Darren was willing to bet on everything , even " who 's going to have toast for breakfast " . Darren finally realises he has a problem when in spite of the fun , he loses everything as his debts increase . Darren begins counselling for his addiction but later plays a game of poker with Warren in which he loses his share of The Dog in the Pond . Dawson said this " devastated " Darren who can 't convince Warren the poker game was " just a joke " . Darren begins a " Bonnie and Clyde partnership " with Jessica Harris ( Jennifer Biddall ) which producer Bryan Kirkwood described as " very funny " . Jessica then leaves the village in a " dramatic twist " , leaving Darren in more debt in the process . Dawson said that Darren 's gambling addiction had been one of his highlights in the show and described the storyline as " fantastic " . 
 = = = Fake death scam = = = 
 This storyline , which was announced June 2008 , was initially billed as Darren 's father , Jack Osborne ( Jimmy McKenna ) , being " at an all @-@ time low " before finding a dead body which is " too good an opportunity for him and Darren to pass up " . They swap Eamon Fisher 's ( Derek Halligan ) identity with Jack 's , before Jack is forced to " slope off into the night " . The storyline was compared to John Darwin faking his own death with the Daily Record commenting , " Clearly , the news stories about John Darwin and his canoe haven 't reached Chester " while the Sunday Mercury commented that Darren 's guilt was deserved " in shades of the current John ' dead canoeist ' Darwin court case " . 
 After these comparisons Dawson confirmed that the storyline was planned ahead of the media coverage of the case , adding that he thought the storyline was " far fetched " , adding that due to the storyline being a " sensitive " issue it was likely to cause controversy . Dawson explained that Darren initially thought faking Jack 's death was a " brilliant idea " but put this down to lack of sleep and stress . Dawson commented that Darren and Jack are so desperate that " everything seemed easy " , but added that they realise their actions were making the situation worse . Dawson felt that if Darren gets through the events without becoming bitter , twisted and cynical , then he could learn from his mistakes but " it could go the other way and he might blame everyone other than himself " . Dawson commented that the fake death scam was his favourite time with the serial . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 = = = = Hannah and Suzanne Ashworth = = = = 
 Darren and Hannah ( Emma Rigby ) go on a weekend away to Denmark with a rock ' n ' roll band where they drunkenly marry in a " shotgun " fashion . What 's on TV announced the storyline in June 2009 . About the beginning of the storyline , " Hannah has gone off the rails of late , but even she manages to outdo herself when she and Darren tie the knot after a particularly boozy night in Denmark " . Holy Soap said the wedding will leave fans " stunned " and described the pair as " odd " . Dawson said , regarding the sudden marriage , that " Darren doesn ’ t suddenly fall in love with Hannah or vice @-@ versa . It ’ s just one of those mad , crazy things you do when you ’ ve had far too many drinks and your life is in a bit of a mess . They both regret it . They get home and their friends and families are horrified – especially Hannah ’ s family " . 
 Rigby said Hannah had married Darren to try to fit in and impress people . She added that Hannah would never have gone out with Darren willingly , " not even under the influence " . She felt Hannah stayed married to Darren to annoy her parents and to get attention . Darren begins scheming with Cindy to scam The Dog . Darren decides to stay married to try to get The Dog back , so proposes that they do not get their marriage annulled to Hannah . Dawson said , regarding his plan to scam Hannah , that " Hannah wants an annulment and so does Darren … at first . The cogs begin to turn in his twisted mind after Cindy points out that being married to Hannah could get him The Dog back . He plans to pretend he ’ s falling in love with her and , motivated by money , tries to make her fall in love with him " . 
 Darren is stabbed while trying to save Hannah , which the Daily Star said " proves to Hannah she is the love of his [ Darren 's ] life . We ’ ll have to see if she ’ ll make another go of it " . Darren offers to leave Hollyoaks with Hannah but she rejects his offer and leaves Hollyoaks alone . E4 wrote , in regards to how the relationship affects Darren , that he " turned a corner after marrying Hannah Ashworth . Darren became a true friend to her and helped her through her eating disorders " . 
 Darren begins an affair with Hannah 's mother , Suzanne ( Suzanne Hall ) , whose son Rhys ( Andrew Moss ) is Darren 's friend . The Daily Star announced this storyline on 23 May 2010 . Suzanne is upset and " Darren is more than happy to give her a shoulder to cry on . But he soon can ’ t believe the mess he gets himself into with his mate ’ s mum . He tries everything he can to put her off but Suzanne is not having any of it " . Dawson explained the romance , saying , " They 're both lonely and there 's a bit of a thrill for Darren as she 's an older woman . It 's just a bit of fun for both of them " . Darren supports Suzanne through her marital problems ; they grow close and begin an affair , until Rhys exposes them . Neville Ashworth ( Jim Millea ) , Suzanne 's husband , throws her out of her home , forcing Darren to allow her to move in with him . Suzanne decides to leave Darren and move to Spain with Neville . When asked who Darren would choose between Suzanne and Cindy , Dawson said , " Cindy any time " . In early 2011 , Suzanne returns , and announces that she 's pregnant with Darren 's twins . She gives birth to twins before she moves in with Darren and girlfriend Nancy Hayton ( Jessica Fox ) . Nancy ends her relationship with Darren . In March , Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) returns and pays Suzanne to leave the village so she can have Darren to herself , which Suzanne accepts . 
 = = = = Cindy Cunningham = = = = 
 When Cindy moves back to Hollyoaks Village she and Darren soon begin a casual relationship . Darren and Cindy later begin to show genuine affection for each other by helping each other through difficult times in their lives . Dawson has said that Cindy was the most suitable for Darren out of his previous relationships . In an interview with What 's on TV , when asked who Darren would choose out of Suzanne and Cindy , Dawson said , " Cindy any time . He 'd really like to make a go of things with her " . Dawson also commented on the relationship calling the relationship " interesting " because Cindy is Darren 's " first port of call " . 
 Waring has said she felt Darren and Cindy are " one and the same - they 're the same person with different body parts " . She felt the pair are " made for each other " but when together are " destructive " . Waring elaborated , saying that unlike Cindy and Tony , Darren and Cindy " bring out the worst in each other " . She felt that if Cindy was with Darren , Darren " could be the love of her life " , but felt Cindy would be sensible and choose the relationship best for her daughter 's welfare . 
 In a later storyline , Cindy announces her intentions to marry Tony Hutchinson ( Nick Pickard ) and scam him , a scam Darren later joins . Darren marries Hannah Ashworth and he and Cindy plan to scam The Dog . Their intentions to scam their respective partners , Dawson said , indicates that the pair are " two sides of the same coin " . He added that they are motivated by money which made Hannah and Tony " useful to them " , and commented that he wouldn 't be surprised if they worked together to get what they want from their partners . 
 Although Darren begs her not to marry Tony , she goes ahead with the wedding , and Darren and Cindy later plan to scam Tony , which Dawson called " cold @-@ hearted " . He added that Darren wouldn 't " have any problems with stabbing Tony in the back even now because Darren 's that kind of guy " . Pickard said , about the beginning of this storyline , " Cindy is with Darren and she ’ s realised I ’ ve got a bit of money . They ’ re scamming me ! " Darren and Cindy begin sleeping together and are caught by Tony but do not continue to see each other . Cindy and Tony divorce ; Cindy begins a relationship with Alistair Longford ( Terence Harvey ) and agrees to marry him . Darren proposes to Cindy on the day of her wedding but she declines stating she wants to give Holly a better life and more financial security which Alistair can give her . 
 Cindy returns in 2011 after Alistair dies and attempts to rekindle her romance with Darren but fails . Dawson later admitted that Darren may still be tempted by Cindy before adding that Cindy is " shocked " that Darren " would go for anyone but her " . Waring felt that the pair would always have a " spark between them " but any romance between them ends when Cindy discovers that Darren has become a father and is engaged to Nancy . She felt that Cindy " gets over it pretty quickly " but Cindy " has her moments with Darren " as Darren is " the only person who [ Cindy ] lets her guard down in front of . With everyone else , a big wall comes up and she doesn 't let anybody else see that vulnerable side " . 
 Cindy begins helping Darren plan his wedding to girlfriend Nancy . Waring felt Cindy 's feelings had been " reawakened " through this storyline , adding that they never " fully went away " . Waring opined that Darren asking Cindy to help plan his wedding made her feel " needed and wanted " . Waring felt that Cindy does not plan to split Darren and Nancy up but that there is " a little part of [ Cindy ] that thinks , ' Surely he 's going to choose me ? " Waring added that when Cindy is trying on wedding dresses for Nancy Cindy thinks " that it should be her " . Cindy attempts to kiss Darren which Waring said is " the worst possible thing she could have done , because she thinks it means something but Darren thinks otherwise " . Dawson said Darren is no longer interested in Cindy . Waring said Darren telling Cindy she will have to let him go leaves her " devastated " . Waring added that when Cindy realises how much Darren likes Nancy she says " that if Nancy is who Darren wants , then she 'll just have to accept it " . Dawson felt that Darren 's relationship with Cindy was " just sex " , adding that " it was more of a raw attraction rather than something that would work well in the long @-@ term " . Dawson added that it was good to revisit the relationship as the pair have been through a lot together . He added that since his relationship with Cindy " Darren has matured ... Their recent goodbye scene was a great one to bring a bit of closure to what they had " . 
 = = = = Nancy Hayton = = = = 
 Darren and Nancy begin a relationship when Darren , Nancy and Nancy 's housemates begin online dating in December 2010 . Darren is due to go on a date he has arranged and Nancy comes to watch him , Darren 's date does not arrive . As the evening continues , the pair realise there is an attraction between them and agree to go home together . Dawson said that the pair have " always sort of hated each other " as they are opposites , explaining that " She 's a feminist and he 's a male chauvinist pig ! " He felt for the pair to begin a relationship is a " case of opposites attracting - for some reason it works " . Dawson added that through the pair 's " pompous ways " they have both been through " hard times and been through them with each other because they 've known each other for so long " . He commented that the pair have " never seen eye @-@ to @-@ eye , but I think that when they sit down and chat they realise they have a lot more in common than they think . In the past they just didn 't want to accept that " . E4 described the relationship this way : " She ’ s chalk and he ’ s definitely more than a bit cheesy , but there you have it ; Darren and Nancy ( Dancy ) are now officially an item ! They ’ re the original odd @-@ couple ! " 
 Dawson added that Darren is " totally in love with Nancy . Nancy has really calmed Darren down " . Fox added , regarding the beginning of their relationship , " It was a relationship that came out of nowhere , but the writers and the audience were so charmed by Nancy and Darren together that it 's kept going " . When asked if they were surprised at being initially paired up Dawson said , " Yes , i was . The scene in which they got together was absolutely hilarious . Darren just looked up and there she was ! " before Fox added " I never thought they were going to last , but we just went for it full throttle " . Fox later explained that the pairing " was only ever intended to be quite a short @-@ term thing " . 
 The pair become engaged after Darren proposes , although the proposal is accidental rather than planned . Dawson felt that it was too soon for Darren to consider marrying Nancy . Shortly after their engagement , Suzanne returns and announces she is expecting Darren 's babies . Regarding Darren being the father of twin babies and if his relationship with Nancy would survive , Dawson felt the situation was too difficult for Nancy but for Darren it was fine . He felt that the story was " interesting " and hoped the pairing would survive as they have " something special " . Darren and Nancy split up when he moves Suzanne and the babies into Nancy 's flat . They resume their romance after Suzanne leaves and takes the children with her . 
 Fox commented that the pair would make good parents but have " a lot of growing up to do themselves " , before adding that she hoped " Nancy and Darren would stay together for a long time " as she enjoyed the pairing . Fox later added that she 'd " love a big soap wedding " . Dawson said , about the couple 's future : " Darren might stray if Nancy continues to push him away , but I think he 's more paranoid about her leaving him . He 's been a good boy far too long - I want him to man up and get his head together " . 
 On 19 December 2011 it was announced that a future storyline would see Darren plan his wedding as a surprise to Nancy . It was announced that Darren would be tempted back into his gambling addiction . Series producer Emma Smithwick commented on the storyline explaining that because Darren was organising the wedding it was " never going to be as smooth as if somebody else was organising it " . She added that the wedding was a " long time coming " for the couple but there going to be " a few obstacles in the way " , some self @-@ imposed and some caused by external forces . She added that the event would be in " true Darren style " . Dawson felt that at this point in the relationship Darren is " besotted " with Nancy . He explained that Darren feels Nancy is good for him but Darren almost feels undeserving of her . Dawson felt that Nancy was the love of Darren 's life . Dawson commented that Darren had " been through the mill " but " for once in his life , Darren is happy " . Dawson put this down to Darren getting the Dog in the Pond back and his relationship with Nancy . On why Darren plans the wedding Dawson said : " He wants to show Nancy how much he loves her and thinks a surprise wedding will do that " . He explained that due to lack of funds Darren will " have to call in a lot of favours but he hasn 't got many friends " . Dawson felt that Darren would have to see the idea through to the end , even if Darren would end up " upside @-@ down in mud " . On how he felt the wedding would turn out Dawson said that " it could be the <unk> thing ever " but that it would be " hilarious " . On the wedding and Darren 's feelings , Dawson said that his character is " incredibly excited about it , especially after all the hard work and planning that he 's been doing in secret for weeks and weeks " . Dawson said that Darren feels like the wedding is " going to be the most perfect day possible and he just can 't wait to see the look on Nancy 's face when she realises what he 's been up to " . Dawson went on to add that " things don 't go as he planned " . Dawson said that he wants the wedding to go ahead , saying " after all this it would be lovely to see them get married , but you never know with soaps . I think they can be happy together " . Dawson felt that the pair are the " perfect match and are incredibly sweet together . Darren brings out Nancy 's fun side and she gives his life a bit of order " . Dawson went on to say he feels the pair are " destined to be the Jack and Vera of Hollyoaks ! " Nancy 's mother , Margaret Hayton ( Darryl Fishwick ) , arrives in the village . Fox said that Margaret believes Darren is " not good enough for Nancy " so begins trying to split the pair up . Fox said that Margaret tries to " make Nancy doubt her relationship with Darren " . Nancy witnesses Darren and Cindy in an embrace which Fox said confirms to Nancy that " everything her mum is saying is true - that Darren doesn 't love her and he has been having an affair " . When questioned if the pair can get through their troubles Fox said : " I hope so ! Myself and Ash have had an awful lot of fun working together , so I 'd love to see a ' happily ever after ' . Well , as much as it can be happy in soapland ! " Fox felt that if Nancy were to discover Darren 's plans for their wedding she would be " horrified " although she would " see that he has good intentions " . Fox later said that Nancy " really wants to get married , have babies and be happy " with Darren , although Nancy may not ready to be a mother " just yet " . 
 Darren and Nancy marry . Dawson explained that Darren felt " relief " that the wedding went ahead as he " often worried that Nancy is too good for him " . Dawson commented that he thinks " the characters work well together and they challenge each other all the time . It 's quite comical , even when they 're arguing . In many ways , Darren is a typical man and Nancy is a typical woman " . On how married life will affect the couple Dawson said : " it will change them is by giving a bit of solidity to their relationship . It proves to both of them how much they mean to each other , so if anything , I think it will make them stronger " . Explaining why Darren went ahead with planning the surprise wedding Dawson said : " he 's got the pub back , he feels like he 's learned all his lessons , and he 's come full circle . This time around , Darren doesn 't want to mess anything up and wants to get everything right . Now that they 're married , having children is something that they 'll look at in the future " . 
 = = = Fatherhood = = = 
 Darren 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Suzanne , returns , pregnant by Darren with twins . Dawson said , " At first [ Darren ] doesn ’ t believe her and he thinks it ’ s a wind @-@ up . When she threatens to go back to Spain he realises it ’ s not what he wants and he stops her . He decides to man up and be a dad to his kids " . A few days later , Suzanne , with Darren 's help , gives birth to twins Jack and Francine . Dawson said that at first , Darren chooses to be in denial about it wants nothing to do with Suzanne because he does not want to lose Nancy . Dawson noted that the birth of Darren 's babies is messy and surprising . Darren finds himself in a situation he never expected when he has to deliver the babies and accept responsibility for them . Dawson stated , " I think it 's a moment where Darren changes a little bit " . Dawson added that Darren does " step up to the mark " and " matures very quickly " . Dawson felt that Darren enjoys being a father and it gives him a " purpose in life " which he has never had before . Dawson explained that Darren usually thinks of himself but is now thinking of the babies . E4 , regarding Darren becoming a father , commented that due to his previous antics , he would not be an ideal candidate for " Father of the year " . The storyline is resolved when Cindy pays Suzanne £ 200 @,@ 000 to return to Spain so that she can have Darren to herself . Suzanne accepts the money and leaves , taking Francine and Jack with her and leaving Darren heartbroken . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dawson was nominated for " Sexiest Male " at the 2004 British Soap Awards , for " Sexiest Male " and " Best Villain " at the 2005 Inside Soap Awards. and for " Funniest Performance " in 2007 at the Inside Soap Awards . In 2009 , he was nominated for " Best Actor " at the British Soap Awards , " Best Actor " and " Funniest Performance " at the Inside Soap Awards . Dawson was nominated for " Best Actor " , " Funniest Performance " and " Sexiest Male " in 2010 for his role as Darren at the Inside Soap Awards . Also in 2010 , at the British Soap Awards , Dawson was nominated for the " Sexiest Male " award . In 2011 he received a nomination for " Sexiest Male " at the British Soap Awards . In 2012 Dawson was again nominated for " Best Actor " and for " Best On @-@ Screen Partnership " at the British Soap Awards . In 2012 Dawson was nominated for " Best Actor " at the 2012 TV Choice Awards . At the 2012 Inside Soap Awards Dawson was nominated for " Best Actor " and " Sexiest Male " . 
 Darren was listed in " The Top 100 Soap Hunks of All Time " by What 's on TV . Dawson was 8th in the " Sexiest Soap Stars " MSN poll . An Inside Soap critic commented that Darren was initially a " <unk> auburn @-@ haired forgettable schoolboy " when played by Booth . They added that Booth 's Darren is a " very distant recollection " while Dawson has " made the part his own in such a big way that we 've decided to wipe the other one from history " . 
 His character was branded a " rat " and " dastardly " for splitting up Gina and Emily by the Daily Record . Upon Darren 's 2003 return to Hollyoaks , the Sunday Mercury said he had become " even more of a pain in the neck " . They later called the character " a really nasty piece of work " and when he stole from his father , they questioned if Jack would " see what he 's really like " . Inside Soap 's Peter Griffiths referred to Darren as one of the serial 's " reliable stalwarts " , saying it was a " relief " when he appeared and added that Darren was one of the characters who can " be relied upon to deliver " . He added that the " tried @-@ and @-@ tested " characters helped the show through its rough patches and that they should be given the storylines they deserved . Griffiths ' colleague Sarah maintained that Darren was the only part of the show that held her interest . The Press and Journal described Darren 's time on the soap , saying : " He languished in prison for helping his father fake his own death , has battled a crippling gambling addiction and has been known to steal people ’ s girlfriends and break up relationships " . 
 Kris Green of Digital Spy responded negatively to Darren 's marriage to Hannah , saying " I still have NO idea why the storyliners thought it was a good idea to marry them off " . Green later said that Rigby 's on @-@ screen partnership with Jamie in Hollyoaks Later worked well and was " better than Hannah and Darren " . Green later dubbed Darren and Suzanne " <unk> " due to their dangerous liaison , while the affair was described as " sizzling " by the Daily Star . 
 Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury said Darren and Cindy 's scheming make them a perfect match . Laws commented that Darren and Cindy 's relationship is more about " making money out of others ’ misery " rather than romance , and sarcastically commented that the pair were " nice " after they decide to con Hannah and Tony . On Darren and Cindy 's intention to scam Tony the Daily Star wrote : " Cindy and Darren are perfect for each other . They are both greedy money @-@ grabbers and it isn ’ t long before they are looking for a way to fleece Tony for all they can get " . MSN said the sexual chemistry between Darren and Cindy was undeniable after Cindy 's return . On Darren and Cindy , Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail questioned if there was " anyone either of these two haven 't had now ? I 'm getting sex @-@ sickness " . 
 Inside Soap described Darren and Nancy as " one of soap 's most unlikely pairings " and added , " It 's clear they 're made for each other " . In a comedy storyline Darren buys Nancy a <unk> , which Stephen opined was " all the better to drown him in ... " , she added that Nancy isn 't impressed " when she learns that he expects her to move in with his family . Still , it ’ ll all be <unk> under the bridge when Nancy becomes pregnant ( my theory ) " . Stephen 's colleague Caroline Fitton commented on Darren and Nancy spending less time together because of her new job , saying it proved " the girl had some sense " . Stephen later questioned if Nancy would forgive Darren after he planned a surprise wedding or if she would " notice that he has <unk> <unk> across his forehead ? " 
 Digital Spy 's Daniel Kilkelly questioned whether Darren could adjust to fatherhood , while What 's on TV labelled him a " doting father " . Once Nancy became pregnant again Claire Crick of All About Soap said " At last – some good news in Hollyoaks for once ! Our favourite soapy couple , Nancy and Darren , discover they ’ re going to be parents once again in tonight ’ s episode , and we ’ ve got our fingers ( and toes ! ) crossed that it works out for them this time " . She said that " with Darren ’ s cheeky escapades and Nancy ’ s no @-@ messing attitude , they ’ ll make the perfect parents and we can ’ t wait to see them with a little one " . Crick went on to say " while Darren might be dad to twins already ( remember them ? You could be forgiven for forgetting they even existed – it seems Darren already has ! ) , we think he ’ s got potential to be great daddy material " . 
 Stephen of the Daily Mail questioned whether Darren would " ever be able to hold on to a <unk> for more than an hour ? " Stephen expressed disinterest in Darren 's subsequent money troubles , saying " There are more money problems for Darren and Jack . Oh , not again " . Stephen later called Darren 's money troubles an " old chestnut " and opined that his business was " Mobs ’ Grotto . There ’ s one vowel wrong in that last word " . Stephen later compared Darren to the Greek government debt crisis and quipped that he " is to money what Greece is to global financial security " . She added that viewers should never become optimistic about his finances improving because " for every ladder he climbs , there ’ s always a snake to bring him crawling back down to Earth " . 
 Virgin Media criticised the character 's original dress sense stating " he might be male , but that doesn 't mean Darren can escape the fashion police . He may have gone to prison once already , but with his chunky gold jewellery and sinister string vests , it won 't be long before he is carted away in cuffs for his crimes against style " . Fellow cast member Jessica Forrest who plays Leanne Holiday opined that the character 's style was the best style of any character from the show but " back in the day ... with the string vests and highlighted hair " . Caroline Fitton of the Daily Mail felt that Darren becoming a student was " just wrong " before questioning if he would " drop the faux @-@ bling @-@ chain T @-@ shirts ? " 
 Producer Bryan Kirkwood said that he thought Dawson was a " brilliant actor " , and added , " Ashley 's one of those people that can do comedy and pathos within the blink of an eye " . Kirkwood said that " Darren 's one of my favourite characters " . Fellow producer Paul Marquess spoke positively of Dawson 's performance in an interview with Digital Spy , stating , " I think Ashley Taylor Dawson , who plays Darren , is a really strong actor , and by the end of this year we 'll see a very different side to his character " . Co @-@ star Kieron Richardson commented on Dawson 's performance as Darren , calling Dawson one of the serial 's " strongest actors " , adding that Dawson compelled him to watch when he was on screen . Richardson added that Dawson " makes me laugh , he does comedy really well and he does vulnerability really well " . 
 = David B. Bleak = 
 David Bruce Bleak ( 27 February 1932 – 23 March 2006 ) was a soldier of the United States Army during the Korean War . Bleak rose to the rank of Staff Sergeant and was awarded the Medal of Honor , the highest military decoration of the United States , for his actions near <unk> @-@ gol , South Korea , on 14 June 1952 . 
 Born in Idaho , Bleak dropped out of school to become a combat medic , and was deployed to Korea with the 40th Infantry Division . During a mission north into Chinese territory , Bleak 's patrol came under heavy attack by fortified Chinese positions . Despite being wounded himself , Bleak rushed the Chinese troops multiple times and killed five Chinese soldiers — four using only his hands — before assisting the wounded , and shielding another soldier from a grenade blast . Bleak is credited with saving the patrol 's wounded and ensuring that all of its members returned to allied lines . For these actions , he was awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 In the years preceding and following his military service , Bleak worked numerous jobs around Idaho and Wyoming , working as a rancher , dairy farmer , truck driver , and meat cutter before retiring as a radioactive waste technician at the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory . He died in 2006 from emphysema , Parkinson 's Disease , and complications from a hip fracture . 
 = = Biography = = 
 David Bruce Bleak was born on 27 February 1932 to William Bleak and Tamar Bleak ( née Young ) in Idaho Falls , Idaho , a remote farming community . The seventh of nine children , he dropped out of high school and worked for a time as a farmer and a rancher and also for railroads , but he grew dissatisfied with life in Idaho . He eventually decided to enlist in the US Army , hoping to see the world . Bleak grew to a height of 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) tall and weighed 250 pounds ( 110 kg ) . He was described as humble and quiet throughout his life . Bleak was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints though later in life he was not an active and practicing member . 
 = = = Military career = = = 
 Bleak entered the Army on 1 November 1950 , and attended basic combat training at Fort Riley , Kansas . Here , he was selected for medical duty . After the completion of his training , Bleak was assigned to a medical company attached to the 223rd Infantry Regiment , 40th Infantry Division of the California Army National Guard . Shortly after Bleak was assigned to the unit , it was selected for deployment to the Korean War . He was moved to Camp Cooke in <unk> , California for advanced medical training in preparation for his deployment . 
 The 40th Infantry Division shipped out to Korea in January 1952 , and shortly thereafter , Bleak was promoted to Sergeant . His unit was assigned to a mountainous area near <unk> @-@ gol , South Korea , along the 38th Parallel . By that point in the war , the fronts had largely stabilized , and the duty in the area was characterized by constant , low @-@ level trench warfare and continued battles over the same ground which produced high casualties . Bleak served as a field medic , assisting troops on the front lines instead of in Mobile Army Surgical Hospital units . 
 = = = Medal of Honor action = = = 
 On 14 June 1952 , Bleak was part of a patrol of the 2nd Battalion , 223rd Infantry , sent north to probe Chinese forward positions and attempt to obtain Chinese prisoners of war for interrogation . Bleak volunteered to accompany the 20 @-@ man patrol of an I & R Platoon on this mission , which was to send them to a sparsely vegetated feature called Hill 499 , where Chinese forces were known to be operating . The patrol left United Nations lines at 04 : 30 Korea Standard Time on 14 June , under cover of darkness . It was preceded by an attack by F Company , 223rd Infantry , to the west which was intended to distract Chinese forces . However , as the patrol ascended the hill , it came under heavy Chinese automatic weapons fire which struck the lead elements , injuring several soldiers . Bleak , at the rear of the formation , rushed forward and treated and stabilized several soldiers hit in the initial volley , then followed the remainder of the patrol as it continued its mission . 
 As they attempted to continue up the hill , several Chinese soldiers from a nearby trench opened fire , injuring another soldier . According to witness reports , Bleak rushed the trench and dove into it , tackling one Chinese soldier and , with only his hands , broke the soldier 's neck , killing him . Bleak was then confronted by a second soldier , whom he reportedly grabbed by the neck , fatally crushing his windpipe . A third Chinese soldier then approached , and in the ensuing scuffle , Bleak used his combat knife to stab and kill the soldier . 
 Bleak then returned to the patrol and attempted to treat more wounded members , but soon thereafter a Chinese hand grenade bounced off of the helmet of the soldier standing next to him and landed nearby . Bleak tackled the soldier over and covered him with his larger frame to protect him from the grenade , but neither was injured in the ensuing blast . The patrol then continued on its mission , and was successful in capturing several Chinese prisoners . However , as it descended Hill 499 to return to UN lines , they were ambushed by another group of Chinese hidden in a trench with an automatic weapon . Three of the other soldiers were wounded in the attack , and as Bleak attempted to run to them , he was hit in the leg . Bleak dressed all four wounds , but one of the men had been hit too critically to move . In spite of continued Chinese fire and his own injury , Bleak picked up the wounded soldier and began to carry him down the hill . 
 As he attempted to withdraw with the wounded soldier , Bleak was confronted by two more Chinese . Putting down the wounded soldier , Bleak reportedly surprised the Chinese soldiers by charging them and smashing their heads together with such force that he may have fractured the skulls of one or both of the assailants before pushing them out of his way . Eventually , all 20 men of the patrol returned to the UN lines , but a third of them were wounded . Bleak was credited with saving the patrol , both by promptly treating the wounded and by aggressively attacking and killing or neutralizing five Chinese soldiers . 
 = = = Subsequent life = = = 
 Bleak reportedly suffered nerve damage as a result of his leg wound . His wounds required hospitalization , but he returned to duty on 9 July 1952 . His tour in Korea ended shortly after the event . He finished his enlistment by serving in Japan , and on 27 October 1953 he was awarded the Medal of Honor in a ceremony at the White House with President Dwight D. Eisenhower . He retired from the Army as a Staff Sergeant . 
 After leaving the military at the end of the Korean War , Bleak returned to Idaho . He later moved to Wyoming , where he took various jobs as a truck driver , a grocery store meat cutter , and a rancher . He eventually married and had four children with his wife , Lois Pickett <unk> in 1966 , he moved to Moore , Idaho , where he ran a dairy farm for 10 years . He eventually became a janitor at the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory , where he worked his way up until his retirement in the mid @-@ 1990s as chief hot cell technician , responsible for disposing of spent nuclear fuel rods . 
 He died on 23 March 2006 , at the Lost Rivers District Hospital in Arco , Idaho , from emphysema , Parkinson 's Disease , and complications from a hip fracture . He died the same day as another Medal of Honor recipient , Desmond Doss . At the time of his death , he had nine grandchildren and six great @-@ grandchildren . Following his death , Bleak was cremated and his remains were scattered in Idaho , at a site which was supposedly his favorite fishing location . His family later placed a cenotaph in his honor at the Lost River Cemetery in Butte County , Idaho . 
 In 1995 a medical clinic at Fort Sill , Oklahoma , was named for Bleak , and following his death , the Governor of Oklahoma declared 14 June 2007 " Sergeant David Bruce Bleak Day " for the 55th anniversary of Bleak 's accomplishments . On 14 June 2006 , Bleak 's family presented his Medal of Honor to the Idaho Military History Museum , where it is now displayed , alongside that of fellow Idaho recipient Gurdon H. Barter . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Bleak 's awards include : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 Bleak was one of eight field medics and corpsmen to be awarded the Medal of Honor in Korea . However , he was one of only two @-@ the other being William R. Charette @-@ for whom the decoration was not posthumous . Those recognized after their deaths were Richard G. Wilson and Bryant E. Womack from the Army , and Edward C. <unk> , Richard <unk> , Francis C. Hammond , and John E. Kilmer from the US Navy . 
 Sgt. Bleak , a member of the medical company , distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and indomitable courage above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy . As a medical <unk> , he volunteered to accompany a reconnaissance patrol committed to engage the enemy and capture a prisoner for interrogation . Forging up the rugged slope of the key terrain , the group was subjected to intense automatic weapons and small arms fire and suffered several casualties . After administering to the wounded , he continued to advance with the patrol . Nearing the military crest of the hill , while attempting to cross the fire @-@ swept area to attend the wounded , he came under hostile fire from a small group of the enemy concealed in a trench . Entering the trench he closed with the enemy , killed 2 with bare hands and a third with his trench knife . Moving from the emplacement , he saw a concussion grenade fall in front of a companion and , quickly shifting his position , shielded the man from the impact of the blast . Later , while ministering to the wounded , he was struck by a hostile bullet but , despite the wound , he undertook to evacuate a wounded comrade . As he moved down the hill with his heavy burden , he was attacked by 2 enemy soldiers with fixed bayonets . Closing with the aggressors , he grabbed them and smacked their heads together , then carried his helpless comrade down the hill to safety . Sgt. Bleak 's dauntless courage and intrepid actions reflect utmost credit upon himself and are in keeping with the honored traditions of the military service . 
 = University of Oxford = 
 The University of Oxford ( informally Oxford University or simply Oxford ) is a collegiate research university located in Oxford , England , United Kingdom . While having no known date of foundation , there is evidence of teaching as far back as 1096 , making it the oldest university in the English @-@ speaking world and the world 's second @-@ oldest surviving university . It grew rapidly from 1167 when Henry II banned English students from attending the University of Paris . After disputes between students and Oxford townsfolk in 1209 , some academics fled northeast to Cambridge where they established what became the University of Cambridge . The two " ancient universities " are frequently jointly referred to as " Oxbridge " . 
 The university is made up of a variety of institutions , including 38 constituent colleges and a full range of academic departments which are organised into four divisions . All the colleges are self @-@ governing institutions as part of the university , each controlling its own membership and with its own internal structure and activities . Being a city university , it does not have a main campus ; instead , all the buildings and facilities are scattered throughout the city centre . Most undergraduate teaching at Oxford is organised around weekly tutorials at the self @-@ governing colleges and halls , supported by classes , lectures and laboratory work provided by university faculties and departments . 
 Oxford is the home of the Rhodes Scholarship , one of the world 's oldest and most prestigious scholarships , which has brought graduate students to study at the university for more than a century . The university operates the world 's oldest university museum , as well as the largest university press in the world and the largest academic library system in Britain . Oxford has educated many notable alumni , including 27 Nobel laureates , 27 Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom , and many foreign heads of state . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The University of Oxford has no known foundation date . Teaching at Oxford existed in some form as early as 1096 , but it is unclear when a university came into being . It grew quickly in 1167 when English students returned from the University of Paris . The historian Gerald of Wales lectured to such scholars in 1188 and the first known foreign scholar , Emo of Friesland , arrived in 1190 . The head of the university was named a chancellor from at least 1201 and the masters were recognised as a <unk> or corporation in 1231 . The university was granted a royal charter in 1248 during the reign of King Henry III . 
 After disputes between students and Oxford townsfolk in 1209 , some academics fled from the violence to Cambridge , later forming the University of Cambridge . 
 The students associated together on the basis of geographical origins , into two " nations " , representing the North ( Northern or <unk> , which included the English people north of the River Trent and the Scots ) and the South ( Southern or Australes , which included English people south of the Trent , the Irish and the Welsh ) . In later centuries , geographical origins continued to influence many students ' affiliations when membership of a college or hall became customary in Oxford . In addition to this , members of many religious orders , including Dominicans , Franciscans , Carmelites and Augustinians , settled in Oxford in the mid @-@ 13th century , gained influence and maintained houses or halls for students . At about the same time , private benefactors established colleges to serve as self @-@ contained scholarly communities . Among the earliest such founders were William of Durham , who in 1249 endowed University College , and John Balliol , father of a future King of Scots ; Balliol College bears his name . Another founder , Walter de Merton , a Lord Chancellor of England and afterwards Bishop of Rochester , devised a series of regulations for college life ; Merton College thereby became the model for such establishments at Oxford , as well as at the University of Cambridge . Thereafter , an increasing number of students forsook living in halls and religious houses in favour of living in colleges . 
 In 1333 – 34 , an attempt by some dissatisfied Oxford scholars to found a new university at Stamford , Lincolnshire was blocked by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge petitioning King Edward III . Thereafter , until the 1820s , no new universities were allowed to be founded in England , even in London ; thus , Oxford and Cambridge had a duopoly , which was unusual in western European countries . 
 = = = Renaissance period = = = 
 The new learning of the Renaissance greatly influenced Oxford from the late 15th century onwards . Among university scholars of the period were William <unk> , who contributed to the revival of Greek language studies , and John Colet , the noted biblical scholar . 
 With the Reformation and the breaking of ties with the Roman Catholic Church , recusant scholars from Oxford fled to continental Europe , settling especially at the University of Douai . The method of teaching at Oxford was transformed from the medieval scholastic method to Renaissance education , although institutions associated with the university suffered losses of land and revenues . As a centre of learning and scholarship , Oxford 's reputation declined in the Age of Enlightenment ; enrolments fell and teaching was neglected . 
 In 1636 , Chancellor William Laud , Archbishop of Canterbury , codified the university 's statutes . These , to a large extent , remained its governing regulations until the mid @-@ 19th century . Laud was also responsible for the granting of a charter securing privileges for the University Press , and he made significant contributions to the Bodleian Library , the main library of the university . From the inception of the Church of England until 1866 , membership of the church was a requirement to receive the B.A. degree from Oxford , and " dissenters " were only permitted to receive the M.A. in 1871 . 
 The university was a centre of the Royalist party during the English Civil War ( 1642 – 1649 ) , while the town favoured the opposing Parliamentarian cause . From the mid @-@ 18th century onwards , however , the University of Oxford took little part in political conflicts . 
 Wadham College , founded in 1610 , was the undergraduate college of Sir Christopher Wren . Wren was part of a brilliant group of experimental scientists at Oxford in the 1650s , the Oxford Philosophical Club , which included Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke . This group held regular meetings at Wadham under the guidance of the College Warden , John Wilkins , and the group formed the nucleus which went on to found the Royal Society . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 The mid @-@ 19th century saw the impact of the Oxford Movement ( 1833 – 1845 ) , led among others by the future Cardinal Newman . The influence of the reformed model of German university reached Oxford via key scholars such as Edward Bouverie Pusey , Benjamin Jowett and Max Müller . 
 The system of separate honour schools for different subjects began in 1802 , with Mathematics and Literae Humaniores . Schools for Natural Sciences and Law , and Modern History were added in 1853 . By 1872 , the latter was split into Jurisprudence and Modern History . Theology became the sixth honour school . In addition to these B.A. Honours degrees , the postgraduate Bachelor of Civil Law ( <unk> ) was , and still is , offered . 
 Administrative reforms during the 19th century included the replacement of oral examinations with written entrance tests , greater tolerance for religious dissent , and the establishment of four women 's colleges . 20th @-@ century Privy Council decisions ( e.g. the abolition of compulsory daily worship , dissociation of the Regius Professorship of Hebrew from clerical status , diversion of colleges ' theological bequests to other purposes ) loosened the link with traditional belief and practice . Furthermore , although the university 's emphasis traditionally had been on classical knowledge , its curriculum expanded in the course of the 19th century to encompass scientific and medical studies . Knowledge of Ancient Greek was required for admission until 1920 , and Latin until 1960 . 
 The University of Oxford began to award doctorates in the first third of the 20th century . The first Oxford DPhil in mathematics was awarded in 1921 . 
 At the start of 1914 the university housed approximately three thousand undergraduates and about 100 postgraduate students . The First World War saw many undergraduates and fellows join the armed forces . By 1918 virtually all fellows were in uniform and the student population in residence was reduced to 12 per cent . The University Roll of Service records that , in total , 14 @,@ 792 members of the university served in the war , with 2 @,@ 716 ( 18 @.@ 36 per cent ) killed . During the war years the deserted university buildings became hospitals , cadet schools and military training camps . 
 The mid @-@ 20th century saw many distinguished continental scholars , displaced by Nazism and communism , relocating to Oxford . 
 The list of distinguished scholars at the University of Oxford is long and includes many who have made major contributions to British politics , the sciences , medicine , and literature . More than 50 Nobel laureates and more than 50 world leaders have been affiliated with the University of Oxford . 
 = = = Women 's education = = = 
 The university passed a statute in 1875 allowing its delegates to create examinations for women at roughly undergraduate level ; for a brief period after the turn of the twentieth century , this allowed the " steamboat ladies " to receive ad eundem degrees from the University of Dublin . The first four women 's colleges were established due to the activism of the Association for Promoting the Higher Education of Women ( AEW ) . Lady Margaret Hall ( 1878 ) was followed by Somerville College in 1879 ; the first 21 students from Somerville and Lady Margaret Hall attended lectures in rooms above an Oxford baker 's shop . The first two colleges for women were followed by St Hugh 's ( 1886 ) , St Hilda 's ( 1893 ) and St Anne 's College ( 1952 ) . In the early 20th century , Oxford and Cambridge were widely perceived to be bastions of male privilege , however the integration of women into Oxford moved forwards during the First World War . In 1916 women were admitted as medical students on a par with men , and in 1917 the university accepted financial responsibility for women 's examinations . On 7 October 1920 women became eligible for admission as full members of the university and were given the right to take degrees . In 1927 the university 's dons created a quota that limited the number of female students to a quarter that of men , a ruling which was not abolished until 1957 . However , before the 1970s all Oxford colleges were for men or women only , so that the number of women was limited by the capacity of the women 's colleges to admit students . It was not until 1959 that the women 's colleges were given full collegiate status . 
 In 1974 , Brasenose , Jesus , Wadham , Hertford and St Catherine 's became the first previously all @-@ male colleges to admit women . 
 In 2008 , the last single @-@ sex college , St Hilda 's , admitted its first men , so that all colleges are now co @-@ residential . By 1988 , 40 % of undergraduates at Oxford were female ; the ratio was about 46 % : 54 % in men 's favour for the 2012 undergraduate admission . 
 The detective novel Gaudy Night by Dorothy L. Sayers , herself one of the first women to gain an academic degree from Oxford , is largely set in a ( fictional ) women 's college at Oxford , and the issue of women 's education is central to its plot . 
 = = Buildings and sites = = 
 = = = Main sites = = = 
 The university is a " city university " in that it does not have a main campus ; instead , colleges , departments , accommodation , and other facilities are scattered throughout the city centre . The Science Area , in which most science departments are located , is the area that bears closest resemblance to a campus . The ten @-@ acre ( 4 hectare ) Radcliffe Observatory Quarter in the northwest of the city is currently under development . However , the larger colleges ' sites are of similar size to these areas . 
 Iconic university buildings include the Radcliffe Camera , the Sheldonian Theatre used for music concerts , lectures , and university ceremonies , and the Examination Schools , where examinations and some lectures take place . The University Church of St Mary the Virgin was used for university ceremonies before the construction of the Sheldonian . Christ Church Cathedral uniquely serves as both a college chapel and as a cathedral . 
 In 2012 – 13 , the university built the controversial one @-@ hectare ( 400m × 25m ) Castle Mill development of 4 – 5 @-@ storey blocks of student flats overlooking <unk> Meadow and the historic Port Meadow , blocking views of the spires in the city centre . The development has been likened to building a " skyscraper beside Stonehenge " . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 The University Parks are a 70 @-@ acre ( 28 ha ) parkland area in the northeast of the city . It is open to the public during daylight hours . As well as providing gardens and exotic plants , the Parks contains numerous sports fields , used for official and unofficial fixtures , and also contains sites of special interest including the Genetic Garden , an experimental garden to elucidate and investigate evolutionary processes . 
 The Botanic Garden on the High Street is the oldest botanic garden in the UK . It contains over 8 @,@ 000 different plant species on 1 @.@ 8 ha ( 4 1 ⁄ 2 acres ) . It is one of the most diverse yet compact major collections of plants in the world and includes representatives of over 90 % of the higher plant families . The Harcourt Arboretum is a 130 @-@ acre ( 53 ha ) site six miles ( 10 km ) south of the city that includes native woodland and 67 acres ( 27 hectares ) of meadow . The 1 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) <unk> Woods are owned by the university and used for research in zoology and climate change . 
 There are also various collegiate @-@ owned open spaces open to the public , including Bagley Wood and most notably Christ Church Meadow . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 As a collegiate university , Oxford 's structure can be confusing to those unfamiliar with it . The university is a federation , comprising over forty self @-@ governing colleges and halls , along with a central administration headed by the Vice @-@ Chancellor . 
 Academic departments are located centrally within the structure of the federation ; they are not affiliated with any particular college . Departments provide facilities for teaching and research , determine the syllabi and guidelines for the teaching of students , perform research , and deliver lectures and seminars . 
 Colleges arrange the tutorial teaching for their undergraduates , and the members of an academic department are spread around many colleges . Though certain colleges do have subject alignments ( e.g. , Nuffield College as a centre for the social sciences ) , these are exceptions , and most colleges will have a broad mix of academics and students from a diverse range of subjects . Facilities such as libraries are provided on all these levels : by the central university ( the Bodleian ) , by the departments ( individual departmental libraries , such as the English Faculty Library ) , and by colleges ( each of which maintains a multi @-@ discipline library for the use of its members ) . 
 = = = Central governance = = = 
 The university 's formal head is the Chancellor , currently Lord Patten of Barnes , though as at most British universities , the Chancellor is a titular figure , and is not involved with the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the university . The Chancellor is elected by the members of Convocation , a body comprising all graduates of the university , and holds office until death . 
 The Vice @-@ Chancellor , currently Louise Richardson , is the de facto head of the university . Five pro @-@ vice @-@ chancellors have specific responsibilities for education ; research ; planning and resources ; development and external affairs ; and personnel and equal opportunities . The University Council is the executive policy @-@ forming body , which consists of the vice @-@ chancellor as well as heads of departments and other members elected by Congregation , in addition to observers from the students ' union . Congregation , the " parliament of the dons " , comprises over 3 @,@ 700 members of the university 's academic and administrative staff , and has ultimate responsibility for legislative matters : it discusses and pronounces on policies proposed by the University Council . 
 Two university proctors , elected annually on a rotating basis from two of the colleges , are the internal <unk> who make sure that the university and its members adhere to its statutes . This role incorporates student welfare and discipline , as well as oversight of the university 's proceedings . The university 's professors are collectively referred to as the " Statutory Professors of the University of Oxford " . They are particularly influential in the running of the university 's graduate programmes . Examples of statutory professors are the Chichele Professorships and the Drummond Professor of Political Economy . The various academic faculties , departments , and institutes are organised into four divisions , each with its own head and elected board . They are the Humanities division ; the Social Sciences Division ; the Mathematical , Physical and Life Sciences Division ; and the Medical Sciences Division . 
 The University of Oxford is a " public university " in the sense that it receives some public money from the government , but it is a " private university " in the sense that it is entirely self @-@ governing and , in theory , could choose to become entirely private by rejecting public funds . 
 = = = Colleges = = = 
 To be a member of the university , all students , and most academic staff , must also be a member of a college or hall . There are 38 colleges of the University of Oxford and six Permanent Private Halls , each controlling its membership and with its own internal structure and activities . Not all colleges offer all courses , but they generally cover a broad range of subjects . 
 The colleges are : 
 The Permanent Private Halls were founded by different Christian denominations . One difference between a college and a <unk> is that whereas colleges are governed by the fellows of the college , the governance of a <unk> resides , at least in part , with the corresponding Christian denomination . The six current <unk> are : 
 The <unk> and colleges join together as the Conference of Colleges , which represents the common concerns of the several colleges of the university , and to discuss policy and to deal with the central university administration . The Conference of Colleges was established as a recommendation of the Franks Commission in 1965 . 
 Teaching members of the colleges ( i.e. fellows and tutors ) are collectively and familiarly known as dons , although the term is rarely used by the university itself . In addition to residential and dining facilities , the colleges provide social , cultural , and recreational activities for their members . Colleges have responsibility for admitting undergraduates and organising their tuition ; for graduates , this responsibility falls upon the departments . There is no common title for the heads of colleges : the titles used include Warden , Provost , Principal , President , Rector , Master and Dean . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 In 2014 / 15 , the university had an income of £ <unk> ; key sources were research grants ( £ <unk> ) and academic fees ( £ <unk> ) . The colleges had a total income of £ <unk> , 
 While the university has the larger annual income and operating budget , the colleges have a larger aggregate endowment : over £ <unk> compared to the university 's £ <unk> . The Central University 's endowment , along with some of the colleges ' , is managed by the university 's wholly owned endowment management office , Oxford University Endowment Management , formed in 2007 . The university has substantial investments in fossil fuel companies , and in 2014 began consultations on whether it should follow some US universities which have committed to sell off their fossil fuel investments . 
 The University was one of the first in the UK to raise money through a major public fundraising campaign , The Campaign for Oxford . The current campaign , its second , was launched in May 2008 and is entitled " Oxford Thinking – The Campaign for the University of Oxford " . This is looking to support three areas : academic posts and programmes , student support , and buildings and infrastructure ; having passed its original target of £ 1 @.@ 25 billion in March 2012 , the target has now been raised to £ 3 billion . The university has raised £ 2 billion so far in 2015 . 
 = = = Affiliations = = = 
 Oxford is a member of the Russell Group of research @-@ led British universities , the G5 , the League of European Research Universities , and the International Alliance of Research Universities . It is also a core member of the <unk> and forms part of the " golden triangle " of highly research intensive and elite English universities . 
 = = Academic profile = = 
 = = = Admission = = = 
 In common with most British universities , prospective students apply through the UCAS application system , but prospective applicants for the University of Oxford , along with those for medicine , dentistry , and University of Cambridge applicants , must observe an earlier deadline of 15 October . 
 To allow a more personalised judgement of students , who might otherwise apply for both , undergraduate applicants are not permitted to apply to both Oxford and Cambridge in the same year . The only exceptions are applicants for organ scholarships and those applying to read for a second undergraduate degree . 
 Most applicants choose to apply to one of the individual colleges , which work with each other to ensure that the best students gain a place somewhere at the university regardless of their college preferences . <unk> is based on achieved and predicted exam results , school references , and , in some subjects , written admission tests or candidate @-@ submitted written work . Approximately 60 % of applicants are shortlisted , although this varies by subject . If a large number of shortlisted applicants for a subject choose one college , then students who named that college may be reallocated randomly to under @-@ subscribed colleges for the subject . The colleges then invite shortlisted candidates for interview , where they are provided with food and accommodation for around three days in December . Most applicants will be individually interviewed by academics at more than one college . Students from outside Europe can be interviewed remotely , for example , over the Internet . 
 Offers are sent out in early January , with each offer usually being from a specific college . One in four successful candidates receives an offer from a college that they did not apply to . Some courses may make " open offers " to some candidates , who are not assigned to a particular college until A Level results day in August . 
 = = = Teaching and degrees = = = 
 Undergraduate teaching is centred on the tutorial , where 1 – 4 students spend an hour with an academic discussing their week 's work , usually an essay ( humanities , most social sciences , some mathematical , physical , and life sciences ) or problem sheet ( most mathematical , physical , and life sciences , and some social sciences ) . The university itself is responsible for conducting examinations and conferring degrees . Undergraduate teaching takes place during three eight @-@ week academic terms : Michaelmas , Hilary and Trinity . ( These are officially known as ' Full Term ' : ' Term ' is a lengthier period with little practical significance . ) Internally , the weeks in a term begin on Sundays , and are referred to numerically , with the initial week known as " first week " , the last as " eighth week " and with the numbering extended to refer to weeks before and after term ( for example " -1st week " and " <unk> week " precede term ) . Undergraduates must be in residence from Thursday of <unk> week . These teaching terms are shorter than those of most other British universities , and their total duration amounts to less than half the year . However , undergraduates are also expected to do some academic work during the three holidays ( known as the Christmas , Easter , and Long Vacations ) . 
 Research degrees at the master 's and doctoral level are conferred in all subjects studied at graduate level at the university . 
 = = = Scholarships and financial support = = = 
 There are many opportunities for students at Oxford to receive financial help during their studies . The Oxford Opportunity <unk> , introduced in 2006 , are university @-@ wide means @-@ based bursaries available to any British undergraduate . With a total possible grant of £ 10 @,@ 235 over a 3 @-@ year degree , it is the most generous bursary scheme offered by any British university . In addition , individual colleges also offer bursaries and funds to help their students . For graduate study , there are many scholarships attached to the university , available to students from all sorts of backgrounds , from Rhodes Scholarships to the relatively new Weidenfeld Scholarships . Oxford also offers the Clarendon Scholarship which is open to graduate applicants of all nationalities . The Clarendon Scholarship is principally funded by Oxford University Press in association with colleges and other partnership awards . 
 Students successful in early examinations are rewarded by their colleges with scholarships and exhibitions , normally the result of a long @-@ standing endowment , although since the introduction of tuition fees the amounts of money available are purely nominal . Scholars , and <unk> in some colleges , are entitled to wear a more voluminous undergraduate gown ; " commoners " ( originally those who had to pay for their " commons " , or food and lodging ) are restricted to a short , sleeveless garment . The term " scholar " in relation to Oxford therefore had a specific meaning as well as the more general meaning of someone of outstanding academic ability . In previous times , there were " noblemen commoners " and " gentlemen commoners " , but these ranks were abolished in the 19th century . " Closed " scholarships , available only to candidates who fitted specific conditions such as coming from specific schools , now exist only in name . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 The university maintains the largest university library system in the UK , and , with over 11 million volumes housed on 120 miles ( 190 km ) of shelving , the Bodleian group is the second @-@ largest library in the UK , after the British Library . The Bodleian is a legal deposit library , which means that it is entitled to request a free copy of every book published in the UK . As such , its collection is growing at a rate of over three miles ( five kilometres ) of shelving every year . 
 The buildings referred to as the university 's main research library , The Bodleian , consist of the original Bodleian Library in the Old Schools Quadrangle , founded by Sir Thomas Bodley in 1598 and opened in 1602 , the Radcliffe Camera , the Clarendon Building , and the New Bodleian Building . A tunnel underneath Broad Street connects these buildings , with the Gladstone Link connecting the Old Bodleian and Radcliffe Camera opening to readers in 2011 . 
 The Bodleian Libraries group was formed in 2000 , bringing the Bodleian Library and some of the subject libraries together . It now comprises 28 libraries , a number of which have been created by bringing previously separate collections together , including the Sackler Library , Social Science Library and Radcliffe Science Library . Another major product of this collaboration has been a joint integrated library system , <unk> ( Oxford Libraries Information System ) , and its public interface , SOLO ( Search Oxford Libraries Online ) , which provides an electronic catalogue covering all member libraries , as well as the libraries of individual colleges and other faculty libraries , which are not members of the group but do share cataloguing information . 
 A new book depository opened in South Marston , Swindon in October 2010 , and current building projects include the remodelling of the New Bodleian building , which will be renamed the Weston Library when it reopens in 2014 – 15 . The renovation is designed to better showcase the library 's various treasures ( which include a Shakespeare First Folio and a Gutenberg Bible ) as well as temporary exhibitions . 
 The Bodleian engaged in a mass @-@ digitisation project with Google in 2004 . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 Oxford maintains a number of museums and galleries , open for free to the public . The Ashmolean Museum , founded in 1683 , is the oldest museum in the UK , and the oldest university museum in the world . It holds significant collections of art and archaeology , including works by Michelangelo , Leonardo da Vinci , Turner , and Picasso , as well as treasures such as the Scorpion <unk> , the Parian Marble and the Alfred Jewel . It also contains " The Messiah " , a pristine Stradivarius violin , regarded by some as one of the finest examples in existence . 
 The University Museum of Natural History holds the university 's zoological , entomological and geological specimens . It is housed in a large neo @-@ Gothic building on Parks Road , in the university 's Science Area . Among its collection are the skeletons of a Tyrannosaurus rex and Triceratops , and the most complete remains of a dodo found anywhere in the world . It also hosts the Simonyi Professorship of the Public Understanding of Science , currently held by Marcus du Sautoy . 
 Adjoining the Museum of Natural History is the Pitt Rivers Museum , founded in 1884 , which displays the university 's archaeological and anthropological collections , currently holding over 500 @,@ 000 items . It recently built a new research annexe ; its staff have been involved with the teaching of anthropology at Oxford since its foundation , when as part of his donation General Augustus Pitt Rivers stipulated that the university establish a lectureship in anthropology . 
 The Museum of the History of Science is housed on Broad St in the world 's oldest @-@ surviving purpose @-@ built museum building . It contains 15 @,@ 000 artefacts , from antiquity to the 20th century , representing almost all aspects of the history of science . In the Faculty of Music on St Aldate 's is the Bate Collection of Musical Instruments , a collection mostly of instruments from Western classical music , from the medieval period onwards . Christ Church Picture Gallery holds a collection of over 200 old master paintings . 
 = = = Publishing = = = 
 The Oxford University Press is the world 's second oldest and currently the largest university press by the number of publications . More than 6 @,@ 000 new books are published annually , including many reference , professional , and academic works ( such as the Oxford English Dictionary , the Concise Oxford English Dictionary , the Oxford World 's Classics , the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , and the Concise Dictionary of National Biography ) . 
 = = = Rankings and reputation = = = 
 Oxford has been among the top ten universities in different league tables . In particular , it had held the number one position in the Times Good University Guide for eleven consecutive years , and the medical school has also maintained first place in the " Clinical , Pre @-@ Clinical & Health " table of the THE World University Rankings for the past five consecutive years . THE has also recognised Oxford as one of the world 's " six super brands " on its World Reputation Rankings . Its Saïd Business School came 23rd in the world in Financial Times Global MBA Ranking . 
 Oxford is ranked 5th best university worldwide and 1st in Britain for forming CEOs according to the Professional Ranking World Universities . It is ranked first in the UK for the quality of its graduates as chosen by the recruiters of the UK 's major companies . 
 In the 2017 Complete University Guide , 34 out of the 35 subjects offered by Oxford rank within the top 10 nationally meaning Oxford was one of only four multi @-@ faculty universities ( along with Cambridge , Imperial College London and Durham ) in the UK to have over 90 % of their subjects in the top 10 . Art & Design , East & South Asian Studies , Medicine , Music , Philosophy and Politics were ranked first in the UK by the guide . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 Academic dress is required for examinations , matriculation , disciplinary hearings , and when visiting university officers . A referendum held amongst the Oxford student body in 2015 showed 76 % against making it voluntary in examinations – <unk> students voted , with the 40 @.@ 2 % turnout the highest ever for a UK student union referendum . This was widely interpreted by students as not so much being a vote on making <unk> voluntary , but rather a vote on whether or not to effectively abolish it by default , as it was assumed that if a minority of people came to exams without <unk> , the rest would soon follow . In July 2012 the regulations regarding academic dress were modified to be more inclusive to transgender people . 
 Other traditions and customs vary by college . For example , some colleges have formal hall six times a week , but in others this only happens occasionally . At most colleges these formal meals require gowns to be worn , and a Latin grace is said . 
 Balls are major events held by colleges ; the largest , held <unk> in 9th week of Trinity Term , are called Commemoration balls ; the dress code is usually white tie . Many other colleges hold smaller events during the year that they call summer balls or parties . These are usually held on an annual or irregular basis , and are usually black tie . 
 Punting is a common summer leisure activity . 
 There are several more or less quirky traditions peculiar to individual colleges , for example the All Souls mallard song . 
 = = = Clubs and societies = = = 
 Sport is played between college teams , in tournaments known as <unk> ( the term is also used for some non @-@ sporting competitions ) . In addition to these there are higher standard university wide groups . Significant focus is given to annual varsity matches played against Cambridge , the most famous of which is The Boat Race , watched by a TV audience of between five and ten million viewers . This outside interest reflects the importance of rowing to many of those within the university . Much attention is given to the termly intercollegiate rowing regattas : Christ Church Regatta , Torpids and Summer Eights . A blue is an award given to those who compete at the university team level in certain sports . As well as traditional sports , there are teams for activities such as <unk> and quidditch . 
 There are two weekly student newspapers : the independent Cherwell and OUSU 's The Oxford Student . Other publications include the Isis magazine , The Owl Journal , the satirical <unk> , and the graduate Oxonian Review . The student radio station is Oxide Radio . Most colleges have chapel choirs . Music , drama , and other arts societies exist both at collegiate level and as university @-@ wide groups . Unlike most other collegiate societies , musical ensembles actively encourage players from other colleges . 
 Most academic areas have student societies of some form which are open to all students , regardless of course , for example the Scientific Society . There are groups for almost all faiths , political parties , countries and cultures . 
 The Oxford Union ( not to be confused with the Oxford University Student Union ) hosts weekly debates and high profile speakers . There have historically been elite invite @-@ only societies such as the Bullingdon Club . 
 Sports teams , but also other societies and groups organised especially for the purpose , often take part in <unk> . These evenings involve ' crews ' ( often one of each gender , hence the name ) going for a meal and consuming much alcohol , before heading to a nightclub . 
 = = = OUSU and common rooms = = = 
 The Oxford University Student Union , better known by its acronym OUSU , exists to represent students in the university 's decision @-@ making , to act as the voice for students in the national higher education policy debate , and to provide direct services to the student body . Reflecting the collegiate nature of the University of Oxford itself , OUSU is both an association of Oxford 's more than 21 @,@ 000 individual students and a federation of the affiliated college common rooms , and other affiliated organisations that represent subsets of the undergraduate and graduate students . The OUSU Executive Committee includes six full @-@ time salaried sabbatical officers , who generally serve in the year following completion of their Final Examinations . 
 The importance of collegiate life is such that for many students their college JCR ( Junior Common Room , for undergraduates ) or MCR ( Middle Common Room , for graduates ) is seen as more important than OUSU . <unk> and <unk> each have a committee , with a president and other elected students representing their peers to college authorities . Additionally , they organise events and often have significant budgets to spend as they wish ( money coming from their colleges and sometimes other sources such as student @-@ run bars ) . ( It is worth noting that JCR and MCR are terms that are used to refer to rooms for use by members , as well as the student bodies . ) Not all colleges use this JCR / MCR structure , for example Wadham College 's entire student population is represented by a combined Students ' Union and purely graduate colleges have different arrangements . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Throughout its history , a sizeable number of Oxford alumni , known as Oxonians , have become notable in many varied fields , both academic and otherwise , ranging from T. E. Lawrence , British Army officer known better as Lawrence of Arabia to the explorer , courtier , and man of letters , Sir Walter Raleigh , ( who attended Oriel College but left without taking a degree ) ; and the Australian media mogul , Rupert Murdoch . Moreover , 58 Nobel prize @-@ winners have studied or taught at Oxford , with prizes won in all six categories . More information on famous senior and junior members of the university can be found in the individual college articles . An individual may be associated with two or more colleges , as an undergraduate , postgraduate and / or member of staff . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 27 British prime ministers have attended Oxford , including William Gladstone , Herbert Asquith , Clement Attlee , Harold Macmillan , Edward Heath , Harold Wilson , Margaret Thatcher , Tony Blair , David Cameron and most recently Theresa May . Of all the post @-@ war prime ministers , only Gordon Brown was educated at a university other than Oxford , while James Callaghan never attended a university . 
 Over 100 Oxford alumni were elected to the House of Commons in 2010 . This includes former Leader of the Opposition , Ed Miliband , and numerous members of the cabinet and shadow cabinet . Additionally , over 140 Oxonians sit in the House of Lords . 
 At least 30 other international leaders have been educated at Oxford This number includes Harald V of Norway , Abdullah II of Jordan , five Prime Ministers of Australia ( John Gorton , Malcolm Fraser , Bob Hawke , Tony Abbott , and Malcolm Turnbull ) two Prime Ministers of Canada ( Lester B. Pearson and John Turner ) , two Prime Ministers of India ( Manmohan Singh and Indira Gandhi ( although she did not finish her degree ) ) , five Prime Ministers of Pakistan ( Liaquat Ali Khan , <unk> Shaheed Suhrawardy , Sir Feroz Khan Noon , Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto , and Benazir Bhutto ) , S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike ( former Prime Minister of Ceylon ) , Norman Washington Manley of Jamaica , Eric Williams ( Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago ) , Álvaro Uribe ( Colombia 's former President ) , <unk> <unk> ( former Prime Minister of Thailand ) and Bill Clinton ( the first President of the United States to have attended Oxford ; he attended as a Rhodes Scholar ) . Arthur Mutambara ( Deputy Prime Minister of Zimbabwe ) , was a Rhodes Scholar in 1991 . Festus <unk> ( former president of Botswana ) was a student at University College . The Burmese democracy activist and Nobel laureate , Aung San Suu Kyi , was a student of St. Hugh 's College . 
 = = = Mathematics and sciences = = = 
 Three Oxford mathematicians , Michael Atiyah , Daniel Quillen and Simon Donaldson , have won Fields Medals , often called the " Nobel Prize for mathematics " . Andrew Wiles , who proved Fermat 's Last Theorem , was educated at Oxford and is currently a Royal Society Research Professor at Oxford . Marcus du Sautoy and Roger Penrose are both currently mathematics professors . Stephen Wolfram , chief designer of Mathematica and Wolfram Alpha studied at the university , along with Tim Berners @-@ Lee , inventor of the World Wide Web , Edgar F. Codd , inventor of the relational model of data , and Tony Hoare , programming languages pioneer and inventor of <unk> . 
 The university is associated with eleven winners of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry , five in physics and sixteen in medicine . 
 Scientists who performed research in Oxford include chemist Dorothy Hodgkin who received her Nobel Prize for " determinations by X @-@ ray techniques of the structures of important biochemical substances " . Both Richard Dawkins and Frederick Soddy studied at the university and returned for research purposes . Robert Hooke , Edwin Hubble , and Stephen Hawking all studied in Oxford . 
 Robert Boyle , a founder of modern chemistry , never formally studied or held a post within the university , but resided within the city to be part of the scientific community and was awarded an honorary degree . Notable scientists who spent brief periods at Oxford include Albert Einstein developer of general theory of relativity and the concept of photons ; and Erwin Schrödinger who formulated the Schrödinger equation and the Schrödinger 's cat thought experiment . 
 Economists Adam Smith , Alfred Marshall , E. F. Schumacher , and Amartya Sen all spent time at Oxford . 
 = = = Literature , music , and drama = = = 
 The long list of writers associated with Oxford includes John Fowles , Theodor Geisel , Thomas Middleton , Samuel Johnson , Christopher Hitchens , Robert Graves , Evelyn Waugh , Lewis Carroll , Aldous Huxley , Oscar Wilde , C. S. Lewis , J. R. R. Tolkien , Graham Greene , <unk> , Philip Pullman , Joseph Heller , Vikram Seth , the poets Percy Bysshe Shelley , John Donne , A. E. Housman , W. H. Auden , T. S. Eliot , Wendy <unk> and Philip Larkin , and seven poets laureate : Thomas Warton , Henry James Pye , Robert Southey , Robert Bridges , Cecil Day @-@ Lewis , Sir John Betjeman , and Andrew Motion . 
 Composers Hubert Parry , George Butterworth , John Taverner , William Walton , James Whitbourn and Andrew Lloyd Webber have all been involved with the university . 
 Actors Hugh Grant , Kate Beckinsale , Dudley Moore , Michael Palin , Terry Jones , Anna Popplewell , and Rowan Atkinson were undergraduates at the university , as were filmmakers Ken Loach and Richard Curtis . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Oxford has also produced at least 12 saints , and 20 Archbishops of Canterbury , the most recent Archbishop being Rowan Williams , who studied at Wadham College and was later a Canon Professor at Christ Church . Religious reformer John Wycliffe was an Oxford scholar , for a time Master of Balliol College . John Colet , Christian humanist , Dean of St Paul 's , and friend of Erasmus , studied at Magdalen College . The founder of Methodism , John Wesley , studied at Christ Church and was elected a fellow of Lincoln College . The Oxford Movement ( 1833 – 1845 ) was closely associated with the Oriel Fellows John Henry Newman , Edward Bouverie Pusey and John Keble . Other religious figures were Mirza Nasir Ahmad , the third Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community , Shoghi Effendi , one of the appointed leaders of the Baha 'i faith and Joseph Cordeiro , the only Pakistani Catholic cardinal . 
 = = = Philosophy = = = 
 Oxford 's philosophical tradition started in the medieval era , with Robert Grosseteste and William of Ockham , commonly known for Occam 's razor , among those teaching at the university . Thomas Hobbes , Jeremy Bentham and the empiricist John Locke received degrees from Oxford . Though the latter 's main works were written after leaving Oxford , Locke was heavily influenced by his twelve years at the university . 
 Philosophy was never absent from Oxford 's preoccupations . Oxford philosophers of the 20th century include Gilbert Ryle , author of the influential The Concept of Mind , who spent his entire philosophical career at the university and Derek <unk> , who specialises in personal identity and related matters . Other commonly read modern philosophers to have studied at the university include A. J. Ayer , Paul Grice , Thomas Nagel , known for his essay " What Is it Like to Be a Bat ? " , Robert Nozick , John Rawls and Michael Sandel . John Searle , presenter of the Chinese room thought experiment , studied and began his academic career at the university . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Some 50 Olympic medal @-@ winners have academic connections with the university , including Sir Matthew Pinsent , quadruple gold @-@ medallist rower . Other sporting connections include Imran Khan . 
 Rowers from Oxford who have won gold at the Olympics or World Championships include Michael Blomquist , Ed Coode , Chris Davidge , Hugh Edwards , Jason Flickinger , Tim Foster , Christopher <unk> , Matthew Pinsent , Pete Reed , Jonny Searle , Andrew Triggs Hodge , Jake Wetzel , Michael <unk> , and Barney Williams . Many Oxford graduates have also risen to the highest echelon in cricket : Harry Altham , Bernard Bosanquet ( inventor of the googly ) , Colin Cowdrey , Gerry Crutchley , Jamie Dalrymple , Martin Donnelly , R. E. Foster ( the only man to captain England at both cricket and football ) , C. B. Fry , George Harris ( also served in the House of Lords ) , Douglas Jardine , Malcolm Jardine , Imran Khan , Alan Melville , Iftikhar Ali Khan Pataudi , Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi , M. J. K. Smith , and Pelham Warner . 
 Oxford students have also excelled in other sports . Such alumni include American football player Myron Rolle ( NFL player ) ; Olympic gold medalists in athletics David <unk> and Jack Lovelock ; basketball players Bill Bradley ( US Senator and NBA player ) and Charles Thomas McMillen ( US Congressman and NBA player ) ; figure skater John Misha <unk> ( national champion ) ; footballers John Bain , Charles Wreford @-@ Brown , and Cuthbert Ottaway ; modern pentathlete Steph Cook ( Olympic gold medalist ) ; rugby footballers Stuart Barnes , Simon <unk> , David Humphreys , David Edward Kirk , Anton Oliver , Ronald Poulton @-@ Palmer , Joe Roff , and William Webb Ellis ( allegedly the inventor of rugby football ) ; runner Sir Roger Gilbert Bannister ( who ran the first sub @-@ four @-@ minute mile ) , World Cup ski racer Ryan Max Riley ( national champion ) ; and tennis player Clarence Bruce . 
 = = = Adventure and exploration = = = 
 Three of the most well @-@ known adventurers and explorers who attended Oxford are Walter Raleigh , one of the most notable figures of the Elizabethan era , T. E. Lawrence , whose life was the basis of the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia , and Thomas Coryat . The latter , the author of " Coryat 's <unk> hastily gobbled up in Five Months Travels in France , Italy , & c ' " ( 1611 ) and court jester of Henry Frederick , Prince of Wales , is credited with introducing the table fork and umbrella to England and being the first Briton to do a Grand Tour of Europe . 
 Other notable figures include Gertrude Bell , an explorer , archaeologist , mapper and spy , who , along with T. E. Lawrence , helped establish the Hashemite dynasties in what is today Jordan and Iraq and played a major role in establishing and administering the modern state of Iraq ; Richard Francis Burton , who travelled in disguise to Mecca and journeyed with John Hanning Speke as the first European explorers to visit the Great Lakes of Africa in search of the source of the Nile ; mountaineer Tom Bourdillon , member of the expedition to make the first ascent of Mount Everest ; and Peter Fleming , adventurer and travel writer and elder brother of Ian Fleming , creator of James Bond . 
 = = Oxford in literature and other media = = 
 The University of Oxford is the setting for numerous works of fiction . Oxford was mentioned in fiction as early as 1400 when Chaucer in his Canterbury Tales referred to a " Clerk [ student ] of <unk> " . By 1989 , 533 novels based in Oxford had been identified and the number continues to rise . Famous literary works range from Brideshead Revisited by Evelyn Waugh , to the trilogy His Dark Materials by Philip Pullman , which features an alternate @-@ reality version of the university . 
 Other notable examples include : 
 Gaudy Night , a Lord Peter Wimsey mystery by Dorothy L. Sayers ( who was herself a graduate of Somerville College ) . 
 The Inspector Morse series by Colin Dexter , and its spin off Lewis , are set in Oxford and frequently refer to the university ( although most of the college names are fictional ) . 
 <unk> Dobson , by Max Beerbohm 
 Brideshead Revisited ( 1981 ) , based on Waugh 's novel ; a miniseries enormously popular in Britain and America , the film has sometimes been seen as drawing unwanted attention to Oxford 's stereotypical reputation as a playground of the upper classes . It stars Jeremy Irons and most college shots are of Christ Church and Hertford . 
 True Blue ( 1996 ) , about the mutiny at the time of the Oxford @-@ Cambridge Boat Race of 1987 
 The History Boys ( film ) ( 2008 ) movie about a group of boys applying to do history at Oxford . Set in 1983 and based on the play by Alan Bennett . 
 The Golden Compass ( film ) ( 2007 ) 
 The Riot Club ( 2014 ) 
 = Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty = 
 Count Étienne @-@ Marie @-@ Antoine Champion de Nansouty ( 30 May 1768 – 12 February 1815 ) was a French cavalry commander during the French Revolutionary Wars who rose to the rank of General of Division in 1803 and subsequently held important military commands during the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Of noble Burgundian descent , he was a student at the Brienne military school , then was a graduate of the Paris military school . Nansouty began his military career in 1785 , as a sub @-@ lieutenant in the regiment Bourgogne @-@ Infanterie , where his father had served during the wars of Louis XV . A cavalry officer at the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1792 , Nansouty was commissioned as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Marshal Nicolas Luckner . During the First Coalition , he saw service as a lieutenant @-@ colonel and squadron commander in the 9th ( heavy ) Cavalry Regiment , campaigning with the French armies on the Rhine and in Germany . Promoted to Colonel in 1793 and given the command of the 9th Cavalry , he was noted for several well @-@ led cavalry actions . Finally made a Brigadier General in 1799 , after he had refused the promotion several times in the past , Nansouty fought the next year under General Jean Victor Moreau in southern Germany , in a decisive campaign of the Second Coalition . 
 Promoted to the top military rank of General of Division in 1803 , Nansouty was called to the command of the 1st Heavy Cavalry Division in Emperor Napoleon I 's newly created Grande Armée . Commanding this division from 1804 to 1809 , Nansouty was present at some of the most significant battles of the Third , Fourth and Fifth coalitions , leading cavalry actions at the battles of Austerlitz , Friedland , Eckmühl , Aspern @-@ Essling and Wagram . In 1812 , during the campaign in Russia , Nansouty commanded the I Cavalry Corps , which he led with distinction at such battles as <unk> and Borodino , where he received a severe knee wound . The next year , he commanded the Imperial Guard cavalry , which he led at Dresden , Leipzig and Hanau , where he was again wounded . In 1814 he led his men in several engagements , including La <unk> , Montmirail , Vauchamps and Craonne until his incapacitation from wounds that year . 
 A member of the military elite of the First French Empire and a recipient of the Grand Aigle de la Légion d 'Honneur , Comte de Nansouty was a member of the Military Household of the Emperor as First Squire of the Emperor , and also held the position of Colonel @-@ General of Dragoons . During the Bourbon Restoration , Louis XVIII awarded him additional honours and commands , including one in the Military Household of the King of France . Nansouty died in February 1815 and is buried at the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris . His name is inscribed on the Arc de Triomphe and a street in the 14th arrondissement of Paris is named after him . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Étienne de Nansouty was born on 30 May 1768 in Bordeaux . His father had served France for fifty years in Louis XV 's wars of the Polish Succession and Austrian Succession and the Seven Years ' War , and had subsequently been appointed " major " ( commander ) of the Château @-@ Trompette fortress in Bordeaux . Typically for a member of the minor nobility of the Ancien Régime , young Étienne de Nansouty chose to follow his father 's footsteps in the military . He was admitted at the military school of Brienne @-@ le @-@ Château in 1779 , aged ten , where he was noted for being a well @-@ behaved and assiduous student . On 21 October 1782 , he transferred to the École Militaire in Paris , where he obtained excellent grades . Two years later , Nansouty became a Chevalier ( Knight ) of the Order Notre @-@ Dame @-@ du @-@ Mont @-@ Carmel and had the honour of being decorated by Monsieur , the future King Louis XVIII , in person . Upon his graduation on 30 May 1783 , he was appointed sub @-@ lieutenant and , on 26 May 1785 , Nansouty was sent to the Bourgogne @-@ Infanterie regiment , where his father had served with distinction . 
 Throughout his childhood and youth , the Nansouty family led a tranquil yet modest life in Bordeaux , where his father held the position of commander of Château @-@ Trompette , in which he lived with his family , additionally receiving a pension of 1000 livres . He was still holding the position as commander when he died suddenly in 1785 , after more than 60 years of active service . His widow had no revenue with which to raise their son and two daughters . However , influential people such as the Duchess of <unk> and the wife of Marshal Beauvau contacted the Minister of War , Marshal de Ségur , regarding the situation of the young Nansouty . As a result , in 1788 , Nansouty was named interim captain in the light cavalry Franche @-@ Comté Cavalerie Regiment ( later <unk> 4th Chasseurs à Cheval ) . He was soon transferred to the Lauzun Hussar Regiment ( which became the 6th Hussars in 1791 , then the 5th Hussars in 1793 ) . In 1791 , Nansouty then left the regiment to fill two consecutive military staff positions , first as deputy aid to Adjutant General Poncet de la Cour <unk> in the Army of the Centre on 20 December , then as aide @-@ de @-@ camp of Marshal Luckner at the beginning of 1792 . He was then promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel and took up the command of a squadron of the 2nd Chasseurs à Cheval ( on 5 March ) , before being transferred to the command of a squadron of the 9th Cavalry Regiment on 4 April , a regiment in which he would serve for the next seven and a half years . 
 = = Revolutionary Wars = = 
 = = = War of the First Coalition = = = 
 = = = = An officer in the 9th Cavalry = = = = 
 As the French Revolutionary Wars broke out , Nansouty soon found himself in the position of having to take provisional command of the whole 9th Cavalry Regiment , as he was the most senior chef d <unk> ( Lieutenant @-@ Colonel ) of the regiment when the commander , Colonel Badda de <unk> , fell ill at the end of May 1792 . His regiment was a part of the " Army of the Rhine " and was integrated in General Custine 's Corps , which was to march towards the Palatinate , where the first military manoeuvres took place . As Colonel Badda de <unk> died at the end of October that year , Nansouty naturally expected to be appointed commander of the regiment in his place . However , Custine appointed the more senior Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Loubat de Bohan as commander of the 9th Cavalry and , despite Nansouty 's protestations , maintained his decision . With Loubat in command , the 9th saw action against the Prussians in an engagement at Ober @-@ <unk> on 30 March 1793 . After a first successful charge , Nansouty 's 1st squadron was counter @-@ charged by enemy hussars ; the remaining squadrons under Loubat quickly caught up with Nansouty 's squadron and together they broke the enemy . Corps commander Custine was then called up to command the Army of the North but , before leaving his command , he attempted a last daunting move against the Habsburg army . This required a night march , not usually undertaken by cavalry , and poorly coordinated manoeuvres of cavalry , infantry and artillery . This led to total failure of the action of 17 May . During this action , though , the initial charge of the corps cavalry , which included the 9th , successfully took a number of enemy guns . However , a Habsburg counter @-@ charge forced them back in disorder , which spread panic among the ranks of oncoming infantry . 
 Despite this setback , a few days later , <unk> de Bohan was promoted to the rank of General and Nansouty again took provisional command of the regiment . When General Alexandre de Beauharnais took command of the Army of the Rhine , he directed his troops towards Mainz . Some fighting took place near Landau and the 9th Cavalry charged several times . Just after this event , the commander of the 2nd Squadron of the regiment invoked the provision of an equivocal new law , demanding that he be given command of the regiment instead of Nansouty . His request was rejected and Nansouty 's provisional command was confirmed . 
 = = = = Commander of the 9th Cavalry = = = = 
 Now holding the rank of chef de brigade ( colonel ) in command of the 9th Cavalry Regiment , Nansouty took part in several successful cavalry skirmishes around Strasbourg in November and December of 1793 . He then participated to the Battle of <unk> , at the end of December . Following this battle , General of Division <unk> , who had commanded the cavalry division of which Nansouty 's regiment was a part , was tried and executed for alleged cowardice in front of the enemy . Nansouty was not involved in the incident . Furthermore , despite being a member of the Ancien Régime nobility , he was not harassed at any time during the radical phase of the French Revolution . 
 During the campaigns of 1794 , war continued in the Rhineland , with General Louis Desaix pushing back the Coalition forces . Nansouty 's 9th Cavalry was brigaded together with the 17th Dragoon Regiment , with General Delmas de La Coste as commander . The brigade performed well against Austrian cavalry in two distinct actions at the end of May of that year . General of Division Michaud , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of France 's Army of the Rhine , noted in his report that Delmas 's two regiments showed bravery and intrepidity every time they faced the enemy . In July , the 9th Cavalry was involved in several well @-@ led cavalry actions and Nansouty acquired an excellent reputation , recognised as a disciplinarian and a commander who knew how to drill his men effectively . 
 Beginning in December 1794 , the French forces on the Rhine experienced a difficult period , marked by General Charles Pichegru 's inability to take Mainz . General Jean Victor Marie Moreau replaced him as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Moreau reorganised the army into three corps , plus a reserve , of which the 9th Cavalry was a part . The Reserve Cavalry , under Bourcier , intervened at the Battle of Ettlingen , with two squadrons of the 9th being committed and behaving most honourably . The next significant moment of this campaign was the incident that occurred at dawn on 11 August 1796 , while Nansouty and his men were temporarily attached to the " Corps of the Centre " , under General Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr . Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr 's cavalry exhausted after several days of continuous marching , it was decided that a squadron of the fresher Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval would be posted as sentry , an unusual duty for such an elite heavy cavalry unit . At daybreak , as the Battle of Neresheim opened , Austrian cavalry charged the carabiniers , stunning the unprepared cavalrymen , who fled in panic . Their precipitate flight spread alarm among the ranks of the other cavalry regiments , who were used to seeing the Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval triumph against the enemy on every occasion . Nansouty did his best to stop the rout of the cavalrymen and to reorganise the other panic @-@ stricken regiments , but the morale of the cavalrymen remained very low throughout the day and Nansouty was forced to give ground in front of the enemy rather than attempt a risky charge with his demoralised troops . This elicited criticism from the Corps commander , General Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr , who sent his aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Nansouty with orders to charge , which the latter did after taking the necessary time to deploy his men . Under his direction , the four cavalry regiments ( 2nd and 20th Chasseurs à Cheval and 2nd and 9th Cavalry Regiments ) , executed a superb charge , which halted the advance of the Austrian first infantry line . The next day , Archduke Charles of Austria retreated from the field . Nansouty 's 9th Cavalry had numerous other opportunities to shine during the campaign of 1796 and rose to the occasion every time . He became very fond of his regiment and refused the promotion to brigadier general several times , preferring to remain colonel of the 9th cavalry . 
 = = = War of the Second Coalition = = = 
 The signature of the Treaty of Campo Formio in October 1797 marked the end of the War of the First Coalition but the fleeting period of peace ended in 1798 , with the formation of the Second Coalition against the French Republic . Nansouty 's 9th Cavalry Regiment was successively attached to the Armies " of Germany " , " of Mainz " and then to the " Army of the Danube " , under the command of Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan . In 1799 , the regiment , with Nansouty commanding it , was integrated into General of Division Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul 's Cavalry Reserve of the " Army of the Danube " . This army was sharply defeated at the Battle of Stockach and most of its units merged with General André Masséna 's " Army of Switzerland " ; the cavalry was sent to the newly formed " Army of the Rhine " . 
 In 1799 , France 's political and military situation seemed perilous , especially after the losses in southwestern Germany culminating in the Battle at Stockach . By then a colonel , Nansouty accepted the promotion to brigadier general on 29 August and was given the command of a heavy cavalry brigade formed by the 8th and 9th Cavalry Regiments . Later , Nansouty 's brigade was provisionally augmented to four regiments , which , alongside Brigadier General Jean @-@ Louis @-@ Brigitte Espagne 's four regiments , was included in a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ man @-@ strong Cavalry Reserve ( the 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval and the 6th , 8th , 9th , 10th , 19th and 23rd Cavalry Regiments , with 14 cannons ) , under the command of the 45 @-@ year @-@ old General d 'Hautpoul . Overall command of the " Army of the Rhine " was given to the promising General Claude Lecourbe . Lecourbe believed his forces to be insufficient for offensive action , so he decided to fall back . During the retreat , a cavalry combat took place during the Battle of <unk> , where d 'Hautpoul 's men , and Nansouty 's brigade in particular , were heavily engaged . With operations on the Rhine coming to an end , Lecourbe was replaced at the head of the army by Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers , who reorganised d 'Hautpoul 's Cavalry Reserve , reducing Nansouty 's brigade to its initial strength of two regiments ( the 8th and 9th Cavalry ) . 
 = = = = Campaign in Germany = = = = 
 Despite the improvement of the military situation on its borders , France remained in political turmoil . Upon his return from the campaign in Egypt , General Napoleon Bonaparte received a hero 's welcome and was regarded by many as the saviour of France . Enjoying wide popular support and political backing , Bonaparte and his followers staged a coup and installed the French Consulate . Then , First Consul Bonaparte immediately drew up campaign plans against France 's only remaining continental enemy , Austria . Nansouty was first called to serve in the First Consul 's " Army of the Reserve " that was to operate in Italy , but General Jean Victor Marie Moreau insisted on retaining him in his own " Army of the Rhine " , which was to operate in central Germany . Consequently , Nansouty received command of the cavalry ( 15th Cavalry , 11th Dragoons and 12th Chasseurs à Cheval ) of Lecourbe 's " Right Wing Corps " of the " Army of the Rhine " . 
 Nansouty 's cavalry took part in several actions , beginning with the Battle of Engen , where the commander was noted for his able and daring manoeuvres , subsequently leading a successful charge against enemy infantry , whom he chased through the streets of the nearby city of Stockach , the locale of the French Army of the Danube 's defeat a year earlier . He patrolled the Tyrol and there repulsed Prince Reuss @-@ Plauen 's forces in an action fought on 14 June 1800 , the day when First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte was winning at Marengo further to the south . Nansouty served as a commander of an autonomous unit in the Tyrol until the end of the War of the Second Coalition , then under the successive command of Generals Molitor and Gudin . Nansouty 's command included as many as five regiments , after the 6th and 8th Hussars were attached to his force . During this time , he enhanced his solid reputation as an able and adept cavalry commander ; General Lecourbe stated that he wanted nobody else at the helm of his cavalry . 
 = = Years of peace = = 
 The signing of the Treaty of Lunéville initiated a period of peace on the European continent . Meanwhile , however , with the Kingdom of Portugal allied to the Kingdom of Great Britain , First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte decided to make a military demonstration against the Lusitanian nation . He ordered the creation of the " Observation Corps of the Gironde " . Chosen from a short list of nine men , Nansouty was named commander of the Corps cavalry . With orders to invade Portugal the " Observation Corps of the Gironde " entered Spanish territory , but it soon returned to France , after a treaty of peace was agreed with the Portuguese government . Nansouty then held various commands , before being named general of division on 24 March 1803 . He was 35 years old . A military commander in the department of Seine @-@ et @-@ Oise , he was then sent to command the cavalry ( 5th Chasseurs à Cheval , 2nd , 4th and 5th Hussar Regiments ) of General Édouard Mortier 's " Army of Hanover " , a position that he held until the Hanoverian army was disarmed and the French occupied the city . 
 On 1 February 1804 , Nansouty was called to a command in the cavalry reserve of the " Army of the Ocean coast " . The reform of the French cavalry arm had already begun in September 1803 , reorganising the first twelve regiments of heavy cavalry of the French Revolutionary army into regiments of cuirassiers . The reforms also established a powerful 6 @-@ regiment heavy cavalry division , comprising the 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval , 2nd , 3rd , 9th and 12th Cuirassiers , with command given to Nansouty . On 29 August 1805 this division was renamed the 1st heavy cavalry division of the newly created Grande Armée . Nansouty was also named Commander of the Legion of Honour on 14 June 1804 . In 1805 , Napoleon appointed him as First Chamberlain of the Empress , but Nansouty disliked Court life and resigned from the position as soon as he was able to find an acceptable excuse . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = War of the Third Coalition = = = 
 At the outbreak of the War of the Third Coalition , a cavalry reserve corps was organised in the Grande Armée , with command given to Marshal Joachim Murat . This cavalry reserve included Nansouty 's heavy cavalry division , another heavy cavalry division under Jean @-@ Joseph d 'Hautpoul , three dragoon divisions , a foot dragoon division and a light cavalry brigade . Nansouty 's six @-@ regiment division soon acquired the reputation of being the best administered and most exact in its manoeuvres . 
 During the initial phase of the campaign , Nansouty 's division was at first attached to Marshal Louis Nicolas Davout 's III Corps , with which it crossed the Rhine and then the Danube , before rejoining Murat 's cavalry reserve . Nansouty had a first opportunity to lead his men into combat at the Battle of Wertingen , where his men were noted for their excellent manoeuvring . <unk> his two Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval regiments , which he had to leave with Murat , Nansouty and his reduced division followed the Emperor at Augsburg , where he was attached to Marshal Jean Lannes 's V Corps . In this capacity , they supported Walther 's division at the Battle of <unk> . Then , at the Battle of <unk> on 25 November 1805 , the 9th Cuirassiers participated in a major cavalry action , alongside d 'Hautpoul 's cuirassier division , Walther 's dragoons and Bessières 's Grenadiers à Cheval and Chasseurs à Cheval of the Guard cavalry . 
 = = = = Charge at Austerlitz = = = = 
 Having advanced the bulk of his army deep into Austrian territory , Napoleon faced a massed enemy army of some 85 @,@ 000 men in the vicinity of the town of Austerlitz . Combat began before dawn on 2 December 1805 , and Nansouty had his entire division reunited under his command and again placed in the Cavalry Reserve , under Murat . Nansouty was positioned on the left wing of the army and his command included his usual six regiments of three @-@ squadrons each : Brigadier General Piston 's 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval ( 205 and 181 men respectively ) , Brigadier General La <unk> 's 2nd and 9th Cuirassiers ( 304 and 280 men respectively ) and Brigadier General Saint @-@ Germain 's 3rd and 12th Cuirassiers ( 333 and 277 men respectively ) . Additionally , a horse battery from the 4th company of the 2nd horse artillery regiment was also a part of his division . These men were at first positioned on two lines , behind Caffarelli 's infantry division of Lannes 's V Corps . 
 At around 10 : 00 , after battle had been joined all along the front , Russian General Pyotr Bagration , who had won the cavalry action a few days earlier at <unk> , pulled his forces back from the advancing enemy infantry from the V Corps . Meanwhile , the Austrian Prince Johann I Joseph , Prince of Liechtenstein threw his 4 @,@ 000 @-@ sabre Austro @-@ Russian cavalry reserve into combat against Murat 's 6 @,@ 000 sabres . The Austro @-@ Russians did not provide infantry or artillery support to the cavalry attack , while Murat 's cavalrymen were able to cooperate with Lannes 's infantry and artillery . Taking immense casualties after a first series of actions against Lannes 's infantry , elements of the Coalition cavalry withdrew and were reformed by their commanders . Joined by Bagration 's own cavalry , they set off again , this time aiming directly at Murat 's command centre . As the Austro @-@ Russian cavalry was closing in on its target , they were steadily met by four of Nansouty 's regiments ( the two Carabiniers regiments and the 2nd and 3rd Cuirassiers ) . The sounds of the two massed cavalries colliding could be heard some distance away . After a brief combat , the Austro @-@ Russian horsemen broke and were driven off . However , Liechtenstein soon reformed his men and , seeing that all the French cavalry was positioned on the left of Caffarelli 's infantry division , he launched his men against the right wing of this division , but was instantly met with sustained musket volleys that disorganised his cavalrymen . Seeing this development , Nansouty wheeled right with his men and crossed the infantry intervals by platoons , and then formed his men on two battle lines in front of the infantry . Three charges ensued in brief succession , with Nansouty skilfully committing the 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval and the 2nd Cuirassiers from his first line , then the 9th Cuirassiers and Saint @-@ Germain 's brigade from his second line . The Austro @-@ Russian cavalry was finally broken and repulsed for good . After another series of well @-@ coordinated cavalry and infantry actions , Murat and Lannes were able to force Bagration 's entire force to withdraw , with a loss 2 @,@ 000 men ( approximately half of the force ) and 16 guns . 
 On the French side , despite their repeated charges on this day , the 1st heavy cavalry division registered only relatively minor casualties , a testament to the skill of its commanders . Piston 's 1st Brigade registered 2 killed and 41 wounded , La Houssaye 's 2nd Brigade registered 1 man killed and 25 wounded , while Saint @-@ Germain 's 3rd Brigade registered 47 killed and 28 wounded . The regiment that suffered the highest casualty rate was by far the 3rd cuirassiers , with 44 killed and 27 wounded , for a casualty rate of 21 per cent . Nansouty 's charge was rated " superb and brilliant " in the report drawn up by General Augustin Daniel Belliard , Murat 's chief of staff , and Nansouty was subsequently mentioned in the army bulletin for this action and named Grand Officier de la Légion d 'honneur on 25 December . Additionally , of the six colonels in his division , three were promoted to Brigadier General and three received the cross of Commandeur de la Légion d 'honneur . Following the peace of Pressburg with the Austrian Empire in late December 1805 , Nansouty 's division was stationed in Bavaria , where they took winter quarters . 
 = = = War of the Fourth Coalition = = = 
 = = = = Campaign in Prussia = = = = 
 As the War of the Fourth Coalition broke out in September 1806 , Emperor Napoleon I took his Grande Armée into the heart of Germany in a memorable campaign against Prussia . Comprising the same regiments as the year before ( 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval , 2nd , 3rd , 9th and 12th cuirassiers ) , Nansouty 's 1st heavy cavalry division was again a part of Joachim Murat 's cavalry reserve . At first , due to the extraordinary speed of Napoleon 's operations , the 1st heavy cavalry division and one of the two cuirassier brigades of d 'Hautpoul 's 2nd heavy cavalry division did not arrive at the front line in time to participate in the Battle of Jena . Beginning with the evening of 14 October , Nansouty 's cavalry pursued the routed Prussian army , following an enemy corps of 10 @,@ 000 infantrymen and 3 cavalry regiments into the streets of Erfurt on 15 October . With the enemy trapped in the city , Colonel Préval of the 3rd cuirassiers negotiated the capitulation of Erfurt by nightfall , which resulted in the capture of 12 @,@ 000 prisoners of war ( including 6 @,@ 000 wounded ) and 65 cannons . 
 Resuming its pursuit of the Prussian army , Nansouty 's division was at Potsdam beginning on 25 October , and two days later they participated to the triumphant parade of the Grande Armée in Berlin , before being reviewed by the Emperor on 30 October . Beginning on 7 November , Nansouty and his division were with Murat , heading for the river Vistula , which they crossed on 22 December with the rest of the cavalry reserve . After a brief and successful cavalry action at the <unk> bridge , they tried to get to the Battle of <unk> in time for the action , but were delayed by the thick mud and by the slower dragoon division that preceded them ; they arrived after the battle . The division then took winter quarters in Warsaw , but with Murat on sick leave , Nansouty was soon called to replace him , taking command of Lasalle 's light cavalry division and the dragoon divisions of Klein and Milhaud . These divisions were placed in the first line of the army , and Nansouty , although formally placed under the overall command of Marshal Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult , had orders to act independently and report directly to the Emperor if any unforeseen and extraordinary events should occur . Nansouty handled this new mission with care , personally patrolling the front line and deciding where to place the pickets of light cavalry that were to cover the infantry outposts . 
 = = = = Campaign in Poland : early manoeuvres = = = = 
 With the news of the alarming Russian operations against the left wing of the army , Murat reassumed command of the cavalry reserve , ordering Nansouty to retake command of the 1st heavy cavalry division and follow the concentration of the army towards Eylau . Joining his men in Warsaw , Nansouty diligently led them towards his assigned destination , but did not arrive until 13 February 1807 , five days after the Battle of Eylau and too late to take part in any action . On 14 February , Nansouty learned of the death of his comrade and former commander during the Revolutionary Wars , General d 'Hautpoul , who had been fatally wounded during the heroic cavalry charges at Eylau . After the battle , the Emperor decided that the army was to take winter quarters . To ensure the safety of his outposts , he sent Murat with a powerful column , including Nansouty 's men , with the mission of pushing back any enemy they might find . A short skirmish involving the 1st heavy cavalry division occurred at <unk> on 10 March , before it was decided that all the heavy cavalry would be sent to the lower Vistula , where they were to rest and be reinforced . 
 With its ranks replenished after the winter actions , the six @-@ regiment division under Nansouty numbered , on 1 June 1807 , no less than 3 @,@ 257 men . It was by far the most powerful heavy cavalry division of the Cavalry Reserve , which then included two other such divisions , the 2nd under Saint @-@ Sulpice and a newly added 3rd , under Espagne . As military operation resumed later in 1807 , <unk> 's division was hastily directed towards the town of <unk> , where Marshal Michel Ney had managed to retreat with his Corps , after energetically extricating himself from a dangerous situation , with surprisingly few losses . With Ney 's Corps , the Cavalry Reserve and the Guard , Napoleon moved towards <unk> , where on 9 June he found a large combined @-@ arms enemy force . Murat took Lasalle 's light horse and Nansouty 's heavy cavalry and launched a series of charges that drove back the enemy force . Murat continued to press on and pushed the enemy into the streets of <unk> , where he penetrated with the cavalry at nightfall . Having fought well with his men , Nansouty was rested the next day , leaving all the action at the Battle of Heilsberg to Espagne 's 3rd Heavy Cavalry division . 
 At the beginning of June 1807 , the Emperor reassessed his strategic situation and decided that he needed to move northeast , in order to prevent <unk> 's Russian army from using the bridge at Friedland to cross the Alle river . If the Russians managed to cross the Alle river at Friedland , they could then move closer to their Prussian allies , who were based in Königsberg . Napoleon drew up a plan , giving Marshal Murat two army corps and a powerful cavalry reserve , with orders to march on Königsberg , while sending the rest of the troops towards Friedland . Leading the thrust towards Friedland was Marshal Jean Lannes 's Reserve Corps ( two infantry divisions and one cavalry brigade ) , with Grouchy 's dragoons and Nansouty 's horse carabiniers and cuirassiers temporarily attached . In Murat 's absence , Grouchy was the senior cavalry commander and was to take overall command of all the cavalry that remained with the Emperor . 
 = = = = Campaign in Poland : Friedland = = = = 
 Arriving with his corps at Friedland on 13 June after nightfall , Lannes found the position already occupied by Russian forces . Very early on 14 June , Lannes <unk> attacked with an almost symbolic force ( between 11 @,@ 000 and 13 @,@ 500 men ) against the might of a massed enemy army of 85 @,@ 000 . His goal was to prevent the enemy from crossing the Alle and to give Napoleon enough time to arrive with the remainder of his forces . Nansouty 's division arrived on the field of battle at Friedland after the first engagements and was directed towards the strategic village of Heinrichsdorf . This village needed to be held , as it protected Lannes 's communications with the rest of Napoleon 's army . Grouchy also directed his dragoon division towards the village and was shocked to find it in enemy hands and Nansouty 's men retreating at a trot , without even attempting to contain the enemy or to cover the route that represented the corps ' communication line . In fact , Nansouty had arrived not long before and had been instructed to place himself at Heinrichsdorf , without further instructions and without being informed of what was happening on the right . As Russian infantry and cavalry were boldly pressing him , he became concerned with his own lines of communication and thus ordered his men back , to avoid being cut off . 
 However , Nansouty 's move compromised Lannes 's entire plan , which counted on powerful reinforcements arriving through Heinrichsdorf . An alarmed Lannes immediately sent one of his aides de camp to Grouchy urging him to stop the enemy from cutting his communications with the Emperor , whatever the cost . Grouchy duly took command of Nansouty 's leading squadrons , ordering them back to their initial position , then launched a desperate but successful charge with his own dragoons , arriving in the streets of the village and cutting off its Russian defenders . Grouchy 's dragoons became disorganised and were badly positioned following this sudden charge , and the Russian cavalry countercharged them , but Nansouty arrived just in time and the French repulsed the Russian cavalry , momentarily securing the position . A lively argument ensued between the two cavalry commanders . Grouchy invoked his seniority and position as commander of the cavalry and criticised Nansouty 's earlier decision to withdraw . Nansouty countered by saying that he had superior experience at handling cavalry . When combat resumed , the quarrel did not prevent Nansouty from performing brilliantly under Grouchy 's command during the dramatic series of events that followed . Having been repulsed earlier , the Russians decided to force the position at Heinrichsdorf , and they assembled a strong infantry force preceded by no less than 60 cavalry squadrons , plus around 2 @,@ 000 Cossacks . To counter this move , Grouchy opted for deception , luring some of the enemy cavalry away from the infantry . Then , Grouchy charged the enemy horse from the front ; simultaneously Nansouty hit them from the flank and together Grouchy and Nansouty repulsed them . Despite numerous charges and countercharges , the French cavalry maintained the upper hand . 
 After the arrival of the Emperor with significant reinforcements , the time was right for a general counterattack . The Emperor planned his main attack against the Russian left and he wanted to prevent the enemy from transferring reinforcements from their right wing to their battered left . To that effect , Grouchy received orders to incessantly harass the enemy before him , in order to prevent <unk> from redeploying them on the left wing . Orders also required Grouchy to silence the enemy guns pounding the French left . In this difficult task , Grouchy was perfectly seconded by Nansouty , and together they ended to the Russian cannonade in this sector . Later , Grouchy 's report expressed admiration for Nansouty 's actions , adding that the latter had " gloriously repaired " his earlier error . Nansouty was also mentioned in the 79th Bulletin of the Grande Armée . After the battle , the 1st heavy cavalry division joined in the pursuit of the Russian army to the Nieman river , but the Treaties of Tilsit in July soon ended hostilities . 
 = = = Count of the Empire , First Squire and the Peninsula = = = 
 The numerous honours and endowments that General Nansouty received following the Battle of Friedland seem to suggest the Emperor 's appreciation and the fact that Napoleon did not regard the early incident during this battle as Nansouty 's fault . On 11 July 1807 , General of Division Nansouty was named Grand Aigle de la Légion d 'Honneur , the fifth and top rank of this order , reserved for the greatest general officers . This also brought an annual revenue of 20 @,@ 000 Francs . His first endowment of 12 @,@ 846 Francs was offered on 30 June 1807 , and was paid by the Duchy of Warsaw . On 23 September , he received another 5 @,@ 882 Francs on the Empire 's Grand Livre . A count of the Empire from 10 March 1808 , Nansouty was offered two additional endowments , one of 25 @,@ 000 Francs , paid by the Kingdom of Westphalia , and the second of 10 @,@ 000 Francs , paid by the Zeven domain in Hannover . He also received an endowment of 100 @,@ 000 Francs for the acquisition of a Parisian Hôtel particulier ; Nansouty bought the Hôtel du Président Duret in the Faubourg Saint @-@ Germain , a neighbourhood inhabited by the new elite of Imperial France . Indeed , first @-@ rate military figures such as the Viceroy of Italy Eugène , Marshals Davout and Lannes and Generals Rapp and Legrand also acquired residences in Faubourg Saint @-@ Germain . 
 Additionally , in 1808 , he was offered the position of First Squire of the Emperor in Napoleon 's Military Household , a dignity that offered an annual revenue of 30 @,@ 000 Francs and which gained importance when the Grand Squire , General Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt , was sent to Saint @-@ Petersburg as ambassador . Napoleon allegedly chose Nansouty for his elegant manners and education , aristocratic posture and talent for administration . In his capacity as First Squire , Nansouty thus had to accompany the Emperor during the latter 's short campaign in Spain ( from November 1808 to early January 1809 ) . There , he was in charge of several administrative tasks linked with managing the Emperor 's stable services and suite and commanding his orderly officers . The Emperor 's aides @-@ de @-@ camp had their own aides @-@ de @-@ camp , who were also placed under the command of the First Squire . Although never very far away from the Emperor in a campaign that included many battles , Nansouty himself never exercised a field command during this campaign , and in January 1809 , he accompanied his master back to France , as the outbreak of the War of the Fifth Coalition was imminent . 
 = = = War of the Fifth Coalition = = = 
 With a large part of the French Empire 's forces now entangled in the bloody Peninsular War , the Austrian Empire believed that its best opportunity to avenge the humiliating defeat of 1805 had finally come . The Austrians were looking to defeat France and regain their former influence in Italy and Germany . In early 1809 , the Austrian war preparations were so intense that Napoleon was forced to leave Spain and head back to Paris to reorganise his main army in Germany . In spring , Nansouty was therefore recalled to the command of 1st of the three heavy cavalry divisions of the Cavalry Reserve , placed this time under the command of Marshal Jean @-@ Baptiste Bessières . As the War of the Fifth Coalition broke out , Nansouty 's division was soon detached from the Reserve and temporarily attached to Marshal Louis Nicolas Davout 's III Corps , the force that was assigned the most difficult tasks during the early military operations of this war . As Napoleon then ordered a concentration of the army at Ratisbon , Nansouty 's division was once again put under the command of Bessières and sent to serve with the Bavarian army . After his initial victories at <unk> and Landshut , Napoleon concentrated the bulk of his army , including Nansouty 's men , at Eckmühl , where Davout was waiting . 
 = = = = Eckmühl and Ratisbon = = = = 
 Napoleon faced Archduke Charles 's Austrian army at the Battle of Eckmühl , on 21 – 22 April 1809 . On 22 April , the second day of the battle , Nansouty was at first sent to the <unk> plain , in support of Bavarian General Deroy , who , after several failed attempts , managed to take the town of Eckmühl from the enemy . Apart from the <unk> plain , the terrain at Eckmühl was very uneven and hilly , with dangerously steep slopes , which made cavalry action here improper . Yet , it was here that one of the most memorable cavalry actions of the entire Napoleonic Wars was to take place . It all began on the slopes next to Eckmühl , where a first brief cavalry engagement occurred , as Bavarian and <unk> cavalry encountered and charged Austrian cavalry . The Austrians won out and the Bavarians and Württembergers retreated and reformed in the vicinity of the two French heavy cavalry divisions present . These two divisions , the 1st under Nansouty ( 1st and 2nd Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval , 2nd , 3rd , 9th and 12th Cuirassiers ) and the 2nd under Saint @-@ Sulpice ( four regiments strong ) , were placed next to one another , forming five lines , with their regiments in column , one in front of the other . These men were ordered forward , up the slope and onto the plateau where the light cavalry had been repulsed moments earlier . Arriving on the plateau at a gallop , the cavalry overtook Marshal Lannes 's infantry , who admiringly cheered " Vive les cuirassiers " ( " Long live the cuirassiers " ) and applauded as the cavalry galloped past them , . With their two frontline regiments now deployed in line and with the German light cavalry protecting their flanks , the two heavy cavalry divisions clashed into whatever Austrian cavalry they could find on the plateau , repulsing them with ease . This was , however , only the prelude of a much larger cavalry combat . 
 In order to protect his retreat , Archduke Charles of Austria reunited his entire cavalry reserve , 44 squadrons in all , on either side of the Ratisbon road , next to the village of <unk> . Between 19 : 00 20 : 00 in the evening , Napoleon ordered his cavalry to disperse the enemy horse from this position . In preparation of the charge , Nansouty formed five of his regiments in two lines : three regiments in the first line and two in the second line , leaving his remaining regiment with Saint @-@ Sulpice . Saint @-@ Sulpice 's division was on Nansouty 's right and it remained formed in regiment column formations , while the light cavalry was protecting the flanks of the whole . In all , the French had 48 squadrons , and , as they advanced , they were met by intense artillery fire from the Austrian batteries and then vigorously charged by the <unk> cuirassier regiment . Seeing the enemy charging , Nansouty ordered his squadrons forward towards the enemy , but at a gentle trot . Then , as soon as the Austrians were at about one hundred paces , the frontline regiment of Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval halted , loaded their carbines and fired a salvo from thirty or forty paces , then drew their swords and joined their fellow cuirassiers in an energetic charge . As Nansouty led , Saint @-@ Sulpice followed and , despite the vigour and determination of the Austrian cavalry , they were repulsed after a brief hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . Coming in support of the <unk> Cuirassiers , the Kaiser Cuirassier regiment shared the same fate , with the <unk> Hussars and Vincent Chevau @-@ légers also repulsed . A generalised and bloody mêlée then occurred under the moonlight , with the sabre hits on the steel <unk> producing sparkles in the night . Austrian General Andreas von Schneller was wounded during this action and General Karl Wilhelm von <unk> , commanding the entire Austrian cavalry , only just escaped capture . The Austrian cavalry was repulsed and pushed into the marshes beyond , subsequently retreating towards <unk> , with the bulk of Archduke Charles 's forces retreating towards Ratisbon . 
 The pursuit resumed the next day at dawn , and was followed by yet another action at the Battle of Ratisbon , where the Austrians tried to delay the French pursuit . After fierce fighting , during which Nansouty 's and Saint @-@ Sulpice 's men successfully charged the enemy cavalry three times , the French captured the citadel at Ratisbon , but saw the Austrians skilfully retreating . Nansouty was left at Ratisbon with Davout , to observe the retreat of Archduke Charles . 
 = = = = Aspern @-@ Essling = = = = 
 On 21 May 1809 , Napoleon crossed the Danube not far from Vienna and attacked Archduke Charles 's Austrian army , situated on the northern bank of the river , in what became known as the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling . The French were nonetheless critically outnumbered and it soon became obvious that they would have a hard time just holding out . Nansouty could only get one of his brigades , Saint @-@ Germain 's 3rd and 12th cuirassiers , across the Danube for the action on 21 May . He found the heroic cuirassiers of General Jean @-@ Louis @-@ Brigitte Espagne charging , as they had done all day long , in a desperate attempt to stop Austrian attacks on the thin French battle line . Espagne had just been killed in action and his exhausted and depleted squadrons needed to be relieved . Nansouty at once brought forward Saint @-@ Germain 's squadrons and charged the enemy infantry , allowing the army to maintain itself on the position . 
 On the second day of the battle , 22 May , Nansouty received his second cuirassier brigade , Doumerc 's 2nd and 9th regiments . During the morning , having received some reinforcements , Napoleon sent Marshal Lannes 's Corps forward , in an attack against the enemy line . Nansouty 's and Lasalle 's cavalry protected the infantry columns , charging the enemy cavalry to clear their path . However , at around 21 : 00 in the morning , news that the great bridge over the Danube had broken , making the arrival of further reinforcements virtually impossible , forced Napoleon to call off his attack and order a phased retreat . The situation of the French army was critical , with Marshal Lannes fatally wounded , and a great number of losses in men . It took all the skill of Nansouty and the other cavalry commanders to contain the formidable Austrian onslaught in order to allow the rest of the army to gradually disengage . After most of the army had safely crossed an arm of the Danube onto the island of Lobau , Nansouty 's men were also withdrawn from the battlefield during the night , with the French cavalry subsequently celebrated for their role in preventing a catastrophic defeat that day . 
 = = = = Wagram = = = = 
 After the bloody setback at Aspern @-@ Essling , Napoleon took six weeks to carefully plan another crossing of the Danube . He launched this operation late on 4 July and , by the early hours of the next day , he had managed to get a substantial force across the river . Nansouty 's division did not see any action during the first day of the Battle at Wagram and at night they camped behind the Imperial Guard . The next day , 6 July , Nansouty was at first directed to support Davout , on the French right , but when it became clear that the latter 's sector was not threatened by the arrival of enemy reinforcements , they were ordered back into reserve in a central position on the battlefield , not far from the village of Aderklaa . Then , as the situation on the French left rapidly deteriorated , they were called into action , when Napoleon ordered Marshal Bessières , commander of the Cavalry Reserve , to launch his men in a charge against the Austrians menacing his left . With time at the essence , Bessières opted not to wait for the Guard cavalry and , with his other two heavy cavalry divisions assigned to other sectors of the battlefield , he decided to lead forward only Nansouty 's men . This division was indeed very strong : 24 squadrons , more than 4 @,@ 000 men , including Brigadier General Defrance 's 1st and 2nd carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval , Brigadier General Doumerc 's 2nd and 9th cuirassiers and Brigadier General <unk> 's 3rd and 12th cuirassiers . 
 Bessières and Nansouty led these men forward , through a hail of cannonballs and case @-@ shot , with the carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval at the front . Finding a weaker spot in the Austrian line , they pierced it and stormed past the enemy infantry formed in squares , <unk> the <unk> Grenzer battalion as they went along their way . However , many of the French cavalry did not manage to penetrate through the formidable masses of Austrian infantry , so Nansouty was now commanding a much diminished force . Showing great skill in handling his men , Nansouty then wheeled right and charged Liechtenstein 's artillery line . However , the Austrian cavalry promptly intervened , spearheaded by the Rosenberg <unk> and the Kronprinz cuirassier regiments , which caught the carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval in flank and repulsed them , pursuing them back to their lines . The costly repulse of Nansouty 's division did not dishearten Bessières , who was preparing another rapid charge , now with the support of elements of the Guard cavalry . This charge never came , as the Marshal 's horse was killed by a cannonball , with Bessières also hit and carried unconscious behind the lines . With his commander presumed dead , Nansouty did not know what the Emperor 's orders were and thus promptly decided to pull back his men , to avoid further damage to his already battered division . 
 This however was not to be the end of General Nansouty 's action at the great Battle of Wagram . Although the great cavalry attack had done much to ease the pressure on Napoleon 's left @-@ centre , the latter 's situation remained critical . The Emperor thus launched the Corps of General Jacques MacDonald in an attack against the Austrian right @-@ centre . MacDonald 's attack formation , formed by chance more than by any tactical forethought , was a huge infantry attack column or square , comprising all his divisions in a deep formation that was highly unusual for Napoleonic warfare . Four squadrons of Nansouty 's carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval were sent to support the flank of this attack , with the rest of his division further back . Realising that his advance is hampered by intense Austrian artillery fire , MacDonald aimed to clear the enemy guns before him , asking for a cavalry charge from Walther 's Guard cavalry on his right and Nansouty 's 1st heavy cavalry division on his left . With no direct orders from the Emperor and his commander , Marshal Bessières , out of action , Walther opted not to move , while Nansouty did send his men forward but , having been positioned too far back , he arrived only after the enemy guns had moved away . 
 Nansouty 's division suffered a very high casualty rate at the Battle of Wagram , with more men and horses lost than the other two heavy cavalry divisions combined . Losses in horses were extremely high , with 1 @,@ 141 animals killed or injured , while losses in men were also significant , despite the fact that only the carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval really came into contact with the enemy . Overall , Nansouty 's division lost 164 men killed and 436 wounded . Foremost of all , the highly battered two carabiniers @-@ à @-@ cheval regiments had no more than 300 horses standing between themselves by the end of the day , for an equine casualty rate of 77 percent , with the 9th and 12th cuirassiers also suffering high casualties . Bessières 's charge , hastily organised with only the division of Nansouty , through murderous artillery fire and against masses of infantry prepared to receive them , had less tactical effect than at Aspern @-@ Essling , but it did win Napoleon valuable time , allowing him to retake the initiative in this battle . 
 = = = Interlude between two campaigns = = = 
 General MacDonald was very critical of both Walther and Nansouty , for their alleged failure to provide proper cavalry support during his attack . MacDonald went on to write in his memoirs that he was " taken aback by the slowness of General Nansouty [ ... ] Nansouty did charge in the end , but too late to take advantage of the gaping hole that I had pierced in the centre of the Austrian army . " A few days after the Battle of Wagram , Napoleon confronted Nansouty over what he saw as being a failure to cooperate with MacDonald . Nansouty responded to the Emperor 's lively reproaches by offering categorical explanations , saying that he had not been consulted in the placement of his division , rendering manoeuvres impossible during that action . As Napoleon insisted , Nansouty stood up to him , finally retorting : " After all , it is not Your Majesty at any rate who can teach me to lead cavalry ... " Despite this remark , Nansouty would continue to be given significant commands in the coming years . It was shortly after this bloody battle that Nansouty insisted that the Carabiniers @-@ à @-@ Cheval be given the steel cuirass , in a bid to cancel out what he saw as being a state of inferiority of these troops vis @-@ à @-@ vis their fellow cuirassiers . Nansouty 's initiative was approved and was enforced in 1810 . 
 With the peace of Vienna signed between the French Empire and the Austrian Empire in October , Nansouty was ordered to leave the command of his division to General Bruyères and retake his position of First Squire alongside the Emperor ( 17 October 1809 ) . However , with the return of the Grand Squire Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt , the role of the First Squire was much diminished . As a result , in 1811 Nansouty was given an additional function , that of General Inspector of cavalry . Very active in exercising this function , he soon became reputed for his strictness and for his detailed knowledge and invaluable experience that he had of this arm . Nonetheless , war was , once more , not far away and , on 19 October 1811 , Nansouty was called to the command of the 2nd and 4th cuirassier divisions of the " Observation Corps of the Elba " , under the command of Marshal Louis Nicolas Davout . Then , with the reorganisation of the Grande Armée in April 1812 , Nansouty was named at the command of the I Cavalry Corps . 
 = = = Campaign in Russia = = = 
 With the outbreak of the war with Russia in 1812 , the Grande Armée included , alongside the usual combined @-@ arms Army Corps , four large Cavalry Reserve Corps , commanded respectively by Generals Nansouty ( Ist ) , Montbrun ( IInd ) , Grouchy ( <unk> ) and La Tour Maubourg ( <unk> Corps ) . This innovation has been much criticised after this campaign and , in the words of Marshal Marmont , it had the only merit of " presenting an extraordinary spectacle that astonished the eye . " 
 During this campaign , Nansouty 's I Cavalry Corps was composed of : 
 General Bruyères 's 1st light cavalry division ( 7th , 8th Hussars , 16th Chasseurs à cheval , 9th Chevau @-@ légers lanciers , one Prussian and one Polish light horse regiments ) , 
 General Saint @-@ Germain 's 1st cuirassier division ( 2nd , 3rd , 9th Cuirassiers , 1st Chevau @-@ légers lanciers regiments ) , 
 General Valence 's 5th cuirassier division ( 6th , 11th and 12th Cuirassiers , 5th Chevau @-@ légers lanciers regiments ) , 
 an artillery of 36 pieces . 
 Having crossed the Niemen river with his Corps , Nansouty would continuously march under the command of Joachim Murat during this campaign , preceding the advance of the army and taking Wilna as they advanced . Despite marching constantly alongside Murat and Emperor Napoleon , Nansouty 's Ist Corps of cavalry reserve saw little action , combating brilliantly in a vanguard action at <unk> and then briefly at Vitebsk . An incident involving some of Nansouty 's light cavalry occurred during the combat at Vitebsk , when the 8th Hussars and 16th Chasseurs à cheval turned and fled before the Russian light horse . This was evidence that the division of Bruyères , of which they were a part , had been much used by always being placed at the vanguard of the army , resulting in the loss many of the best and bravest troopers . Despite Nansouty 's best efforts , the extremely long and exhausting marches , the torrential rains and the absence of proper fodder took their toll on the Ist Cavalry Corps , with numbers reduced to half by this time . Additionally , just like the other Cavalry Corps commanders , Nansouty rarely had all his troops under direct control , which led to cavalry being used improperly at times . 
 With his three divisions reunited on 7 September 1812 , Nansouty 's Ist Cavalry Corps saw action at the Battle of Borodino . He was placed on the French right , in second line , behind the Corps of Marshal Davout and , after Murat managed to take two of the redoubts on the Russian left , Nansouty placed his men on the right of this position and then supported the advance of the right wing of the army . With the Russians making an offensive comeback , Nansouty placed himself at the head of the heavy divisions of Saint @-@ Germain and Valence and charged and while doing so a bullet pierced one of his knees . This was Nansouty 's first battle wound and it was serious enough to end his active role during this campaign . He was transported to Moscow following the battle and although still wounded , on 10 October , he was entrusted with the mission of commanding the convoy that was to take the wounded generals and colonels , as well as the main trophies captured , behind the lines . During this mission , he was exposed to great danger , to famine and extreme cold , which impacted his already frail health . He was then allowed to return to France and recover from his injury . 
 = = = War of the Sixth Coalition = = = 
 The remains of the French army had completely evacuated Russian territory by December 1812 but their defeat sparked anti @-@ French sentiments in Germany and Prussia joined the Russians , forming a Sixth Coalition . Hostilities thus continued in early 1813 but Nansouty 's wound did not yet allow him to return to action , so he was offered the prestigious position of Colonel @-@ General of dragoons ( 16 January ) , in replacement of General Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers , who had just died of exhaustion . Nansouty 's wound was very serious but he had been very lucky : the bullet that pierced his knee only tore through flesh , leaving his kneecap intact . Having missed the first part of the campaign , General Nansouty was recalled to a field command once his knee wound was cured , towards mid @-@ 1813 . He accepted to take the helm of the Guard cavalry , with a complement of 5 @,@ 000 sabres , and including Guyot 's Grenadiers @-@ à @-@ cheval , Letort 's Dragons , Lefebvre @-@ Desnouettes Chasseurs @-@ à @-@ cheval and Édouard Colbert 's Chevau @-@ légers lanciers . 
 = = = = Campaign in Saxony = = = = 
 In 1813 , most military operations took part in Saxony , with the Chasseurs @-@ à @-@ cheval and Colbert 's Chevau @-@ légers lanciers encountering the enemy in several isolated cavalry actions , but the first serious action came only at the Battle of Dresden , where Nansouty 's Guard cavalry supported Marshal Michel Ney 's attack on the extreme left , in conjunction with Marshal Édouard Mortier 's " Young Guard " infantry divisions . 
 However , the Guard cavalry was not needed as a whole before the epic " Battle of Nations " at Leipzig . Placed in reserve at first , the Guard cavalry and artillery had to spring into action at once , after Napoleon received news of the Saxon defection . With the Saxons now in the Coalition camp and firing at the soldiers who moments before had been their allies , the situation of some of the French troops became desperate . The position of General Durutte 's division , placed close to Saxon lines , was particularly tenuous and Napoleon soon came to its aid , with Nansouty in command of the Guard cavalry and horse artillery . Nansouty launched an impetuous charge with some of his regiments , the Grenadiers @-@ à @-@ cheval , Dragons and Chevau @-@ légers and the Saxons were unable to hold out in this sector . However , the situation changed on 19 October , with the untimely explosion of a bridge over the Elster , the main retreat line for the French rearguard , which was now blocked in the city of Leipzig . The Guard cavalry extricated itself from the field of battle and was very useful in covering the retreat of the remaining French forces . 
 With the Grande Armée in full retreat , another dangerous situation occurred on 29 October . With Bavaria now also in the camp of the Coalition , an Austro @-@ Bavarian army of some 45 @,@ 000 men , under General Karl Philipp von Wrede , who had fought under the command of the Emperor during the previous campaigns , tried to block the French retreat and delay the French force until the arrival of the rest of the Coalition forces . Wrede had the means necessary to achieve his goal , as he possessed a numerous artillery of about one hundred pieces and a powerful cavalry of 50 squadrons . In comparison , the French forces were much dispersed and only a few units remained cohesive and combat @-@ capable . During the ensuing Battle of Hanau , Wrede placed his troops in front of the forest of <unk> , through which he expected that the French would retreat . He also positioned almost all of his cavalry on the left , placing it under the command of Field Marshal @-@ Lieutenant <unk> . Despite his numeric inferiority , Napoleon sent forward a part of his men against Bavarians deployed in the forest before him , but the intervention of the Foot Guards was soon required . The Bavarians had fought alongside the French in the past and the sight of the fearsome <unk> of French Guardsmen shook their morale and they abandoned their position in the forest after a brief fight . But , with the fire of a Bavarian grand battery upon them , the French infantry soon had to stop . Napoleon positioned General Le <unk> 's artillery in battery and brought in support General Drouot with the horse artillery of the Guard , as well as other pieces , constituting a grand battery of some 50 pieces that was soon able to respond adequately to the Austro @-@ Bavarian cannonade . Nansouty , with the Guard Dragoons and Lancers , was instructed to protect this battery from the enemy and thus positioned his men behind the guns . 
 Seeing this inauspicious development , Wrede sent his cavalry , no less than 7 @,@ 000 men , to charge Drouot 's grand battery . The steady French canister fire was devastating and many Coalition squadrons turned back to safety . Some of them did manage to get to the French guns and crossed the battery , with the Guard cavalry immediately <unk> and driving them off . With the gun line now out of danger , Nansouty , with the aid of Sebastiani 's cuirassiers launched a pursuit of the repulsed enemy horse , encountering and breaking an Austrian cuirassier regiment , the <unk> Dragoon regiment and two Bavarian <unk> regiments , all under the personal command of Field Marshal @-@ Lieutenant Franz <unk> de <unk> . Then , with a manoeuvre resembling that of Kellermann at Marengo , Nansouty wheeled his men left and rushed onto the enemy infantry , breaking them . The Grenadiers @-@ à @-@ Cheval were in the thick of the fighting and , with an offensive comeback of the Bavarian cavalry , they were momentarily in a dangerous situation , but were duly rescued by the Gardes d 'Honneur regiment . Nansouty then took his entire cavalry and broke the remaining enemy squares and cavalry , pushing some of these men into the Kinzig river . Meanwhile , Nansouty 's action left Sebastiani free to silence the Bavarian grand battery , skilfully using Saint @-@ Germain 's cuirassier division and <unk> 's light division of his Corps . Nansouty received a light wound during this battle , but his role at Hanau is compared by a Russian author to that of Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz at the Battle of <unk> . 
 = = = = Campaign in France = = = = 
 Nansouty 's final campaign took place in 1814 on French soil , under bleak circumstances for the French , who saw huge Coalition armies invade France at the beginning of that year . During this campaign , his command , 5 @,@ 000 Horse Guards , included the 1st and 2nd Chevau @-@ légers <unk> regiments , under General Édouard Colbert , the Chasseurs à Cheval , under General Laferrière , the Grenadiers à Cheval under General Guyot , the Dragons , under General Letort , as well as the entire Guard horse artillery . 
 These men soon saw action on 27 January , at the Battle of Brienne . Here , two companies of horse artillery , under an officer called Marin , a veteran of the campaigns in Italy and Egypt and personal favourite of the Emperor , were almost completely destroyed , with their guns and commander captured by the enemy . Napoleon was extremely irritated about the failure of the heavy cavalry of the Guard to protect these gunners . A further loss of cannon of the Guard artillery occurred at the Battle of La <unk> , a rare battlefield defeat for Napoleon . Here , a part of the Guard cavalry charged and was initially successful against enemy cavalry but , faced by steady ranks of the Russian and Prussian Guardsmen and with its flank threatened by enemy dragoons , it soon had to withdraw , leaving behind some of its cannon . 
 After rejoining the Emperor at Champaubert , Nansouty took part to the Battle of Montmirail , where he was at first instructed to protect the artillery . He then joined in the attack of the Guard infantry on the farm of <unk> @-@ au @-@ Bois , where he suddenly wheeled left with his men and fell upon unprepared enemy infantry , charging home , routing these troops and subsequently pursuing the fugitives . This combined attack of the Guard resulted in a great number of prisoners and captured enemy guns , with Nansouty receiving a light wound in the process . A part of his men then took part to the Battle of Château @-@ Thierry , where the Emperor ordered the Guard cavalry to make a turning move against the enemy left , and where Nansouty 's subordinates General Letort and Colonel <unk> brilliantly broke several enemy squares . Then , on 14 February , Nansouty personally led a brilliant charge at the Battle of Vauchamps , where he supported Grouchy in a cavalry action that decided the battle . Charging Blücher 's men from the front , Nansouty allowed Grouchy to magnificently fall behind the enemy columns , which they both then <unk> and crushed , with the Guard cavalry subsequently participating to a highly successful pursuit . Enemy losses reached a staggering 9 @,@ 000 @-@ 10 @,@ 000 casualties , with 25 cannons lost . The Emperor was radiant following this battle , but , by nightfall , his mood changed when he found out of the loss of some Guard horse artillerymen . These men had been captured during their march and it was reported that their capture resulted from General Guyot ( one of Nansouty 's subordinates ) failing to provide an escort and a guide for them . In Nansouty 's presence , a fuming Napoleon summoned Guyot and then chastised him for the repeated losses in cannon during the previous battles , as well as for various other shortcomings , such as failing to properly escort the Emperor . After an angry tirade , Napoleon promptly axed Guyot and announced Nansouty that General <unk> would replace Guyot at the helm of his Old Guard heavy cavalry . This episode apparently strained relations between Emperor Napoleon and General Nansouty . 
 Always in the thick of the action during this campaign , on 24 February , Nansouty was present near the city of Troyes . Negotiations for an armistice were ongoing in a village nearby and , despite formal orders to continue the fighting , the two armies had ceased the combat . Nansouty then took his men and attacked enemy troops , charging into the streets of the village where the negotiations were taking place . The French envoy to the armistice talks , Monsieur de <unk> saw this development and found Nansouty , bitterly protesting against the latter 's action . Nansouty responded that the Emperor was doubtlessly aware that negotiations were indeed taking place there , but that he had orders to capture the position without further delay . On 27 February , the Emperor again moved against Blücher 's Prussians , leaving a part of his forces near Troyes to observe the movement of Prince of Schwarzenberg 's Austrian army . Nansouty , with the Guard cavalry , accompanied the Emperor , ensuring his protection and clearing his way after a bloody cavalry skirmish at Château @-@ Thierry on 3 March . Another cavalry skirmish occurred on 5 March , with Nansouty repulsing a numerous enemy cavalry , 3 @,@ 000 @-@ 4 @,@ 000 troopers , and capturing the bridge of Berry @-@ au @-@ Bac , over the Aisne , despite the enemy cannonade . Once across the Aisne with a few Polish lancer platoons , Nansouty launched a heroic pursuit , capturing enemy cannons and munitions , and taking a significant number of prisoners , among whom was the teenage Russian Prince Gagarin . 
 On 7 March , at the Battle of Craonne , another incident occurred , seemingly indicating that there had been some sort of disagreement between the General and the Emperor . As the battle was raging , General Belliard from the Emperor 's staff came to Nansouty and told him that he had orders to relieve him of command should his health prevent him from exercising his duties . Nansouty responded that he was indeed ill , but that he was able to retain command . Although in unusually bad humour after this incident , Nansouty subsequently led a most brilliant action at Craonne . He was ordered to cross bogged and broken terrain , and climb a steep incline with his cavalry and artillery , in order to fall on the enemy 's right flank . Managing to bring his cavalrymen on the ridge , Nansouty formed them in line and launched them against the enemy , pushing back in disorder two Russian battalions . Nansouty was again wounded during this action , but this injury was not very serious and he continued to energetically lead his men . Napoleon then allegedly ordered Nansouty to assault a redoubt , under the most murderous fire . Nonetheless , Nansouty ordered his men to halt and advanced alone towards the position . Asked to explain his behaviour , he replied that he would not send his men to die in vain and that he would be attacking alone . Napoleon at once revoked his order . 
 This was to be the last military engagement of Nansouty 's long career . On 8 March , on the eve of the Battle of Laon , Nansouty was at <unk> , nine kilometres from Laon , where the Emperor was also present and , although the circumstances of Nansouty 's departure are unclear , it is certain that he left this village , and his command , that very day . Two days later , Napoleon wrote to his War Minister to inform him that General Nansouty 's health did not allow him to exercise his military duties and that he was authorised to take sick leave in Paris . General Belliard had taken interim command of the Guard cavalry during the battle of Laon , with General Sébastiani subsequently given permanent command . 
 = = Bourbon Restoration = = 
 Having left his command to General Belliard on 8 March , three days later , Nansouty was a part of a convoy of several officers , heading to Paris . On the road to the capital , they were attacked by a <unk> of Cossacks , which managed to disperse the convoy 's escort . Nansouty and his officers fought their way out sabre in hand and made a run for it towards the river Aisne . Reaching the riverbanks , the General got isolated and , as he was preparing to cross the river on horseback , his horse was shot under him , throwing the General to the ground . Nevertheless , he stood up and swam to the other bank of the river and safety . This event , as well as his tireless activity during the campaign , seem to suggest that his health was not the main reason of his departure from the army . It is also unlikely that the Emperor himself decided to replace him , given Belliard 's tentative approach at the Battle of Craonne and this General 's subsequent provisional status as commander , after Nansouty 's departure . It is thus more likely that Nansouty resigned , following his disputes with the Emperor . 
 General Nansouty arrived in Paris and there he remained during the Bourbon Restoration that followed Napoleon 's abdication . He was one of the first general officers to swear allegiance to the new King of France , Louis XVIII , who would bestow a number of honours upon the General . His gesture encouraged many other generals to also swear allegiance to the new regime . On 12 April 1814 , Nansouty was named extraordinary commissioner of the King in the 2nd military division , then , on 20 April , became a member of the commission that was in charge of the dissolution of Napoleon 's Imperial Guard . He was given the distinction of Knight of the Order of Saint Louis on 1 June and on 6 July he was called to a command in the Military Household of the King of France , as captain @-@ lieutenant of the 1st company of musketeers ( grey musketeers ) . Despite these positions , Nansouty 's financial situation declined severely under the Restoration . The General had had a highly honourable behaviour during the Napoleonic Wars and , unlike some of his fellow Napoleonic Generals , had drawn no revenues from pillaging . He had also been living a lofty and very costly lifestyle , which he considered normal for a nobleman such as himself . Nansouty had been earning a high revenue from his various positions during the Empire and additionally Napoleon was constantly paying high endowments to his best generals . Napoleonic endowments aside , Nansouty 's salaries during the first four months of 1814 had brought him no less than 104 @,@ 000 Francs , but , under the Bourbons , his dignity as Colonel @-@ General of dragoons had been suppressed and transformed into an honorific title of Inspector of dragoons , leaving him with only a 25 @,@ 000 Francs salary as captain @-@ lieutenant in the King 's Military Household . 
 = = Death and resting place = = 
 By the second half of 1814 , following his long and almost continuous campaigns throughout Europe during the last ten years , the health of General Nansouty badly deteriorated . He was suffering from his wounds , some of which were very recent , but , above all from war fatigue . On his death bed , he is recorded to have said : " I have carefully reflected upon all my action ever since I was born and in all my life , I have not done anyone wrong . " He is also said to have reasserted his Christian faith and to have asked that his son be recommended for the King 's protection , as a favour for his services . Just before passing away , he told his son that his heritage would be to follow his example and live an honourable and blameless life . General Count Étienne @-@ Marie @-@ Antoine @-@ Champion de Nansouty died on 12 February 1815 in Paris , leaving behind his wife and their only son . A pension of 6 @,@ 000 Francs per year was granted to the General 's widow by the King of France . His final resting place is at the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris , division 27 . The engraving on his tombstone reads : 
 The name <unk> is inscribed under the Arc de Triomphe in Paris . 
 = = Family = = 
 The Nansouty family was ancient Burgundy nobility and it was intimately linked to the history of this region , to which it gave several esteemed magistrates and soldiers throughout the centuries . One of its illustrious members , Seigneur de Nansouty was instrumental in ensuring the allegiance of Burgundy to King Henri IV and was rewarded by the monarch for his fidelity by being named state counselor . 
 General Count de Nansouty was the first child of Jean @-@ Baptiste @-@ Pierre @-@ Charles Champion de Nansouty ( born 1718 in Dijon , died 1785 in Bordeaux ) and his wife Antoinette Hélène <unk> ( born ca . 1740 ) , who also had <unk> @-@ Adélaïde Champion de Nansouty ( 1771 – 1849 ) . On 27 September 1802 , General Nansouty married Jeanne @-@ Françoise Adélaïde Gravier de Vergennes ( 1781 – 1849 ) , the niece of a former minister of Louis XVI , Charles Gravier , comte de Vergennes . Her parents were : Charles Xavier Gravier de Vergennes , 1751 – 1794 , and Elisabeth Adélaïde Françoise de Bastard , 1763 – 1808 . General Count de Nansouty and his wife had only one child , Étienne Champion de Nansouty ( 1803 – 1865 ) , who , having followed his father 's and grandfather 's footsteps in the military , rose to the rank of squadron commander , but then resigned from the army . General Count Nansouty also had a nephew , Charles @-@ Étienne Champion de Nansouty , who saw a successful military career and who later rose to the rank of general of division . 
 = = Considerations = = 
 As a commander , General Nansouty is reported to have been a man of spirit but also to have had an excessive inclination towards sarcasm , which was damaging to his reputation and made him a number of enemies . His few months spent in Spain in 1808 , where he commanded the orderly officers of the Emperor and the aides @-@ de @-@ camp of the senior generals of the General Staff , seem to have acquired him an unwanted reputation for mockery on the service , to such a point that one of his subordinates reported that " no one ever knew when he was joking and when he was serious . " When it came to military matters though , Nansouty 's posture became extremely imposing , concise and tough . A perfectionist , with a keen eye and impeccable knowledge of his arm , he was shocked whenever he saw his cavalry manoeuvres mishandled and then he became sarcastic , at times even insulting his subordinates . However , whenever he went too far with his reprimands , he was noticeably displeased with himself and remorseful , trying to offer reparation to the person he had insulted . This behaviour seems to have been recurrent . His mood seems to have been particularly bad during his last days of service , in 1814 , after he had received a number of light wounds in a short period of time , and foremost , after he had fallen out with the Emperor . During this period , he severely mistreated one of his squadron commanders for not executing his order fast enough , and even sacked his chief of staff , Colonel de la <unk> , for a minor fault . 
 Nansouty 's character as a proud and independent commander was apparent throughout his career and his <unk> assertive nature , quite typical of the great cavalry commanders of the time , led to several clashes with his peers . At least one such incident almost led to a duel with another senior cavalry commander , in front of their men . It occurred on 11 July 1809 , a few days after the Battle of Wagram , and opposed him to General Arrighi de Casanova , the commander of the 3rd heavy cavalry division . Both Nansouty and Arrighi adamantly claimed for their respective troops exclusive rights to use a small farm pond that they had found . Both men refused to give way and engaged in a heated argument , to such a point that they almost came to a duel in order to settle the matter . In the end , the more senior Nansouty won out and just after the incident , one of Arrighi 's cuirassiers erected a sign sarcastically saying " Nansouty 's pond " . 
 Indeed , at times , his sarcasm was directed even at his superiors , with Nansouty clashing with the more senior Grouchy at the Battle of Friedland . Nevertheless , Grouchy later recognised that the actions of Nansouty 's division throughout the battle were " glorious " . In 1809 , Nansouty famously responded to Napoleon 's criticism after the Battle of Wagram by saying : " It is not Your Majesty at any rate who can teach me how to handle cavalry . " Three years later , during the campaign in Russia , when Murat , King of Naples complained to him about the lack of resistance of the horses , Nansouty retorted : " Oh yes , Sire , this is because they lack patriotism . " At the Battle of Craonne , in 1814 , one day before resigning , he was recorded to have refused to execute Napoleon 's order to assault a redoubt , a move which he saw as a death sentence to his men . Instead , Nansouty told the Emperor : " I am going alone . There is nothing but death there and I will not lead these brave soldiers to it . " 
 His behaviour on campaign can only be described as perfectly honourable and at times humane , a trait which was illustrated during the French Revolutionary Wars , when he spared no effort to protect captured émigrés from the wrath of the Revolutionary radicals in the army . He also showed respect for occupied populations and never tolerated pillaging nor violence from his men . As a sign a gratitude , he was offered gifts several times but he was often seen refusing and sending them back . While on campaign in Tyrol , he was recorded to have accepted a large sum of money but he immediately distributed it to the local hospitals . Further evidence of his humanity was the care that he displayed for the lives and well @-@ being of his men , whom he was always reluctant to sacrifice for the sake of glory . 
 Overall as a heavy cavalry commander , Nansouty was one of the best men available during the Napoleonic Wars . Precise , methodical , with perfect knowledge of cavalry tactics , he was better than any other in preparing his attack dispositions . He was however less daring than the likes of Lasalle , Montbrun or Kellermann , which did not prevent him from leading some of the most memorable cavalry charges of the Napoleonic Wars . It has also been said that he reacted with " calculated slowness " when placed under the command of Murat . His talents for up @-@ keeping and training his troops seemed to surpass that of his peers . This was illustrated right from the start of the Napoleonic Wars , with the organisation of the cavalry reserve in the Grande Armée , under Marshal Murat . The command of the various units of this reserve was given to some of the best cavalry commanders available , including Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul , Louis Klein , Marc Antoine de Beaumont , Frédéric Henri Walther , Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers and Édouard Jean Baptiste Milhaud . Despite the fame and quality of these commanders , it was Nansouty 's six @-@ regiment division that acquired the reputation of being the best serviced and most exact in its manoeuvres . He was also a commander who had his men continually manoeuvre during a battle , believing that this would distract them from the danger that they were facing . 
 Nansouty 's battlefield talents were demonstrated through superb charges at Austerlitz , Friedland , Eckmühl , Essling , Borodino , Hanau , Montmirail , Vauchamps or Craonne , thus contributing to some of the most glorious victories of the French Empire and eliciting comparisons with the superb Prussian cavalry commander Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz . 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Gustav = 
 The meteorological history of Hurricane Gustav spanned eleven days , from August 25 to September 4 , 2008 . The tropical disturbance which eventually spawned Hurricane Gustav gathered on August 16 , southwest of the Cape Verde islands , but was slow to develop as it trekked west across the Atlantic . Upon reaching the warm waters of Caribbean Sea it began to organize and became a tropical depression on August 25 . It quickly strengthened to a tropical storm , and then a hurricane , before making landfall on Haiti 's southwest peninsula . Gustav was severely disrupted by Hispaniola 's mountains and stalled , disorganized , in the Gulf of Gonâve between August 26 and 27 . 
 Deep convection reformed the storm 's center southwest of Haiti , near Jamaica 's east coast . Under the influence of a mid @-@ level ridge that extended from the Gulf of Mexico to the western Atlantic Ocean , Gustav picked up a westward motion . It was briefly disrupted by Jamaica as it passed over the mountainous island but rapidly strengthened when it moved over open water once again . Reaching Category 4 strength less than 24 hours after having been a tropical storm , Gustav brushed the Isle of Youth and made landfall on Cuba 's western 's peninsula . 
 Disrupted by mountains once again , Gustav never regained its former strength . Briefly traveling over a warm eddy of the Gulf Stream 's loop current it encountered moderate wind shear and cooling sea surface temperatures . Fluctuations in its internal structure and visible appearance did not counter the storm 's general weakening trend , and Hurricane Gustav made its final landfall as a Category 2 hurricane near Cocodrie , Louisiana on September 1 . Moving inland , the storm quickly weakened but persisted as a significant tropical depression until it was adsorbed by a frontal boundary on September 5 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 On August 18 , 2008 , a tropical wave which had left the coast of Africa five days previously , developed into a significant low pressure area about 600 miles ( 970 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . This wave moved westward across the Atlantic in conditions that were not favorable for development . As it began to approach the Windward Islands conditions improved and it showed some signs of organization , but no circulation . Upon reaching the windward islands on August 23 , bringing showers , thunderstorms , and generally squally weather , wind shear over the system decreased and atmospheric conditions improved . Over the eastern Caribbean Sea , about 250 miles ( 400 km ) south of Santo Domingo , a low level circulation began to form . Hours later well @-@ defined curved bands and an improving circulation at the surface warranted that the system be designated a tropical depression . 
 The depression formed a small inner wind core 25 mi ( 40 km ) in diameter which allowed it to rapidly organize , and on the afternoon of August 25 it was upgraded to a tropical storm and first given the name Gustav . A renewed period of disorganization proved to be very short lived , and that night a well @-@ defined eye formed . This eye was accompanied by strengthening as the storm continued to move northwest towards Haiti . Before reaching the island , Gustav 's strengthening pattern raised it to hurricane strength . Its prominent and organizing central dense overcast belied persistent strengthening which continued until Hurricane Gustav made landfall on Haiti 's southwest peninsula about 10 mi ( 16 km ) west of Jacmel around 1730 UTC on August 26 , with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 981 mbar ( 28 @.@ 97 inHg ) . 
 = = Interaction with Haiti and Jamaica = = 
 After making landfall near Jacmel , Hurricane Gustav began traversing northwestward across the mountainous terrain of southwestern Haiti , dumping heavy rains as it passed . With favorable atmospheric conditions the storm maintained its hurricane intensity for several hours after landfall , but the high mountains over which it was traveling disrupted its lower level circulation . The eye because ragged and clouded over as Gustav weakened to a tropical storm . A large mid- to upper @-@ level anticyclone over the Florida Straight slowed Gustav 's movement , holding it over the northern coast of Haiti 's southern peninsula . Rainfall from the storm , which had been heavy since its landfall , began to accumulate as the storm 's movement stalled . Although the storm 's upper levels began experiencing moderate shear , and although parts of its circulation were still interacting with the mountains of southwestern Haiti , enough of Gustav 's convection was over the Gulf of Gonâve that on the morning of August 27 its organization started to improve . That afternoon , as a broad ridge extended from the Gulf of Mexico into the western Atlantic Ocean , Tropical Storm Gustav began to slowly pull to the west , away from the island of Hispaniola . Increased shear weakened the storm as the building ridge to the north of Gustav imparted a southerly component to the storm 's motion . 
 <unk> shear inhibited convection in the northeast quadrant , breaking up the storm 's existing center . The storm 's center reformed to the south , east of Jamaica , around a flare of deep convection . This new center was a little stronger than its previous one , and Gustav began moving southwest toward Jamaica . With its southerly reformation Gustav had moved itself away from the mountains of Haiti and over the warm waters of the Caribbean Sea . Finding itself in a much more advantageous environment , Gustav restrengthened to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Continuing west under influence of the same mid @-@ level ridge that had dominated its steering thus far , Gustav approached Jamaica and its outer bands delivered heavy rains . Unwavering in its westward motion , Gustav made landfall on Jamaica 's eastern tip on August 28 at 1800 UTC at just below hurricane strength . It then moved across Jamaica , with its center on the southern coast , and its convection dragging across the island 's mountainous center . Fifteen hours after making landfall , Gustav 's center moved off the island 's west coast and back over the Caribbean Sea . Unlike its Haitian landfall , Gustav 's interaction with Jamaica did not disturb its structure . As it left the island on the morning of August 29 , the storm 's diameter increased substantially and prominent banding features developed . Its low @-@ level center reorganized over the open water and with little wind shear a strengthening pattern emerged which quickly returned Gustav to hurricane status that afternoon . 
 = = Western Caribbean Sea = = 
 Having cleared the disruptive landmass of Jamaica , Hurricane Gustav entered a period of sustained intensification . Within hours of leaving the island the storm regained hurricane status and the first signs of an eye appeared . Convective bands and upper @-@ level outflow became well defined in all quadrants , wind shear decreased , and deep warm waters of the Caribbean Sean provided the perfect conditions for strengthening . The subtropical ridge over the eastern Gulf of Mexico developed a weakness , and as Gustav approached the Cayman Islands it was into this weakness that Gustav was drawn . As Hurricane Gustav tore through the low @-@ lying Cayman Islands its 30 mi ( 48 km ) wide eye became very well pronounced . In the early morning hours of August 30 , and Gustav continued to pass through the Cayman Islands , the storm 's winds increased to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , raising Hurricane Gustav to Category 2 strength . 
 Through the morning Hurricane Gustav continued to rapidly strengthen . Deep convection around the eye flared intensely and the hurricane 's minimum central pressure dropped precipitously — 24 mbar ( 0 @.@ 71 inHg ) in 24 hours . By 1000 UTC it had reached Category 3 strength and continued to strengthen . Another drop in pressure – down 11 mbar ( 0 @.@ 32 inHg ) in 6 hours to 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 17 inHg ) – was quickly followed by an increase in wind speed to 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) , making Hurricane Gustav a Category 4 hurricane when it had been a mere tropical storm only 24 hours earlier . That afternoon , as Hurricane Gustav continued moving northwest towards Cuba , its western eyewall passed directly over the Isle of Youth . 
 Passing along the eastern coast of the Isle of Youth , Gustav wobbled slightly , possibly the result of an eyewall replacement cycle , and strengthened even further . Here , even as it brushed the island , Hurricane Gustav continued to strengthen , making a brief landfall with a central pressure of 943 mbar ( 27 @.@ 85 inHg ) and winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . Its long @-@ term motion continued to be dominated by a mid @-@ level ridge over the western Atlantic , and that evening , with a central pressure of 941 mbar ( 27 @.@ 79 inHg ) , the hurricane made landfall in western mainland Cuba near los Palacios at just under Category 5 intensity , bringing its 155 mph ( 249 km / h ) winds onshore . At a height of 10 metres ( 33 ft ) , a 211 mph ( 340 km / h ) gust was recorded , which the World Meteorological Organization confirmed to be strongest ever measured during a hurricane . 
 = = Gulf of Mexico = = 
 The low mountains of western Cuba disrupted Hurricane Gustav 's low @-@ level circulation . Although it crosses the island in only a few hours , the brief interaction caused the storm 's eye to partially cloud @-@ over and its wind speeds fell to 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) as it entered that southeastern Gulf of Mexico that night . Through that night and into the morning of August 31 it continued moving northwestward across the gulf , its winds weakening to 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) as the damage from its interaction with Cuba continued to take its toll . That morning the eye , which was expanding as the storm weakened , completely clouded over . Some mid- to upper @-@ level dry air was drawn into the cyclone and a trough to the south added a slight vertical shear , but these interferences were short lived . Under the continued influence of the ridge over the western Atlantic and southeastern United States Hurricane Gustav accelerated into the central gulf . Here the storm tracked over a warm eddy in the loop current , but the high oceanic heat content failed to induce strengthening . Deep convection continued to be asymmetric and the eyewall opened to the southeast as wind speed continued to fall into Category 2 status . However by the afternoon of August 31 the hurricane 's ragged appearance began to improve . The eye returned properly and its minimum central pressure fell even as its outer bands came ashore on the northern Gulf Coast . Its asymmetric appearance improved and its wind radius expanded , but by that night Gustav had moved off the eddy of the loop current and over slightly cooler water . It could not restrengthen here , despite its more impressive presentation . 
 In the pre @-@ dawn hours of September 1 , while 170 mi ( 270 km ) from the gulf coast , the hurricane 's wind field expanded and tropical storm force winds extended 220 mi ( 350 km ) from its center . Dry air intrusion from the south broke up the hurricane 's eye , completely dissolving the eyewall as heavy rain bands came ashore in the state of Louisiana . As the eye approached the Louisiana coast , the storm weakened to 105 mph . Making landfall near Cocodrie , Louisiana at 1430 UTC the eye briefly reformed but was not associated with any strengthening . 
 = = Dissipation = = 
 After landfall the hurricane continued moving northwestward at 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) . The mid @-@ level ridge over the southeastern United States which had dominated Gustav 's steering for the last few days drifted northward , pulling the hurricane with it . Moving further inland Hurricane Gustav continued to weaken while delivering torrential rains to the central gulf coast of the United States . The eye that had cleared during landfall filled in that afternoon and was replaced by a central dense overcast . That night , 12 hours after landfall , Gustav weakened to a tropical storm with winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . 
 Slipping below tropical storm strength the following morning , Gustav 's previously firm steering currents began to erode and its forward motion slowed . As the storm crept through northwest Louisiana on September 2 , its heavy rainfall began to accumulate in the region . As the storm continued northwestward though the intersection of Arkansas , Louisiana , Texas , and Oklahoma and into Arkansas proper , its forward motion slowed considerably and it dumped isolated rainfall accumulations in excess of 9 inches ( 228 @.@ 60 mm ) . Through the morning of September 3 , Tropical Depression Gustav briefly drifted north @-@ northeastward under very weak steering currents , but stalled completely over southwestern Arkansas that afternoon and spread heavy rain into the mid @-@ Mississippi Valley . By the evening , steering currents returned and Gustav picked up speed to the northeast at 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) . Moving even more rapidly Gustav left the Mississippi Valley and headed towards the Ohio Valley . 
 The next morning , as it passed through Missouri , Gustav began to gain extratropical characteristics as it merged with a frontal boundary . The extratropical transition was completed on the afternoon of September 4 as Gustav 's remnant low was moving 28 mph ( 45 km / h ) over St. Louis , Missouri . Although no longer a tropical system , the remnants of Gustav continued to bring wind and rain to the northern United States . That evening , still traveling northeastward , the remnants dropped 2 – 4 in ( 51 – 102 mm ) of rain on Illinois and its widespread remnant low produced trace rainfall stretching from Iowa to Indiana . By nightfall on September 4 the remnants had reached southwest Michigan , where they dumped rain until the next morning , with accumulations as high as 5 in ( 130 mm ) . The storm 's circulation remained intact through Wisconsin where it dropped almost 1 in ( 25 mm ) of rainfall . Some of Gustav 's more northerly remnants even drifted into Minnesota where they dropped small amounts of rain . On September 5 , the storm 's extratropical remnants were absorbed by a larger extratropical low moving through the Great Lakes . 
 = Slime ( Dragon Quest ) = 
 The Slime is the mascot of the Dragon Quest role @-@ playing video game franchise . Originally inspired by the game Wizardry to be a weak and common monster for the video game Dragon Quest , Slime has appeared in almost every Dragon Quest game since . The character 's popularity led to the appearance of many varieties of slimes , including boss characters , and even emerging as the protagonist of the Rocket Slime video game series . 
 The Slime has been placed on a multitude of different kinds of merchandise . The Slime 's friendliness , limited power , and appealing form have caused the Slime to become a popular character and symbol of the Dragon Quest series . 
 = = Character design = = 
 The inspiration for the Slime came to Yuji Horii , the creator of Dragon Quest , from a role @-@ playing game called Wizardry . " I was really hooked on ' <unk> , ' the PC game , ... There 's ... slime @-@ looking characters ... , so I got the inspiration from it . I was doodling the slime @-@ looking character and I took it to Mr. Toriyama , who did the character design , and he made it the Slime we see today . " Horii said that when it was originally conceived , the Slime was " a pile of goo " , but Toriyama 's design came back as a tear @-@ drop which they considered " perfect " . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 In most appearances of the Slime , it is an antagonist , and occasionally a boss . In some Dragon Quest titles , slimes also appear as friendly non @-@ player characters and peaceful inhabitants of cities . Friendly slimes usually greet players with the phrase , " I 'm not a bad slime ! " . Slimes , like many monsters in the Dragon Quest series , have a certain verbal tic , " slurp " . Slimes also replace certain words or syllables with the word " goo " ( i.e. " human " is " <unk> " ) , or other words relating to slime or goo , when they speak . 
 = = = Outward appearance = = = 
 There are many different types of slimes found throughout the Dragon Quest and Rocket Slime series . These include slimes in different colors , bubble slimes , which look like pools of slime , nautical slimes that wear conch shells , the rare metal slimes , which have high defense , give out large amounts of experience points , and tend to flee from battle , <unk> , which have tentacles , and king slimes , which are very large slimes wearing crowns and come in various versions , such as regular or metal . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The Slime made its first appearance in Dragon Quest as the first and weakest enemy in the game , and has made a similar appearance in all subsequent Dragon Quest titles . In Dragon Quest V , the monster is an easy recruit that learns a variety of magic spells . The Slime is also the protagonist of its own spinoff series , beginning with Slime <unk> Dragon Quest , a Japanese Game Boy Advance title . It was followed by Dragon Quest Heroes : Rocket Slime , which was released worldwide for the Nintendo DS , and the Japanese @-@ exclusive title , Slime Mori Mori Dragon Quest 3 for the Nintendo 3DS . These games follow a nation of slimes who are intelligent and civilized , but also cute and somewhat comical . In the North American localization of the Dragon Quest games for the Nintendo DS , joking references and puns are made about slimes . Slime also appeared in three crossover games along with characters from Nintendo 's Mario franchise : Itadaki Street DS , Mario Sports Mix , and Fortune Street . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Reviewers have seen the slime as symbolic of the Dragon Quest series in the same way that the Moogle represents Final Fantasy . Dragon Quest creator Yuji Horii speculated that the popularity of the slime may come from its cuteness , how it is easy to defeat , and while the protagonists change in every Dragon Quest game , the slime is always there . GamesRadar speculated that the intense " grinding " , or fighting of enemies in the Dragon Quest series exposed players to an abundance of slimes , but a positive association was created by their familiarity . Yoshiki Watabe , producer of Dragon Quest VIII , hypothesized its popularity came from it being a " well designed character " , but " simple " , being accessible to anyone . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 As the most recognizable symbol of the best @-@ selling video game series in Japan , the Slime has been featured prominently in Dragon Quest @-@ related merchandise . It has its own section called ' Smile Slime ' on the Square Enix JP shopping website . Slime merchandise includes plush toys , pencil cases , keychains , game controllers , a stylus , and several boardgames including one titled Dragon Quest Slime Racing . In Japan , pork filled steam buns shaped like slimes have been sold . For Dragon Quest 's 25th anniversary , special items were sold including business cards , tote bags , and crystal figurines . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Dragon Quest Slime has received positive reception from critics and fans , being called the " most prolific " of all the " memorable " monsters from the series and is one of the most recognizable characters in gaming . The Slime has also been called cute and charming by several critics , especially when reviewing Rocket Slime . GamesRadar listed it as the most lovable blob in video games , calling them the " equivalent of training wheels " due to how easy they are to defeat typically , but also saying that their weird smile makes players think twice about killing them . They also listed it as a character they wished they knew less about . They stated that while they started out as nothing more than things for players to kill and not feel guilty about , the playable role of a Slime in the Dragon Quest Heroes series made them realize they were more than just generic enemies . In the January 2010 issue of Nintendo Power , the editors listed the Slime among its Favorite <unk> Bags , a list including Goombas and <unk> . They wrote that " The Slimes are just so cute and friendly @-@ looking , it 's almost hard to slay them . But you know , a hero 's gotta do what a hero 's gotta do . " 
 = Battle of Ngomano = 
 The Battle of Ngomano or <unk> was fought between the German Empire and Portugal during the East African Campaign of World War I. A force of Germans and Askaris under Paul Emil von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck had just won a costly victory against the British at the Battle of Mahiwa , in present @-@ day Tanzania and ran very short of supplies . To find food , the Germans invaded Portuguese East Africa to the south , to escape superior British forces to the north and supply themselves with captured Portuguese materiel . 
 Portugal was part of the Entente and a belligerent , employing troops in France and a force under Major João Teixeira Pinto was sent to stop von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck from crossing the border . The Portuguese were flanked by the Germans , while encamped at Ngomano on 25 November 1917 . The battle saw the Portuguese force nearly destroyed , with many troops killed and captured . The capitulation of the Portuguese enabled the Germans to seize a large quantity of supplies and continue operations in East Africa until the end of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 By late November 1917 , the Germans in East Africa were left with few options if they wanted to continue the war . They were outnumbered drastically and were split up into several different columns . The two largest of these , under Theodor Tafel and Paul Emil von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck , were completely cut off from each other . Although von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's column had defeated a large British force at the Battle of Mahiwa he had lost a large number of troops and expended virtually his entire supply of modern ammunition . With only antiquated weapons and no way of resupplying , von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck decided to invade Portuguese East Africa in hopes of acquiring sufficient supplies to continue the war . There was no legal impediment to this attack ; Germany had declared war on Portugal on 9 March 1916 . 
 Although Tafel 's force was intercepted by the Allies and capitulated before reaching the border , von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck and his column was able to reach the Rovuma River . Facing supply shortages , the German general then reduced his force by dismissing a large number of Askaris , who could not be adequately equipped , as well as a number of camp followers . With his reduced force , von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck made plans to attack the Portuguese garrison across the river at Ngomano . The Portuguese force was a native contingent led by European officers under João Teixeira Pinto , a veteran with experience fighting in Africa . Rather than prepare defensive positions , the Portuguese had begun building a large encampment upon their arrival at Ngomano on 20 November . Pinto had at his disposal 900 troops with six machine guns and a large supply cache but his inexperienced force was no match for von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's force , which crossed the river with between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 veterans as well as a large number of porters . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 07 : 00 on the morning of 25 November , the Portuguese garrison at Ngomano received word from a British intelligence officer that an attack was about to commence . Nevertheless , when the attack came they were unprepared . In order to distract Pinto and his men , the Germans shelled the camp from across the river with high explosive rounds . While the artillery attacked the camp , the Germans moved their forces upstream and crossed the Rovuma safely out sight of Pinto and his men . The Portuguese did not resist von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's forces when they crossed the river and remained encamped at Ngomano . The Germans were easily able to flank the Portuguese positions and completely envelop them with six companies of German infantry attacking the camp from the south , south @-@ east and west . 
 Having been forewarned about the attack , the Portuguese commander had been able to begin preparations for the assault ; however , he had planned on receiving a frontal assault and when the force came under attack from the rear he was completely surprised . The Portuguese attempted to entrench themselves in rifle pits , but they became disoriented after Pinto and several other officers were slain early in the engagement . 
 The Germans had very little in the way of heavy weapons , as they had discarded most of their artillery and machine guns due to lack of ammunition . Despite the chronic ammunition shortage von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck was able to move four machine guns up close to the rifle pits , using them only at close range to ensure his ammunition would not be wasted . The inexperience of the Portuguese proved to be their downfall , as despite their firing over 30 @,@ 000 rounds German casualties were extremely light , including only one casualty among their officers . Taking heavy casualties , having lost their commanding officer , and finding themselves hopelessly outnumbered , the Portuguese finally surrendered despite the fact that they had enough military supplies to continue the action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The German casualties were light , with only a few Askaris and one European killed . The Portuguese , on the other hand , had suffered a massive defeat and by failing to prevent von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's force from crossing the Rovuma allowed him to continue his campaign until the end of the war . Estimates of Portuguese casualties vary , with some sources providing figures of over 200 Portuguese killed and wounded and nearly 700 taken prisoner ; other writers state around 25 Portuguese killed along with 162 Askari , with almost 500 captured . The prisoners of war were used by the Germans as porters for the 250 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , six machine guns and several hundred rifles that were also captured . With this equipment , the Germans managed to completely resupply their force . Von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck abandoned and destroyed the majority of his force 's German weaponry for which he had no ammunition and armed his troops with Portuguese and British weapons . Portuguese uniforms seized from the captured prisoners were used to replace the ragged old German ones that the force had previously worn . 
 Von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck did not stay at Ngomano for long and soon marched his force south to attack more Portuguese positions , leaving only one company at Ngomano as a rearguard in case the British decided to follow him into Portuguese East Africa . His force won several more victories while seizing even more supplies and ammunition before moving back into German East Africa in 1918 . 
 = Pygmy hippopotamus = 
 The pygmy hippopotamus ( Choeropsis liberiensis or Hexaprotodon liberiensis ) is a small hippopotamid which is native to the forests and swamps of West Africa , primarily in Liberia with small populations in Sierra Leone , Guinea , and Ivory Coast . 
 The pygmy hippo is reclusive and nocturnal . It is one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae , the other being its much larger cousin the common hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus amphibius ) . The pygmy hippopotamus displays many terrestrial adaptations , but like its larger cousin , it is semi @-@ aquatic and relies on water to keep its skin moist and its body temperature cool . Behaviors such as mating and giving birth may occur in water or on land . The pygmy hippo is herbivorous , feeding on ferns , broad @-@ leaved plants , grasses , and fruits it finds in the forests . 
 A rare nocturnal forest creature , the pygmy hippopotamus is a difficult animal to study in the wild . Pygmy hippos were unknown outside West Africa until the 19th century . Introduced to zoos in the early 20th century , they breed well in captivity and the vast majority of research is derived from zoo specimens . The survival of the species in captivity is more assured than in the wild ; the World Conservation Union estimates that there are fewer than 3 @,@ 000 pygmy hippos remaining in the wild . 
 Pygmy hippos are primarily threatened by loss of habitat , as forests are logged and converted to farm land , and are also vulnerable to poaching , hunting for bushmeat , natural predators and war . Pygmy hippos are among the species illegally hunted for food in Liberia . 
 = = Taxonomy and origins = = 
 Nomenclature of the pygmy hippopotamus reflects that of the hippopotamus . The plural form is pygmy hippopotami ( hippopotamuses is also accepted as a plural form by the OED , or pygmy hippos for short ) . A male pygmy hippopotamus is known as a bull , a female as a cow , and a baby as a calf . A group of hippopotami is known as a herd or a bloat . 
 The pygmy hippopotamus is a member of the family Hippopotamidae where it is classified as a member of either the genus Choeropsis ( " resembling a hog " ) or , the genus Hexaprotodon ( " six front teeth " ) . Members of Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids . Sometimes the sub @-@ family <unk> is used . Further , some taxonomists group hippopotami and anthracotheres in the superfamily <unk> or <unk> . 
 A sister species of the pygmy hippopotamus may have been the little @-@ studied Malagasy pygmy hippopotamus ( Hexaprotodon madagascariensis or Hippopotamus madagascariensis ) , one of three recently extinct species from Madagascar . C. madagascariensis was the same size as C. liberiensis and shared its terrestrial behavior , inhabiting the forested highlands of Madagascar , rather than open rivers . It is believed to have gone extinct within the last 500 years . 
 The taxonomy of the genus of the pygmy hippopotamus has changed as understanding of the animal has developed . Samuel G. Morton initially classified the animal as Hippopotamus minor , but later determined it was distinct enough to warrant its own genus , and labeled it Choeropsis . In 1977 , Shirley C. Coryndon proposed that the pygmy hippopotamus was closely related to Hexaprotodon , a genus that consisted of prehistoric hippos mostly native to Asia . 
 This assertion was widely accepted , until <unk> asserted in 2005 that the pygmy hippopotamus was not a member of Hexaprotodon , after a thorough examination of the phylogeny of Hippopotamidae . He suggested instead that the pygmy hippopotamus was a distinct genus , and returned the animal to Choeropsis . All agree that the modern pygmy hippopotamus , be it H. liberiensis or C. liberiensis , is the only extant member of its genus . 
 = = = Nigerian subspecies = = = 
 A distinct subspecies of pygmy hippopotamus lived in Nigeria until at least the 20th century , though the validity of this has been questioned . The existence of the subspecies , makes Choeropsis liberiensis liberiensis ( or Hexaprotodon liberiensis liberiensis under the old classification ) the full trinomial nomenclature for the Liberian pygmy hippopotamus . The Nigerian pygmy hippopotamus was never studied in the wild and never captured . All research and all zoo specimens are the Liberian subspecies . The Nigerian subspecies is classified as C. liberiensis <unk> . 
 The Nigerian pygmy hippopotamus ranged in the Niger River Delta , especially near Port Harcourt , but no reliable reports exist after the collection of the museum specimens secured by I. R. P. Heslop , a British colonial officer , in the early 1940s . It is probably extinct . The subspecies is separated by over 1 @,@ 800 km ( 1 @,@ 100 mi ) and the Dahomey Gap , a region of savanna that divides the forest regions of West Africa . The subspecies is named after I. R. P. Heslop , who claimed in 1945 to have shot a pygmy hippo in the Niger Delta region and collected several skulls . He estimated that perhaps no more than 30 pygmy hippos remained in the region . 
 Heslop reportedly sent four pygmy hippopotamus skulls he collected to the British Museum of Natural History in London . These specimens were not subjected to taxonomic evaluation , however , until 1969 when G. B. Corbet classified the skulls as belonging to a separate subspecies based on consistent variations in the proportions of the skulls . The Nigerian pygmy hippos were seen or shot in Rivers State , Imo State and <unk> State , Nigeria . While some local populations are aware that the species once existed , its history in the region is poorly documented . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The evolution of the pygmy hippopotamus is most often studied in the context of its larger cousin . Both species were long believed to be most closely related to the family <unk> ( pigs and hogs ) or <unk> ( peccaries ) , but research within the last 10 years has determined that pygmy hippos and hippos are most closely related to cetaceans ( whales and dolphins ) . Hippos and whales shared a common semi @-@ aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around 60 mya . 
 This hypothesized ancestor likely split into two branches about six million years later . One branch would evolve into cetaceans , the other branch became the anthracotheres , a large family of four @-@ legged beasts , whose earliest member , from the Late Eocene , would have resembled narrow hippopotami with comparatively small and thin heads . 
 <unk> are deeply nested within the family <unk> . The oldest known hippopotamid is the genus Kenyapotamus , which lived in Africa from 16 to 8 mya . Kenyapotamus is known only through fragmentary fossils , but was similar in size to C. liberiensis . The Hippopotamidae are believed to have evolved in Africa , and while at one point the species spread across Asia and Europe , no hippopotami have ever been discovered in the Americas . Starting 7 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 8 mya the <unk> , likely ancestors to the genus Hippopotamus and Hexaprotodon , lived in Africa and the Middle East . 
 While the fossil record of hippos is still poorly understood , the lineages of the two modern genera , Hippopotamus and Choeropsis , may have diverged as far back as 8 mya . The ancestral form of the pygmy hippopotamus may be the genus <unk> . <unk> and Choeropsis are significantly more basal than Hippopotamus and Hexaprotodon , and thus more closely resemble the ancestral species of hippos . 
 = = = Extinct pygmy and dwarf hippos = = = 
 Several species of small hippopotamids have also become extinct in the Mediterranean in the late Pleistocene or early Holocene . Though these species are sometimes known as " pygmy hippopotami " they are not believed to be closely related to C. liberiensis . These include the Cretan dwarf hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus <unk> ) , the Sicilian hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus <unk> ) , the Maltese hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus melitensis ) and the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus minor ) . 
 These species , though comparable in size to the pygmy hippopotamus , are considered dwarf hippopotamuses , rather than pygmies . They are likely descended from a full @-@ sized species of European hippopotamus , and reached their small size through the evolutionary process of insular dwarfism which is common on islands ; the ancestors of pygmy hippopotami were also small and thus there was never a dwarfing process . There were also several species of pygmy hippo on the island of Madagascar ( see Malagasy hippopotamus ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pygmy hippos share the same general form as a hippopotamus . They have a graviportal skeleton , with four stubby legs and four toes on each foot , supporting a portly frame . The pygmy hippo , however , is only half as tall as the hippopotamus and weighs less than 1 / 4 as much as its larger cousin . Adult pygmy hippos stand about 75 – 100 cm ( 2 @.@ 46 – 3 @.@ 28 ft ) high at the shoulder , are 150 – 175 cm ( 4 @.@ 92 – 5 @.@ 74 ft ) in length and weigh 180 – 275 kg ( 397 – 606 lb ) . Their lifespan in captivity ranges from 30 to 55 years , though it is unlikely that they live this long in the wild . 
 The skin is greenish @-@ black or brown , shading to a creamy gray on the lower body . Their skin is very similar to the common hippo 's , with a thin epidermis over a dermis that is several centimeters thick . Pygmy hippos have the same unusual secretion as common hippos , that gives a pinkish tinge to their bodies , and is sometimes described as " blood sweat " though the secretion is neither sweat nor blood . The highly alkaline substance is believed to have antiseptic and <unk> properties . The skin of hippos dries out quickly and cracks , which is why both species spend so much time in water . 
 The skeleton of C. liberiensis is more gracile than that of the common hippopotamus , meaning their bones are proportionally thinner . The common hippo 's spine is parallel with the ground ; the pygmy hippo 's back slopes forward , a likely adaptation to pass more easily through dense forest vegetation . Proportionally , the pygmy hippo 's legs and neck are longer and its head smaller . 
 The orbits and nostrils of a pygmy hippo are much less pronounced , an adaptation from spending less time in deep water ( where pronounced orbits and nostrils help the common hippo breathe and see ) . The feet of pygmy hippos are narrower , but the toes are more spread out and have less webbing , to assist in walking on the forest floor . 
 Despite adaptations to a more terrestrial life than the common hippopotamus , pygmy hippos are still more aquatic than all other even @-@ toed ungulates . The ears and nostrils of pygmy hippos have strong muscular valves to aid submerging underwater , and the skin physiology is dependent on the availability of water . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The behavior of the pygmy hippo differs from the common hippo in many ways . Much of its behavior is more similar to that of a tapir , though this is an effect of convergent evolution . While the common hippopotamus is gregarious , pygmy hippos live either alone or in small groups , typically a mated pair or a mother and calf . Pygmy hippos tend to ignore each other rather than fight when they meet . Field studies have estimated that male pygmy hippos range over 1 @.@ 85 km2 ( 460 acres ) , while the range of a female is 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 6 km2 ( 99 – 148 acres ) . 
 Pygmy hippos spend most of the day hidden in rivers . They will rest in the same spot for several days in a row , before moving to a new spot . At least some pygmy hippos make use of dens or burrows that form in river banks . It is unknown if the pygmy hippos help create these dens , or how common it is to use them . Though a pygmy hippo has never been observed burrowing , other artiodactyls , such as warthogs , are burrowers . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Like the common hippopotamus , the pygmy hippo emerges from the water at dusk to feed . It relies on game trails to travel through dense forest vegetation . It marks trails by vigorously waving its tail while defecating to further spread its feces . The pygmy hippo spends about six hours a day foraging for food . 
 Pygmy hippos are herbivorous . They do not eat aquatic vegetation to a significant extent and rarely eat grass because it is uncommon in the thick forests they inhabit . The bulk of a pygmy hippo 's diet consists of ferns , broad @-@ leaved plants and fruits that have fallen to the forest floor . The wide variety of plants pygmy hippos have been observed eating suggests that they will eat any plants available . This diet is of higher quality than that of the common hippopotamus . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 A study of breeding behavior in the wild has never been conducted ; the artificial conditions of captivity may cause the observed behavior of pygmy hippos in zoos to differ from natural conditions . Sexual maturity for the pygmy hippopotamus occurs between three and five years of age . The youngest reported age for giving birth is a pygmy hippo in the Zoo Basel , Switzerland which bore a calf at three years and three months . The oestrus cycle of a female pygmy hippo lasts an average of 35 @.@ 5 days , with the oestrus itself lasting between 24 – 48 hours . 
 Pygmy hippos consort for mating , but the duration of the relationship is unknown . In zoos they breed as monogamous pairs . Copulation can take place on land or in the water , and a pair will mate one to four times during an oestrus period . In captivity , pygmy hippos have been conceived and born in all months of the year . The gestation period ranges from 190 – 210 days , and usually a single young is born , though twins are known to occur . 
 The common hippopotamus gives birth and mates only in the water , but pygmy hippos mate and give birth on both land and water . Young pygmy hippos can swim almost immediately . At birth , pygmy hippos weigh 4 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 2 kg ( 9 @.@ 9 – 13 @.@ 7 lb ) with males weighing about 0 @.@ 25 kg ( 0 @.@ 55 lb ) more than females . Pygmy hippos are fully weaned between six and eight months of age ; before weaning they do not accompany their mother when she leaves the water to forage , but instead hide in the water by themselves . The mother returns to the hiding spot about three times a day and calls out for the calf to suckle . Suckling occurs with the mother lying on her side . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The greatest threat to the remaining pygmy hippopotamus population in the wild is loss of habitat . The forests in which pygmy hippos live have been subject to logging , settling and conversion to agriculture , with little efforts made to make logging sustainable . As forests shrink , the populations become more fragmented , leading to less genetic diversity in the potential mating pool . 
 Pygmy hippos are among the species illegally hunted for food in Liberia . Their meat is said to be of excellent quality , like that of a wild boar ; unlike those of the common hippo , the pygmy hippo 's teeth have no value . The effects of West Africa 's civil strife on the pygmy hippopotamus are unknown , but unlikely to be positive . The pygmy hippopotamus can be killed by leopards , pythons and crocodiles . How often this occurs is unknown . 
 C. liberiensis was identified as one of the top @-@ 10 " focal species " in 2007 by the Evolutionarily Distinct and Globally Endangered ( EDGE ) project . Some populations inhabit protected areas , such as the Gola Forest Reserve in Sierra Leone . 
 The Zoo Basel in Switzerland holds the international studbook and coordinates the entire captive pygmy hippo population that freely breeds in zoos around the world . Between 1970 and 1991 the population of pygmy hippos born in captivity more than doubled . The survival of the species in zoos is more certain than the survival of the species in the wild . In captivity , the pygmy hippo lives from 42 to 55 years , longer than in the wild . Since 1919 , only 41 percent of pygmy hippos born in zoos have been male . 
 = = History and folklore = = 
 While the common hippopotamus was known to Europeans since classical antiquity , the pygmy hippopotamus was unknown outside its range in West Africa until the 19th century . Due to their nocturnal , forested existence , they were poorly known within their range as well . In Liberia the animal was traditionally known as a water cow . 
 Early field reports of the animal misidentified it as a wild hog . Several skulls of the species were sent to the American natural scientist Samuel G. Morton , during his residency in Monrovia , Liberia . Morton first described the species in 1843 . The first complete specimens were collected as part of a comprehensive investigation of Liberian fauna in the 1870s and 1880s by Dr. Johann <unk> . The specimens were taken to the Natural History Museum in Leiden , The Netherlands . 
 The first pygmy hippo was brought to Europe in 1873 after being captured in Sierra Leone by a member of the British Colonial Service but died shortly after arrival . Pygmy hippos were successfully introduced to Europe in 1911 . They were first shipped to Germany and then to the Bronx Zoo in New York City where they also thrived . 
 In 1927 , Harvey Firestone of Firestone Tires presented Billy the pygmy hippo to U.S. President Calvin Coolidge . Coolidge donated Billy to the National Zoo in Washington , D.C. According to the zoo , Billy is a common ancestor to most pygmy hippos in U.S. zoos today . 
 Several folktales have been collected about the pygmy hippopotamus . One tale says that pygmy hippos carry a shining diamond in their mouths to help travel through thick forests at night ; by day the pygmy hippo has a secret hiding place for the diamond , but if a hunter catches a pygmy hippo at night the diamond can be taken . Villagers sometimes believed that baby pygmy hippos do not nurse but rather lick secretions off the skin of the mother . 
 = Rode Hall = 
 Rode Hall , a Georgian country house , is the seat of the Wilbraham family , members of the landed gentry in the parish of Odd Rode , Cheshire , England . The estate , with the original timber @-@ framed manor house , was purchased by the Wilbrahams from the ancient Rode family in 1669 . The medieval manor house was replaced between 1700 and 1708 by a brick @-@ built seven @-@ bay building ; a second building , with five bays , was built in 1752 ; the two buildings being joined together in 1800 to form the present Rode Hall . 
 Both the exterior and interior of Rode Hall have been altered multiples times , including work by Thomas <unk> Pritchard and Lewis Wyatt , resulting in an irregular and complex layout . The house has large collections of period paintings , furniture , and porcelain by Chelsea , Bow and Royal Worcester . 
 The house is Grade II * listed , and is surrounded by parkland and formal gardens , which are included as Grade II on the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . On the site are a grotto , an ice house , and an ornamental obelisk , all Grade II listed structures . Rode Hall is still owned and occupied by the Wilbrahams , currently by the 8th Baronet , Sir Richard Baker Wilbraham , and his wife , Lady Anne Baker Wilbraham . The hall and gardens are open to the public from April to September . 
 = = History = = 
 The Rode Estate had been owned by the Rode family since at least the 14th century , when William de Rode bore arms for Edward II . The estate was purchased in 1669 by Roger Wilbraham for the sum of £ 2 @,@ 400 ( equivalent to £ 350 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , from his cousin Randle Rode . The Wilbrahams were prominent local landowners and descended from Sir Richard de <unk> , the Sheriff of Cheshire in the mid 13th century . The estate passed through the male line until 1900 when General Sir Richard Wilbraham died , leaving it to his only daughter Katherine . Katherine 's husband , George Baker , assumed by royal licence the surname Wilbraham . In 1910 , George succeeded to the Baker baronetcy on the death of his elder brother . 
 Rode Hall consists of two houses , formerly separate , but later joined together . The older house was built for Randle Wilbraham in the early 18th century ; it was recorded as being " recently completed " in 1708 and replaced an earlier timber @-@ framed manor house , thought to have been similar to the nearby Little Moreton Hall . The second house was built for his grandson Randle Wilbraham III , a noted barrister , in 1752 . The hall has been updated by successive generations , most notably in the early 1800s , when a bay was constructed to join the two houses , and in 1927 , when the front portico was added . Rode Hall was opened to the public in 1980 , by Sir Randle John Baker Wilbraham , 7th Baronet . Since then an extensive restoration has been performed with the assistance of English Heritage , including tackling an outbreak of dry rot in the late 1980s . In 1985 , the house was designated Grade II * by English Heritage on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England ; Grade II * buildings are particularly important buildings of more than special interest . Only 5 @.@ 5 % of listed buildings are Grade II * . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The older part of the brick @-@ built hall consists of seven bays , over two floors . There are projecting bays at either end of the building , dressed with ashlar quoins . A central doorway is flanked with plain pilasters , also of ashlar . The roof is of a hipped design , with a central octagonal bellcote , topped by a small dome . 
 The newer building , constructed in 1752 under the guidance of architects William <unk> and his brother David , consists of five bays , with a large bay at the side , constructed around 1800 to connect it to the older building . There is a central portico , with a flat roof supported by four ionic columns , added in 1926 . The tripartite windows of the ground floor contrast with the French windows of the first floor , which are fronted by cast iron balconies . The attic floor has small 4 x 2 pane windows . The rear of the house consists of four bays , with a large central window on the first floor and a central door , surrounded with ashlar <unk> . Both sections of the house are constructed in red Flemish bond brick , which , until 1926 , was covered with render . 
 The design has received mixed reviews . Architectural historian David Watkin described the house as ' large , irregular and rather featureless ' and of a ' dull design ' . On the other hand , historian , archivist and Maltravers Herald Extraordinary John Martin Robinson , in The architecture of Northern England , noted the ' complex building history ' of the hall , describing it as a ' substantial and elegant Georgian house ' . In his early 19th century work ' Views of the Seats , Mansions , Castles , Etc. of Noblemen and Gentlemen of England , Scotland and Ireland ' , John Preston Neale noted that the house is ' large and handsome ' . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The main family living quarters are located in the 1752 addition . The staircase hall is the only room in the 1752 house to have kept its original , Georgian interior . The rococo plaster ceiling is attributed to Shrewsbury @-@ born architect , Thomas <unk> Pritchard , who also designed interiors at Tatton Hall , Powis Castle and Croft Castle . Facing the gardens , on the north side of the house , is the library . Remodelled in the early 1800s , this room was previously used by the family as a dining room . It features fitted 19th @-@ century mahogany bookcases , decorated with small acanthus friezes . The white marble fireplace is flanked on either side by family coats of arms . Connecting the library to the staircase hall and the drawing room is the ante @-@ room , which is furnished with pieces commissioned by the family in the late 18th century . Originally , an entrance into the hall was located in this octagonal room , until Randle Wilbraham III relocated it . The room features copies of works by Raphael , attributed to Michelangelo Maestri . 
 The dining room , originally the library , was designed by Lewis Wyatt in about 1808 . Wyatt extended the room and added a shallow , semi @-@ circular apse at one end . It features decorative plasterwork on both the ceiling and walls , but is largely unadorned . Wyatt implemented a design featuring gilded acanthus leaves and vines on the ceiling with large @-@ scale egg @-@ and @-@ dart molding around the upper sections of the wall , <unk> columns and a black marble fireplace with bronze ornamentation . Wyatt 's alteration works at Rode Hall are influenced by the style of Sir John Soane , and he described his designs for the interiors as an ' experiment in primitive simplicity ... At Rode the primitivist intent is emphasized by the total absence of an entablature . ' The room is furnished with original pieces of furniture designed and made by the English manufacturer <unk> of Lancaster and London ; of note is the mahogany dining @-@ table and the semi @-@ circular sideboard built into the apse . A Royal Crown Derby dinner service , purchased by Mary Wilbraham @-@ Bootle for her son Randle Wilbraham III in 1809 , is on display here . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The park , including 10 acres ( 4 ha ) of gardens , are listed as Grade II on the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens , and are promoted by the Campaign to Protect Rural England . While there is a description in a seventeenth @-@ century survey , describing the ' orchards , gardens and courts within the Greene before the hall ' , there are no other known records of the gardens until 1790 , when gardener Humphry Repton was commissioned to landscape the grounds . Repton 's proposal was not implemented until 1803 , when Richard Wilbraham III employed a John Webb to construct a new driveway , create two artificial lakes , the smaller one called Stew Pond and the one @-@ mile long Rode Pool , and lay out a " Wild Garden " . 
 The gardens are still maintained by the current owner and his wife and have been recognised as a member of Cheshire 's Gardens of Distinction . An Italian Garden was constructed in 2007 and contains olive and cypress trees . The garden 's design was inspired by the Garden of Ninfa , an English @-@ style garden outside of Rome which was planted under the guidance of Lady Constance Adela ( Ada ) Bootle @-@ Wilbraham , a distant relative of the owners . 
 = = = Kitchen garden = = = 
 The 2 @-@ acre ( 1 ha ) walled kitchen garden was built in the early 1700s to provide fruit and vegetables for the estate . The Victorian head gardener 's cottage is built into the southern wall . Alongside the west wall is a private path , known as the Colonel 's Walk , used by the family to bypass the kitchen garden on their way to church . There are traces of original chimneys built into the wall supporting <unk> fruit trees , located there in order to maintain an optimum temperature for year @-@ round growth . One of these chimneys has been restored . The garden is still in use today and includes traditional and exotic varieties [ of vegetables ] , and fruit bushes , some of which are used to make jams and chutneys for sale in the hall 's tearooms . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Four structures in the grounds around the house are recorded in the National Heritage List for England as designated Grade II listed buildings ; Grade II listing means that a building or structure is considered to be " nationally important and of special interest " . The red @-@ brick and rubble grotto was constructed in either the 18th or 19th century , and is built around a brick barrel vaulted tunnel , decorated internally with plasterwork and shells . The ice house is also in the garden and is built in brick and covered in earth . A tunnel @-@ vaulted passage leads into a circular chamber with a domed roof . The obelisk is located on the edge of the larger of the two estate lakes , and is in sandstone with chamfered edges . It stands on a square plinth and is constructed in two sections ; the upper section was added later . It was originally located at Kent Green , a nearby hamlet . The stable block was built in 1804 to the designs of one John Hope . As with the main house , the block is constructed in red Flemish @-@ bond brickwork , with ashlar quoins and banding and a slate roof . Originally there were a number of open archways , several of which have since been bricked @-@ up . The two central openings are topped with a stone pediment and the roof features an octagonal bellcote , with an ogee dome . 
 = = = Mow Cop Castle = = = 
 Mow Cop Castle is an elaborate , Gothic Revival folly , built two miles from Rode Hall , at Mow Cop , land previously belonging to the estate . Dating from 1754 , the castle was built by Randle Wilbraham III and designed by the <unk> brothers , the architects who worked on the 1752 improvements to the hall . It was constructed to improve the view across the valley from the hall . The family often used it as a summer house and for picnics . The castle fell into disrepair a number of times in the 19th century and several programs of restoration were completed , including the replacement of the doors at a cost of £ 4 4s . The castle and surrounding land were sold by the Wilbrahams in 1923 . The castle is renowned as the birthplace of Primitive Methodism , following a camp meeting there in 1807 . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Rode Hall is still owned and occupied by the Wilbrahams , currently by the 8th Baronet , Sir Richard Baker Wilbraham , and his wife , Lady ( Anne ) Baker Wilbraham . The hall and gardens are open to the public from April to September , for an entrance fee . The tearooms , located in the 1752 section of the hall , use and sell the produce from the kitchen garden . Every month a farmers ' market is held next to the kitchen garden . 
 = Richard Hamming = 
 Richard Wesley Hamming ( February 11 , 1915 – January 7 , 1998 ) was an American mathematician whose work had many implications for computer engineering and telecommunications . His contributions include the Hamming code ( which makes use of a Hamming matrix ) , the Hamming window , Hamming numbers , sphere @-@ packing ( or Hamming bound ) , and the Hamming distance . 
 Born in Chicago , Hamming attended University of Chicago , University of Nebraska and the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign , where he wrote his doctoral thesis in mathematics under the supervision of Waldemar Trjitzinsky ( 1901 @-@ 1973 ) . In April 1945 he joined the Manhattan Project at the Los Alamos Laboratory , where he programmed the IBM calculating machines that computed the solution to equations provided by the project 's physicists . He left to join the Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1946 . Over the next fifteen years he was involved in nearly all of the Laboratories ' most prominent achievements . 
 After retiring from the Bell Labs in 1976 , Hamming took a position at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey , California , where he worked as an Adjunct Professor and senior lecturer in computer science , and devoted himself to teaching and writing books . He delivered his last lecture in December 1997 , just a few weeks before he died from a heart attack on January 7 , 1998 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Wesley Hamming was born in Chicago , Illinois , on February 11 , 1915 , the son of Richard J. Hamming , a credit manager , and Mabel G. Redfield . He grew up in Chicago , where he attended Crane Technical High School and Crane Junior College . 
 Hamming initially wanted to study engineering , but money was scarce during the Great Depression , and the only scholarship offer he received came from the University of Chicago , which had no engineering school . Instead , he became a science student , majoring in mathematics , and received his Bachelor of Science degree in 1937 . He later considered this a fortunate turn of events . " As an engineer , " he said , " I would have been the guy going down manholes instead of having the excitement of frontier research work . " 
 He went on to earn a Master of Arts degree from the University of Nebraska in 1939 , and then entered the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign , where he wrote his doctoral thesis on Some Problems in the Boundary Value Theory of Linear Differential Equations under the supervision of Waldemar Trjitzinsky . His thesis was an extension of Trjitzinsky 's work in that area . He looked at Green 's function and further developed Jacob Tamarkin 's methods for obtaining characteristic solutions . While he was a graduate student , he discovered and read George Boole 's The Laws of Thought . 
 The University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign awarded Hamming his Doctor of Philosophy in 1942 , and he became an Instructor in Mathematics there . He married Wanda Little , a fellow student , on September 5 , 1942 , immediately after she was awarded her own Master of Arts in English literature . They would remain married until his death , but had no children . In 1944 , he became an Assistant Professor at the J.B. Speed Scientific School at the University of Louisville in Louisville , Kentucky . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 With World War II still ongoing , Hamming left Louisville in April 1945 to work on the Manhattan Project at the Los Alamos Laboratory , in Hans Bethe 's division , programming the IBM calculating machines that computed the solution to equations provided by the project 's physicists . His wife Wanda soon followed , taking a job at Los Alamos as a human computer , working for Bethe and Edward Teller . Hamming later recalled that : 
 Shortly before the first field test ( you realize that no small scale experiment can be done — either you have a critical mass or you do not ) , a man asked me to check some arithmetic he had done , and I agreed , thinking to fob it off on some subordinate . When I asked what it was , he said , " It is the probability that the test bomb will ignite the whole atmosphere . " I decided I would check it myself ! The next day when he came for the answers I remarked to him , " The arithmetic was apparently correct but I do not know about the formulas for the capture cross sections for oxygen and nitrogen — after all , there could be no experiments at the needed energy levels . " He replied , like a physicist talking to a mathematician , that he wanted me to check the arithmetic not the physics , and left . I said to myself , " What have you done , Hamming , you are involved in risking all of life that is known in the Universe , and you do not know much of an essential part ? " I was pacing up and down the corridor when a friend asked me what was bothering me . I told him . His reply was , " Never mind , Hamming , no one will ever blame you . " 
 Hamming remained at Los Alamos until 1946 , when he accepted a post at the Bell Telephone Laboratories ( BTL ) . For the trip to New Jersey , he bought Klaus Fuchs 's old car . When he later sold it just weeks before Fuchs was unmasked as a spy , the FBI regarded the timing as suspicious enough to interrogate Hamming . Although Hamming described his role at Los Alamos as being that of a " computer janitor " , he saw computer simulations of experiments that would have been impossible to perform in a laboratory . " And when I had time to think about it , " he later recalled , " I realized that it meant that science was going to be changed " . 
 = = Bell Laboratories = = 
 At the Bell Labs Hamming shared an office for a time with Claude Shannon . The Mathematical Research Department also included John Tukey and Los Alamos veterans Donald Ling and Brockway McMillan . Shannon , Ling , McMillan and Hamming came to call themselves the Young Turks . " We were first @-@ class troublemakers , " Hamming later recalled . " We did unconventional things in unconventional ways and still got valuable results . Thus management had to tolerate us and let us alone a lot of the time . " 
 Although Hamming had been hired to work on elasticity theory , he still spent much of his time with the calculating machines . Before he went home on one Friday in 1947 , he set the machines to perform a long and complex series of calculations over the weekend , only to find when he arrived on Monday morning that an error had occurred early in the process and the calculation had <unk> off . Digital machines manipulated information as sequences of zeroes and ones , units of information that Tukey would christen " bits " . If a single bit in a sequence was wrong , then the whole sequence would be . To detect this , a parity bit was used to verify the correctness of each sequence . " If the computer can tell when an error has occurred , " Hamming reasoned , " surely there is a way of telling where the error is so that the computer can correct the error itself . " 
 Hamming set himself the task of solving this problem , which he realised would have an enormous range of applications . Each bit can only be a zero or a one , so if you know which bit is wrong , then it can be corrected . In a landmark paper published in 1950 , he introduced a concept of the number of positions in which two code words differ , and therefore how many changes are required to transform one code word into another , which is today known as the Hamming distance . Hamming thereby created a family of mathematical error @-@ correcting code , which are called Hamming codes . This not only solved an important problem in telecommunications and computer science , it opened up a whole new field of study . 
 The Hamming bound , also known as the sphere @-@ packing or volume bound is a limit on the parameters of an arbitrary block code . It is from an interpretation in terms of sphere packing in the Hamming distance into the space of all possible words . It gives an important limitation on the efficiency with which any error @-@ correcting code can utilize the space in which its code words are embedded . A code which attains the Hamming bound is said to be a perfect code . Hamming codes are perfect codes . 
 Returning to differential equations , Hamming studied means of numerically integrating them . A popular approach at the time was Milne 's Method , attributed to Arthur Milne . This had the drawback of being unstable , so that under certain conditions the result could be swamped by <unk> noise . Hamming developed an improved version , the Hamming predictor @-@ corrector . This was in use for many years , but has since been superseded by the Adams method . He did extensive research into digital filters , devising a new filter , the Hamming window , and eventually writing an entire book on the subject , Digital Filters ( 1977 ) . 
 During the 1950s , he programmed one of the earliest computers , the IBM 650 , and with Ruth A. Weiss developed the L2 programming language , one of the earliest computer languages , in 1956 . It was widely used within the Bell Labs , and also by external users , who knew it as Bell 2 . It was superseded by Fortran when the Bell Labs ' IBM 650 were replaced by the IBM 704 in 1957 . 
 In A Discipline of Programming ( 1967 ) , Edsger Dijkstra attributed to Hamming the problem of efficiently finding regular numbers . The problem became known as " Hamming 's problem " , and the regular numbers are often referred to as Hamming numbers in Computer Science , although he did not discover them . 
 Throughout his time at Bell Labs , Hamming avoided management responsibilities . He was promoted to management positions several times , but always managed to make these only temporary . " I knew in a sense that by avoiding management , " he later recalled , " I was not doing my duty by the organization . That is one of my biggest failures . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hamming served as president of the Association for Computing Machinery from 1958 to 1960 . In 1960 , he predicted that one day half of the Bell Lab 's budget would be spent on computing . None of his colleagues thought that it would ever be so high , but his forecast actually proved to be too low . His philosophy on scientific computing appeared as the motto of his Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers ( 1962 ) : 
 The purpose of computing is insight , not numbers . 
 In later life , Hamming became interested in teaching . Between 1960 and 1976 , when he left the Bell labs , he held visiting or adjunct professorships at Stanford University , the City College of New York , the University of California at Irvine and Princeton University . As a Young Turk , Hamming had resented older scientists who had used up space and resources that would have been put to much better use by the young Turks . Looking at a commemorative poster of the Bell Labs ' valued achievements , he noted that he had worked on or been associated with nearly all of those listed in the first half of his career at Bell Labs , but none in the second . He therefore resolved to retire in 1976 , after thirty years . 
 In 1976 he moved to the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey , California , where he worked as an Adjunct Professor and senior lecturer in computer science . He gave up research , and concentrated on teaching and writing books . He noted that : 
 The way mathematics is currently taught it is exceedingly dull . In the calculus book we are currently using on my campus , I found no single problem whose answer I felt the student would care about ! The problems in the text have the dignity of solving a crossword puzzle – hard to be sure , but the result is of no significance in life . 
 Hamming attempted to rectify the situation with a new text , Methods of Mathematics Applied to Calculus , Probability , and Statistics ( 1985 ) . In 1993 , he remarked that " when I left BTL , I knew that that was the end of my scientific career . When I retire from here , in another sense , it 's really the end . " And so it proved . He became Professor Emeritus in June 1997 , and delivered his last lecture in December 1997 , just a few weeks before his death from a heart attack on January 7 , 1998 . He was survived by his wife Wanda . 
 = = Awards and professional recognition = = 
 Turing Award , Association for Computing Machinery , 1968 . 
 IEEE Emanuel R. <unk> Award , 1979 . 
 Member of the National Academy of Engineering , 1980 . 
 Harold Pender Award , University of Pennsylvania , 1981 . 
 IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal , 1988 . 
 Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery , 1994 . 
 Basic Research Award , Eduard Rhein Foundation , 1996 . 
 The IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal , named after him , is an award given annually by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) , for " exceptional contributions to information sciences , systems and technology " , and he was the first recipient of this medal . The reverse side of the medal depicts a Hamming parity check matrix for a Hamming error @-@ correcting code . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Hamming discusses the use and potential of computers in the 1965 film Logic By Machine . 
 = Happy Brothers = 
 Happy Brothers , Their Poor Mother ! ( often referred to simply as Happy Brothers ) is an 1887 oil painting by the Serbian artist Uroš Predić . It shows four intoxicated youths walking through their village whilst the mother of one shouts her disapproval from the distance . The painting is said to have been inspired by a frequent sight in Predić 's home village of Orlovat — that of drunken youths returning from the pub at dawn . Predić painted the composition hoping it would persuade the villagers to change their ways . He was disappointed that it not only failed to decrease the incidence of drunkenness in Orlovat , but was well received by the villagers themselves , who were happy merely to have been depicted . 
 One art historian suggests the painting was influenced by the works of Rosa Bonheur and Gustave Courbet , while another believes it was informed by those of the satirists William Hogarth and Honoré Daumier . The painting 's humorous content contributed to its popularity among critics , collectors and the public at large , which led to Predić painting two replicas in 1918 and 1922 . By 1890 , the original was owned by the National Museum of Serbia , in whose possession it remains . 
 = = Background = = 
 Uroš Predić ( 1857 – 1953 ) was one of the most successful 19th- and 20th @-@ century Serbian realists . A native of Orlovat , a village in the Banat region of Austria @-@ Hungary , Predić drew scenes of life in the village throughout his career . One of the more frequent sights during his stays there was of intoxicated young men returning from the pub at dawn and waking up the whole village . In painting the composition , Predić was not only attempting to realistically depict contemporary village life but also to convey a message . " I observed this every day " , he explained . " I said to myself there must be some way of telling these people to what an unhappy level they have descended and have a moral impact on them , capturing all the bad habits of my compatriots . " Predić had expressed disapproval of the villagers ' behavior in an earlier work , Clients in Front of a Lawyer 's Door ( 1886 ) . 
 = = Painting = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 Happy Brothers , Their Poor Mother ! , often referred to simply as Happy Brothers , is an oil painting that measures 82 by 122 centimetres ( 32 by 48 in ) . " It is a glimpse into village life in early fall " , Predić explained . " The harvest has been gathered and the pigs slaughtered . The fires have been lit , the spits turned , the drinks dispensed and the celebrations fully under way . The air is filled with the aroma of ... cooking meat ... and the sounds of music and drunken song that disturb the village 's peace . " 
 According to Predić , the painting shows four intoxicated youths who have been drinking all night walking rowdily through their village around dawn and waking all their neighbours . They trudge down the middle of the dirt road and distance themselves from the surrounding houses so as to avoid crashing against a wall and hurting themselves . The <unk> ( bagpipe ) player — the most sober of the four — walks ahead of his friends . The one to the left , the youngest of the group , walks barefoot through the mud and props one of his friends up against his shoulder . The man he is propping up , who is the most intoxicated , paid for the previous night 's drinks and bounces between shoulders for support . The man to his right has just realized that he is walking by his own dilapidated home . His mother , alerted by the young men 's laughter and song , emerges from the house and recognizes her son . She begins shouting at him and says she will spank him once he returns , but the young man simply laughs and sends her an acknowledging wave with his hat . A young girl peaks out the bottom pane of the left window of the house to the far right , wondering if her boyfriend is part of the group . A sign above her reads <unk> ( " distillery " in Hungarian ) . Predić 's initials in Cyrillic — <unk> — can be found in the bottom @-@ right corner . 
 In his notes , Predić identified the individuals depicted in the painting as " <unk> " ( the <unk> player ) , Nikola Bojić ( the man waving his hat ) and Nikola <unk> ( the man bobbing between friends ) . Predić described the person to <unk> 's right as simply " a young man from Orlovat " . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The art historian Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson posits that the painting is informed by the progressive style of French realists such as Rosa Bonheur and Gustave Courbet . She concedes that there is no documentary evidence to suggest Predić was influenced by Courbet 's depictions of peasant life , but notes that the latter 's work was in the public domain at the time Happy Brothers was created and was quite popular throughout Europe . Filipovitch @-@ Robinson believes that Predić rejected the precision and <unk> of both Academic and Biedermeier art , and , as Courbet would have done , used heavily textured brushstrokes to define the roughness of the muddy road . She also draws parallels between the painting and Courbet 's Peasants of <unk> , which was shown at the Paris Salon of 1850 – 51 alongside The Stone Breakers and A Burial At <unk> . 
 The art historian Dejan <unk> once suggested that Predić was imitating the style of satirists William Hogarth and Honoré Daumier . Filipovitch @-@ Robinson writes that if this were so , Predić 's attempt at emulation was almost certainly unsuccessful . " Perhaps this was due to the inherent limitations of his subject " , she writes , " the fact that the figures are not caricatured and that the painting is devoid of biting or mocking humor " . According to Filipovitch @-@ Robinson , Predić ’ s treatment of Balkan rural life differs in a number of ways from that of his contemporary Paja Jovanović , who was known for painting similar subjects . Jovanović 's paintings were based on careful ethnographic studies of rural costumes and everyday objects , whereas Predić 's works lack Jovanović 's precision , owing to the artist 's tendency not to produce detailed studies of his subjects beforehand . " The images " , Filipovitch @-@ Robinson writes , " are more gestural because of the combination of generous brush strokes and minimal linear definition . This painting also brings Predić much closer to the more daring experimentations of the Munich School not only because of the textural play of the mud @-@ laden soil against rough peasant garb but in his convincing presentation of the atmosphere of the quiet predawn hours . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Upon seeing reproductions of the painting , the villagers did not interpret it as a call to change their ways . Instead , they were flattered by Predić 's decision to depict them . " To local audiences in particular " , Filipovitch @-@ Robinson writes , " such lighthearted didacticism entwined with a familiar and beloved world was immensely satisfying " . It is said that on one of his visits home , Predić went to the local pub and encountered the patrons examining a calendar with a reproduction of his painting inside it . A number of patrons — some of whom were included in the composition — tapped him on the shoulder in drunken stupor and commended him on how accurately he had captured them . What Filipovitch @-@ Robinson calls Predić 's " well @-@ meaning and subtle moralizing " had thus been rendered ineffectual . 
 Writing for the Novi Sad @-@ based publication <unk> in 1890 , the critic Milan <unk> ranked the painting among Predić 's finest works up to that point . The Croatian magazine <unk> offered a positive review of the work , saying it offered a sad look at conditions in the Banat . The magazine praised Predić as " a true artist ... one who isn 't afraid to use his talent to educate people and nurture the nobler aspects of human nature " . Critics were satisfied with Happy Brothers because it not only offered an instructive narrative but also demonstrated the artist 's technical abilities . Such vignettes of village life contributed greatly to Predić 's popularity among collectors from the emerging Serbian middle class . Reproductions of the painting met with commercial success , further contributing to its popularity . This led Predić to paint two replicas , one in 1918 and the other in 1922 . By 1890 , the original was owned by the National Museum of Serbia , in whose possession it remains . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = Catching Fire = 
 Catching Fire is a 2009 science fiction young adult novel by the American novelist Suzanne Collins , the second book in The Hunger Games trilogy . As the sequel to the 2008 bestseller The Hunger Games , it continues the story of Katniss Everdeen and the post @-@ apocalyptic nation of Panem . Following the events of the previous novel , a rebellion against the oppressive Capitol has begun , and Katniss and fellow tribute Peeta Mellark are forced to return to the arena in a special edition of the Hunger Games . 
 The book was first published on September 1 , 2009 , by Scholastic , in hardcover , and was later released in ebook and audiobook format . Catching Fire received mostly positive reviews , with reviewers praising Collins ' prose , the book 's ending , and the development of Katniss 's character . According to critics , major themes of the novel include survival , authoritarianism , rebellion and interdependence versus independence . The book has sold more than 19 million copies in the U.S. alone . 
 A film adaptation , The Hunger Games : Catching Fire , was released on November 22 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After winning the 74th Hunger Games in the previous novel , Katniss Everdeen and Peeta Mellark return home to District 12 , the poorest sector in the country of Panem . But on the day that Katniss and Peeta are to start a " Victory Tour " of the country , President Snow visits unexpectedly and tells Katniss that he is angry with her for breaking the rules at the end of the last Hunger Games , which permitted both Peeta and Katniss to win . Snow tells Katniss that when she defied the Capitol , she inspired rebellion in the districts . 
 The first stop on the Victory Tour is District 11 , the home of Katniss ' deceased friend and ally in the Hunger Games , Rue . During the ceremony , Katniss delivers a speech thanking the people of District 11 for their participants in the Games . When she finishes , an old man whistles the tune that Rue used in the arena to tell Katniss that she was safe . The song acts as a signal and everyone salutes Katniss , using the same gesture that she used to say farewell to Rue . To the horror of Katniss , the old man and two others are executed . 
 Katniss and Peeta travel to the rest of the twelve Districts and the Capitol . Hoping to placate the growing rebellion and settle the dispute between Katniss and President Snow , Peeta proposes to Katniss during an interview . Despite this , Katniss learns that their attempt to avert revolt in the districts has failed . 
 Shortly after returning to District 12 , Katniss discovers on the mayor 's television that District 8 has had an uprising , and she fears that what she has done to placate the crowds is not enough , as there may be uprisings in other Districts as well . She then meets two runaways from District 8 , Bonnie and <unk> . They explain their theory which contradicts what the other districts have been led to believe : District 13 was not completely wiped out by the Capitol , and its residents survive in underground shelters . 
 Later , it is announced that , for the 75th Hunger Games , twenty @-@ four victors from previous years will be forced to compete once again . This is the third occurrence of the " Quarter Quell " : an event that occurs every 25th year of the Games and allows the Capitol to introduce a twist . Knowing that she and Peeta will be competing in the Games a second time , Katniss decides that she will devote herself to ensuring that Peeta becomes the Quarter Quell 's victor and convinces their mentor , Haymitch , to help her . Likewise , Peeta is devoted to protecting her , but Katniss and her mentor are determined that only Peeta returns home safely . 
 During the Games , set in a jungle with a saltwater lake , Katniss and Peeta join up with two other previous victors : Finnick <unk> , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old man who survived the Games at the age of 14 , and Mags , Finnick 's 80 @-@ year @-@ old mentor , both from District 4 . The party encounters poisonous fog in which Peeta comes into contact with the gas and cannot walk . Mags sacrifices herself to save Peeta and dies in the poisonous fog . After Mags 's death , Katniss , Peeta , and Finnick join forces with Johanna Mason , a sarcastic and often cruel victor from District 7 , and Beetee and Wiress , an older couple from District 3 who are said to be " exceptionally smart " . Wiress soon proves her genius by revealing to Katniss that the arena is arranged like a clock , with all of the arena 's disasters occurring on a timed chart . After Wiress is killed in a battle with the Careers ( tributes from the first three districts who train all their lives for the Games and are usually the winners ) , Katniss learns of Beetee 's plan to harness lightning in order to electrocute Brutus and <unk> , the two remaining Careers Tributes from District 2 . In the final chapters , Katniss instead directs the lightning at the force field that contains the arena , thereby destroying the arena and resulting in her temporary paralysis . 
 When Katniss wakes up , she is being transported to District 13 , joined by Finnick , Beetee , and her mentor , Haymitch Abernathy . She learns that Peeta , <unk> , and Johanna have been captured by the Capitol and is informed that there had been a plan among half of the contestants to break out of the arena — Beetee had been attempting to destroy the force field in the same way that she did . The book ends when Katniss ' best friend , Gale , comes to visit her and informs her that , though he got her family out in time , District 12 has been destroyed . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The main themes of Catching Fire include survival , sacrifice , and the conflict between interdependence and independence . As reviewer Margo Dill noted , " In [ Catching Fire ] , Katniss and Peeta are definitely interdependent . They are both helping each other to survive . As a matter of fact , they want the other one to survive more than they do themselves . " Dill goes on to explain how this likely increases the chances of each character dying . 
 Government control is another important theme , both within the book and throughout the entire trilogy . After suppressing the first rebellion , the Capitol establishes rules in order to restrict and control the citizens ' lives . Examples noted by Dill include that , " the 75th annual Hunger Games have ' new ' rules that cause Katniss and Peeta to be in danger once again . More ' Peacekeepers ' are placed in districts to diminish any hope that the citizens started to have after the last Hunger Games . " Another major theme throughout the trilogy is the media and the influence or power that popular culture has over the emotions , wishes and views of society . Other themes in the book include morality , obedience , sacrifice , redemption , love , and law . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Catching Fire had a preliminary hardcover release date of September 8 , 2009 , which was moved up to September 1 in response to requests by retailers to move the release to before Labor Day and the start of school for many readers . It was also published as an audiobook on the same day . Advance reading copies were available at <unk> America in New York City , and were sent out to some booksellers , and offered as prizes in Scholastic 's " How Would You Survive " writing contest in May 2009 . An eBook version was also published on June 3 , 2010 . Catching Fire had an initial print of 350 @,@ 000 copies , a number which had grown to over 750 @,@ 000 by February 2010 . The release of Mockingjay , the third novel of the series , followed on August 24 , 2010 . As of March 2012 , the book has sold over 10 million copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Catching Fire received mainly positive reviews from critics . Publishers Weekly wrote , " If this second installment spends too much time recapping events from book one , it doesn 't disappoint when it segues into the pulse @-@ pounding action readers have come to expect . " Booklist commented on how the " unadorned prose provides an open window to perfect pacing and electrifying world building " . The New York Times also gave a positive review , writing , " Collins has done that rare thing . She has written a sequel that improves upon the first book . As a reader , I felt excited and even hopeful : could it be that this series and its characters were actually going somewhere ? " The review also praised Collins ' development of the character of Katniss . The Plain Dealer wrote , " The very last sentence of Catching Fire will leave readers gasping . Not to mention primed for part three . " 
 However , not all reviews were positive . The same review from The Plain Dealer expressed displeasure at how , " after 150 pages of romantic dithering , I was tapping my foot to move on . " A review from Entertainment Weekly opined that the book was weaker than the first and wrote , " Katniss pretends to be in love with her sweet @-@ natured Games teammate Peeta Mellark , but she secretly pines for brooding Gale , a childhood friend . Except — why ? There 's little distinction between the two thinly imagined guys , other than the fact that Peeta has a <unk> name . Collins conjures none of the erotic energy that makes Twilight , for instance , so creepily alluring . " 
 In addition , Time magazine placed Catching Fire at number four on its list of the top 100 fiction books of 2009 , while People magazine rated it the eighth Best Book of 2009 . It also won the Publishers Weekly 's 2009 award for Best Book of the Year . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 Lionsgate announced that The Hunger Games : Catching Fire was to be released on November 22 , 2013 , as a sequel to the film adaptation of The Hunger Games . In April 2012 , it was announced that Gary Ross , director of The Hunger Games , would not return due to a " tight " and " fitted " schedule . Francis Lawrence was officially announced as the director for Catching Fire on May 3 , 2012 . The film 's cast includes Jena Malone as Johanna Mason , Philip Seymour Hoffman as Plutarch Heavensbee , Lynn Cohen as Mags , Alan Ritchson as Gloss , Sam Claflin as Finnick , and Jeffrey Wright as Beetee . Production officially began on September 10 , 2012 and concluded on December 21 , 2012 . Shooting first took place in and around metropolitan Atlanta . Several District 11 scenes were also filmed in the rural areas of Macon County , Georgia , and the rest of production took place in Hawaii . Some of the wooded scenes were filmed in Oakland , New Jersey . 
 The film was successful , grossing more than $ 800 million to become the fifth highest @-@ grossing film at the box office in 2013 and receiving positive reviews from critics . 
 = 2010 São Paulo Indy 300 = 
 The 2010 São Paulo Indy 300 was the first race of the 2010 IZOD IndyCar Series season . The race took place on March 14 , on the 2 @.@ 536 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 081 km ) temporary street circuit in São Paulo , Brazil , and was telecast by Versus in the United States . Originally scheduled for 190 @.@ 2 miles ( 306 @.@ 1 km ) , the race was shortened to 154 @.@ 696 miles ( 248 @.@ 959 km ) due to a two @-@ hour time limit brought about by an extended red @-@ flag period due to heavy rain . 
 The race was won by Australian driver Will Power for Team Penske . Power was making his race return after an incident during a practice session at the 2009 Indy Grand Prix of Sonoma , which left him with two broken vertebrae in his back . Second place went to Ryan Hunter @-@ Reay , who was making his first start for Andretti Autosport , and third place went to another returnee , A. J. Foyt Enterprises ' Vitor Meira . Meira was making his first start since suffering similar injuries to Power , during the 2009 Indianapolis 500 . 
 Four drivers made their IndyCar Series débuts in the race . Former Formula One driver Takuma Sato , Firestone Indy Lights graduates Ana Beatriz and Mario Romancini , and Atlantic Championship title contender Simona de Silvestro were all classified outside the top ten at the conclusion of the race , with de Silvestro leading four laps during the race . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Plans for an IndyCar Series race in Brazil were confirmed on 25 November 2009 , with authorities in São Paulo and the Indy Racing League agreeing to a deal for the city to host the series . Race details for the São Paulo Indy 300 were announced on 25 January 2010 . It was the first American open @-@ wheel race in the country since the Rio 200 at Jacarepaguá in 2000 . Despite a lengthy distance to travel from most team bases , the event promoters offered each team a six @-@ figure sum of money , as well as paying for all expenses . A total of seven Brazilian drivers would compete in the race , including Ana Beatriz , Hélio Castroneves , Tony Kanaan , Raphael Matos , Vitor Meira , Mario Moraes and Mario Romancini . Of those seven , four drivers — Beatriz , Castroneves , Moraes and Romancini — are natives of São Paulo . The race weekend was scheduled to have two practice sessions on Saturday morning , qualifications on Saturday afternoon with the race on Sunday afternoon . In preparation for the race weekend , the public roads that made up areas of the track were closed off just before midnight on Friday evening . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 In the first practice session , Chip Ganassi Racing driver Scott Dixon recorded the fastest lap , ahead of Team Penske 's Ryan Briscoe , the Andretti Autosport car of Tony Kanaan and Briscoe 's teammate Will Power . Due to the slippery nature of the circuit , drivers were caught out and ended up inflicting damage to their cars . Defending series champion Dario Franchitti ventured down the escape road before damaging his suspension against the Turn 8 wall . He ended the session in seventeenth position . Other drivers to hit the wall included Romancini and Milka <unk> . Incidents continued in the second practice session , with no less than five drivers spinning or making contact with the outside retaining walls . The session saw the same top four drivers as the first session . 
 Having observed the sessions and received feedback from the drivers and the teams about the circuit conditions , the series ' president of competition Brian Barnhart and course designer Tony Cotman opted to postpone the qualification session to race morning , with the running of a third practice session and a Sunday morning warm @-@ up instead of it . Power topped this extra session , ahead of Kanaan and Ryan Hunter @-@ Reay , with Justin Wilson — a new arrival at Dreyer & Reinbold Racing — in fourth position . After the session , track officials started grinding down the concrete in order to provide a track surface that was suitable for racing the following day . Hunter @-@ Reay topped the Sunday morning warmup before qualifying , setting the fastest lap time by over half a second ahead of second @-@ year driver Mike Conway in another Dreyer & Reinbold car . 
 Qualifying followed the usual road and street course system , with the field being split into two groups . In the first group of twelve runners , Wilson topped the session , 0 @.@ 46 seconds ahead of the <unk> Racing machine of Switzerland 's Simona de Silvestro — one of four female drivers in the race — with Alex Tagliani in third position . Other drivers to make it into the second session of qualifying were Power , Takuma Sato and Raphael Matos . The remaining twelve drivers took part in the second group , with Hunter @-@ Reay topping his second session of the day . Hélio Castroneves , Briscoe , Franchitti , Dixon and Kanaan were the other competitors in the top six , and thus progressed to the second round of qualifying . In the Top 12 , Power recorded the fastest lap time , holding off the British pair Wilson and Franchitti . Hunter @-@ Reay , Kanaan and Tagliani finished between fourth and sixth , and would be the other half of the drivers that progressed to the Fast Six . Franchitti saved his best lap of qualifying to the last possible moment , taking his thirteenth career IndyCar Series pole position , and his 24th in American open @-@ wheel racing . Tagliani took second on the grid , on his début with the <unk> Race Team . Wilson took third ahead of Hunter @-@ Reay , Power and Kanaan . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Minutes before the race start , reports of rain falling on the track caused the start to be delayed by around ten minutes . Race control eventually deemed the race to be dry enough to be called a dry race , thus the rain tyres were not necessary , but would be required later in the race . Dario Franchitti and Alex Tagliani led the field to the line , with the circuit still being dusty from the previous night 's repair work . Dust clouds engulfed the start @-@ finish straight , blinding many of the midfield runners . The top five runners managed to negotiate the first chicane cleanly , while behind , half a dozen cars were involved in a first @-@ corner crash . Takuma Sato misjudged his braking into the first corner and clipped the rear of Will Power 's Penske machine , which spun him into Scott Dixon . Hélio Castroneves could not avoid running into Dixon 's stationary car at the first corner . After many drivers went down the escape road to avoid being involved in the crash , a separate accident took place between Marco Andretti and Mario Moraes . Moraes lost control of his KV Racing Technology car behind Ana Beatriz , hit Andretti and became airborne before coming to rest across the cockpit of Andretti 's car . It took several minutes to extricate Andretti from his damaged machinery , but was uninjured and very critical of Moraes ' driving . The crash resulted in a seven @-@ lap caution period , and eliminated Sato , Moraes and Andretti from the race . Dixon and Castroneves both recovered to the pit lane to repair damage . 
 Franchitti led the field to the restart on lap eight , ahead of Tagliani , Hunter @-@ Reay ( up from fourth ) , Kanaan ( up from sixth ) , and Matos , who advanced seven positions while avoiding the mêlée at turn one . Franchitti became only the third driver in series history to lead the final lap of one season and the first lap of the next , having won the championship by winning the 2009 Firestone Indy 300 at Homestead @-@ Miami Speedway . The top five remained the same until lap 15 when Dan Wheldon passed the De Ferran <unk> Dragon Racing car of Matos for fifth place . Hunter @-@ Reay took second place from Tagliani into the final hairpin on lap 19 , before Milka <unk> brought out the second caution of the afternoon on lap 22 by nudging her Dale Coyne Racing car into the wall at turn four . The entire field except for Simona de Silvestro headed to pit road for the first of two scheduled pit stops . De Silvestro became the first rookie driver since Graham Rahal in 2008 to lead at least one lap on début . 
 When the race returned to green flag conditions on lap 26 , de Silvestro held the lead ahead of Franchitti , Hunter @-@ Reay and Kanaan with Tagliani in fifth position . De Silvestro kept the lead for a further two laps , with Hunter @-@ Reay 's Andretti Autosport car moving ahead of Franchitti on lap 27 , repeating his move on Tagliani on the defending series champion . Not long after , Hunter @-@ Reay moved ahead of de Silvestro as the pair were under braking for turn five . Hunter @-@ Reay nearly lost control of his car as his car bottomed out on the straight , with lifted the car slightly airborne . Franchitti further demoted the young Swiss driver to third , moving ahead on lap 29 . Behind them , Hideki Mutoh hit Vitor Meira which saw his retirement from the race , and Wheldon hit the back of Tagliani which sent him into Kanaan , resulting in the retirement of the Canadian driver . Rain started falling once again , more heavily than before and much of the field pitted to change from dry @-@ weather tyres to wet @-@ weather ones . Alex Lloyd <unk> into the wall in the second Dale Coyne car , bringing out the caution for the third time , and with rain falling relentlessly , series officials brought out the red flag to allow the weather conditions to pass . After a 36 @-@ minute red flag delay , cars returned to the circuit with slicks being the choice of tyre for the track , despite a few wet patches remaining on the circuit . Some cars gambled on wets thinking that the circuit would not dry quickly enough for their tyres to drop off compared to the slicks . 
 As the green flag flew on lap 38 , Chip Ganassi Racing held a one – two with Franchitti leading Dixon , with two of the Dreyer & Reinbold cars — Conway and Wilson — holding third and fourth places , with the only remaining KV car of E. J. Viso holding fifth , the Venezuelan disposing of Castroneves just after the restart . Realising that the gamble had backfired , the lead quintet pitted on laps 41 and 42 , which cycled Hunter @-@ Reay back through to the lead . Power made an error which allowed Matos and Briscoe to move ahead of him . Briscoe moved ahead of Matos on lap 45 and set off in chase of Hunter @-@ Reay . Four laps later , the Australian was on the American 's tail , and moved ahead after an <unk> move into the final hairpin . Hunter @-@ Reay immediately regained the position into the first chicane on Lap 51 , before Briscoe sealed the place with a similar final hairpin move at the end of the lap . Briscoe 's luck would run out , however , when he overcooked it into turn five on lap 54 , and nudged the barriers with his nose assembly , bringing out the fourth and final caution of the race . The time limit meant that only six laps remained at the restart , with Hunter @-@ Reay leading Power , Matos , Meira and Wheldon . Meira soon passed his fellow Brazilian for third on Lap 57 , and began to chase down the lead duo , who had changed positions after Power used the slipstream to overtake Hunter @-@ Reay into the final corner . Power moved away from Hunter @-@ Reay in the final laps , taking the chequered flag to cap his return from injury with a victory . Hunter @-@ Reay took his best result for a year in second , with another injury returnee , Meira , finishing third . Matos was fourth , holding off seven other cars , as fourth to eleventh were covered by 3 @.@ 49 seconds at the race 's conclusion . Wheldon led those seven in fifth , ahead of the <unk> , Conway , Castroneves , Kanaan and Wilson . Viso finished twelfth ahead of top rookie Beatriz , a recovering Briscoe , Danica Patrick and de Silvestro , the final two off the lead lap . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
