 = = = = = Library = = = = = 
 The ceiling of the original library at Althorp collapsed in 1773 , and at the same time a new floor was put down in the Picture Gallery . Ionic columns and an Adam style ceiling were added . George John 's fascination in literature began at a young age and there is a Reynolds portrait in the house of him at Trinity College , Cambridge holding a book By his later life , George John 's collecting habit had become something of an obsession and he attempted to collect every volume ever published in Britain . 
 The books were kept in five apartments in Althorp in the west wing , which , combined , formed the " Long Library " with books from the floor to the ceiling along much of its approximately 200 by 20 feet ( 61 @.@ 0 m × 6 @.@ 1 m ) length . He not only collected British works but imported Greek and Latin classics , and in 1790 , he acquired the collection of Count Charles de <unk> , paying an initial £ 1000 , and then £ 500 annually until the count 's death , only three years later . George often paid great fees for rare books , including a woodcut of St Christopher dated to 1423 , believed at that time to be the oldest work in ink with a date on it , the Papal Indulgence Letters of 1452 , the Mazarin Bible of 1455 , the Mentz Psalter of 1457 , and some of the earliest works form the printing presses of Augsburg and Nuremberg such as <unk> and <unk> <unk> . In 1812 , George John was involved in an intense bidding war with his cousin , The Duke of Marlborough , for a copy of Boccacio 's The Decameron of 1471 , one of only three known copies . Marlborough won the auction with a bid of £ 2 @,@ 260 – an amount described by Charles Spencer as " ludicrous " for that time – but he later sold it to George for £ 750 . 
 In 1802 , George hired Reverend Thomas <unk> Dibdin as an official librarian to look after the collection and the library contains his many catalogues entitled Aedes <unk> , documenting the books of the library . The collection became so enormous that the massive library became inadequate to hold the contents , and books began being stored along the long picture gallery on the first floor above it . By the time of George John 's death in 1834 , he had amassed one of the largest private collections in Europe of some 110 @,@ 000 volumes . <unk> were added to the ends of the library during the Holland restoration , creating extra room for the growing collection . 
 = = = = = Billiard Room = = = = = 
 The Billiard Room is situated between the South Drawing Room and the library , and overlooks the Deer Park . Once known as the " Rubens Room " , the room was once described by Charles Spencer as a " dead space ; desperately uncomfortable furniture , and Ruben 's imposing portraits of several unattractive Habsburgs , against a tightly patterned silver silk , making it anything but welcoming " . The room has now been " brought to life " with numerous horse and sporting paintings and portraits , including a dramatic portrait of Elisabeth , Empress of Austria hunting , and a full @-@ sized billiard table moved from the stables in the 1990s . The chimney piece of the room was made by Derval under Holland , and the room also contains an 1893 bronze sculpture of <unk> , the Red Earl 's favourite foxhound . The Broadbent ceiling is dated to 1865 . 
 = = = = = China Museum and porcelain = = = = = 
 The old " Painter 's Passage " , parallel to the South Drawing Room was renovated after the Second World War when glass cases were installed along its length to showcase the Spencer crockery , with a range of porcelain including Meissen , Sèvres , Kangxi , Chelsea and Derby pieces . Charles Spencer remarked that his grandfather Albert was trying to say , " This part of Althorp will never be lived in again ; so we may as well use it to show off the treasures in an orderly way " . Today , most of the collection has been moved to the China Museum which lies on the east side of the house , between the Sutherland Room and the Great Dining Room , and the passage now contains a series of busts and paintings in its place , including a self @-@ portrait of <unk> <unk> , and portraits of the dramatist Molière and the actor David Garrick . Charles Spencer highlights a pair of late 17th century blue and white <unk> , special vases to hold tulips which were fashionable at the time , as his favourite in the museum . 
 The Garden Lobby of Althorp also contains a number of pieces of porcelain from reputable European manufacturers , but also several rare Oriental pieces . Of note in the Garden Lobby aside from its many plates is a Sèvres tobacco jar with double strap handles , believed to be painted by Louis Jean Thévenet in 1765 , two Chelsea vases decorated with putti which metaphorically represent the four seasons , which the Red Earl had bought as a gift for his wife Charlotte , an extremely finely carved Meissen flower bowl with hundreds of tiny gilded blooms which dates to around 1745 , a Meissen card box , and a blue and gold cherubic Meissen chocolate set @-@ for @-@ one which was believed to have been made for Marie Antoinette in 1781 as a present celebrating the birth of her son Dauphin . 
 = = = = First floor = = = = 
 = = = = = The Picture Gallery and chapel = = = = = 
 The Picture Gallery stretches for 115 feet ( 35 m ) on the first floor of the west wing , 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) wide and 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) high . The room is one of the best remaining examples of the original Tudor woodwork and ambiance in the mansion , featuring oak panelling along its length . During the renovation of the 18th century the oak panelling in the gallery was covered with white paint , and it was not until 1904 that it was restored to its former glory , the restoration funded by the sale of a Rubens painting in the housekeeper 's room . Due to its length , during Tudor times the ladies of the mansion used the gallery for exercise on rainy days to avoid dragging their long skirts and dresses through the mud in the grounds . It was also used as a dining hall , and in 1695 the county nobility and gentry all met together and dined in the gallery to pay their respects to William III . 
 The gallery has an extensive collection of about 60 portraits , including Van Dyck 's War and Peace , a John de Critz portrait of James I , a Frans <unk> the Younger aristocratic portrait of Claude Lorraine , Duc de Chevreuse , a Mary Beale portrait of Charles II and others of him by court artist Sir Peter Lely , and portraits of George Digby , Second Earl of Bristol and William , First Duke of Bedford . Visiting the gallery in 1748 , the Marchioness Grey described the gallery in a letter to a friend : " Indeed there is a gracefulness and life in the figures beyond what I ever saw , they are quite animated and a strength of colouring that strikes you from one end of that gallery to the other . It is so beautiful that a picture which hangs by it is hurt by its situation . " Horace Walpole once wrote : " Althorp has several very fine pictures by the best Italian hands , and a gallery of all one 's acquaintances by Vandyke and Lely . In the gallery I found myself quite at home ; and surprised the housekeeper by my familiarity with the portraits . " The portraits in the Picture Gallery are set in extravagant baroque gilded frames , designed by Robert Spencer , the Second Earl , which feature as " cartouche at the top and a stylised mask at the bottom , with a moulded inner edge , which softens the line between frame and painting " . Albert Spencer was so protective of War and Peace , once the most valuable item in Althorp , that he had the nearest tall window in the gallery converted into a door with hinges , so in case of a fire it could safely be lifted outside . There is also a small hidden door between War and Peace and " The Windsor Beauties " cut into the oak which leads to a staircase and the Pink Suite , a guest bedroom . Margaret Douglas @-@ Home , sister of Albert Spencer , lived at Althorp from 1910 , and the gallery was a favourite of hers . During the renovation of the 1980s , the old @-@ fashioned celestial and terrestrial globes dating to the George II period were moved from the gallery back to the library . 
 The chapel on the upper floor became a store room in the early 1980s for pieces being sold off . The stained glass window of the chapel , with the Spencer crest , dates to 1588 , and was brought to Althorp from <unk> . The organ on the other hand is far more recent , acquired from the parish of Meriden in the 1990s . A number of earlier occupants of Althorp , particularly George John and Frederick , were devout Christians and would preach in the chapel , and Robert , 6th Earl Spencer would hold a daily service here . It is still used for family christenings , and for services at Christmas , Easter and Harvest Thanksgiving . 
 = = = = = Bedrooms = = = = = 
 The Oak Bedroom is at the rear of the house , on the western side between King William Bedroom and the Great Room . The marriage of the first Earl Spencer and Margaret Georgiana took place in secret here on 20 December 1755 , during a ball which was taking place at Althorp to celebrate John 's 21st birthday . Georgiana later recalled , " We both behaved very well , spoke distinctly and loudly but I trembled so much I could hardly stand " . As of 1998 it was furnished with deep red wall paper , rug and chairs , with oak floors , bed and chairs . There are several portraits on the wall , one of them very large above the fireplace . The Spencer " S " features on the blue velvet bed cover , and above the king @-@ sized bed and by the fireplace . 
 The room to the east of the Oak Bedroom is known as The Great Room . The room was established in the mid 17th century as part of a reception suite , and was used by George John , the Second Earl for important political conferences during his period as First Lord of the Admiralty and Home Secretary . The Great Room , predominantly red and gold in design like many of the first floor rooms , contains a table and chairs with a large gilded mirror with three urns in front of it . The long mirror , designed by James Stuart , who was noted for his Athenian designs , features a tableaux at the top with the Spencer coat of arms and the pulling of chariots by cherubs , representing the love between John and Georgiana . The Great Room contains an extensive collection of miniature portraits , including a very rare Lucas de Heere portrait of Lady Jane Grey as a teenage girl at her family residence in <unk> , Leicestershire . The Portrait of Isaak <unk> . Massa is mentioned in the 1822 Bibliotheca <unk> as hanging in one of the bedrooms at Althorp . It was sold in 1924 to art merchant Joseph Duveen , who sold it the following year to Canadian businessman Frank P. Wood . 
 The Princess of Wales Bedroom is named after the wife of the future King Edward VII , Alexandra , Princess of Wales , who stayed at Althorp in 1863 on a visit to see the Red Earl . Although the fabric of the four @-@ poster bed was designed in 1911 , the room is largely Georgian , with deep red walls and furnishings , and contains a notable portrait of a young princess by the Spanish court painter , Bartolomé Esteban Murillo . The Queen Mary Bedroom is named after Mary , the wife of King George V , who visited Althorp in 1913 . It contains a bed with an extremely tall structure , dated to the 18th century , draped in pea green <unk> . Of particular note in the Queen Mary Bedroom are two chairs covered with needlework created by Albert , who was once the chairman of the Royal School of Needlework . 
 The upper floor also contains the India Silk Bedroom and the Ante Room , which measures 23 ft 4 inches by 32 ft 6 inches . Formerly known as the Patchwork Bedroom , the Ante Room was established by Charlotte , Countess Spencer and her sister during the Victorian period , and today forms part of a suite of state chambers . 
 = = = Outer buildings = = = 
 In total , Althorp estate contains 28 listed buildings and structures , of which nine are planting stones , dotted around the park . Two are Grade I listed , including the main house ; two are Grade II * listed , including the Stable Block and Gardener 's House , Althorp , and the remainder have a Grade II designation , mainly garden screens , gates and gateways aside from the planting stones . 
 The mustard @-@ yellow Grade II * listed Stable Block , designed by architect Roger Morris with a Palladian influence , was ordered by Charles , Fifth Earl of Sutherland in the early 1730s . It replaced an earlier building which had long been in disrepair and could hold 30 to 40 horses . Morris designed the building with a clear Tuscan architectural design , drawing upon earlier inspiration from his stables at Inigo Jones 's St Paul 's Church in Covent Garden . A fountain was installed in the courtyard to provide the horse 's troughs with water . Several rooms were built within the stable block , including hot and cold baths for riders after hunting , a veterinarian 's room with medicines for horses , and what was once a smoking room . It was converted into an exhibition centre for Princess Diana between 1998 and 2013 . 
 The Grade I listed Falconry was built in 1613 using the same local ironstone as the stables and is of similar Palladian appearance , featuring a " gabled roof with ashlar parapets , <unk> and obelisks " . It is a two storey structure , but a single storey red @-@ brick extension was added in the 19th century . The hall of the falconry contains 2 arcaded openings with keystones , and to the left of the hall is a fireplace with Delft tiles , dated to the 19th century . Over the centuries at various times it has been the home of the park warden , the gamekeeper , and the <unk> who looked after the hounds , hosting puppy shows in the 20th century . Both the Stable Block and Falconry became listed buildings in November 1954 . Nearby was the Lavender Cottage with a thatched roof and a <unk> house which the Althorp children would play in , but was accidentally burned down by the son of the chauffeur of Albert , and never rebuilt . 
 The Fifth Earl also built the Grade II * listed Gardener 's House at the back of the park , in a similar Palladian style . The head gardener of Althorp resided at the villa in the 18th century . Princess Diana had been intent on living in the house following her separation from Prince Charles , but due to security concerns it was considered unfeasible . Of particular note is its Victorian three @-@ quarter life @-@ sized marble sculpture , The Shipwrecked Mariner , depicting a sailor reaching desperately from a raft . Charles Spencer has since moved it from the main portico of Gardener 's House to the main house . 
 Both of the North and South West Lodges of Althorp date to around 1730 under Roger Morris and are both built from lias ashlar with slate roofs . The North and South East Lodges date to around 1810 and are built from limestone ashlar with slate roofs . All four buildings became Grade II listed buildings in November 1954 . The Grade II listed Dairy Cottage , to the northwest of the lake , dates to the late 18th century under Henry Holland , and was listed in December 1986 . It is a two storey building with an attic and hipped roof . It has a 19th @-@ century central door and a surrounding porch " flanked by casements under flat arch heads " . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The estate of Althorp covers an area of at least 13 @,@ 000 acres ( 50 km2 ) , and not only includes the house grounds but areas of woodland , cottages , farms , and surrounding hamlets . The soil in the area is of a rich , dark coloured loam , and the estate is situated mainly on Jurassic Clay between 85 metres ( 279 ft ) and 125 metres ( 410 ft ) above sea level , with the highest area lying in the southeast of Althorp on Northampton Sand . Within the grounds , there are earthworks of the lost village of Althorp on which the estate was built . To the southwest of the house is High Wood , with the Dog Pond to the east of this . Bircham Spinney is immediately to east , to the south of the pond . <unk> Spinney lies in the north @-@ east corner of the estate bordering the <unk> , and Sir John 's Wood marks the northwest corner . Sir John 's Wood is named after John Spencer was responsible for the planting of a number of woods on the grounds in the latter half of the 16th century . One tablet mentions he planted one of the woods in 1567 @-@ 8 and Sir John 's Wood in 1589 at a time when lords of manors around Britain grew increasingly anxious of their security following the Spanish Armada and planted woodlands around their properties . Between 1567 and 1901 at least seven stone date tablets were erected in the park commemorating the planting of trees . In the north and north @-@ eastern part of Althorp is marshy ground which is natural feeding ground for herons , a prized delicacy historically at the house . They were harvested by the gamekeeper usually from early March , after being fattened up by meal and bullock 's liver . In 1842 one hundred nests were recorded at the estate but this had fallen to ten by 1889 . The herons were moved to a pond about two miles away in 1993 and are no longer produced for domestic consumption at Althorp . Northampton Golf Club , established in July 1893 , is situated immediately to the southeast of Althorp . 
 Robert Spencer hired the French landscape architect André Le Nôtre to lay out the park and grounds in the 1660s . A map by Kip which appeared in Britannia <unk> ( 1709 ) showed the result of the changes , depicting the house with a wide rectangular courtyard on the main south front , a formal walled garden structured by rectangular @-@ shaped flower @-@ beds and lawns to the east , and tree @-@ lined avenues to the north and south . During the renovation under Holland in the 18th century , the lake was drained in the Deer Park , which the First Earl had used as a playground with full @-@ sized Venetian gondolas , and remaining traces of the old moat were eradicated . From 1860 onwards the architect William Milford Teulon ( 1823 – 1900 ) updated the gardens at Althorp , and further additions and changes were made in the 1990s under Dan Pearson when the Diana memorial was established and many trees planted . After Teulon 's additions , the Spencers began growing its own fruit and vegetables and flowers . In 1901 a variety of sweet pea , now known " Spencer type " , with " flowers of exceptional size and of an exquisite shade of pink " , was cultivated at Althorp by Silas Cole , the chief gardener to the Fifth Earl Spencer , and exhibited at horticultural shows . 
 = = = Diana grave , memorial , and exhibition = = = 
 Diana , Princess of Wales was interred on a small island in the middle of the ornamental Round Oval lake , which was created by Teulon in 1868 . The island was decided as the best place to lay her to rest because the water would , according to Spencer , " act as a buffer against the interventions of the insane and ghoulish , the thick mud presenting a further line of defence . We all agreed that , with its beauty and tranquillity , this was the place for Diana to be " . Her burial place is marked with a white memorial plinth and urn . 
 A Doric @-@ style temple with Diana 's name inscribed on top is situated across from the lake , as a place where visitors can lay down their floral tributes to the princess . It contains a black silhouette of her in the middle , set in white marble , evocative of the Henry Holland 's material preference , with a tablet on either side . One tablet displays a quote from Diana about her love of charitable work , and the other holds Charles Spencer 's concluding tribute given at her funeral in Westminster Abbey . 
 Following the death of Diana on 31 August 1997 and the subsequent decision to create a memorial and open the house and estate to the public , the garden designer Dan Pearson was commissioned to update the park and gardens , to accommodate for visitors . A series of 36 oak trees was planted along the access road , symbolic of the years of Diana 's life . Thousands of plants were planted , including 100 white rambling roses on the island and 1000 white water lilies , donated by Stowe School , in the water around it . 
 The estate stable block was converted into a public exhibition devoted to the memory of Diana , and open between 1998 and 2013 , It was designed by <unk> Ali Din , who had to seek approval from English Heritage due to it being a Grade II listed building . Din said of the result , " You have a contrast of the modern and the new with the old and the established , which is basically a metaphor for Diana . She was a very modern woman within an established environment . " He created six rooms out of the former carriage houses and stabling areas , and the old tea room was transformed into a restaurant , and toilets installed for visitors . 
 The first room was called " Spencer Women " , placing Diana in context to the women of her family , with paintings and jewellery of Sarah , Duchess of Marlborough , and portraits of Georgiana Spencer etc . The next room contained four minutes of edited video footage of Diana as a child to show to the world that she did not simply come into being in 1980 when she became the girlfriend of Prince Charles . It featured footage of Diana at her christening , her first winter , her first birthday , her first steps , and footage displaying her affection for animals , swimming , and leaving for boarding school . The room also contained her tuck @-@ box , toy typewriter , ballet shoes , and a childhood photo album . 
 A third room documented the Royal Wedding and its " glamour and excitement " , with a display of the David Emanuel wedding dress she wore on 29 July 1981 . A fourth room documented her extensive charitable and humanitarian work through video footage edited by Tim Ashton , and a fifth , known as the " Tribute Room " , was an " evocation of those doom @-@ laden days between Diana 's death and burial , when the public were reduced to shocked silence in their attempt to digest the death of a much @-@ loved icon " . 
 The sixth room was the Exhibition , which was a celebration of her life , and contained large glass cases at the sides with dummies of Diana wearing her notable suits and dresses , with the occasions documented on cards on the floor in front of them . A great glass case at the end underneath a stylish black and white photograph contained a selected few hundred of the thousands of condolence books the Spencer received from around the world , designed to give a " final sense of scale to the impact of Diana 's life and of her death " . A sleek , silk @-@ bound copy of the incendiary address that her brother Charles delivered at Diana 's funeral was available for £ 25 . 
 The estate and house are open to the public during the summer months ( 1 July to 30 August ) , although the exhibition centre in the stable block was closed in August 2013 . It was believed to be due to concern about the commercial exploitation of Diana 's name , and the desire to " squash the cult of Diana " . The items on display have been packed up , with the intention to give them to her sons William and Harry . All profits made were donated to the Diana , Princess of Wales Memorial Fund , which closed in 2012 . 
 = = Haunting = = 
 Although the current owner Charles Spencer professes to have never witnessed a ghost at Althorp or anywhere else , over the years numerous ghostly sightings have been reported in the mansion . In the mid 19th century the Dean of Lincoln was invited to stay at the property by Fredrick , 4th Earl Spencer . He complained the following morning that during the night a figure dressed as a groom ( believed to be the ghost of the deceased servant of the 3rd Earl ) had entered his room holding candles and checking that they were snuffed out around the bed . Margaret Douglas @-@ Home professed to being aware of the ghost of girl with grey slippers in the gallery . 
 = Æthelred of Mercia = 
 Æthelred ( / <unk> / ; died after 704 ) was King of Mercia from 675 until 704 . He was the son of Penda of Mercia and came to the throne in 675 , when his brother , Wulfhere of Mercia , died . Within a year of his accession he invaded Kent , where his armies destroyed the city of Rochester . In 679 he defeated his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Ecgfrith of Northumbria , at the Battle of the Trent : the battle was a major setback for the Northumbrians , and effectively ended their military involvement in English affairs south of the Humber . It also permanently returned the kingdom of Lindsey to Mercia 's possession . However , Æthelred was unable to re @-@ establish his predecessors ' domination of southern Britain . 
 He was known as a pious and devout Christian king , and he made many grants of land to the church . It was during his reign that Theodore , the Archbishop of Canterbury , reorganized the church 's diocesan structure , creating several new sees in Mercia and Northumbria . Æthelred befriended Bishop Wilfrid of York when Wilfrid was expelled from his see in Northumbria ; Æthelred made Wilfrid Bishop of the Middle Angles during his exile and supported him at the synod of Austerfield in about 702 , when Wilfrid argued his case for the return of the ecclesiastical lands he had been deprived of in Northumbria . 
 Æthelred 's wife , Osthryth , was a daughter of King Oswiu , one of the dominant 7th @-@ century Northumbrian kings . Osthryth was murdered in unknown circumstances in 697 , and in 704 Æthelred abdicated , leaving the throne to Wulfhere 's son Coenred . Æthelred became a monk at Bardney , a monastery which he had founded with his wife , and was buried there . Ceolred , who was Æthelred 's son ( though apparently not by Osthryth ) , became king after Coenred ; it is also possible that Æthelred had another son named Ceolwald who was briefly king before Ceolred . 
 = = Mercia in the seventh century = = 
 By the 7th century , England was almost entirely divided into kingdoms ruled by the Anglo @-@ Saxons who had come to Britain two hundred years before . The kingdom of Mercia occupied what is now the English midlands . The origin of the kingdom is not recorded , but royal genealogies preserved in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle and the Anglian collection agree that the royal houses were descended from a founder named Icel ; the Mercian royal house is hence known as the <unk> . The earliest Mercian king about whom definite historical information has survived is Penda of Mercia , Æthelred 's father . The larger neighbouring kingdoms included Northumbria to the north , recently united from its constituent kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira , East Anglia to the east , and Wessex , the kingdom of the West Saxons , to the south . 
 According to Ecclesiastical History of the English People , a history of the English church written by the 8th @-@ century monk Bede , there were seven early Anglo @-@ Saxon rulers who held imperium , or overlordship , over the other kingdoms . The fifth of these was Edwin of Northumbria , who was killed at the battle of Hatfield Chase by a combined force including Cadwallon , a British king of Gwynedd , and Penda . After Edwin 's death , Northumbria briefly fell apart into its two subkingdoms of Bernicia and Deira . Within a year Oswald , Edwin 's nephew , killed Cadwallon and reunited the kingdoms , subsequently re @-@ establishing Northumbrian hegemony over the south of England . In 642 Penda killed Oswald at the battle of Maserfield , and Northumbria was again divided . Oswald 's son Oswiu succeeded to the throne of Bernicia , and Osric 's son Oswine to Deira , the southern of the two kingdoms . 
 In 655 , Oswiu defeated and killed Penda at the Battle of the Winwaed . Oswiu installed Peada , a son of Penda , as king of southern Mercia and ruled the northern half himself ; after Peada was murdered in 656 Oswiu took direct control of all of Mercia . A coup in 658 threw off Northumbrian overlordship and established Wulfhere as king . By the early 670s , Wulfhere had become the most powerful king in southern Britain , with an effective hegemony over all the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms except for Northumbria . 
 The main source for this period is Bede 's History , completed in about 731 . Despite its focus on the history of the church , this work also provides valuable information about the early Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . For Wessex and Kent , Bede had informants who supplied him with details of the church 's history in each province , but he appears to have had no such contact in Mercia , about which he is less well @-@ informed . A further source for this period is the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , compiled at the end of the 9th century in Wessex . The Chronicle 's anonymous scribe appears to have incorporated much information recorded in earlier periods . 
 = = Ancestry and early reign = = 
 Æthelred was the son of Penda of Mercia . Penda 's queen , <unk> , is named by Bede , who does not mention her children ; no other wives of Penda are known and so it is likely but not certain that she was Æthelred 's mother . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle gives Penda 's age as fifty in 626 , and credits him with a thirty @-@ year reign , but this would put Penda at eighty years old at the time of his death , which is generally thought unlikely as two of his sons ( Wulfhere and Æthelred ) were young when he was killed . At least as likely is that Penda was fifty years old at his death , rather than at his accession . Æthelred 's date of birth is unknown , but Bede describes Wulfhere as a youth at the time of his accession in 658 , so it is likely he and Æthelred were in their middle teens at that time . The early sources do not say whether Æthelred was older or younger than Wulfhere . 
 Nothing is known of Æthelred 's childhood . He had another brother , Peada , and two sisters , Cyneburh and Cyneswith ; it is also possible that Merewalh , king of the Magonsæte , was Æthelred 's brother . 
 In 674 , according to Stephen of Ripon , Wulfhere " stirred up all the southern nations against [ Northumbria ] " , but he was defeated by Oswiu 's son Ecgfrith who forced him to surrender Lindsey , and to pay tribute . Wulfhere survived the defeat , but died in 675 , possibly of disease , and Æthelred became king . 
 The first recorded act of Æthelred 's reign is in 676 , when his armies ravaged Kent , destroying Rochester , the seat of the bishops of West Kent . The reason for his attack is not recorded , but he may have wished to prevent King Hlothhere of Kent from regaining control of Surrey , which had been recently brought into the Mercian orbit by Wulfhere . It may also be that Æthelred wished for revenge for the murder of the sons of Eormenred of Kent ; the murders had been instigated by Ecgberht of Kent , Hlothhere 's brother , and it is possible that Æthelred was the uncle of the murdered princes . A third suggestion is that the kings of Essex solicited the invasion , in response to recent Kentish attempts to gain dominance over the East Saxons . Regardless of the reason , Hlothhere was likely then forced to accept Æthelred 's overlordship . The damage to the see of Rochester was so great that the incumbent bishop , <unk> , retired from his diocese ; his appointed successor , <unk> , also gave up the see " because of its poverty " . 
 Early in Æthelred 's reign , Theodore , the Archbishop of Canterbury , began a substantial reorganization of the church in Mercia . In 675 he removed Winfred from his position as Bishop of Lichfield , and over the next four years he divided the vast Mercian see into the five dioceses of Leicester , Lichfield , Worcester , Dorchester and Hereford . Æthelred was a devout king , " more famed for his pious disposition than his skill in war " , and he made several gifts of land to the expanding church , including grants at Tetbury , Long Newton , and Somerford Keynes . There is also a tradition that Æthelred was associated with the founding of Abingdon Abbey , in southern Oxfordshire . 
 = = Relations with Northumbria = = 
 Mercia had been in conflict with Northumbria since at least 633 , when Penda of Mercia defeated and killed Edwin of Northumbria at the Battle of Hatfield Chase . However , there were diplomatic marriages between the two kingdoms : Æthelred 's sister Cyneburh married Alhfrith , a son of Oswiu of Northumbria , and both Æthelred and his brother Peada married daughters of Oswiu . Cyneburh 's marriage to Alhfrith took place in the early 650s , and Peada 's marriage , to Ealhflæd , followed shortly afterwards ; Æthelred 's marriage , to Osthryth , is of unknown date but must have occurred before 679 , since Bede mentions it in describing the Battle of the Trent , which took place that year . 
 Bede does not mention the cause of the battle , simply saying that it occurred in the ninth year of Ecgfrith 's reign . He is more informative on the outcome . Ælfwine , the young subking of Deira , was killed ; Ælfwine was brother to Osthryth and Ecgfrith , and was well liked in both Mercia and Northumbria since Æthelred 's marriage to Osthryth . According to Bede , his death threatened to cause further strife between the two kingdoms , but Theodore , the Archbishop of Canterbury , intervened : 
 Theodore , the beloved of God , enlisting God 's help , smothered the flames of this awful peril by his wholesome advice . As a result , peace was restored between the kings and peoples , and in lieu of further bloodshed the customary compensation was paid to King Ecgfrith for his brother 's death . 
 Æthelred took possession of Lindsey again after the battle ; the change in control this time was lasting , and Lindsey remained part of Mercia until the Viking invasion of the 9th century remade the map of England . Conflict between Northumbria and Mercia did not completely cease after this date : Scottish annals record that Æthelbald , an 8th @-@ century Mercian king , ravaged Northumbrian territory in 740 while King Eadberht of Northumbria was absent fighting the Picts . However , the Battle of the Trent effectively ended Northumbrian involvement in southern Britain . 
 A conflict between Bishop Wilfrid of York and the church and secular establishment led to Wilfrid 's expulsion from Northumbria and the division of his vast diocese , and Æthelred sided with Ecgfrith against Wilfrid . After Ecgfrith 's death in 685 , Archbishop Theodore arranged a reconciliation between Wilfrid and Aldfrith , Ecgfrith 's successor , but in 692 Aldfrith and Wilfrid fell out and Wilfrid went into exile in Mercia . Æthelred now supported Wilfrid , making him bishop of the Middle Angles , and defending him at the Council of Austerfield in about 702 , when Wilfrid argued his case before an assembly of bishops led by Archbishop Berhtwald of Canterbury . Æthelred 's support for Wilfrid embroiled him in dispute with both Canterbury and Northumbria , and it is not clear what his motive was , though it may be relevant that some of Wilfrid 's monasteries were in Mercian territory . 
 = = The southern kingdoms = = 
 Two charters of 681 show Æthelred granting land near Tetbury , on what is now the border between Gloucestershire and Wiltshire . This may indicate that Æthelred was able to extend Mercian influence further into the territory of the West Saxons , as Wulfhere had done before him . The West Saxons managed a significant military resurgence under Cædwalla , king of Wessex from about 685 to 688 , but when Cædwalla departed for Rome on pilgrimage there may have been internal strife before Ine , his successor , took the throne . Cædwalla had successfully conquered the kingdoms of Sussex and Kent , and his abdication may have contributed to the unsettled history of the southeast over the next few years . In Kent , Oswine emerged as king , though only in eastern Kent ; the western half of the kingdom was ruled by Swæfheard , son of Sæbbi , the king of Essex . It is possible that Æthelred provided support to both Swæfheard and Oswine ; for each king a charter survives in which Æthelred confirms land grants they made in Kent , and Æthelred 's invasion of Kent in 676 indicates his opposition to the traditional Kentish royal house . A charter of Swæfheard 's dated 691 is also of interest as it indicates that Æthelred had invaded Kent ; it has been suggested that Æthelred intended to place Wilfrid in the Archbishop 's seat at Canterbury , but if so he was unsuccessful . Alternatively , Æthelred may have needed assistance in Kent from the East Saxons who may have been independent of Mercia for a decade or more by that time . The East Saxons did return to the Mercian orbit over the next few years : a charter of Æthelred 's , dated between 693 and 704 , shows him granting land to Wealdhere , the bishop of London , and in 704 Æthelred consented to a grant made by Swæfheard . The latter charter also appears to show that a comes , or local official , was put in place by the Mercians to protect their interests . 
 Despite this evidence of Mercian involvement in the southeast there is very little indication that Æthelred had expansionist ambitions to the south . The increasing strength of the West Saxons under Cædwalla and Ine would have limited Mercian opportunities in that direction . The Northumbrians were no longer a distraction ; they had been contained north of the Humber since the Battle of the Trent , and became even less of a threat after their disastrous defeat in 685 at the hands of the Picts . A possible explanation is that Æthelred was preoccupied with war with the Welsh . It was also at this time that the Hwicce came more definitely into the Mercian orbit . The last <unk> ruler to take the title of king was Oshere , who died in 685 ; but from the mid @-@ 670s he sought Æthelred 's consent for his grants , and Æthelred regarded him as a subking . Further evidence of Æthelred 's involvement among the Hwicce comes from a charter in which he grants land for a minster in Gloucestershire , in <unk> territory ; the charter is generally thought to be a fabrication , but it appears to be based on an authentic earlier source . 
 = = Abdication and final years = = 
 Osthryth was murdered in 697 , for reasons unknown ; according to Bede the murderers were " her own people , the Mercian chieftains " . Bede records that Peada 's death , forty years earlier , stemmed from " the treachery , it is said , of his own wife " ; Peada 's wife was Ealhflæd , Osthryth 's sister . Hence Osthryth 's murder may have been in revenge for Peada 's assassination , though it has also been interpreted more directly as a sign of continuing hostility between Northumbria and Mercia . Osthryth was buried at Bardney in Lindsey , the monastery where , at her urging , the relics of her uncle , Oswald of Northumbria , were kept and revered , though evidence of resistance at Bardney to the cult of Oswald is also indicative of the poor relations between the two kingdoms . 
 In 704 , Æthelred abdicated to become a monk and abbot at Bardney , leaving the kingship to his nephew Coenred . Seventh century Mercian rulers often patronised religious establishments outside the Mercian heartlands , perhaps as a way of gaining support in outlying provinces . Æthelred 's and Osthryth 's interest in Bardney is consistent with this pattern . The encouragement of the cult of royal saints in areas beyond the central Mercian lands also seems to have been a deliberate policy , and both Æthelred and Osthryth were later revered as saints at Bardney . It appears that Æthelred continued to have influence in the kingdom after his abdication : a passage in Stephen of Ripon 's Life of Wilfrid shows Æthelred summoning Coenred to him and advising him to make peace with Wilfrid . The date of Æthelred 's death is not recorded ; though it is known that he was buried at Bardney . 
 Æthelred had at least one son , Ceolred . According to the thirteenth @-@ century Chronicon Abbatiae de Evesham , Ceolred was not the son of Osthryth , although it does not name Ceolred 's mother , and in the view of the historian Ann Williams this may mean that Æthelred remarried after Osthryth 's death . However , Susan Kelly states that Osthryth was " most likely ( though not certainly ) " Ceolred 's mother . Ceolred succeeded to the throne in 709 , after Coenred abdicated in 709 to go to Rome on pilgrimage . One version of the regnal lists for Mercia shows a king named Ceolwald reigning after Ceolred , and it is possible that Ceolwald , if he existed , was also a son of Æthelred 's . 
 = Ronald Reagan = 
 Ronald Wilson Reagan ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; February 6 , 1911 – June 5 , 2004 ) was an American politician and actor who served as the 40th President of the United States from 1981 to 1989 . Prior to his presidency , he was the 33rd Governor of California from 1967 to 1975 , following a career as a Hollywood actor and union leader . 
 Raised in a poor family in small towns of northern Illinois , Ronald Reagan graduated from Eureka College in 1932 and worked as a sports announcer on several regional radio stations . After moving to Hollywood in 1937 , he became an actor and starred in a few major productions . Reagan was twice elected as President of the Screen Actors Guild , the labor union for actors , where he worked to root out Communist influence . In the 1950s , he moved into television and was a motivational speaker at General Electric factories . Having been a lifelong Democrat , his views changed . He became a conservative and in 1962 switched to the Republican Party . In 1964 , Reagan 's speech , " A Time for Choosing " , in support of Barry Goldwater 's floundering presidential campaign , earned him national attention as a new conservative spokesman . Building a network of supporters , he was elected Governor of California in 1966 . As governor , Reagan raised taxes , turned a state budget deficit to a surplus , challenged the protesters at the University of California , ordered National Guard troops in during a period of protest movements in 1969 , and was re @-@ elected in 1970 . He twice ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nominations in 1968 and 1976 ; four years later , he easily won the nomination outright , going on to be elected the oldest President , defeating incumbent Jimmy Carter in 1980 . 
 Entering the presidency in 1981 , Reagan implemented sweeping new political and economic initiatives . His supply @-@ side economic policies , dubbed " Reaganomics " , advocated tax rate reduction to spur economic growth , control of the money supply to curb inflation , economic deregulation , and reduction in government spending . In his first term he survived an assassination attempt , escalated the War on Drugs , and fought public @-@ sector labor . Over his two terms , his economic policies saw a reduction of inflation from 12 @.@ 5 % to 4 @.@ 4 % , and an average annual growth of real GDP of 3 @.@ 4 % ; while Reagan did enact cuts in domestic discretionary spending , increased military spending contributed to increased federal outlays overall , even after adjustment for inflation . During his reelection bid , Reagan campaigned on the notion that it was " Morning in America " , winning a landslide in 1984 with the largest electoral college victory in history . Foreign affairs dominated his second term , including ending of the Cold War , the bombing of Libya , and the Iran – Contra affair . Publicly describing the Soviet Union as an " evil empire " , he transitioned Cold War policy from détente to rollback , by escalating an arms race with the USSR while engaging in talks with Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev , which culminated in the INF Treaty , shrinking both countries ' nuclear arsenals . During his famous speech at the Brandenburg Gate , President Reagan challenged Gorbachev to " tear down this wall ! " . Five months after the end of his term , the Berlin Wall fell , and on December 26 , 1991 , nearly three years after he left office , the Soviet Union collapsed . 
 Leaving office in 1989 , Reagan held an approval rating of sixty @-@ eight percent , matching those of Franklin D. Roosevelt , and later Bill Clinton , as the highest ratings for departing presidents in the modern era . While having planned an active post @-@ presidency , in 1994 Reagan disclosed his diagnosis with Alzheimer 's disease earlier that year , appearing publicly for the last time at the funeral of Richard Nixon ; he died ten years later at the age of 93 . An icon among Republicans , he ranks favorably in public and critical opinion of U.S. Presidents , and his tenure constituted a realignment toward conservative policies in the United States . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ronald Wilson Reagan was born in an apartment on the second floor of a commercial building in Tampico , Illinois on February 6 , 1911 , the son of Nelle Clyde ( Wilson ) and John Edward " Jack " Reagan . Reagan 's father was a salesman and a storyteller , the grandson of Irish Catholic immigrants from County Tipperary , while his mother was of half Scots and half English descent ( Reagan 's maternal grandmother was born in Surrey , England ) . Reagan had one older brother , Neil ( 1908 – 96 ) , who became an advertising executive . As a boy , Reagan 's father nicknamed his son " Dutch , " due to his " fat little Dutchman " -like appearance , and his " <unk> " haircut ; the nickname stuck with him throughout his youth . Reagan 's family briefly lived in several towns and cities in Illinois , including Monmouth , Galesburg , and Chicago , in 1919 , they returned to Tampico and lived above the H. C. Pitney Variety Store until finally settling in Dixon . After his election as president , residing in the upstairs White House private quarters , Reagan would quip that he was " living above the store again " . 
 According to Paul <unk> , author of God and Ronald Reagan , Reagan had a particularly strong faith in the goodness of people , which stemmed from the optimistic faith of his mother , Nelle , and the Disciples of Christ faith , which he was baptized into in 1922 . For the time , Reagan was unusual in his opposition to racial discrimination , and recalled a time in Dixon when the local inn would not allow black people to stay there . Reagan brought them back to his house , where his mother invited them to stay the night and have breakfast the next morning . 
 After the closure of the Pitney Store in late 1920 , the Reagans moved to Dixon ; the midwestern " small universe " had a lasting impression on Reagan . He attended Dixon High School , where he developed interests in acting , sports , and storytelling . His first job was as a lifeguard at the Rock River in Lowell Park , near Dixon , in 1927 . Over a six @-@ year period , Reagan reportedly performed 77 rescues as a lifeguard . Reagan attended Eureka College , a Disciples @-@ oriented liberal arts school , where he became a member of the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity , a cheerleader , and studied economics and sociology . While involved , the Miller Center of Public Affairs described him as an " indifferent student " . He majored in Economics and graduated with a C average . He developed a reputation as a jack of all trades , excelling in campus politics , sports and theater . He was a member of the football team and captain of the swim team . He was elected student body president and led a student revolt against the college president after he tried to cut back the faculty . 
 = = Entertainment career = = 
 = = = Radio and film = = = 
 After graduating from Eureka in 1932 , Reagan drove himself to Iowa , where he held jobs as an announcer at several stations . He moved to WHO radio in Des Moines as an announcer for Chicago Cubs baseball games . His specialty was creating play @-@ by @-@ play accounts of games using as his source only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress . 
 While traveling with the Cubs in California , Reagan took a screen test in 1937 that led to a seven @-@ year contract with Warner Brothers studios . He spent the first few years of his Hollywood career in the " B film " unit , where , Reagan joked , the producers " didn 't want them good ; they wanted them Thursday " . 
 His first screen credit was the starring role in the 1937 movie Love Is on the Air , and by the end of 1939 he had already appeared in 19 films , including Dark Victory with Bette Davis and Humphrey Bogart . Before the film Santa Fe Trail with Errol Flynn in 1940 , he played the role of George " The Gipper " Gipp in the film Knute Rockne , All American ; from it , he acquired the lifelong nickname " the Gipper . " In 1941 exhibitors voted him the fifth most popular star from the younger generation in Hollywood . 
 Reagan 's favorite acting role was as a double amputee in 1942 's Kings Row , in which he recites the line " Where 's the rest of me ? " — later used as the title of his 1965 autobiography . Many film critics considered Kings Row to be his best movie , though the film was condemned by New York Times critic Bosley Crowther . 
 Although Reagan called Kings Row the film that " made me a star " , he was unable to capitalize on his success because he was ordered to active duty with the U.S. Army at San Francisco two months after its release , and never regained " star " status in motion pictures . In the post @-@ war era , after being separated from almost four years of World War II stateside service with the 1st Motion Picture Unit in December 1945 , Reagan co @-@ starred in such films as , The Voice of the Turtle , John Loves Mary , The Hasty Heart , Bedtime for Bonzo , Cattle Queen of Montana , Tennessee 's Partner , Hellcats of the Navy ( the only film in which he appears with Nancy Reagan ) and the 1964 remake The Killers ( his final film and the only one in which he played a villain ) . Throughout his film career , his mother answered much of his fan mail . 
 = = = Military service = = = 
 After completing fourteen home @-@ study Army Extension Courses , Reagan enlisted in the Army Enlisted Reserve and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Officers Reserve Corps of the cavalry on May 25 , 1937 . 
 Reagan was ordered to active duty for the first time on April 18 , 1942 . Due to his poor eyesight , he was classified for limited service only , which excluded him from serving overseas . His first assignment was at the San Francisco Port of Embarkation at Fort Mason , California , as a liaison officer of the Port and Transportation Office . Upon the approval of the Army Air Force ( AAF ) , he applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the AAF on May 15 , 1942 , and was assigned to AAF Public Relations and subsequently to the First Motion Picture Unit ( officially , the " 18th Army Air Force Base Unit " ) in Culver City , California . On January 14 , 1943 , he was promoted to first lieutenant and was sent to the Provisional Task Force Show Unit of This Is the Army at Burbank , California . He returned to the First Motion Picture Unit after completing this duty and was promoted to captain on July 22 , 1943 . 
 In January 1944 , Reagan was ordered to temporary duty in New York City to participate in the opening of the Sixth War Loan Drive . He was reassigned to the First Motion Picture Unit on November 14 , 1944 , where he remained until the end of World War II . He was recommended for promotion to major on February 2 , 1945 , but this recommendation was disapproved on July 17 of that year . While with the First Motion Picture Unit in 1945 , he was indirectly involved in discovering actress Marilyn Monroe . He returned to Fort MacArthur , California , where he was separated from active duty on December 9 , 1945 . By the end of the war , his units had produced some 400 training films for the AAF . 
 Reagan never left the United States during the war , though he kept a film reel , obtained while in the service , depicting the liberation of Auschwitz , as he believed that someday doubts would arise as to whether the Holocaust had occurred . It has been alleged that he was overheard telling Israeli foreign minister Yitzhak Shamir in 1983 that he had filmed that footage himself and helped liberate Auschwitz , though this purported conversation was disputed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz . 
 = = = SAG president = = = 
 Reagan was first elected to the Board of Directors of the Screen Actors Guild in 1941 , serving as an alternate . After World War II , he resumed service and became 3rd vice @-@ president in 1946 . The adoption of conflict @-@ of @-@ interest bylaws in 1947 led the SAG president and six board members to resign ; Reagan was nominated in a special election for the position of president and subsequently elected . He was subsequently chosen by the membership to serve seven additional one @-@ year terms , from 1947 to 1952 and in 1959 . Reagan led SAG through eventful years that were marked by labor @-@ management disputes , the Taft – Hartley Act , House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) hearings and the Hollywood blacklist era . 
 = = = = Secret FBI informant in Hollywood = = = = 
 During the late 1940s , Reagan and his wife provided the FBI with names of actors within the motion picture industry whom they believed to be communist sympathizers , though he expressed reservations ; he said " Do they expect us to constitute ourselves as a little FBI of our own and determine just who is a Commie and who isn 't ? " 
 Reagan testified before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee on the subject as well . A fervent anti @-@ communist , he reaffirmed his commitment to democratic principles , stating , " I never as a citizen want to see our country become urged , by either fear or resentment of this group , that we ever compromise with any of our democratic principles through that fear or resentment . " 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Though an early critic of television , Reagan landed fewer film roles in the late 1950s and decided to join the medium . He was hired as the host of General Electric Theater , a series of weekly dramas that became very popular . His contract required him to tour GE plants sixteen weeks out of the year , often demanding of him fourteen speeches per day . He earned approximately $ 125 @,@ 000 per year ( about $ 1 @.@ 07 million in 2010 dollars ) in this role . The show ran for ten seasons from 1953 to 1962 and , as a result it increased Reagan 's profile in American households , especially as he had appeared in feature films mostly in supporting role or as a " second lead " . 
 His final work as a professional actor was as host and performer from 1964 to 1965 on the television series Death Valley Days . 
 Reagan and Nancy Davis appeared together on television several times , including an episode of General Electric Theater in 1958 called " A Turkey for the President . " 
 = = Marriages and children = = 
 In 1938 , Reagan co @-@ starred in the film Brother Rat with actress Jane Wyman ( 1917 – 2007 ) . They were engaged at the Chicago Theatre , and married on January 26 , 1940 , at the Wee Kirk o ' the Heather church in Glendale , California . Together they had two biological children , Maureen ( 1941 – 2001 ) and Christine ( who was born in 1947 but only lived one day ) , and adopted a third , Michael ( born 1945 ) . After arguments about Reagan 's political ambitions , Wyman filed for divorce in 1948 , citing a distraction due to her husband 's Screen Actors Guild union duties ; the divorce was finalized in 1949 . He is the only US president to have been divorced . Reagan and Wyman continued to be friends until his death , with Wyman voting for Reagan in both of his runs and , upon his death , saying " America has lost a great president and a great , kind , and gentle man . " 
 Reagan met actress Nancy Davis ( 1921 – 2016 ) in 1949 after she contacted him in his capacity as president of the Screen Actors Guild to help her with issues regarding her name appearing on a Communist blacklist in Hollywood . She had been mistaken for another Nancy Davis . She described their meeting by saying , " I don 't know if it was exactly love at first sight , but it was pretty close . " They were engaged at Chasen 's restaurant in Los Angeles and were married on March 4 , 1952 , at the Little Brown Church in the Valley ( North Hollywood , now Studio City ) San Fernando Valley . Actor William Holden served as best man at the ceremony . They had two children : Patti ( born October 21 , 1952 ) and Ron ( born May 20 , 1958 ) . 
 Observers described the Reagans ' relationship as close , authentic and intimate . During his presidency they were reported to frequently display their affection for one another ; one press secretary said , " They never took each other for granted . They never stopped courting . " He often called her " Mommy " and she called him " Ronnie . " He once wrote to her , " Whatever I treasure and enjoy ... all would be without meaning if I didn 't have you . " When he was in the hospital in 1981 , she slept with one of his shirts to be comforted by his scent . In a letter to U.S. citizens written in 1994 , Reagan wrote " I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimer 's disease ... I only wish there was some way I could spare Nancy from this painful experience , " and in 1998 , while Reagan was stricken by Alzheimer 's , Nancy told Vanity Fair , " Our relationship is very special . We were very much in love and still are . When I say my life began with Ronnie , well , it 's true . It did . I can 't imagine life without him . " Nancy Reagan died on March 6 , 2016 at the age of 94 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Reagan began as a Hollywood Democrat ; Franklin D. Roosevelt was his great hero . He moved to the right in the 1950s , became a Republican in 1962 , and emerged as a leading conservative spokesman in the Goldwater campaign of 1964 . 
 He joined numerous political committees with a left @-@ wing orientation , such as the American Veterans Committee . He fought against Republican @-@ sponsored right @-@ to @-@ work legislation and for Helen Gahagan Douglas in 1950 , when she was defeated for the Senate by Richard Nixon . It was his realization that Communists were a powerful backstage influence in those groups , that led him to rally his friends against them . 
 Reagan spoke frequently at rallies with a strong ideological dimension ; in December 1945 , he was stopped from leading an anti @-@ nuclear rally in Hollywood by pressure from the Warner Bros. studio . He would later make nuclear weapons a key point of his presidency , specifically his opposition to mutually assured destruction , building on previous efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons to a new focus to reduce the numbers and types of them . In the 1948 election , Reagan strongly supported Harry S. Truman , appearing on stage with him during a campaign speech in Los Angeles . However , in the early 1950s , as his relationship with actress Nancy Davis grew , he shifted to the right and endorsed the presidential candidacies of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and 1956 as well as Richard Nixon in 1960 . 
 He was hired by General Electric in 1954 to host the General Electric Theater , a weekly TV drama series . Much more important , he crisscrossed the country giving talks to over 200 @,@ 000 GE employees as a motivational speaker . His many speeches — which he wrote himself — were non @-@ partisan but carried a conservative , pro @-@ business message ; he was influenced by Lemuel Boulware , a senior GE executive . Boulware , known for his tough stance against unions and his innovative strategies to win over workers , championed the core tenets of modern American conservatism : free markets , anticommunism , lower taxes , and limited government . Eager for a larger stage , but not allowed to enter politics by GE , he quit and formally registered as a Republican . He often said " I didn 't leave the Democratic Party . The party left me . " 
 When legislation that would become Medicare was introduced in 1961 , Reagan created a recording for the American Medical Association warning that such legislation would mean the end of freedom in America . Reagan said that if his listeners did not write letters to prevent it , " we will awake to find that we have socialism . And if you don 't do this , and if I don 't do it , one of these days , you and I are going to spend our sunset years telling our children , and our children 's children , what it once was like in America when men were free . " He also joined the National Rifle Association and would become a lifetime member . 
 Reagan gained national attention in his speeches for conservative presidential contender Barry Goldwater in 1964 . Speaking for Goldwater , Reagan stressed his belief in the importance of smaller government . Consolidating themes he had developed in talks for GE , he argued in " A Time for Choosing " ( October 27 , 1964 ) : 
 The Founding Fathers knew a government can 't control the economy without controlling people . And they knew when a government sets out to do that , it must use force and coercion to achieve its purpose . So we have come to a time for choosing ... You and I are told we must choose between a left or right , but I suggest there is no such thing as a left or right . There is only an up or down . Up to man 's age @-@ old dream – the maximum of individual freedom consistent with order – or down to the ant heap of totalitarianism . 
 This " A Time for Choosing " speech was not enough to turn around the faltering Goldwater campaign , but it was the key event that established Reagan 's national political visibility . 
 = = Governorship of California : 1967 – 75 = = 
 California Republicans were impressed with Reagan 's political views and charisma after his " Time for Choosing " speech , he announced in late 1965 , his campaign for Governor of California in 1966 . He defeated former San Francisco mayor George Christopher in the GOP primary . In Reagan 's campaign , he emphasized two main themes : " to send the welfare bums back to work , " and , in reference to burgeoning anti @-@ war and anti @-@ establishment student protests at the University of California at Berkeley , " to clean up the mess at Berkeley . " Ronald Reagan accomplished in 1966 what US Senator William F. Knowland in 1958 and former Vice President Richard Nixon in 1962 had tried : he was elected , defeating two @-@ term governor Edmund G. " Pat " Brown , and was sworn in on January 2 , 1967 . In his first term , he froze government hiring and approved tax hikes to balance the budget . 
 Shortly after the beginning of his term , Reagan tested the presidential waters in 1968 as part of a " Stop Nixon " movement , hoping to cut into Nixon 's Southern support and be a compromise candidate if neither Nixon nor second @-@ place Nelson Rockefeller received enough delegates to win on the first ballot at the Republican convention . However , by the time of the convention Nixon had 692 delegate votes , 25 more than he needed to secure the nomination , followed by Rockefeller with Reagan in third place . 
 Reagan was involved in high @-@ profile conflicts with the protest movements of the era . On May 15 , 1969 , during the People 's Park protests at UC Berkeley , Reagan sent the California Highway Patrol and other officers to quell the protests , in an incident that became known as " Bloody Thursday , " resulting in the death of student James Rector and the blinding of carpenter Alan Blanchard . Reagan then called out 2 @,@ 200 state National Guard troops to occupy the city of Berkeley for two weeks to crack down on the protesters . A year after " Bloody Thursday , " Reagan responded to questions about campus protest movements saying , " If it takes a bloodbath , let 's get it over with . No more appeasement . " When the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapped Patty Hearst in Berkeley and demanded the distribution of food to the poor , Reagan joked to a group of political aides about a botulism outbreak contaminating the food . Conversely , in that one afternoon , " Bloody Thursday , " 111 police officers were injured , including one <unk> officer who was knifed in the chest . After calling in the National Guard , the Guard remained in Berkeley for 17 days , camping in People 's Park , and demonstrations subsided as the University removed cordoned @-@ off fencing and placed all development plans for People 's Park on hold . 
 Early in 1967 , the national debate on abortion was beginning . Democratic California state senator Anthony C. <unk> introduced the " Therapeutic Abortion Act , " in an effort to reduce the number of " back @-@ room abortions " performed in California . The State Legislature sent the bill to Reagan 's desk where , after many days of indecision , he signed it . About two million abortions would be performed as a result , most because of a provision in the bill allowing abortions for the well @-@ being of the mother . Reagan had been in office for only four months when he signed the bill , and later stated that had he been more experienced as governor , he would not have signed it . After he recognized what he called the " consequences " of the bill , he announced that he was pro @-@ life . He maintained that position later in his political career , writing extensively about abortion . 
 In 1967 , Reagan signed the Mulford Act , which became California penal code <unk> and 171 ( c ) . The bill repealed a law allowing public carrying of loaded firearms . Named after Republican assemblyman Don Mulford , the bill garnered national attention after the Black Panthers marched bearing arms upon the California State Capitol to protest the bill . 
 Despite an unsuccessful attempt to recall him in 1968 , Reagan was re @-@ elected in 1970 , defeating " Big Daddy " Jesse M. Unruh . He chose not to seek a third term in the following election cycle . One of Reagan 's greatest frustrations in office concerned capital punishment , which he strongly supported . His efforts to enforce the state 's laws in this area were thwarted when the Supreme Court of California issued its People v. Anderson decision , which invalidated all death sentences issued in California before 1972 , though the decision was later overturned by a constitutional amendment . The only execution during Reagan 's governorship was on April 12 , 1967 , when Aaron Mitchell 's sentence was carried out by the state in San Quentin 's gas chamber . 
 In 1969 , Reagan , as governor , signed the Family Law Act , an amalgam of two bills which had been written and revised by the California State Legislature for over two years and became the first no @-@ fault divorce legislation in the United States . 
 Reagan 's terms as governor helped to shape the policies he would pursue in his later political career as president . By campaigning on a platform of sending " the welfare bums back to work , " he spoke out against the idea of the welfare state . He also strongly advocated the Republican ideal of less government regulation of the economy , including that of undue federal taxation . 
 Reagan did not seek re @-@ election to a third term as governor in 1974 and was succeeded by Democratic California Secretary of State Jerry Brown on January 6 , 1975 . 
 = = 1976 presidential campaign = = 
 In 1976 , Reagan challenged incumbent President Gerald Ford in a bid to become the Republican Party 's candidate for president . Reagan soon established himself as the conservative candidate with the support of like @-@ minded organizations such as the American Conservative Union which became key components of his political base , while President Ford was considered a more moderate Republican . 
 Reagan 's campaign relied on a strategy crafted by campaign manager John Sears of winning a few primaries early to damage the inevitability of Ford 's likely nomination . Reagan won North Carolina , Texas , and California , but the strategy failed , as he ended up losing New Hampshire , Florida , and his native Illinois . The Texas campaign lent renewed hope to Reagan , when he swept all ninety @-@ six delegates chosen in the May 1 primary , with four more awaiting at the state convention . Much of the credit for that victory came from the work of three co @-@ chairmen , including Ernest Angelo , the mayor of Midland , and Ray Barnhart of Houston , whom President Reagan would appoint in 1981 as director of the Federal Highway Administration . 
 However , as the GOP convention neared , Ford appeared close to victory . Acknowledging his party 's moderate wing , Reagan chose moderate Senator Richard <unk> of Pennsylvania as his running mate if nominated . Nonetheless , Ford prevailed with 1 @,@ 187 delegates to Reagan 's 1 @,@ 070 . Ford would go on to lose the 1976 Presidential election to the Democrat Jimmy Carter . 
 Reagan 's concession speech emphasized the dangers of nuclear war and the threat posed by the Soviet Union . Though he lost the nomination , he received 307 write @-@ in votes in New Hampshire , 388 votes as an Independent on Wyoming 's ballot , and a single electoral vote from a faithless elector in the November election from the state of Washington , which Ford had won over Democratic challenger Jimmy Carter . 
 After the campaign , Reagan remained in the public debate with the Ronald Reagan Radio Commentary series and his political action committee , Citizens for the Republic , which was later revived in Alexandria , Virginia , in 2009 by the Reagan biographer Craig Shirley . 
 = = 1980 presidential campaign = = 
 The 1980 presidential campaign between Reagan and incumbent President Jimmy Carter was conducted during domestic concerns and the ongoing Iran hostage crisis . His campaign stressed some of his fundamental principles : lower taxes to stimulate the economy , less government interference in people 's lives , states ' rights , and a strong national defense . 
 Reagan launched his campaign by declaring " I believe in states ' rights . " After receiving the Republican nomination , Reagan selected one of his primary opponents , George H. W. Bush , to be his running mate . His showing in the October televised debate boosted his campaign . Reagan won the election , carrying 44 states with 489 electoral votes to 49 electoral votes for Carter ( representing six states and Washington , D.C. ) . Reagan received 51 % of the popular vote while Carter took 41 % , and Independent John B. Anderson ( a liberal Republican ) received 7 % . Republicans captured the Senate for the first time since 1952 , and gained 34 House seats , but the Democrats retained a majority . 
 = = Presidency of the United States : 1981 – 89 = = 
 During his presidency , Reagan pursued policies that reflected his personal belief in individual freedom , brought changes domestically , both to the U.S. economy and expanded military , and contributed to the end of the Cold War . Termed the Reagan Revolution , his presidency would reinvigorate American morale , reinvigorate the American economy and reduce American reliance upon government . As president , Reagan kept a diary in which he commented on daily occurrences of his presidency and his views on the issues of the day . The diaries were published in May 2007 in the bestselling book , The Reagan Diaries . 
 = = = First term = = = 
 To date , Reagan is the oldest person elected to the office of the presidency ( at 69 ) and the oldest president at the time of inauguration ( at 69 years , 341 days ) . In his first inaugural address on January 20 , 1981 , which Reagan himself wrote , he addressed the country 's economic malaise arguing : " In this present crisis , government is not the solution to our problems ; government is the problem . " 
 = = = = Prayer in schools and a moment of silence = = = = 
 In 1981 , Reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer . The school prayer had previously been banned by the Supreme Court in 1962 , and Reagan 's election reflected an opposition to the courts decision . Reagan 's 1981 proposed amendment stated : " Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit individual or group prayer in public schools or other public institutions . No person shall be required by the United States or by any state to participate in prayer . " In a message to Congress , Reagan said that his proposed amendment would " restore the simple freedom of our citizens to offer prayer in public schools and institutions . " In a nationally televised speech the following day , Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson lauded Reagan 's speech and said the moment of silence would " ensure that children grow up to be decent and upright . " In 1984 , Reagan again raised the issue , asking Congress " why can 't [ the ] freedom to acknowledge God be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this land ? " In 1985 , Reagan expressed his disappointment that the Supreme Court ruling still bans a moment of silence for public schools , and said he had " an uphill battle . " In 1987 Reagan again renewed his call for Congress to support voluntary prayer in schools and end " the expulsion of God from America 's classrooms . " During his term in office , Reagan campaigned vigorously to restore prayer to the schools , first as a moment of prayer and later as a Moment of Silence . 
 = = = = Assassination attempt = = = = 
 On March 30 , 1981 , only 69 days into the new administration , Reagan , his press secretary James Brady , Washington police officer Thomas Delahanty , and Secret Service agent Tim McCarthy were struck by gunfire from would @-@ be assassin John Hinckley Jr . , outside the Washington Hilton Hotel . Although " close to death " upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital , Reagan was stabilized in the emergency room , then underwent emergency exploratory surgery . He recovered and was released from the hospital on April 11 , becoming the first serving U.S. President to survive being shot in an assassination attempt . The attempt had great influence on Reagan 's popularity ; polls indicated his approval rating to be around 73 % . Reagan believed that God had spared his life so that he might go on to fulfill a greater purpose . 
 = = = = Assistant Secretary of State nomination = = = = 
 In response to conservative criticism that the state department lacked hardliners , Reagan in 1981 nominated Ernest W. Lefever as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs . Lefever performed poorly at his confirmation hearings and the Senate committee rejected his nomination by vote of 4 – 13 ; Lefever withdrew his name . 
 = = = = Air traffic controllers ' strike = = = = 
 In summer 1981 PATCO , the union of federal air traffic controllers went on strike , violating a federal law prohibiting government unions from striking . Declaring the situation an emergency as described in the 1947 Taft – Hartley Act , Reagan stated that if the air traffic controllers " do not report for work within 48 hours , they have forfeited their jobs and will be terminated . " They did not return and on August 5 , Reagan fired 11 @,@ 345 striking air traffic controllers who had ignored his order , and used supervisors and military controllers to handle the nation 's commercial air traffic until new controllers could be hired and trained . A leading reference work on public administration concluded , " The firing of PATCO employees not only demonstrated a clear resolve by the president to take control of the bureaucracy , but it also sent a clear message to the private sector that unions no longer needed to be feared . " 
 = = = = " Reaganomics " and the economy = = = = 
 During Jimmy Carter 's last year in office ( 1980 ) , inflation averaged 12 @.@ 5 % , compared with 4 @.@ 4 % during Reagan 's last year in office ( 1988 ) . During Reagan 's administration , the unemployment rate declined from 7 @.@ 5 % to 5 @.@ 4 % , with the rate reaching highs of 10 @.@ 8 % in 1982 and 10 @.@ 4 % in 1983 , averaging 7 @.@ 5 % over the eight years , and real GDP growth averaged 3 @.@ 4 % with a high of 8 @.@ 6 % in 1983 , while nominal GDP growth averaged 7 @.@ 4 % , and peaked at 12 @.@ 2 % in 1982 . 
 Reagan implemented policies based on supply @-@ side economics , advocating a laissez @-@ faire philosophy and free @-@ market fiscal policy , seeking to stimulate the economy with large , across @-@ the @-@ board tax cuts . He also supported returning the United States to some sort of gold standard , and successfully urged Congress to establish the U.S. Gold Commission to study how one could be implemented . Citing the economic theories of Arthur Laffer , Reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base , offsetting the revenue loss due to reduced rates of taxation , a theory that entered political discussion as the Laffer curve . Reaganomics was the subject of debate with supporters pointing to improvements in certain key economic indicators as evidence of success , and critics pointing to large increases in federal budget deficits and the national debt . His policy of " peace through strength " resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup including a 40 % real increase in defense spending between 1981 and 1985 . 
 During Reagan 's presidency , federal income tax rates were lowered significantly with the signing of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 , which lowered the top marginal tax bracket from 70 % to 50 % and the lowest bracket from 14 % to 11 % . Other tax increases passed by Congress and signed by Reagan ensured however that tax revenues over his two terms were 18 @.@ 2 % of GDP as compared to 18 @.@ 1 % over the 40 @-@ year period 1970 – 2010 . Then , in 1982 the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 was signed into law , initiating one of the United States ' first public – private partnerships and a major part of the president 's job creation program . Reagan 's Assistant Secretary of Labor and Chief of Staff , Al <unk> , was a primary architect of the bill . 
 Conversely , Congress passed and Reagan signed into law tax increases of some nature in every year from 1981 to 1987 to continue funding such government programs as Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( <unk> ) , Social Security , and the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 ( DEFRA ) . Despite the fact that <unk> was the " largest peacetime tax increase in American history , " gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth recovered strongly after the early 1980s recession ended in 1982 , and grew during his eight years in office at an annual rate of 7 @.@ 9 % per year , with a high of 12 @.@ 2 % growth in 1981 . Unemployment peaked at 10 @.@ 8 % monthly rate in December 1982 — higher than any time since the Great Depression — then dropped during the rest of Reagan 's presidency . Sixteen million new jobs were created , while inflation significantly decreased . The Tax Reform Act of 1986 , another bipartisan effort championed by Reagan , simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax brackets to four and slashing a number of tax breaks . The top rate was dropped to 28 % , but capital gains taxes were increased on those with the highest incomes from 20 % to 28 % . The increase of the lowest tax bracket from 11 % to 15 % was more than offset by expansion of the personal exemption , standard deduction , and earned income tax credit . The net result was the removal of six million poor Americans from the income tax roll and a reduction of income tax liability at all income levels . 
 The net effect of all Reagan @-@ era tax bills was a 1 % decrease in government revenues when compared to Treasury Department revenue estimates from the Administration 's first post @-@ enactment January budgets . However , federal income tax receipts increased from 1980 to 1989 , rising from $ 308 @.@ 7 billion to $ 549 billion or an average annual rate of 8 @.@ 2 % ( 2 @.@ 5 % attributed to higher Social Security receipts ) , and federal outlays grew at an annual rate of 7 @.@ 1 % . 
 Reagan 's policies proposed that economic growth would occur when marginal tax rates were low enough to spur investment , which would then lead to higher employment and wages . Critics labeled this " trickle @-@ down economics " — the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will create a " trickle @-@ down " effect to the poor . Questions arose whether Reagan 's policies benefited the wealthy more than those living in poverty , and many poor and minority citizens viewed Reagan as indifferent to their struggles . These views were exacerbated by the fact that Reagan 's economic regimen included freezing the minimum wage at $ 3 @.@ 35 an hour , slashing federal assistance to local governments by 60 % , cutting the budget for public housing and Section 8 rent subsidies in half , and eliminating the <unk> Community Development Block Grant program . The widening gap between the rich and poor had already begun during the 1970s before Reagan 's economic policies took effect . Along with Reagan 's 1981 cut in the top regular tax rate on unearned income , he reduced the maximum capital gains rate to only 20 % . Reagan later set tax rates on capital gains at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages , with both topping out at 28 % . Reagan is viewed as an <unk> hero despite raising taxes eleven times over the course of his presidency , all in the name of fiscal responsibility . According to Paul Krugman , " Over all , the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut ; as a share of GDP , the increase was substantially larger than Mr. Clinton 's 1993 tax increase . " According to historian and domestic policy adviser Bruce Bartlett , Reagan 's tax increases over the course of his presidency took back half of the 1981 tax cut . 
 Further following his opposition to government intervention , Reagan cut the budgets of non @-@ military programs including Medicaid , food stamps , federal education programs and the EPA . While he protected entitlement programs , such as Social Security and Medicare , his administration attempted to purge many people with disabilities from the Social Security disability rolls . 
 The administration 's stance toward the Savings and Loan industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis . It is also suggested , by a minority of Reaganomics critics , that the policies partially influenced the stock market crash of 1987 , but there is no consensus regarding a single source for the crash . In order to cover newly spawned federal budget deficits , the United States borrowed heavily both domestically and abroad , raising the national debt from $ 997 billion to $ 2 @.@ 85 trillion . Reagan described the new debt as the " greatest disappointment " of his presidency . 
 He reappointed Paul Volcker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve , and in 1987 he appointed monetarist Alan Greenspan to succeed him . Reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil which had contributed to energy crises in the early 1970s . The price of oil subsequently dropped , and the 1980s did not see the fuel shortages that the 1970s had . Reagan also fulfilled a 1980 campaign promise to repeal the windfall profit tax in 1988 , which had previously increased dependence on foreign oil . Some economists , such as Nobel Prize winners Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell , argue that Reagan 's tax policies invigorated America 's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s . Other economists , such as Nobel Prize winner Robert Solow , argue that Reagan 's deficits were a major reason his successor , George H.W. Bush , reneged on a campaign promise and resorted to raising taxes . 
 During Reagan 's presidency , a program was initiated within the U.S. Intelligence Community to ensure America 's economic strength . The program , Project Socrates , developed and demonstrated the means required for the United States to generate and lead the next evolutionary leap in technology acquisition and utilization for a competitive advantage — automated innovation . To ensure that the United States acquired the maximum benefit from automated innovation , Reagan , during his second term , had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the Project Socrates results on a nationwide basis . However , Reagan 's term came to end before the executive order could be coordinated and signed , and the incoming Bush administration , labeling Project Socrates as " industrial policy , " had it terminated . 
 = = = = Escalation of the Cold War = = = = 
 Reagan escalated the Cold War , accelerating a reversal from the policy of détente which began in 1979 after the Soviet war in Afghanistan . Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces and implemented new policies towards the Soviet Union : reviving the B @-@ 1 Lancer program that had been canceled by the Carter administration , and producing the MX missile . In response to Soviet deployment of the SS @-@ 20 , Reagan oversaw NATO 's deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany . 
 In 1984 , journalist Nicholas Lemann interviewed Reagan Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and summarized the strategy of the Reagan administration to roll back the Soviet Union : 
 Their society is economically weak , and it lacks the wealth , education , and technology to enter the information age . They have thrown everything into military production , and their society is starting to show terrible stress as a result . They can 't sustain military production the way we can . Eventually it will break them , and then there will be just one superpower in a safe world – if , only if , we can keep spending . 
 Lemann notes that when he wrote that in 1984 , he thought the <unk> were living in a fantasy world . But in 2016 , he says , that passage represents " a fairly uncontroversial description of what Reagan actually did . " 
 Together with the United Kingdom 's prime minister Margaret Thatcher , Reagan denounced the Soviet Union in ideological terms . In a famous address on June 8 , 1982 , to the British Parliament in the Royal Gallery of the Palace of Westminster , Reagan said , " the forward march of freedom and democracy will leave Marxism – Leninism on the ash heap of history . " On March 3 , 1983 , he predicted that communism would collapse , stating , " Communism is another sad , bizarre chapter in human history whose last pages even now are being written . " In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8 , 1983 , Reagan called the Soviet Union " an evil empire . " 
 After Soviet fighters downed Korean Air Lines Flight 007 near Moneron Island on September 1 , 1983 , carrying 269 people , including Georgia congressman Larry McDonald , Reagan labeled the act a " massacre " and declared that the Soviets had turned " against the world and the moral precepts which guide human relations among people everywhere . " The Reagan administration responded to the incident by suspending all Soviet passenger air service to the United States , and dropped several agreements being negotiated with the Soviets , wounding them financially . As result of the shootdown , and the cause of KAL 007 's going astray thought to be inadequacies related to its navigational system , Reagan announced on September 16 , 1983 , that the Global Positioning System would be made available for civilian use , free of charge , once completed in order to avert similar navigational errors in future . 
 Under a policy that came to be known as the Reagan Doctrine , Reagan and his administration also provided overt and covert aid to anti @-@ communist resistance movements in an effort to " rollback " Soviet @-@ backed communist governments in Africa , Asia , and Latin America . Reagan deployed the CIA 's Special Activities Division to Afghanistan and Pakistan . They were instrumental in training , equipping and leading <unk> forces against the Soviet Army . President Reagan 's Covert Action program has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan , though some of the United States funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to U.S. troops in the 2000s ( decade ) war in Afghanistan . However , in a break from the Carter policy of arming Taiwan under the Taiwan Relations Act , Reagan also agreed with the communist government in China to reduce the sale of arms to Taiwan . 
 In March 1983 , Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative , a defense project that would have used ground- and space @-@ based systems to protect the United States from attack by strategic nuclear ballistic missiles . Reagan believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible . There was much disbelief surrounding the program 's scientific feasibility , leading opponents to dub SDI " Star Wars " and argue that its technological objective was unattainable . The Soviets became concerned about the possible effects SDI would have ; leader Yuri Andropov said it would put " the entire world in jeopardy . " For those reasons , David Gergen , former aide to President Reagan , believes that in retrospect , SDI hastened the end of the Cold War . 
 Critics labeled Reagan 's foreign policies as aggressive , imperialistic , and chided them as " warmongering , " though they were supported by leading American conservatives who argued that they were necessary to protect U.S. security interests . The Reagan administration also backed anti @-@ communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations , such as Efraín Ríos Montt of Guatemala and Hissène Habré of Chad . 
 = = = = Lebanese Civil War ( 1983 ) = = = = 
 With the approval of Congress , Reagan in 1983 sent forces to Lebanon to reduce the threat of the Lebanese Civil War . The American peacekeeping forces in Beirut , a part of a multinational force during the Lebanese Civil War , were attacked on October 23 , 1983 . The Beirut barracks bombing killed 241 American servicemen and wounded more than 60 others by a suicide truck bomber . Reagan sent in the USS New Jersey battleship to shell Syrian positions in Lebanon . He then withdrew all the Marines from Lebanon . 
 = = = = Operation Urgent Fury ( Grenada : 1983 ) = = = = 
 On October 25 , 1983 , Reagan ordered U.S. forces to invade Grenada , code named Operation Urgent Fury , where a 1979 coup d 'état had established an independent non @-@ aligned Marxist – Leninist government . A formal appeal from the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( <unk> ) led to the intervention of U.S. forces ; President Reagan also cited an allegedly regional threat posed by a Soviet @-@ Cuban military build @-@ up in the Caribbean and concern for the safety of several hundred American medical students at St. George 's University as adequate reasons to invade . Operation Urgent Fury was the first major military operation conducted by U.S. forces since the Vietnam War , several days of fighting commenced , resulting in a U.S. victory , with 19 American fatalities and 116 wounded American soldiers . In mid @-@ December , after a new government was appointed by the Governor @-@ General , U.S. forces withdrew . 
 = = = = 1984 presidential campaign = = = = 
 Reagan accepted the Republican nomination in Dallas , Texas . He proclaimed that it was " morning again in America , " regarding the recovering economy and the dominating performance by the U.S. athletes at the 1984 Summer Olympics , among other things . He became the first American president to open an Olympic Games held in the United States . 
 Reagan 's opponent in the 1984 presidential election was former Vice President Walter Mondale . With questions about Reagan 's age , and a weak performance in the first presidential debate , his ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned . His apparent confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters ; they had previously known him clever and witty . Rumors began to circulate that he had Alzheimer 's disease . Reagan rebounded in the second debate , and confronted questions about his age , quipping , " I will not make age an issue of this campaign . I am not going to exploit , for political purposes , my opponent 's youth and inexperience , " which generated applause and laughter , even from Mondale himself . 
 That November , Reagan was re @-@ elected , winning 49 of 50 states . The president 's overwhelming victory saw Mondale carry only his home state of Minnesota ( by 3 @,@ 800 votes ) and the District of Columbia . Reagan won a record 525 electoral votes , the most of any candidate in United States history , and received 59 % of the popular vote to Mondale 's 41 % . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 Reagan was sworn in as president for the second time on January 20 , 1985 , in a private ceremony at the White House . Because January 20 fell on a Sunday , a public celebration was not held but took place in the Capitol rotunda the following day . January 21 was one of the coldest days on record in Washington , D.C. ; due to poor weather , inaugural celebrations were held inside the Capitol . In the coming weeks he shook up his staff somewhat , moving White House Chief of Staff James Baker to Secretary of the Treasury and naming Treasury Secretary Donald Regan , a former Merrill Lynch officer , Chief of Staff . 
 In 1985 , Reagan visited a German military cemetery in Bitburg to lay a wreath with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl . It was determined that the cemetery held the graves of forty @-@ nine members of the Waffen @-@ SS . Reagan issued a statement that called the Nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves " victims , " a designation which ignited a stir over whether Reagan had equated the SS men to victims of the Holocaust ; Pat Buchanan , Reagan 's Director of Communications , argued that the president did not equate the SS members with the actual Holocaust . Now strongly urged to cancel the visit , the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to Chancellor Kohl . He ultimately attended the ceremony where two military generals laid a wreath . 
 The disintegration of the Space Shuttle Challenger on January 28 , 1986 , proved a pivotal moment in Reagan 's presidency . All seven astronauts aboard were killed . On the night of the disaster , Reagan delivered a speech , written by Peggy Noonan , in which he said : 
 The future doesn 't belong to the <unk> ; it belongs to the brave ... We will never forget them , nor the last time we saw them , this morning , as they prepared for their journey and waved goodbye and ' slipped the surly bonds of Earth ' to ' touch the face of <unk> 
 In 1988 , near the end of the Iran – Iraq War , the U.S. Navy guided missile cruiser USS Vincennes accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655 killing 290 civilian passengers . The incident further worsened already tense Iran – United States relations . 
 = = = = War on Drugs = = = = 
 Reagan announced a War on Drugs in 1982 , in response to concerns about the increasing crack epidemic . Though Nixon had previously declared a war on drugs , Reagan advocated more militant policies . 
 He said that " drugs were menacing our society " and promised to fight for drug @-@ free schools and workplaces , expanded drug treatment , stronger law enforcement and drug interdiction efforts , and greater public awareness . 
 In 1986 , Reagan signed a drug enforcement bill that budgeted $ 1 @.@ 7 billion to fund the War on Drugs and specified a mandatory minimum penalty for drug offenses . The bill was criticized for promoting significant racial disparities in the prison population and critics also charged that the policies did little to reduce the availability of drugs on the street , while resulting in a great financial burden for America . Defenders of the effort point to success in reducing rates of adolescent drug use . First Lady Nancy Reagan made the War on Drugs her main priority by founding the " Just Say No " drug awareness campaign , which aimed to discourage children and teenagers from engaging in recreational drug use by offering various ways of saying " no . " Nancy Reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states , raising awareness about the dangers of drugs including alcohol . 
 = = = = Response to AIDS Epidemic = = = = 
 The Reagan administration largely ignored the AIDS crisis , which began to unfold in the United States in 1981 , the same year Reagan took office . AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagan 's administration , and requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) were routinely denied . By the end of the first 12 months of the epidemic , when more than 1 @,@ 000 people had died of AIDS in the US , the CDC had spent less than $ 1 million on AIDS research . In contrast , funding had been made amply available to the CDC in their efforts to stop Legionnaires ' disease after an outbreak in 1976 ; the CDC had spent $ 9 million in fighting Legionnaires ' disease , though the outbreak had caused fewer than 50 deaths . 
 By the time President Reagan had given his first speech on the epidemic , some six years into his presidency , 36 @,@ 058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS and 20 @,@ 849 had died of it . By the end of 1989 , the year Reagan left office , 115 @,@ 786 people had been diagnosed with AIDS in the United States , and more than 70 @,@ 000 of them had died of it . It has been suggested that far fewer would have died , both then and in the decades that followed , if the Reagan Administration had applied the same determination in combatting AIDS as Gerald Ford 's Administration had applied to fighting Legionnaires ' disease . 
 = = = = Libya bombing = = = = 
 Relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were continually contentious , beginning with the Gulf of Sidra incident in 1981 ; by 1982 , Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was considered by the CIA to be , along with USSR leader Leonid Brezhnev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro , part of a group known as the " unholy trinity " and was also labeled as " our international public enemy number one " by a CIA official . These tensions were later revived in early April 1986 , when a bomb exploded in a Berlin discothèque , resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman . Stating that there was " irrefutable proof " that Libya had directed the " terrorist bombing , " Reagan authorized the use of force against the country . In the late evening of April 15 , 1986 , the United States launched a series of air strikes on ground targets in Libya . 
 The UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher allowed the U.S. Air Force to use Britain 's air bases to launch the attack , on the justification that the UK was supporting America 's right to self @-@ defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter . The attack was designed to halt Gaddafi 's " ability to export terrorism , " offering him " incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior . " The president addressed the nation from the Oval Office after the attacks had commenced , stating , " When our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes , we will respond so long as I 'm in this office . " The attack was condemned by many countries . By a vote of 79 in favor to 28 against with 33 abstentions , the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 41 / 38 which " condemns the military attack perpetrated against the Socialist People 's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on April 15 , 1986 , which constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law . " 
 = = = = Immigration = = = = 
 Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986 . The act made it illegal to knowingly hire or recruit illegal immigrants , required employers to attest to their employees ' immigration status , and granted amnesty to approximately three million illegal immigrants who entered the United States before January 1 , 1982 , and had lived in the country continuously . Critics argue that the employer sanctions were without teeth and failed to stem illegal immigration . Upon signing the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished Statue of Liberty , Reagan said , " The legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows , without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society . Very soon many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and , ultimately , if they choose , they may become Americans . " Reagan also said , " The employer sanctions program is the keystone and major element . It will remove the incentive for illegal immigration by eliminating the job opportunities which draw illegal aliens here . " 
 = = = = Iran – Contra affair = = = = 
 In 1986 , the Iran – Contra affair became a problem for the administration stemming from the use of proceeds from covert arms sales to Iran during the Iran – Iraq War to fund the Contra rebels fighting against the government in Nicaragua , which had been specifically outlawed by an act of Congress . The affair became a political scandal in the United States during the 1980s . The International Court of Justice , whose jurisdiction to decide the case was disputed by the United States , ruled that the United States had violated international law and breached treaties in Nicaragua in various ways ( see Nicaragua v. United States ) . 
 President Reagan professed that he was unaware of the plot 's existence . He opened his own investigation and appointed two Republicans and one Democrat ( John Tower , Brent Scowcroft and Edmund Muskie , known as the " Tower Commission " ) to investigate the scandal . The commission could not find direct evidence that Reagan had prior knowledge of the program , but criticized him heavily for his disengagement from managing his staff , making the diversion of funds possible . A separate report by Congress concluded that " If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing , he should have . " Reagan 's popularity declined from 67 % to 46 % in less than a week , the greatest and quickest decline ever for a president . The scandal resulted in fourteen indictments within Reagan 's staff , and eleven convictions . 
 Many Central Americans criticize Reagan for his support of the Contras , calling him an anti @-@ communist zealot , blinded to human rights abuses , while others say he " saved Central America . " Daniel Ortega , <unk> and president of Nicaragua , said that he hoped God would forgive Reagan for his " dirty war against Nicaragua . " 
 = = = = End of the Cold War = = = = 
 Until the early 1980s , the United States had relied on the qualitative superiority of its weapons to essentially frighten the Soviets , but the gap had been narrowed . Although the Soviet Union did not accelerate military spending after President Reagan 's military buildup , their large military expenses , in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing , were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy . At the same time , Saudi Arabia increased oil production , which resulted in a drop of oil prices in 1985 to one @-@ third of the previous level ; oil was the main source of Soviet export revenues . These factors contributed to a stagnant Soviet economy during Gorbachev 's tenure . 
 Reagan recognized the change in the direction of the Soviet leadership with Mikhail Gorbachev , and shifted to diplomacy , with a view to encourage the Soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements . Reagan 's personal mission was to achieve " a world free of nuclear weapons , " which he regarded as " totally irrational , totally inhumane , good for nothing but killing , possibly destructive of life on earth and civilization . " He was able to start discussions on nuclear disarmament with General Secretary Gorbachev . Gorbachev and Reagan held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988 : the first in Geneva , Switzerland , the second in Reykjavík , Iceland , the third in Washington , D.C. , and the fourth in Moscow . Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech , this would lead to reform and the end of Communism . 
 Speaking at the Berlin Wall on June 12 , 1987 , Reagan challenged Gorbachev to go further , saying " General Secretary Gorbachev , if you seek peace , if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe , if you seek liberalization , come here to this gate ! Mr. Gorbachev , open this gate ! Mr. Gorbachev , tear down this wall ! " 
 Before Gorbachev 's visit to Washington , D.C. , for the third summit in 1987 , the Soviet leader announced his intention to pursue significant arms agreements . The timing of the announcement led Western diplomats to contend that Gorbachev was offering major concessions to the United States on the levels of conventional forces , nuclear weapons , and policy in Eastern Europe . He and Reagan signed the Intermediate @-@ Range Nuclear Forces Treaty ( INF ) at the White House , which eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons . The two leaders laid the framework for the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty , or START I ; Reagan insisted that the name of the treaty be changed from Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to Strategic Arms Reduction Talks . 
 When Reagan visited Moscow for the fourth summit in 1988 , he was viewed as a celebrity by the Soviets . A journalist asked the president if he still considered the Soviet Union the evil empire . " No , " he replied , " I was talking about another time , another era . " At Gorbachev 's request , Reagan gave a speech on free markets at the Moscow State University . In his autobiography , An American Life , Reagan expressed his optimism about the new direction that they charted and his warm feelings for Gorbachev . In November 1989 , ten months after Reagan left office , the Berlin Wall was opened , the Cold War was unofficially declared over at the Malta Summit on December 3 , 1989 , and two years later , the Soviet Union collapsed . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Early in his presidency , Reagan started wearing a custom , technologically advanced hearing aid , first in his right ear and later in his left as well . His decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small , audio @-@ amplifying device boosted their sales . 
 On July 13 , 1985 , Reagan underwent surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital to remove cancerous polyps from his colon . He relinquished presidential power to the Vice President for eight hours in a similar procedure as outlined in the 25th Amendment , which he specifically avoided invoking . The surgery lasted just under three hours and was successful . Reagan resumed the powers of the presidency later that day . In August of that year , he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose . In October , additional skin cancer cells were detected on his nose and removed . 
 In January 1987 , Reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate which caused further worries about his health . No cancerous growths were found , however , and he was not sedated during the operation . In July of that year , aged 76 , he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose . 
 On January 7 , 1989 , Reagan underwent surgery at Walter Reed Army Medical Center to repair a Dupuytren 's contracture of the ring finger of his left hand . The surgery lasted for more than three hours and was performed under regional anesthesia . This procedure was done just thirteen days before he left office . For this reason he had a hand and finger bandage the day of his farewell speech and the day of the Inauguration of George H. W. Bush . 
 = = = Judiciary = = = 
 During his 1980 campaign , Reagan pledged that , if given the opportunity , he would appoint the first female Supreme Court Justice . That opportunity came in his first year in office when he nominated Sandra Day O 'Connor to fill the vacancy created by the retirement of Justice Potter Stewart . In his second term , Reagan elevated William Rehnquist to succeed Warren E. Burger as Chief Justice , and named Antonin Scalia to fill the vacant seat . Reagan nominated conservative jurist Robert Bork to the high court in 1987 . Senator Ted Kennedy , a Democrat of Massachusetts , strongly condemned Bork , and great controversy ensued . Bork 's nomination was rejected 58 – 42 . Reagan then nominated Douglas Ginsburg , but Ginsburg withdrew his name from consideration after coming under fire for his cannabis use . Anthony Kennedy was eventually confirmed in his place . Along with his three Supreme Court appointments , Reagan appointed 83 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 290 judges to the United States district courts . 
 Reagan also nominated Vaughn Walker , who would later be revealed to be the earliest known gay federal judge , to the United States District Court for the Central District of California . However , the nomination stalled in the Senate , and Walker was not confirmed until he was renominated by Reagan 's successor , George H. W. Bush . 
 Early in his tenure , Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton , Jr . , of San Diego as the first African American to chair the United States Commission on Civil Rights . Pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with Reagan 's views on social and civil rights policy during his time as tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988 . Pendleton soon aroused the ire of many civil rights advocates and feminists when he ridiculed the comparable worth proposal as being " Looney Tunes . " 
 In 1984 , Reagan commuted the 18 @-@ year sentence of former Louisiana Commissioner of Agriculture and Forestry Gil Dozier , a Democrat from Baton Rouge , to the time served for violations of both the Hobbs and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations acts . On September 23 , 1980 , the United States District Court for the Middle District of Louisiana convicted Dozier of extortion and racketeering when he pushed companies doing business with his department to make campaign contributions on his behalf . Reagan determined that the 18 @-@ year sentence was excessive compared to what other political figures in similar circumstances had been receiving . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 After leaving office in 1989 , the Reagans purchased a home in Bel Air , Los Angeles , in addition to the Reagan Ranch in Santa Barbara . They regularly attended Bel Air Presbyterian Church and occasionally made appearances on behalf of the Republican Party ; Reagan delivered a well @-@ received speech at the 1992 Republican National Convention . Previously on November 4 , 1991 , the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library was dedicated and opened to the public . At the dedication ceremonies , five presidents were in attendance , as well as six first ladies , marking the first time that five presidents were gathered in the same location . Reagan continued publicly to speak in favor of a line @-@ item veto ; the Brady Bill ; a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget ; and the repeal of the 22nd Amendment , which prohibits anyone from serving more than two terms as president . In 1992 Reagan established the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award with the newly formed Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation . His final public speech was on February 3 , 1994 , during a tribute to him in Washington , D.C. , and his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27 , 1994 . 
 = = = Alzheimer 's disease = = = 
 = = = = Announcement and reaction : 1994 = = = = 
 In August 1994 , at the age of 83 , Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimer 's disease , an incurable neurological disorder which destroys brain cells and ultimately causes death . In November , he informed the nation through a handwritten letter , writing in part : 
 I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimer 's Disease ... At the moment I feel just fine . I intend to live the remainder of the years God gives me on this earth doing the things I have always done ... I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my life . I know that for America there will always be a bright dawn ahead . Thank you , my friends . May God always bless you . 
 After his diagnosis , letters of support from well @-@ wishers poured into his California home . 
 But there was also speculation over how long Reagan had demonstrated symptoms of mental degeneration . Former CBS White House correspondent Lesley Stahl recounted that , in her final meeting with the president in 1986 , Reagan did not seem to know who Stahl was , and that she came close to reporting that Reagan was senile , but at the end of the meeting , Reagan had regained his alertness . However , Dr. Lawrence K. Altman , a physician employed as a reporter for the New York Times , noted that " the line between mere forgetfulness and the beginning of Alzheimer 's can be fuzzy , " and all four of Reagan 's White House doctors said that they saw no evidence of Alzheimer 's while he was president . Dr. John E. Hutton , Reagan 's primary physician from 1984 to 1989 , said the president " absolutely " did not " show any signs of dementia or Alzheimer 's . " His former Chief of Staff James Baker considered " ludicrous " the idea that Reagan slept during cabinet meetings . Other staff members , former aides , and friends said they saw no indication of Alzheimer 's while he was president . Reagan did experience occasional memory lapses , though , especially with names . Reagan 's doctors say that he only began exhibiting overt symptoms of the illness in late 1992 or 1993 , several years after he had left office . For example , Reagan repeated a toast to Margaret Thatcher , with identical words and gestures , at his 82nd @-@ birthday party on Feb. 6 , 1993 . 
 Complicating the picture , Reagan suffered an episode of head trauma in July 1989 , five years before his diagnosis . After being thrown from a horse in Mexico , a subdural hematoma was found and surgically treated later in the year . Nancy Reagan , citing what doctors told her , asserts that her husband 's 1989 fall hastened the onset of Alzheimer 's disease , although acute brain injury has not been conclusively proven to accelerate Alzheimer 's or dementia . Reagan 's one @-@ time physician Daniel Ruge has said it is possible , but not certain , that the horse accident affected the course of Reagan 's memory . 
 = = = = Progression : 1994 – 2004 = = = = 
 As the years went on , the disease slowly destroyed Reagan 's mental capacity . He was only able to recognize a few people , including his wife , Nancy . He remained active , however ; he took walks through parks near his home and on beaches , played golf regularly , and until 1999 he often went to his office in nearby Century City . 
 Reagan suffered a fall at his Bel Air home on January 13 , 2001 , resulting in a broken hip . The fracture was repaired the following day and the 89 @-@ year @-@ old Reagan returned home later that week , although he faced difficult physical therapy at home . On February 6 , 2001 , Reagan reached the age of 90 , becoming the third former president to do so ( the other two being John Adams and Herbert Hoover , with Gerald Ford , George H. W. Bush and Jimmy Carter later reaching 90 ) . Reagan 's public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease , and as a result , his family decided that he would live in quiet semi @-@ isolation with his wife Nancy . Nancy Reagan told CNN 's Larry King in 2001 that very few visitors were allowed to see her husband because she felt that " Ronnie would want people to remember him as he was . " After her husband 's diagnosis and death , Nancy Reagan became a stem @-@ cell research advocate , urging Congress and President George W. Bush to support federal funding for embryonic stem @-@ cell research , something Bush opposed . In 2009 , she praised President Barack Obama for lifting restrictions on such research . Mrs. Reagan has said that she believes that it could lead to a cure for Alzheimer 's . 
 = = Death = = 
 Reagan died of pneumonia , complicated by Alzheimer 's disease , at his home in Bel Air , California , on the afternoon of June 5 , 2004 . A short time after his death , Nancy Reagan released a statement saying , " My family and I would like the world to know that President Ronald Reagan has died after 10 years of Alzheimer 's disease at 93 years of age . We appreciate everyone 's prayers . " President George W. Bush declared June 11 a National Day of Mourning , and international tributes came in from around the world . Reagan 's body was taken to the Kingsley and Gates Funeral Home in Santa Monica , California later in the day , where well @-@ wishers paid tribute by laying flowers and American flags in the grass . On June 7 , his body was removed and taken to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library , where a brief family funeral was held conducted by Pastor Michael Wenning . His body lay in repose in the Library lobby until June 9 ; over 100 @,@ 000 people viewed the coffin . 
 On June 9 , Reagan 's body was flown to Washington , D.C. where he became the tenth United States president to lie in state ; in thirty @-@ four hours , 104 @,@ 684 people filed past the coffin . 
 On June 11 , a state funeral was conducted in the Washington National Cathedral , and presided over by President George W. Bush . Eulogies were given by former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney , and both former President George H. W. Bush and President George W. Bush . Also in attendance were Mikhail Gorbachev , and many world leaders , including British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Prince Charles , representing his mother Queen Elizabeth II , German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi , and interim presidents Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan , and Ghazi al @-@ Yawer of Iraq . 
 After the funeral , the Reagan entourage was flown back to the Ronald W. Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , California , where another service was held , and President Reagan was interred . At the time of his death , Reagan was the longest @-@ lived president in U.S. history , having lived 93 years and 120 days ( 2 years , 8 months , and 23 days longer than John Adams , whose record he surpassed ) . He is now the second longest @-@ lived president , just 45 days fewer than Gerald Ford . He was the first United States president to die in the 21st century , and his was the first state funeral in the United States since that of President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1973 . 
 His burial site is inscribed with the words he delivered at the opening of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library : " I know in my heart that man is good , that what is right will always eventually triumph and that there is purpose and worth to each and every life . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since Reagan left office in 1989 , substantial debate has occurred among scholars , historians , and the general public surrounding his legacy . Supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of Reagan 's economic policies , foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the Cold War , and a restoration of American pride and morale . Proponents also argue Reagan restored faith in the American Dream with his unabated and passionate love for the United States , after a decline in American confidence and self @-@ respect under Jimmy Carter 's perceived weak leadership , particularly during the Iranian hostage crisis , as well as his gloomy , dreary outlook for the future of the United States during the 1980 election . Critics contend that Reagan 's economic policies resulted in rising budget deficits , a wider gap in wealth , and an increase in homelessness and that the Iran – Contra affair lowered American credibility . 
 Opinions of Reagan 's legacy among the country 's leading policy makers and journalists differ as well . Edwin <unk> , president of The Heritage Foundation , said that Reagan " helped create a safer , freer world " and said of his economic policies : " He took an America suffering from ' malaise ' ... and made its citizens believe again in their destiny . " However , Mark <unk> , co @-@ Director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research , contended that Reagan 's " economic policies were mostly a failure " while Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post opined that Reagan was " a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest . " 
 Despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy , many conservative and liberal scholars agree that Reagan has been the most influential president since Franklin D. Roosevelt , leaving his imprint on American politics , diplomacy , culture , and economics through his effective communication , dedicated patriotism and pragmatic compromising . Since he left office , historians have reached a consensus , as summarized by British historian M. J. Heale , who finds that scholars now concur that Reagan rehabilitated conservatism , turned the nation to the right , practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of politics , revived faith in the presidency and in American exceptionalism , and contributed to victory in the Cold War . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 The Cold War was a major political , economic and military endeavor for over four decades , but the confrontation between the two superpowers had decreased dramatically by the end of Reagan 's presidency . The significance of Reagan 's role in ending the Cold War has spurred contentious and opinionated debate . That Reagan played a role in contributing to the downfall of the Soviet Union is agreed , but the extent of this role is continuously debated , with many believing that Reagan 's defense policies , economic policies , military policies and hard line rhetoric against the Soviet Union and Communism , as well as summits with General Secretary Gorbachev played a significant part in ending the Cold War . 
 He was first among post – World War II presidents to put into practice the concept that the Soviet Union could be defeated rather than simply negotiated with , a post @-@ Détente strategy , a conviction that was vindicated by Gennadi <unk> , the Foreign Ministry spokesman under Gorbachev , who said that the Strategic Defense Initiative was " very successful blackmail . ... The Soviet economy couldn 't endure such competition . " Reagan 's aggressive rhetoric toward the USSR had mixed effects ; Jeffery W. Knopf observes that being labeled " evil " probably made no difference to the Soviets but gave encouragement to the East @-@ European citizens opposed to communism . 
 General Secretary Gorbachev said of his former rival 's Cold War role : " [ He was ] a man who was instrumental in bringing about the end of the Cold War , " and deemed him " a great president . " Gorbachev does not acknowledge a win or loss in the war , but rather a peaceful end ; he said he was not intimidated by Reagan 's harsh rhetoric . Margaret Thatcher , former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , said of Reagan , " he warned that the Soviet Union had an insatiable drive for military power ... but he also sensed it was being eaten away by systemic failures impossible to reform . " She later said , " Ronald Reagan had a higher claim than any other leader to have won the Cold War for liberty and he did it without a shot being fired . " Said Brian Mulroney , former Prime Minister of Canada : " He enters history as a strong and dramatic player [ in the Cold War ] . " Former President Lech Wałęsa of Poland acknowledged , " Reagan was one of the world leaders who made a major contribution to communism 's collapse . " That Reagan had little or no effect in ending the Cold War is argued with equal weight ; that Communism 's internal weakness had become apparent , and the Soviet Union would have collapsed in the end regardless of who was in power . President Harry S. Truman 's policy of containment is also regarded as a force behind the fall of the U.S.S.R. , and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan undermined the Soviet system itself . 
 = = = Domestic and political legacy = = = 
 Ronald Reagan reshaped the Republican party , led the modern conservative movement , and altered the political dynamic of the United States . More men voted Republican under Reagan , and Reagan tapped into religious voters . The so @-@ called " Reagan Democrats " were a result of his presidency . 
 After leaving office , Reagan became an iconic influence within the Republican party . His policies and beliefs have been frequently invoked by Republican presidential candidates since 1989 . The 2008 Republican presidential candidates were no exception , for they aimed to liken themselves to him during the primary debates , even imitating his campaign strategies . Republican nominee John McCain frequently said that he came to office as " a foot soldier in the Reagan Revolution . " Reagan 's most famous statement regarding the role of smaller government was that " Government is not a solution to our problem , government is the problem . " 
 Reagan has become an iconic figure in the Republican Party , with praise for his accomplishments part of the standard GOP rhetoric a quarter century after his retirement . Washington Post reporter Carlos Lozada notes how in the 2016 presidential race the main Republican contenders have adopted " standard GOP Gipper worship , " including even Donald Trump , who previously had been skeptical . 
 The period of American history most dominated by Ronald Reagan and his policies concerning taxes , welfare , defense , the federal judiciary and the Cold War is known today as the Reagan Era , and emphasizes that the conservative " Reagan Revolution , " led by Reagan , had a permanent impact on the United States in domestic and foreign policy . The Clinton presidency ( 1993 – 2001 ) is often treated as an extension of the Reagan Era , as is the Bush presidency ( 2001 – 09 ) . Historian Eric Foner noted that the Obama candidacy in 2008 " aroused a great deal of wishful thinking among those yearning for a change after nearly thirty years of Reaganism . " 
 Campaigning for the Democratic nomination in 2008 , Barack Obama , an American liberal , interpreted how Reagan changed the nation 's trajectory : 
 I think Ronald Reagan changed the trajectory of America in a way that Richard Nixon did not and in a way that Bill Clinton did not . He put us on a fundamentally different path because the country was ready for it . I think they felt like with all the excesses of the 1960s and 1970s and government had grown and grown but there wasn 't much sense of accountability in terms of how it was operating . I think that people ... he just tapped into what people were already feeling , which was we want clarity , we want optimism , we want a return to that sense of dynamism and entrepreneurship that had been missing . 
 = = = Cultural and political image = = = 
 According to columnist Chuck <unk> , " Reagan transformed the American presidency in ways that only a few have been able to . " He redefined the political agenda of the times , advocating lower taxes , a conservative economic philosophy , and a stronger military . His role in the Cold War further enhanced his image as a different kind of leader . Reagan 's " avuncular style , optimism , and plain @-@ folks demeanor " also helped him turn " government @-@ bashing into an art form . " 
 As a sitting president , Reagan did not have the highest approval ratings , but his popularity has increased since 1989 . Gallup polls in 2001 and 2007 ranked him number one or number two when correspondents were asked for the greatest president in history . Reagan ranked third of post – World War II presidents in a 2007 Rasmussen Reports poll , fifth in an ABC 2000 poll , ninth in another 2007 Rasmussen poll , and eighth in a late 2008 poll by United Kingdom newspaper The Times . In a Siena College survey of over 200 historians , however , Reagan ranked sixteenth out of 42 . While the debate about Reagan 's legacy is ongoing , the 2009 Annual C @-@ SPAN Survey of Presidential Leaders ranked Reagan the 10th greatest president . The survey of leading historians rated Reagan number 11 in 2000 . 
 In 2011 , the Institute for the Study of the Americas released the first ever UK academic survey to rate U.S. presidents . This poll of UK specialists in U.S. history and politics placed Reagan as the 8th greatest U.S. president . 
 Reagan 's ability to connect with Americans earned him the laudatory moniker " The Great Communicator . " Of it , Reagan said , " I won the nickname the great communicator . But I never thought it was my style that made a difference — it was the content . I wasn 't a great communicator , but I communicated great things . " His age and soft @-@ spoken speech gave him a warm grandfatherly image . 
 Reagan also earned the nickname " the Teflon President , " in that public perceptions of him were not tarnished by the controversies that arose during his administration . According to Congresswoman Patricia Schroeder , who coined the phrase , and reporter Howard Kurtz , the epithet referred to Reagan 's ability to " do almost anything wrong and not get blamed for it . " 
 Public reaction to Reagan was always mixed ; the oldest president was supported by young voters , and began an alliance that shifted many of them to the Republican party . Reagan did not fare well with minority groups , especially African @-@ Americans . This was largely due to his opposition to affirmative action policies . However , his support of Israel throughout his presidency earned him support from many Jews . He emphasized family values in his campaigns and during his presidency , although he was the first president to have been divorced . The combination of Reagan 's speaking style , unabashed patriotism , negotiation skills , as well as his savvy use of the media , played an important role in defining the 1980s and his future legacy . 
 Reagan was known to joke frequently during his lifetime , displayed humor throughout his presidency , and was famous for his storytelling . His numerous jokes and one @-@ liners have been labeled " classic quips " and " legendary . " Among the most notable of his jokes was one regarding the Cold War . As a microphone test in preparation for his weekly radio address in August 1984 , Reagan made the following joke : " My fellow Americans , I 'm pleased to tell you today that I 've signed legislation that will outlaw Russia forever . We begin bombing in five minutes . " Former aide David Gergen commented , " It was that humor ... that I think endeared people to Reagan . " 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Reagan received a number of awards in his pre- and post @-@ presidential years . After his election as president , Reagan received a lifetime gold membership in the Screen Actors Guild , was inducted into the National Speakers Association Speaker Hall of Fame and received the United States Military Academy 's Sylvanus Thayer Award . 
 In 1981 , Ronald Reagan was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln ( the state 's highest honor ) by the Governor of Illinois in the area of Government . 
 In 1989 , Reagan was made an Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath , one of the highest British orders ( this entitled him to the use of the post @-@ nominal letters " GCB " but , as a foreign national , not to be known as " Sir Ronald Reagan " ) ; only two American presidents have received this honor , Reagan and George H.W. Bush . Reagan was also named an honorary Fellow of Keble College , Oxford . Japan awarded him the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum in 1989 ; he was the second American president to receive the order and the first to have it given to him for personal reasons ( Dwight D. Eisenhower received it as a commemoration of <unk> relations ) . 
 On January 18 , 1993 , Reagan 's former Vice @-@ President and sitting President George H. W. Bush awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom ( awarded with distinction ) , the highest honor that the United States can bestow . Reagan was also awarded the Republican Senatorial Medal of Freedom , the highest honor bestowed by Republican members of the Senate . 
 On Reagan 's 87th birthday , in 1998 , Washington National Airport was renamed Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport by a bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton . That year , the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center was dedicated in Washington , D.C. He was among 18 included in Gallup 's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century , from a poll conducted in the U.S. in 1999 ; two years later , USS Ronald Reagan was christened by Nancy Reagan and the United States Navy . It is one of few Navy ships christened in honor of a living person and the first aircraft carrier to be named in honor of a living former president . 
 In 1998 the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Reagan its Naval Heritage award for his support of the U S Navy and military in both his film career and while he served as president . 
 Congress authorized the creation of the Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home National Historic Site in Dixon , Illinois in 2002 , pending federal purchase of the property . On May 16 of that year , Nancy Reagan accepted the Congressional Gold Medal , the highest civilian honor bestowed by Congress , on behalf of the president and herself . 
 After Reagan 's death , the United States Postal Service issued a President Ronald Reagan commemorative postage stamp in 2005 . Later in the year , CNN , along with the editors of Time magazine , named him the " most fascinating person " of the network 's first 25 years ; Time listed Reagan one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century as well . The Discovery Channel asked its viewers to vote for The Greatest American in June 2005 ; Reagan placed in first place , ahead of Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr . 
 In 2006 , Reagan was inducted into the California Hall of Fame , located at The California Museum for History , Women , and the Arts . Every year since 2002 , California Governors Gray Davis and Arnold Schwarzenegger have proclaimed February 6 " Ronald Reagan Day " in the state of California in honor of their most famous predecessor . In 2010 , Schwarzenegger signed Senate Bill 944 , authored by Senator George Runner , to make every February 6 Ronald Reagan Day in California . 
 In 2007 , Polish President Lech Kaczyński posthumously conferred on Reagan the highest Polish distinction , the Order of the White Eagle , saying that Reagan had inspired the Polish people to work for change and helped to unseat the repressive communist regime ; Kaczyński said it " would not have been possible if it was not for the tough @-@ mindedness , determination , and feeling of mission of President Ronald Reagan . " Reagan backed the nation of Poland throughout his presidency , supporting the anti @-@ communist Solidarity movement , along with Pope John Paul II ; the Ronald Reagan Park , a public facility in Gdańsk , was named in his honor . 
 On June 3 , 2009 , Nancy Reagan unveiled a statue of her late husband in the United States Capitol rotunda . The statue represents the state of California in the National Statuary Hall Collection . After Reagan 's death , both major American political parties agreed to erect a statue of Reagan in the place of that of Thomas Starr King . The day before , President Obama signed the Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission Act into law , establishing a commission to plan activities to mark the upcoming centenary of Reagan 's birth . 
 Independence Day 2011 saw the unveiling of another statue to Reagan — this time in the British capital of London , outside the American Embassy , Grosvenor Square . The unveiling was supposed to be attended by Reagan 's wife , Nancy , but she did not attend ; former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf ; further to the former First Lady 's absence President Reagan 's friend , and the sole British Prime Minister during Reagan 's presidency , Baroness Thatcher , was also unable to attend due to frail health . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Johns , Andrew L. , ed . A Companion to Ronald Reagan ( Wiley @-@ Blackwell , 2015 ) . xiv , 682 pp . ; topical essays by scholars emphasizing historiography contents – free at many libraries 
 = White @-@ bellied sea eagle = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle ( Haliaeetus leucogaster ) , also known as the white @-@ breasted sea eagle , is a large diurnal bird of prey in the family Accipitridae . Originally described by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1788 , it is closely related to Sanford 's sea eagle of the Solomon Islands , and the two are considered a superspecies . A distinctive bird , the adult white @-@ bellied sea eagle has a white head , breast , under @-@ wing coverts and tail . The upper parts are grey and the black under @-@ wing flight feathers contrast with the white coverts . The tail is short and wedge @-@ shaped as in all Haliaeetus species . Like many raptors , the female is slightly larger than the male , and can measure up to 90 cm ( 35 in ) long with a wingspan of up to 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) , and weigh 4 @.@ 5 kg ( 9 @.@ 9 lb ) . Immature birds have brown plumage , which is gradually replaced by white until the age of five or six years . The call is a loud goose @-@ like honking . 
 Resident from India and Sri Lanka through Southeast Asia to Australia on coasts and major waterways , the white @-@ bellied sea eagle breeds and hunts near water , and fish form around half of its diet . Opportunistic , it consumes carrion and a wide variety of animals . Although rated of Least Concern globally , it has declined in parts of southeast Asia such as Thailand , and southeastern Australia . It is ranked as Threatened in Victoria and Vulnerable in South Australia and Tasmania . Human disturbance to its habitat is the main threat , both from direct human activity near nests which impacts on breeding success , and from removal of suitable trees for nesting . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is revered by indigenous people in many parts of Australia , and is the subject of various folk tales throughout its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle was first described by the German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1788 , although John Latham had made notes on the species in 1781 , from a specimen obtained in February 1780 at Princes Island off the westernmost cape of Java during Captain Cook 's last voyage . Its specific name is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> ' white ' , and gaster ' belly ' . Its closest relative is the little @-@ known Sanford 's sea eagle of the Solomon Islands . These form a superspecies , and as is usual in other sea eagle superspecies , one ( the white @-@ bellied sea eagle ) has a white head , as opposed to the other species ' dark head . The bill and eyes are dark , and the talons are dark yellow as in all Southern Hemisphere sea eagles . Both these species have at least some dark colouration in their tails , though this may not always be clearly visible in the white @-@ bellied sea eagle . The nucleotide sequences of the cytochrome b gene of the two sea eagles were among those analysed in a 1996 study . Although they differ greatly in appearance and ecology , their genetic divergence of 0 @.@ 3 % indicates that the ancestors of the two forms might have diverged as recently as 150 @,@ 000 years ago . The study authors conclude that although the genetic divergence is more consistent with subspecies , the distinctness in appearance and behaviour warrants the two being retained as separate species . Mitochondrial sequence of the cytochrome b locus differs very slightly from that of Sanford 's sea eagle suggesting a relatively recent divergence after New Guinea @-@ based white @-@ bellied sea eagles colonised the Solomon Islands . 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle 's affinities beyond the Sanford 's sea eagle are a little less clear ; molecular data indicate that it is one of four species of tropical sea eagle ( along with the African fish eagle and the Madagascar fish eagle ) , while allozyme data indicate it might have a closer relationship with the sea eagles of the northern hemisphere . A further molecular study published in 2005 showed the white @-@ bellied and Sanford 's sea eagles to be basal to the four fish eagles ( the two mentioned above plus the two hitherto untested species of the genus <unk> ) . 
 As well as white @-@ bellied sea eagle and white @-@ breasted sea eagle , other recorded names include white @-@ bellied fish @-@ hawk , white @-@ eagle , and grey @-@ backed sea eagle . 
 = = Description = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle has a white head , rump and underparts , and dark or slate @-@ grey back and wings . In flight , the black flight feathers on the wings are easily seen when the bird is viewed from below . The large , hooked bill is a leaden blue @-@ grey with a darker tip , and the irides are dark brown . The cere is also lead grey . The legs and feet are yellow or grey , with long black talons ( claws ) . Unlike those of eagles of the genus Aquila , the legs are not feathered . The sexes are similar . Males are 66 – 80 cm ( 26 – 31 in ) long and weigh 1 @.@ 8 – 3 kg ( 4 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . Females are slightly larger , at 80 – 90 cm ( 31 – 35 in ) and 2 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 kg ( 5 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 9 lb ) . The wingspan ranges from 1 @.@ 78 to 2 @.@ 2 m ( 5 @.@ 8 to 7 @.@ 2 ft ) . A 2004 study on 37 birds from Australia and Papua New Guinea ( 3 ° S to 50 ° S ) found that birds could be sexed reliably on size , and that birds from latitudes further south were larger than those from the north . There is no seasonal variation in plumage . The moulting pattern of the white @-@ bellied sea eagle is poorly known . It appears to take longer than a year to complete , and can be interrupted and later resumed from the point of interruption . 
 The wings are modified when gliding so that they rise from the body at an angle , but are closer to horizontal further along the wingspan . In silhouette , the comparatively long neck , head and beak stick out from the front almost as far as the tail does behind . For active flight , the white @-@ bellied sea eagle alternates strong deep wing @-@ beats with short periods of gliding . 
 A young white @-@ bellied sea eagle in its first year is predominantly brown , with pale cream @-@ streaked plumage on their head , neck , nape and rump areas . The plumage becomes more infiltrated with white until it acquires the complete adult plumage by the fourth or fifth year . The species breeds from around six years of age onwards . The lifespan is thought to be around 30 years . 
 The loud goose @-@ like honking call is a familiar sound , particularly during the breeding season ; pairs often honk in unison , and often carry on for some time when perched . The male 's call is higher @-@ pitched and more rapid than that of the female . Australian naturalist David Fleay observed that the call is among the loudest and furthest @-@ carrying of all Australian bird calls , in stark contrast to the relatively quiet calls of the wedge @-@ tailed eagle . 
 Adult white @-@ bellied sea eagles are unmistakable and unlikely to be confused with any other bird . Immature birds can be confused with wedge @-@ tailed eagles . However , the plumage of the latter is darker , the tail longer , and the legs feathered . They might also be confused with the black @-@ breasted buzzard ( <unk> <unk> ) , but this species is much smaller , has white patches on the wings , and has a more undulating flight . In India , the Egyptian vulture has white plumage , but is smaller and has a whiter back and wings . The white tail of the white @-@ bellied sea eagle in flight distinguishes it from other species of large eagles . In the Philippines , it can be confused with the Philippine eagle , which can be distinguished by its crest ; immature white @-@ bellied sea eagles resemble immature grey @-@ headed fish eagles , but can be identified by their more wholly dark brown underparts and flight feathers , and wedge @-@ shaped tail . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is found regularly from Mumbai ( sometimes north to Gujarat , and in the past in the Lakshadweep Islands ) eastwards in India , Bangladesh , and Sri Lanka in southern Asia , through all of coastal Southeast Asia including Burma , Thailand , Malaysia , Indonesia , Indochina , the main and offshore islands of the Philippines , and southern China including Hong Kong , Hainan and Fuzhou , eastwards through New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago , and Australia . In the northern Solomons it is restricted to Nissan Island , and replaced elsewhere by Sanford 's sea eagle . In Victoria , where it is otherwise scarce , it is locally more common at Corner Inlet and Gippsland Lakes . Similarly in South Australia , it is most abundant along the north coast of Kangaroo Island . The range extends to the islands of Bass Strait and Tasmania , and it is thought able to move between the islands and the mainland . There is one unconfirmed record from Lord Howe Island and several from New Zealand . 
 They are a common sight in coastal areas , but may also be seen well inland ( It is reportedly seen at the Panna Tiger Reserve in central India , nearly 1 @,@ 000 km ( 621 mi ) away from the sea shore ) The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is generally sedentary and territorial , although it may travel long distances . They have been reported travelling upriver to hunt for flying foxes ( Pteropus ) . Populations in inland Australia move around as inland bodies of water appear and then dry up . In one instance , a pair came to breed at Lake <unk> in northwestern Victoria after the lake had been empty for 30 years . The species is easily disturbed by humans , especially when nesting , and may desert nesting sites as a result . It is found in greater numbers in areas with little or no human impact or interference . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is generally territorial ; some birds form permanent pairs that inhabit territories throughout the year , while others are nomadic . The species is monogamous , with pairs remaining together until one bird dies , after which the surviving bird quickly seeks a new mate . This can lead to some nest sites being continuously occupied for many years ( one site in Mallacoota was occupied for over fifty years ) . Immature birds are generally dispersive , with many moving over 50 km ( 31 mi ) away from the area they were raised . One juvenile raised in Cowell , South Australia was reported 3 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) away at Fraser Island in Queensland . A study of the species in Jervis Bay showed increases in the numbers of immature and subadult birds in autumn , although it was unclear whether these were locally fledged or ( as was considered more likely ) an influx of young birds born and raised elsewhere in Australia . Birds are often seen perched high in a tree , or soaring over waterways and adjacent land . They are most commonly encountered singly or in pairs . Small groups of white @-@ bellied sea eagles sometimes gather if there is a plentiful source of food such as a carcass or fish offal on a ship . Much of the white @-@ bellied sea eagle 's behaviour , particularly breeding , remains poorly known . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is an opportunistic carnivore and consumes a wide variety of animal prey , including carrion . It often catches a fish by flying low over the water and grasping it in its talons . It prepares for the strike by holding its feet far forward ( almost under its chin ) and then strikes backwards while simultaneously beating its wings to lift upwards . Generally only one foot is used to seize prey . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle may also dive at a 45 degree angle from its perch and briefly submerge to catch fish near the water surface . While hunting over water on sunny days , it often flies directly into the sun or at right angles to it , seemingly to avoid casting shadows over the water and hence alerting potential prey . 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle hunts mainly aquatic animals , such as fish , turtles and sea snakes , but it takes birds , such as little penguins , Eurasian coots and shearwaters , and mammals ( including flying foxes ) as well . In the Bismarck Archipelago it has been reported feeding on two species of possum , the northern common <unk> and common spotted <unk> . It is a skilled hunter , and will attack prey up to the size of a swan . They also feed on carrion such as dead sheep , birds and fish found along the waterline , as well as raiding fishing nets and following cane harvesters . 
 They harass smaller raptors such as swamp harriers , whistling kites , brahminy kites and ospreys , forcing them to drop any food that they are carrying . Other birds victimised include silver and Pacific gulls , cormorants and Australasian gannets . There is one record of a white @-@ bellied sea eagle seizing a gannet when unsuccessful in obtaining its prey . They may even steal food from their own species , including their mates . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle attacks these birds by striking them with outstretched talons from above or by flying upside down underneath the smaller predator and snatching the prey , all the while screeching shrilly . Southern fur seals have also been targeted for their fish . 
 White @-@ bellied sea eagles feed alone , in pairs , or in family groups . A pair may cooperate to hunt . Prey can be eaten while the bird is flying or when it lands on a raised platform such as its nest . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle skins the victim as it eats it . It is exceptionally efficient at digesting its food , and disgorges only tiny pellets of fragmented bone , fur and feathers . 
 A 2006 study of inland bodies of water around Canberra where wedge @-@ tailed eagles and white @-@ bellied sea eagles share territories showed little overlap in the range of prey taken . Wedge @-@ tailed eagles took rabbits , various macropods , terrestrial birds such as cockatoos and parrots , and various passerines including magpies and starlings . White @-@ bellied sea eagles caught fish , water @-@ dwelling reptiles such as the eastern long @-@ necked turtle and Australian water dragon , and waterbirds such as ducks , grebes and coots . Both species preyed on the maned duck . Rabbits constituted only a small fraction of the white @-@ bellied sea eagle 's diet . Despite nesting near each other , the two species seldom interacted , as the wedge @-@ tailed eagles hunted away from water and the white @-@ bellied sea eagles foraged along the lake shores . However , conflict with wedge @-@ tailed eagles over nesting sites in remnant trees has been recorded in Tasmania . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The breeding season varies according to location — it has been recorded in the dry season in the Trans @-@ Fly region and Central Province of Papua New Guinea , and from June to August in Australia . A pair of white @-@ bellied sea eagles performs skilful displays of flying before copulation : diving , gliding and chasing each other while calling loudly . They may mirror each other , flying 2 – 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) apart and copying each other swooping and swerving . A talon @-@ grappling display has been recorded where the pair will fly high before one flips upside down and tries to grapple the other 's talons with its own . If successful , the two then plunge cartwheeling before separating as they approach the ground . This behaviour has also been recorded as an aggressive display against a wedge @-@ tailed eagle . 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle usually chooses tall trees or man @-@ made pylons to nest in . Often , locations are sought where there is a tall dead tree or high branch with good visibility which can be used as a perch to survey the surrounding area , which is generally a low @-@ lying locale near water with some forest cover . The perch becomes covered in faeces and pellets and animal remains litter the immediate surrounding area . The nest is a large deep bowl constructed of sticks and branches , and lined with such materials as grass or seaweed . Yearly renovations result in nests getting gradually bigger . Nests are generally sited in the forks of large trees overlooking bodies of water . Old nests of wedge @-@ tailed eagles or whistling kites have been renovated and used . Cliffs are also suitable nesting sites , and on islands nests are sometimes built directly on the ground . A breeding pair , with the male being more active , spends three to six weeks building or renovating the nest before laying eggs . Normally a clutch of two dull , white , oval eggs are laid . Measuring 73 × 55 mm , they are incubated over six weeks before hatching . The young are semi @-@ altricial , and covered in white down when they emerge from the egg . Initially , the male brings food and the female feeds the chicks , but both parents feed the chicks as they grow larger . Although two eggs are laid , it is unusual for two young to be reared successfully to fledging ( leaving the nest ) . One egg may be infertile , or the second chick may die in the nest . If the first clutch is lost , the parents may attempt a second brood . Nestlings have been recorded fledging when 70 to 80 days old , and remaining around the parents ' territory for up to six months or until the following breeding season . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is listed as being of Least Concern by the IUCN . There are an estimated 10 thousand to 100 thousand individuals , although there seems to be a decline in numbers . They have become rare in Thailand and some other parts of southeast Asia . They are relatively abundant in Hong Kong , where the population increased from 39 to 57 birds between 2002 and 2009 . A field study on Kangaroo Island in South Australia showed that nesting pairs in areas of high human disturbance ( as defined by clearing of landscape and high human activity ) had lower breeding success rates . In the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia , nests have been vacated as human activities have encroached on the eagles ' territories . Elsewhere , the clearing of trees suitable for nesting has seen it largely disappear locally , such as the removal of stands of Casuarina <unk> in Visakhapatnam district in Andhra Pradesh in India . In India , nest densities of about one per 4 @.@ 32 km of coastline have been noted in <unk> and one per 3 @.@ 57 km ( 45 nests along 161 km ) in Ratnagiri district of Maharashtra . They also nest on <unk> Island , where about a 100 birds were noted in 1875 ( then known as Pigeon Island ) by Allan Octavian Hume who noted that this was perhaps the largest breeding colony of the species . In 2000 , the disturbance to the island from torpedo @-@ firing exercises conducted by the Indian navy was noted as a threat . Nearly 100 nests have been noted in 2004 on this island . 
 DDT was a widely used pesticide in agriculture that was found to have significant adverse effects on wildlife , particularly egg thinning and subsequent breakage in birds of prey . A review of DDT 's impact on Australian raptors between 1947 and 1993 found that the average egg @-@ shell thickness had decreased by 6 % . This average level of thinning was not thought likely to result in significantly more breakage overall , however individual clutches that had been even thinner might have broken . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle was one of the more affected species , probably due to its feeding in areas heavily treated with pesticide such as swamps . DDT use peaked in 1973 , but was no longer approved after 1987 and its use had effectively ceased by 1989 . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is listed under the marine and migratory categories which give it protected status under Australia 's federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . As a mainly coastal species , it is vulnerable to habitat destruction in Australia 's increasingly populated and urbanised coastal areas , particularly in the south and east of the country , where it appears to have declined in numbers . However , there may have been an increase in population inland , secondary to the creation of reservoirs , dams and weirs , and the spread of the introduced common carp ( Cyprinus carpio ) . However , it is rare along the Murray River where it was once common . It is also listed as Threatened under Victoria 's Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act ( 1988 ) , with possibly fewer than 100 breeding pairs remaining in the state . On the 2007 advisory list of threatened vertebrate fauna in Victoria , the white @-@ bellied sea eagle is listed as vulnerable . 
 There are fewer than 1000 adult birds in Tasmania , where the species is listed as Vulnerable under Schedule 3 @.@ 1 of the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 . In Tasmania it is threatened by nest disturbance , loss of suitable nesting habitat , shooting , poisoning , trapping , and collision with power lines and wind turbines , as well as entanglement and environmental pollution . Estuaries are a favoured habitat , and these are often subject to environmental <unk> white @-@ bellied sea eagles have been observed to increase their hunting ranges to include salmon fish farms , but the effect of this on breeding success is unknown . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle was important to different tribes of indigenous people across Australia . The guardian animal of the Wreck Bay aboriginal community , it is also the official emblem of the <unk> National Park and Botanic Gardens in the Jervis Bay Territory . The community considered localities around <unk> National Park to be connected with it . A local Sydney name was <unk> , and the bird was the totem of <unk> , the late 18th century indigenous leader of the Cadigal people . The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is important to the Mak Mak people of the floodplains to the southwest of Darwin in the northern Territory , who recognised its connection with " good country " . It is their totem and integrally connected to their land . The term Mak Mak is their name for both the species and themselves . The <unk> Gorge Nature Park was a Dreaming site of the bird , in this area known as Kuna @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> . It was similarly symbolic to the Tasmanian indigenous people — <unk> was one name used there . 
 Known as <unk> to the people of Nissan Island , the white @-@ bellied sea eagle is considered special and killing it is forbidden . Its calls at night are said to foretell danger , and seeing a group of calling eagles flying overhead is a sign that someone has died . Local Malay folk tales tell of the white @-@ bellied sea eagle screaming to warn the shellfish of the turning of tides , and a local name <unk> hamba siput translates as " slave of the shellfish " . Called <unk> in the recently extinct Aka @-@ Bo language , the white @-@ bellied sea eagle was held to be the ancestor of all birds in one Andaman Islands folk tale . On the Maharashtra coast , their name is <unk> and its call is said to indicate the presence of fish in the sea . They sometimes nest on coconut trees . Owners of the trees destroy the nest to avoid attacks when harvesting the coconuts . 
 The white @-@ bellied sea eagle is featured on the $ 10 @,@ 000 Singapore note , which was introduced into circulation on 1 February 1980 . It is the emblem of the Malaysian state of Selangor . Malay magnate Loke Wan Tho had a 40 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 130 ft ) tower built for the sole purpose of observing a white @-@ bellied sea eagle nest in the palace gardens of Istana Bukit Serene in Johor Bahru . Taken in February 1949 , the resulting photographs appeared in The Illustrated London News in 1954 . The bird is the emblem of the Manly @-@ Warringah Sea Eagles rugby league team , chosen at the club 's inception in 1947 . From 2010 , a nesting pair of white @-@ bellied sea eagles have had their attempts at raising chicks filmed live on " <unk> " , with footage on display at the nearby Birds Australia Discovery Centre in Sydney Olympic Park , New South Wales . After raising one brood , however , their nest collapsed in February 2011 . The story attracted statewide attention . 
 = Guitar Method = 
 Guitar Method ( subtitled 1996 – 1999 ) is the only album by indie supergroup Kid Kilowatt , initially released by Second Nature Recordings on vinyl in 2003 , and later on CD by Hydra Head Records in 2004 . It consists of material recorded over a period of three years , including after the band 's breakup . Still , it did not see release as a whole for over four years after the last track was recorded . 
 Kid Kilowatt was formed by members of Cave In and Converge as a side project ; sessions together were sporadic and rare , and the process of writing , recording and release took seven years in all . Reviewers praised the band 's musicianship and the depth and range of the sound ; one " much mellower " than that of the members ' main projects . 
 = = Context and recording = = 
 Kid Kilowatt was initially created as ' Ester of Wood Rosin ' by Cave In 's Stephen Brodsky in August 1996 , " inspired by [ his ] love for Giants Chair and [ his ] need for an alter @-@ ego to Cave In " . Other influences upon Kid Kilowatt 's sound , as stated by <unk> , included Sunny Day Real Estate and " early " Promise Ring . Brodsky recruited Adam McGrath , also of Cave In , on bass guitar , along with local drummer Matt Redmond and Piebald guitarist and vocalist Aaron Stuart . Brodsky took the role of guitarist and lead vocalist , and with this line @-@ up they , in the words of Brodsky , " began to formulate some good ol ' sappy @-@ but @-@ not @-@ too @-@ sappy rock n ' roll tunes " . 
 The first material destined for Guitar Method was written within the initial few months , including " Teg Nugent " and " the original , 9 minute long opus version " of " Tug of War " . In Autumn 1996 , they recorded a four @-@ song demo with Kurt Ballou at his 8 @-@ track home studio , GodCity . Brodsky hand @-@ crafted the demo inserts in his high school graphic arts room , with around 400 copies pressed . According to Brodsky , they were " gone in no time " . In Spring 1997 , Aaron Stuart left the band in order to concentrate on his primary project , Piebald . Ballou , of Converge , who had recorded and produced their prior four track demo , joined the band in his stead , and they renamed the band " Kid Kilowatt " , inspired by a Guided by Voices song entitled " Cool Off Kid Kilowatt " from their 1993 album Vampire on Titus . 
 Now with Ballou as a full @-@ time member , the band re @-@ developed songs written with Stuart , including " The Bicycle Song " , " 7th Inning Song Formation " , " The Scope " , " Peeping Tomboy " and " Red Carpet " . They resumed writing fresh material with " Radio Pow for Now " . In their first show as Kid Kilowatt , they performed with Brodsky 's " heroes " , Giants Chair , in his home town of Methuen , Massachusetts . For the following six to seven months , however , all the band members were <unk> with other musical projects , resulting in infrequent rehearsal and intermittent live performance . They did occasionally play live during this period , however , performing with bands such as Piebald , <unk> , and Regulator Watts . 
 They recorded as Kid Kilowatt only once before the official demise of the band , in July 1997 . During this session , they recorded " Bicycle Song " and " The Scope " on Ballou 's 8 @-@ track machine ; this version of " Bicycle Song " appeared on Hydra Head Records CD sampler Volume 1 . 
 After Brodsky joined Converge , whilst still a member of Cave In , in 1997 , the amount of time being devoted to Kid Kilowatt began to wane . Matt Redmond had moved to New Hampshire also , causing " enthusiasm for the band to fizzle " . They played what would be their last show in January 1998 at the Met Café in Providence , Rhode Island . Soon after that show , Brodsky left Converge in order to devote all his time to Cave In , now as not only the guitarist , but as the vocalist . McGrath and Ballou continued their duties with Cave In and Converge , respectively , and Redmond joined a new band called <unk> . As Brodsky eulogises : " There was simply no time left in our schedules for Kid Kilowatt and the band collapsed " . 
 In November 1998 , the band decided to try to record everything they had written together . Recording continued at GodCity until October 1999 , occurring " completely sporadically ; a week night here and there , maybe a full day during one weekend of a month or two " . Brodsky describes this as " quite evident from the sound of the record " . During these sessions , some new material was composed , including " Memorial Drive " , " Glass of Shattered Youth " , " Cadence for a Rainy Day " and " Cadence for the Desert Sun " . The last Kid Kilowatt song ever recorded was the album version of " Tug of War " . The record was mastered at M @-@ works in Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
 = = Release = = 
 Predating Guitar Method by three years , Second Nature Recordings released a 7 @-@ inch Kid Kilowatt single entitled Hit Single in 2001 . It includes tracks " Peeping Tomboy " and " Glass of Shattered Youth " , described as " a playful companion to their Guitar Method debut full @-@ length " . The vinyl saw two pressings . Second Nature also released the original version of Guitar Method on 12 " on October 14 , 2003 , in slightly abridged form . The vinyl edit excluded the tracks " Glass of Shattered Youth " , " Blue / Green Heart " and " Tug of War " . These three tracks were credited as " bonus tracks " on the Hydra Head Records CD , released on March 9 , 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception to the album was largely positive ; reviews specifically praised the band 's musicianship and the range of material on the album . Adam Moore , writing for the Tufts Observer , posits that " [ a ] ll of the members bring their great musical abilities to Kid Kilowatt and make them more palatable to the listener who isn 't into blast beats and Jake Bannon 's [ of Converge ] distinctive voice " . The album 's sound is described as " more recent Cave In , but without the spacey effects and meandering songwriting " . Moore likens the sound to that of Thursday , but concedes that " Kilowatt isn ’ t even that metallic or scream @-@ oriented " . Attempting to categorise that band , a <unk> review writes that " [ o ] ne could narrowly define Kid Kilowatt as either indie @-@ rock or post @-@ hardcore , both are accurate descriptions " . Moore says that " [ o ] verall , the album sounds rather pop @-@ y " , and that their use of " pop hooks combined with post @-@ pop chord progressions " gives the album a " very melodic feel " . Chris Morgan , in a glowing review , writes that Guitar Method is " a sleeper classic of the modern underground " . 
 Several songs are selected as stand @-@ outs throughout the album . " Tug of War " is labelled as " the strongest song on the album " , with John D. Luerssen writing that " the cohesiveness of the material suggests the lads in Kid Kilowatt exited this side project as friends . After all , only buddies capable of putting their differences aside could craft the soaring , majestic " Tug of War , " where Brodsky 's wide @-@ reaching pipes mesh brilliantly with KK 's ace musicianship " . He continues to say that " the disc shifts from roaring , expansive rockers like " Bicycle Song " to crunching anthems like " Ted Nugent " and on to lilting , near @-@ ballads like " Memorial Drive " with inexplicable ease " . Moore writes that " The Scope " " encapsulates what the rest of the album will sound like . It starts out sounding rather crunchy and smooths out as the album progresses , providing a good contrasting effect that runs throughout the album " . Moore , however , writes that " Memorial Drive " is " only mediocre . It 's the only song on the album over five minutes long . Playing slow just isn 't this band 's forte , although they have the ability to write poignant lyrics " . Similarly , a <unk> review states that " Cadence for a Rainy Day " and " Memorial Drive " " often diverge and lead the listener off @-@ course " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kid Kilowatt . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Band members 
 Kurt Ballou – guitar 
 Stephen Brodsky – guitar , vocals 
 Adam McGrath – bass 
 Matt Redmond – drums 
 Aaron Stuart – guitar 
 Other personnel 
 Aaron Turner – album artwork and design 
 Nick <unk> – mastering 
 = Female genital mutilation = 
 Female genital mutilation ( FGM ) , also known as female genital cutting and female circumcision , is the ritual removal of some or all of the external female genitalia . UNICEF estimated in 2016 that 200 million women had undergone the procedures in 27 countries in Africa , as well as in Indonesia , Iraqi Kurdistan and Yemen , with a rate of 80 – 98 percent within the 15 – 49 age group in Djibouti , Egypt , Eritrea , Guinea , Mali , Sierra Leone , Somalia and Sudan . The practice is also found elsewhere in Asia , the Middle East , and among communities from these areas around the world . 
 Typically carried out by a traditional circumciser using a blade , FGM is conducted from days after birth to puberty and beyond ; in half the countries for which national figures are available , most girls are cut before the age of five . Procedures differ according to the country or ethnic group . They include removal of the clitoral hood and clitoral glans ; removal of the inner labia ; and removal of the inner and outer labia and closure of the vulva . In this last procedure ( known as infibulation ) , a small hole is left for the passage of urine and menstrual fluid ; the vagina is opened for intercourse and opened further for childbirth . The United Nations Population Fund estimated in 2010 that 20 percent of women affected by FGM had been infibulated , a practice found largely in northeast Africa . 
 The practice is rooted in gender inequality , attempts to control women 's sexuality , and ideas about purity , modesty and aesthetics . It is usually initiated and carried out by women , who see it as a source of honour , and who fear that failing to have their daughters and granddaughters cut will expose the girls to social exclusion . The health effects depend on the procedure ; they can include recurrent infections , difficulty urinating and passing menstrual flow , chronic pain , the development of cysts , an inability to get pregnant , complications during childbirth , and fatal bleeding . There are no known health benefits . 
 FGM has been outlawed or restricted in most of the countries in which it occurs , but the laws are poorly enforced . There have been international efforts since the 1970s to persuade practitioners to abandon it , and in 2012 the United Nations General Assembly , recognizing FGM as a human @-@ rights violation , voted unanimously to intensify those efforts . The opposition is not without its critics , particularly among anthropologists . Eric Silverman writes that FGM has become one of anthropology 's central moral topics , raising difficult questions about cultural relativism , tolerance and the universality of human rights . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 = = = English = = = 
 Until the 1980s FGM was widely known as female circumcision , which implied an equivalence in severity with male circumcision . The Kenya Missionary Council began referring to it as the sexual mutilation of women in 1929 , following the lead of Marion Scott Stevenson , a Church of Scotland missionary . References to the practice as mutilation increased throughout the 1970s . In 1975 Rose Oldfield Hayes , an American anthropologist , called it female genital mutilation in the title of a paper , and in 1979 Fran Hosken , an Austrian @-@ American researcher and feminist , called it mutilation in her influential The Hosken Report : Genital and Sexual Mutilation of Females . 
 The Inter @-@ African Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children and the World Health Organization ( WHO ) began referring to it as female genital mutilation in 1990 and 1991 respectively . In April 1997 the WHO , United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) and United Nations Population Fund ( UNFPA ) issued a joint statement using that term . Other terms in common use include female genital cutting ( <unk> ) and female genital mutilation / cutting ( FGM / C ) , preferred by those who work with practitioners . 
 = = = Local terms = = = 
 The many variants of FGM are reflected in dozens of local terms in countries where it is common . These often refer to purification . A common Arabic term for purification has the root t @-@ h @-@ r , used for male and female circumcision ( <unk> and <unk> ) . It is also known in Arabic as <unk> or <unk> . In the Bambara language , spoken mostly in Mali , FGM is known as <unk> ( " washing your hands " ) and in the Igbo language in eastern Nigeria as <unk> aru or <unk> aru ( " having your bath , " as in " a young woman must ' have her bath ' before she has a baby " ) . 
 Sunna circumcision usually refers to clitoridectomy , but is also used for more severe forms . Communities often refer to just two forms of FGM : pharaonic for infibulation and sunna for everything else . Sunna means " path or way " in Arabic and refers to the tradition of Muhammad , although none of the procedures are required within Islam . The term infibulation derives from fibula , Latin for clasp ; the Ancient Romans reportedly fastened clasps through the <unk> or labia of slaves to prevent sexual intercourse . The surgical infibulation of women came to be known as pharaonic circumcision in Sudan , but as Sudanese circumcision in Egypt . In Somalia it is known simply as <unk> ( " to sew up " ) . 
 = = <unk> , methods = = 
 The procedures are generally performed by a traditional circumciser ( cutter or <unk> ) in the girls ' homes , with or without anaesthesia . The cutter is usually an older woman , but in communities where the male barber has assumed the role of health worker he will perform FGM too . 
 When traditional cutters are involved , non @-@ sterile devices are likely to be used , including knives , razors , scissors , glass , sharpened rocks and fingernails . A nurse in Uganda , quoted in 2007 in The Lancet , said that a cutter would use one knife on up to 30 girls at a time . 
 Health professionals are often involved in Egypt , Kenya , Indonesia and Sudan . In Egypt 77 percent of FGM procedures , and in Indonesia over 50 percent , were performed by medical professionals as of 2008 and 2016 . Depending on the involvement of medical professionals , the procedures may include a local or general anaesthetic , or neither . Women in Egypt reported in 1995 that a local anaesthetic had been used on their daughters in 60 percent of cases , a general in 13 percent and neither in 25 percent ( two percent were missing / don 't know ) . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The WHO , UNICEF and UNFPA issued a joint statement in April 1997 defining FGM as " all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs whether for cultural or other non @-@ therapeutic reasons . " 
 The procedures vary considerably according to ethnicity and individual practitioners . During a 1998 survey in Niger , women responded with over 50 different terms when asked what was done to them . Translation problems are compounded by the women 's confusion over which type of FGM they experienced , or even whether they experienced it . Several studies have suggested that survey responses are unreliable . 
 Standard questionnaires from United Nations bodies ask women whether they have undergone the following : ( 1 ) cut , no flesh removed ( pricking or symbolic circumcision ) ; ( 2 ) cut , some flesh removed ; ( 3 ) sewn closed ; and ( 4 ) type not determined / unsure / doesn 't know . The most common procedures fall within the " cut , some flesh removed " category and involve complete or partial removal of the clitoral glans . 
 = = = WHO Types I – II = = = 
 The World Health Organization has created a more detailed typology , Types I – II , based on how much tissue is removed . Type III is " sewn closed . " Type IV describes symbolic circumcision and miscellaneous procedures . 
 Type I is subdivided into Ia , removal of the clitoral hood ( rarely performed alone ) , and the more common Ib ( clitoridectomy ) , the complete or partial removal of the clitoral glans and clitoral hood . ( When discussing FGM , the WHO uses clitoris to refer to the clitoral glans , the visible tip of the clitoris . ) Susan <unk> and <unk> <unk> write : " [ T ] he clitoris is held between the thumb and index finger , pulled out and amputated with one stroke of a sharp object . " 
 Type II ( excision ) is the complete or partial removal of the inner labia , with or without removal of the clitoral glans and outer labia . Type IIa is removal of the inner labia ; IIb , removal of the clitoral glans and inner labia ; and IIc , removal of the clitoral glans , inner and outer labia . Excision in French can refer to any form of FGM . 
 = = = Type III = = = 
 Type III ( infibulation or pharaonic circumcision ) , the " sewn closed " category , involves the removal of the external genitalia and fusion of the wound . The inner and / or outer labia are cut away , with or without removal of the clitoral glans . Type IIIa is the removal and closure of the inner labia and IIIb the outer labia . The practice is found largely in Djibouti , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Somalia and Sudan ( though not South Sudan ) in northeast Africa . Estimates of numbers vary : according to one in 2008 , over eight million women in Africa have experienced it . According to UNFPA in 2010 , 20 percent of women with FGM have been infibulated . 
 Comfort Momoh , a specialist midwife , writes of Type III : " [ E ] <unk> women , relatives and friends secure the girl in the lithotomy position . A deep incision is made rapidly on either side from the root of the clitoris to the <unk> , and a single cut of the razor excises the clitoris and both the labia majora and labia minora . " In Somalia the clitoral glans is removed and shown to the girl 's senior female relatives , who decide whether enough has been amputated . After this the labia are removed . 
 A single hole of 2 – 3 mm is left for the passage of urine and menstrual fluid by inserting something , such as a twig , into the wound . The vulva is closed with surgical thread , agave or acacia thorns , or covered with a poultice such as raw egg , herbs and sugar . The parts that have been removed might be placed in a pouch for the girl to wear . To help the tissue bond , the girl 's legs are tied together , often from hip to ankle , for up to six weeks ; the bindings are usually loosened after a week and may be removed after two . Momoh writes : 
 [ The entrance to the vagina ] is obliterated by a drum of skin extending across the orifice except for a small hole . Circumstances at the time may vary ; the girl may struggle ferociously , in which case the incisions may become uncontrolled and haphazard . The girl may be pinned down so firmly that bones may fracture . 
 If the remaining hole is too large in the view of the girl 's family , the procedure is repeated . The vagina is opened for sexual intercourse , for the first time either by a midwife with a knife or by the woman 's husband with his penis . In some areas , including Somaliland , female relatives of the bride and groom might watch the opening of the vagina to check that the girl is a virgin . Psychologist Hanny Lightfoot @-@ Klein interviewed hundreds of women and men in Sudan in the 1980s about sexual intercourse with Type III : 
 The penetration of the bride 's infibulation takes anywhere from 3 or 4 days to several months . Some men are unable to penetrate their wives at all ( in my study over 15 % ) , and the task is often accomplished by a midwife under conditions of great secrecy , since this reflects negatively on the man 's potency . Some who are unable to penetrate their wives manage to get them pregnant in spite of the infibulation , and the woman 's vaginal passage is then cut open to allow birth to take place . ... Those men who do manage to penetrate their wives do so often , or perhaps always , with the help of the " little knife . " This creates a tear which they gradually rip more and more until the opening is sufficient to admit the penis . 
 The woman is opened further for childbirth and closed afterwards , a process known as <unk> ( or <unk> ) and <unk> . <unk> can involve cutting the vagina again to restore the pinhole size of the first infibulation . This might be performed before marriage , and after childbirth , divorce and widowhood . 
 = = = Type IV = = = 
 The WHO defines Type IV as " [ a ] ll other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non @-@ medical purposes " , including pricking , piercing , incising , scraping and cauterization . It includes nicking of the clitoris ( symbolic circumcision ) , burning or scarring the genitals , and introducing substances into the vagina to tighten it . <unk> stretching is also categorized as Type IV . Common in southern and eastern Africa , the practice is supposed to enhance sexual pleasure for the man and add to the sense of a woman as a closed space . From the age of eight , girls are encouraged to stretch their inner labia using sticks and massage . Girls in Uganda are told they may have difficulty giving birth without stretched labia . 
 A definition of FGM from the WHO in 1995 included <unk> cutting and <unk> cutting , found in Nigeria and Niger . These were removed from the WHO 's 2008 definition because of insufficient information about prevalence and consequences . <unk> cutting involves cutting the vagina 's front or back wall with a blade or penknife , performed in response to infertility , obstructed labour and several other conditions . Over 30 percent of women with <unk> cuts in a study by Nigerian physician <unk> Usman <unk> had <unk> fistulae . <unk> cutting is excision of the hymen , usually performed seven days after birth . 
 = = Complications = = 
 = = = Short @-@ term and late = = = 
 FGM harms women 's physical and emotional health throughout their lives . It has no known health benefits . The short @-@ term and late complications depend on the type of FGM , whether the practitioner had medical training , and whether she used antibiotics and unsterilized or surgical single @-@ use instruments . In the case of Type III , other factors include how small a hole was left for the passage of urine and menstrual blood , whether surgical thread was used instead of agave or acacia thorns , and whether the procedure was performed more than once ( for example , to close an opening regarded as too wide or re @-@ open one too small ) . 
 Common short @-@ term complications include swelling , excessive bleeding , pain , urine retention and healing problems / wound infection . A 2015 systematic review of 56 studies that recorded immediate complications suggested that each of these occurred in more than one in ten girls and women undergoing any form of FGM , including symbolic nicking of the clitoris ( Type IV ) , although the risks increased with Type III . The review also suggested that there was under @-@ reporting . Other short @-@ term complications include fatal bleeding , anaemia , urinary infection , septicaemia , tetanus , gangrene , necrotizing fasciitis ( flesh @-@ eating disease ) and endometritis . It is not known how many girls and women die as a result of the practice , because complications may not be recognized or reported . The practitioners ' use of shared instruments is thought to aid the transmission of hepatitis B , hepatitis C and HIV , although no epidemiological studies have shown this . 
 Late complications vary depending on the type of FGM . They include the formation of scars and keloids that lead to strictures and obstruction , epidermoid cysts that may become infected , and neuroma formation ( growth of nerve tissue ) involving nerves that supplied the clitoris . 
 An infibulated girl may be left with an opening as small as 2 – 3 mm , which can cause prolonged , drop @-@ by @-@ drop urination , pain while urinating , and a feeling of needing to urinate all the time . Urine may collect underneath the scar , leaving the area under the skin constantly wet , which can lead to infection and the formation of small stones . The opening is larger in women who are sexually active or have given birth by vaginal delivery , but the urethra opening may still be obstructed by scar tissue . <unk> or <unk> fistulae can develop ( holes that allow urine or faeces to seep into the vagina ) . This and other damage to the urethra and bladder can lead to infections and incontinence , pain during sexual intercourse and infertility . 
 Painful periods are common because of the obstruction to the menstrual flow , and blood can stagnate in the vagina and uterus . Complete obstruction of the vagina can result in <unk> and <unk> ( where the vagina and uterus fill with menstrual blood ) . The swelling of the abdomen that results from the collection of fluid , together with the lack of menstruation , can lead to suspicion of pregnancy . Asma El <unk> , a Sudanese physician , reported in 1979 that a girl in Sudan with this condition was killed by her family . 
 = = = Pregnancy , childbirth = = = 
 FGM may place women at higher risk of problems during pregnancy and childbirth , which are more common with the more extensive FGM procedures . <unk> women may try to make childbirth easier by eating less during pregnancy to reduce the baby 's size . In women with <unk> or <unk> fistulae , it is difficult to obtain clear urine samples as part of prenatal care , making the diagnosis of conditions such as pre @-@ eclampsia harder . Cervical evaluation during labour may be impeded and labour prolonged or obstructed . Third @-@ degree laceration ( tears ) , anal @-@ sphincter damage and emergency caesarean section are more common in infibulated women . 
 Neonatal mortality is increased . The WHO estimated in 2006 that an additional 10 – 20 babies die per 1 @,@ 000 deliveries as a result of FGM . The estimate was based on a study conducted on 28 @,@ 393 women attending delivery wards at 28 obstetric centres in Burkina Faso , Ghana , Kenya , Nigeria , Senegal and Sudan . In those settings all types of FGM were found to pose an increased risk of death to the baby : 15 percent higher for Type I , 32 percent for Type II and 55 percent for Type III . The reasons for this were unclear , but may be connected to genital and urinary tract infections and the presence of scar tissue . The researchers wrote that FGM was associated with an increased risk to the mother of damage to the perineum and excessive blood loss , as well as a need to resuscitate the baby , and stillbirth , perhaps because of a long second stage of labour . 
 = = = Psychological effects , sexual function = = = 
 According to a 2015 systematic review there is little high @-@ quality information available on the psychological effects of FGM . Several small studies have concluded that women with FGM suffer from anxiety , depression and post @-@ traumatic stress disorder . Feelings of shame and betrayal can develop when women leave the culture that practises FGM and learn that their condition is not the norm , but within the practising culture they may view their FGM with pride , because for them it signifies beauty , respect for tradition , chastity and hygiene . 
 Studies on sexual function have also been small . A 2013 meta @-@ analysis of 15 studies involving 12 @,@ 671 women from seven countries concluded that women with FGM were twice as likely to report no sexual desire and 52 percent more likely to report <unk> ( painful sexual intercourse ) . One third reported reduced sexual feelings . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Household surveys = = = 
 The prevalence of FGM is defined as the percentage of the 15 – 49 age group that has <unk> it . These figures are based on nationally representative household surveys known as Demographic and Health Surveys ( DHS ) , developed by Macro International and funded mainly by the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) , and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys ( <unk> ) , conducted with financial and technical help from UNICEF . 
 These surveys have been carried out in Africa , Asia , Latin America and elsewhere roughly every five years , since 1984 and 1995 respectively . The first to ask about FGM was the 1989 – 1990 DHS in northern Sudan . The first publication to estimate FGM prevalence based on DHS data ( in seven countries ) was by Dara Carr of Macro International in 1997 . 
 = = = Prevalence = = = 
 FGM is found mostly in what Gerry Mackie called an " intriguingly contiguous " zone in Africa – east to west from Somalia to Senegal , and north to south from Egypt to Tanzania . Nationally representative figures available as of 2016 suggest that the practice is concentrated in 27 countries in Africa , as well as in Indonesia , Iraqi Kurdistan and Yemen . Over 200 million women and girls are thought to be living with FGM in those 30 countries . As of 2013 , 27 @.@ 2 million women had undergone FGM in Egypt , 23 @.@ 8 million in Ethiopia , and 19 @.@ 9 million in Nigeria . 
 The highest concentrations among the 15 – 49 age group are in Somalia ( 98 percent ) , Guinea ( 97 percent ) , Djibouti ( 93 percent ) , Egypt ( 91 percent ) and Sierra Leone ( 90 percent ) . There is also a high concentration in Indonesia ; national figures for adults are not available , but the prevalence rate for the 0 – 11 age group there is 49 percent , mostly Types I and IV . 
 Smaller studies or anecdotal reports suggest that FGM is also practised in Colombia , the Congo , Malaysia , Oman , Peru , Saudi Arabia , Sri Lanka , and the United Arab Emirates , as well as among the Bedouin in Israel ; in Rahmah , Jordan ; and among the Dawoodi Bohra in India . It is also found within immigrant communities in Australasia , Europe , North America and Scandinavia . 
 = = = Downward trend = = = 
 Women who respond to surveys on FGM are reporting events experienced years ago , so prevalence figures for the 15 – 49 age group do not reflect current trends . Figures for the 15 – 19 age group show , for example , a reduction in Burkina Faso from 89 percent ( 1980 ) to 58 percent ( 2010 ) ; in Egypt from 97 percent ( 1985 ) to 70 percent ( 2015 ) ; and in Kenya from 41 percent ( 1984 ) to 11 percent ( 2014 ) . 
 From 2010 , household surveys asked women about the FGM status of all their living daughters . The highest concentrations among girls aged 0 – 14 , as reported by UNICEF in 2016 , were in Gambia ( 56 percent ) , Mauritania ( 54 percent ) , Indonesia ( 49 percent for 0 – 11 ) and Guinea ( 46 percent ) . 
 The figures suggest that , overall , a girl was one third less likely in 2014 to undergo FGM than she was 30 years ago . If the rate of decline continues , the number of girls cut will nevertheless rise from 3 @.@ 6 million a year in 2013 to 4 @.@ 1 million in 2050 because of population growth . 
 = = = Rural areas , wealth , education = = = 
 Surveys have found FGM to be more common in rural areas , less common in most countries among girls from the wealthiest homes , and ( except in Sudan and Somalia ) less common in girls whose mothers had access to primary or secondary / higher education . In Somalia and Sudan the situation was reversed : in Somalia the mothers ' access to secondary / higher education was accompanied by a rise in prevalence of FGM in their daughters , and in Sudan access to any education was accompanied by a rise . 
 = = = Age conducted = = = 
 FGM is not invariably a rite of passage between childhood and adulthood , but is often performed on much younger children . Girls are most commonly cut shortly after birth to age 15 . In half the countries for which national figures were available in 2000 – 2010 , most girls had been cut by age five . 
 Over 80 percent ( of those cut ) are cut before the age of five in Nigeria , Mali , Eritrea , Ghana and Mauritania . The 1997 Demographic and Health Survey in Yemen found that 76 percent of girls had been cut within two weeks of birth . The percentage is reversed in Somalia , Egypt , Chad and the Central African Republic , where over 80 percent ( of those cut ) are cut between five and 14 . Just as the type of FGM is often linked to ethnicity , so is the mean age . In Kenya , for example , the <unk> cut around age 10 and the Kamba at 16 . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 A country 's national prevalence often reflects a high sub @-@ national prevalence among certain ethnicities , rather than a widespread practice . In Iraq , for example , FGM is found mostly among the Kurds in Erbil ( 58 percent prevalence within age group 15 – 49 , as of 2011 ) , Sulaymaniyah ( 54 percent ) and Kirkuk ( 20 percent ) , giving the country a national prevalence of eight percent . 
 The practice is sometimes an ethnic marker , but may differ along national lines . In the northeastern regions of Ethiopia and Kenya , which share a border with Somalia , the Somali people practise FGM at around the same rate as they do in Somalia . But in Guinea all Fulani women responding to a survey in 2012 said they had experienced FGM , against 12 percent of the Fulani in Chad , while in Nigeria the Fulani are the only large ethnic group in the country not to practise it . 
 = = = Type of FGM = = = 
 Women are asked during surveys about the type of FGM they experienced : 
 Was the genital area just nicked / cut without removing any flesh ? 
 Was any flesh ( or something ) removed from the genital area ? 
 Was your genital area sewn ? 
 Most affected women experience one of the " cut , some flesh removed " procedures , which embrace WHO Types I and II . Types I and II are both performed in Egypt . Mackie wrote in 2003 that Type II was more common there , while a 2011 study identified Type I as more common . In Nigeria Type I is usually found in the south and the more severe forms in the north . 
 Type III ( infibulation ) is concentrated in northeastern Africa , particularly Djibouti , Eritrea , Somalia and Sudan . In surveys in 2002 – 2006 , 30 percent of cut girls in Djibouti had experienced Type III , 38 percent in Eritrea and 63 percent in Somalia . There is also a high prevalence of infibulation among girls in Niger and Senegal , and in 2013 it was estimated that in Nigeria three percent of the 0 – 14 age group had been infibulated . The type of procedure is often linked to ethnicity . In Eritrea , for example , a survey in 2002 found that all <unk> girls had been infibulated , compared with two percent of the <unk> , most of whom fell into the " cut , no flesh removed " category . 
 = = Reasons = = 
 = = = Support from women = = = 
 <unk> Musa , a Somali woman , described infibulation in a 1988 poem as the " three feminine sorrows " : the procedure itself , the wedding night when the woman is cut open , then childbirth when she is cut again . Despite the evident suffering , it is women who organize all forms of FGM . Anthropologist Rose Oldfield Hayes wrote in 1975 that educated Sudanese men who did not want their daughters to be infibulated ( preferring clitoridectomy ) would find the girls had been sewn up after the grandmothers arranged a visit to relatives . 
 Gerry Mackie has compared FGM to footbinding . Like FGM , footbinding was carried out on young girls , nearly universal where practised , tied to ideas about honour , chastity and appropriate marriage , and supported by women . FGM practitioners see the procedures as marking not only ethnic boundaries but also gender difference . According to this view , FGM <unk> women , while male circumcision <unk> men . 
 <unk> <unk> , an anthropologist and member of the Kono people of Sierra Leone , who in 1992 underwent clitoridectomy as an adult during a Sande society initiation , argued in 2000 that it is a male @-@ centred assumption that the clitoris is important to female sexuality . African female symbolism revolves instead around the concept of the womb . <unk> draws on that idea of enclosure and fertility . " [ G ] <unk> cutting completes the social definition of a child 's sex by eliminating external traces of androgyny , " Janice Boddy wrote in 2007 . " The female body is then covered , closed , and its productive blood bound within ; the male body is unveiled , opened and exposed . " 
 In communities where infibulation is common , there is a preference for women 's genitals to be smooth , dry and without odour , and both women and men may find the natural vulva repulsive . Men seem to enjoy the effort of penetrating an infibulation . The local preference for dry sex causes women to introduce substances into the vagina to reduce lubrication , including leaves , tree bark , toothpaste and Vicks menthol rub . The WHO includes this practice within Type IV FGM , because the added friction during intercourse can cause lacerations and increase the risk of infection . Because of the smooth appearance of an infibulated vulva , there is also a belief that infibulation increases hygiene . 
 Common reasons for FGM cited by women in surveys are social acceptance , religion , hygiene , preservation of virginity , <unk> and enhancement of male sexual pleasure . In a study in northern Sudan , published in 1983 , only 17 @.@ 4 percent of women opposed FGM ( 558 out of 3 @,@ 210 ) , and most preferred excision and infibulation over clitoridectomy . Attitudes are slowly changing . In Sudan in 2010 , 42 percent of women who had heard of FGM said the practice should continue . In several surveys since 2006 , over 50 percent of women in Mali , Guinea , Sierra Leone , Somalia , Gambia and Egypt supported FGM 's continuance , while elsewhere in Africa , Iraq and Yemen most said it should end , although in several countries only by a narrow margin . 
 = = = Social obligation , poor access to information = = = 
 Against the argument that women willingly choose FGM for their daughters , UNICEF calls the practice a " self @-@ enforcing social convention " to which families feel they must conform to avoid uncut daughters facing social exclusion . 
 Ellen Gruenbaum reports that , in Sudan in the 1970s , cut girls from an Arab ethnic group would mock uncut Zabarma girls with Ya , <unk> ! ( " Hey , unclean ! " ) . The Zabarma girls would respond Ya , <unk> ! ( A <unk> was a storage pit for grain that was continually opened and closed , like an infibulated woman . ) But despite throwing the insult back , the Zabarma girls would ask their mothers , " What 's the matter ? Don 't we have razor blades like the Arabs ? " 
 Because of poor access to information , and because <unk> downplay the causal connection , women may not associate the health consequences with the procedure . Lala <unk> , president of a women 's association in Medina <unk> , a village in Senegal , told Mackie in 1998 that when girls fell ill or died , it was attributed to evil spirits . When informed of the causal relationship between FGM and ill health , Mackie wrote , the women broke down and wept . Mackie argued that surveys taken before and after this sharing of information would show very different levels of support for FGM . 
 The American non @-@ profit group Tostan , founded by Molly Melching in 1991 , introduced community @-@ empowerment programmes in several countries that focus on literacy , education about healthcare and local democracy , giving women the tools to make their own decisions . In 1997 , using the Tostan programme , <unk> Bambara in Senegal became the first village to abandon FGM . By 2016 , over 7 @,@ 300 communities in six countries had pledged to abandon FGM and child marriage . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Surveys have shown a widespread belief , particularly in Mali , Mauritania , Guinea and Egypt , that FGM is a religious requirement . Gruenbaum has argued that practitioners may not distinguish between religion , tradition and chastity , making it difficult to interpret the data . 
 FGM 's origins in northeastern Africa are pre @-@ Islamic , but the practice became associated with Islam because of that religion 's focus on female chastity and seclusion . There is no mention of it in the Quran . It is praised in several hadith ( sayings attributed to Muhammad ) as noble but not required . In 2007 the Al @-@ Azhar Supreme Council of Islamic Research in Cairo ruled that FGM had " no basis in core Islamic law or any of its partial provisions . " 
 There is no mention of FGM in the Bible . Christian missionaries in Africa were among the first to object to FGM , but Christian communities in Africa do practise it . UNICEF reported in 2013 that , for example , 55 percent of Christian women and girls in Niger had experienced FGM , compared with two percent of their Muslim counterparts . The only Jewish group known to have practised it are the Beta Israel of Ethiopia . Judaism requires male circumcision , but does not allow FGM . FGM is also practised by animist groups , particularly in Guinea and Mali . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 The origins of the practice are unknown . Its east @-@ west , north @-@ south distribution in Africa meets in Sudan . Gerry Mackie has suggested that infibulation originated there with the <unk> civilization ( c . 800 BCE — c . 350 CE ) and imperial polygyny , before the rise of Islam , to increase confidence in paternity . 
 According to historian Mary Knight , Spell 1117 ( c . 1991 – 1786 BCE ) of the Ancient Egyptian Coffin Texts may refer in hieroglyphs to an uncircumcised girl ( ' m 't ) : 
 The spell was found on the sarcophagus of Sit @-@ <unk> , now in the Egyptian Museum , and dates to Egypt 's Middle Kingdom . ( Paul F. O 'Rourke argues that ' m 't probably refers instead to a menstruating woman . ) 
 The proposed circumcision of an Egyptian girl , Tathemis , is mentioned on a Greek papyrus from 163 BCE in the British Museum : 
 Sometime after this , <unk> [ Tathemis 's mother ] defrauded me , being anxious that it was time for Tathemis to be circumcised , as is the custom among the Egyptians . She asked that I give her 1 @,@ 300 drachmae ... to clothe her ... and to provide her with a marriage dowry ... if she didn 't do each of these or if she did not circumcise Tathemis in the month of <unk> , year 18 [ 163 BCE ] , she would repay me 2 @,@ 400 drachmae on the spot . 
 The examination of mummies has shown no evidence of FGM . Citing the Australian pathologist Grafton Elliot Smith , who examined hundreds of mummies in the early 20th century , Knight writes that the genital area may resemble Type III , because during mummification the skin of the outer labia was pulled toward the anus to cover the pudendal cleft , possibly to prevent sexual violation . It was similarly not possible to determine whether Types I or II had been performed , because soft tissues had been removed by the <unk> or had deteriorated . 
 The Greek geographer Strabo ( c . 64 BCE – c . 23 CE ) wrote about FGM after visiting Egypt around 25 BCE ( right ) . The philosopher Philo of Alexandria ( c . 20 BCE – 50 CE ) also made reference to it : " the Egyptians by the custom of their country circumcise the marriageable youth and maid in the fourteenth ( year ) of their age , when the male begins to get seed , and the female to have a menstrual flow . " It is mentioned briefly in a work attributed to the Greek physician Galen ( 129 – c . 200 CE ) : " When [ the clitoris ] sticks out to a great extent in their young women , Egyptians consider it appropriate to cut it out . " 
 Another Greek physician , Aëtius of Amida ( mid @-@ 5th to mid @-@ 6th century CE ) , offered more detail in book 16 of his Sixteen Books on Medicine , citing the physician <unk> . The procedure was performed in case the clitoris , or <unk> , grew too large or triggered sexual desire when rubbing against clothing . " On this account , it seemed proper to the Egyptians to remove it before it became greatly enlarged " , Aëtius wrote , " especially at that time when the girls were about to be married " : 
 The surgery is performed in this way : Have the girl sit on a chair while a muscled young man standing behind her places his arms below the girl 's thighs . Have him separate and steady her legs and whole body . Standing in front and taking hold of the clitoris with a broad @-@ mouthed forceps in his left hand , the surgeon stretches it outward , while with the right hand , he cuts it off at the point next to the pincers of the forceps . 
 It is proper to let a length remain from that cut off , about the size of the membrane that 's between the nostrils , so as to take away the excess material only ; as I have said , the part to be removed is at that point just above the pincers of the forceps . Because the clitoris is a <unk> structure and stretches out excessively , do not cut off too much , as a urinary fistula may result from cutting such large growths too deeply . 
 The genital area was then cleaned with a sponge , frankincense powder and wine or cold water , and wrapped in linen bandages dipped in vinegar , until the seventh day when calamine , rose petals , date pits or a " genital powder made from baked clay " might be applied . 
 Whatever the practice 's origins , infibulation became linked to slavery . Mackie cites the Portuguese missionary João dos Santos , who in 1609 wrote of a group inland from Mogadishu who had a " custome to sew up their Females , especially their slaves being young to make them unable for conception , which makes these slaves sell dearer , both for their <unk> , and for better confidence which their Masters put in them . " The English explorer William Browne wrote in 1799 that the Egyptians practised excision , and that slaves in that country were infibulated to prevent pregnancy . Thus , Mackie argues , a " practice associated with shameful female slavery came to stand for honor . " 
 = = = Europe and the United States = = = 
 Gynaecologists in 19th @-@ century Europe and the United States removed the clitoris to treat insanity and masturbation . British doctor Robert Thomas suggested clitoridectomy as a cure for <unk> in 1813 . The first reported clitoridectomy in the West , described in The Lancet in 1825 , was performed in 1822 in Berlin by Karl Ferdinand von Graefe on a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl who was masturbating excessively . 
 Isaac Baker Brown , an English gynaecologist , president of the Medical Society of London , and co @-@ founder in 1845 of St. Mary 's Hospital there , believed that masturbation , or " unnatural irritation " of the clitoris , caused peripheral excitement of the pubic nerve , which led to hysteria , spinal irritation , fits , idiocy , mania and death . He therefore " set to work to remove the clitoris whenever he had the opportunity of doing so " , according to his obituary in the Medical Times and Gazette in 1873 . Brown performed several <unk> between 1859 and 1866 . When he published his views in On the <unk> of Certain Forms of Insanity , Epilepsy , <unk> , and Hysteria in Females ( 1866 ) , doctors in London accused him of quackery and expelled him from the Obstetrical Society . 
 In the United States J. Marion Sims followed Brown 's work , and in 1862 slit the neck of a woman 's uterus and amputated her clitoris , " for the relief of the nervous or hysterical condition as recommended by Baker Brown " , after the patient complained of menstrual pain , convulsions and bladder problems . Later that century A. J. Bloch , a surgeon in New Orleans , removed the clitoris of a two @-@ year @-@ old girl who was reportedly masturbating . According to a 1985 paper in the Obstetrical & <unk> Survey , clitoridectomy was performed in the US into the 1960s to treat hysteria , <unk> and lesbianism . 
 = = Opposition = = 
 = = = Colonial opposition in Kenya = = = 
 Protestant missionaries in British East Africa ( present @-@ day Kenya ) began campaigning against FGM in the early 20th century , when Dr. John Arthur joined the Church of Scotland Mission ( CSM ) in Kikuyu . The practice , an important ethnic marker , was known by the Kikuyu , the country 's main ethnic group , as <unk> for both girls and boys . It involved excision ( Type II ) for girls and removal of the foreskin for boys . <unk> Kikuyu women , known as <unk> , were outcasts . 
 Jomo Kenyatta , general secretary of the Kikuyu Central Association and Kenya 's first prime minister from 1963 , wrote in 1938 that , for the Kikuyu , the institution of FGM was the " <unk> sine qua non of the whole teaching of tribal law , religion and morality . " No proper Kikuyu man or woman would marry or have sexual relations with someone who was not circumcised . A woman 's responsibilities toward the tribe began with her initiation . Her age and place within tribal history was traced to that day , and the group of girls with whom she was cut was named according to current events , an oral tradition that allowed the Kikuyu to track people and events going back hundreds of years . 
 From 1925 , beginning with the CSM mission , several missionary churches declared that FGM was prohibited for African Christians . The CSM announced that Africans practising it would be excommunicated , resulting in hundreds leaving or being expelled . The stand @-@ off turned FGM into a focal point of the Kenyan independence movement ; the 1929 – 1931 period is known in the country 's historiography as the female circumcision controversy . 
 In 1929 the Kenya Missionary Council began referring to FGM as the " sexual mutilation of women , " rather than circumcision , and a person 's stance toward the practice became a test of loyalty , either to the Christian churches or to the Kikuyu Central Association . Hulda Stumpf , an American missionary with the Africa Inland Mission who opposed FGM in the girls ' school she helped to run , was murdered in 1930 . Edward Grigg , the governor of Kenya , told the British Colonial Office that the killer , who was never identified , had attempted to circumcise her . 
 In 1956 the council of male elders ( the <unk> <unk> ) in Meru announced a ban on FGM . Over the next three years , as a symbol of defiance , thousands of girls cut each other 's genitals with razor blades . The movement came to be known in Meru as <unk> ( " I will circumcise myself " ) , because to avoid naming their friends the girls said they had cut themselves . Historian Lynn Thomas described the episode as significant in the history of FGM because it made clear that its victims were also its perpetrators . 
 = = = Growth of opposition = = = 
 The first known non @-@ colonial campaign against FGM began in Egypt in the 1920s , when the Egyptian Doctors ' Society called for a ban . There was a parallel campaign in Sudan , run by religious leaders and British women . <unk> was banned there in 1946 , but the law was unpopular and barely enforced . The Egyptian government banned infibulation in state @-@ run hospitals in 1959 , but allowed partial clitoridectomy if parents requested it . 
 In 1959 the UN asked the WHO to investigate FGM , but the latter responded that it was not a medical matter . Feminists took up the issue throughout the 1970s . Women and Sex ( 1972 ) , a book by the Egyptian physician and feminist Nawal El <unk> , criticized FGM ; the book was banned in Egypt and El <unk> lost her job as director general of public health . She followed up with a chapter , " The Circumcision of Girls , " in The Hidden Face of Eve : Women in the Arab World ( 1980 ) , which described her own clitoridectomy when she was six years old : 
 I did not know what they had cut off from my body , and I did not try to find out . I just wept , and called out to my mother for help . But the worst shock of all was when I looked around and found her standing by my side . Yes , it was her , I could not be mistaken , in flesh and blood , right in the midst of these strangers , talking to them and smiling at them , as though they had not participated in slaughtering her daughter just a few moments ago . 
 In 1975 Rose Oldfield Hayes , an American social scientist , became the first female academic to publish a detailed account of FGM , aided by her ability to discuss it directly with women in Sudan . Her article in American Ethnologist called it " female genital mutilation , " rather than female circumcision , and brought it to wider academic attention . 
 In 1977 Edna Adan Ismail , who worked at the time for the Somalia Ministry of Health , raised the health consequences of FGM with the Somali Women 's Democratic Organization . Two years later Fran Hosken , an Austria @-@ American feminist , published The Hosken Report : Genital and Sexual Mutilation of Females ( 1979 ) , the first to offer global figures . She estimated that 110 @,@ 529 @,@ 000 women in 20 African countries had experienced FGM . The figures were speculative but consistent with later surveys ; Mackie writes that her work was " more informative than the silence that preceded her efforts . " Describing FGM as a " training ground for male violence , " Hosken accused female practitioners of " participating in the destruction of their own kind . " The language caused a rift between Western and African feminists ; African women boycotted a session featuring Hosken during the UN 's Mid @-@ Decade Conference on Women in Copenhagen in July 1980 . 
 In 1979 the WHO held a seminar , " Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children , " in Khartoum , Sudan , and in 1981 , also in Khartoum , 150 academics and activists signed a pledge to fight FGM after a workshop held by the <unk> Badri Scientific Association for Women 's Studies ( <unk> ) , " Female Circumcision <unk> and <unk> Women – Combat it ! " Another <unk> workshop in 1984 invited the international community to write a joint statement for the United Nations . It recommended that the " goal of all African women " should be the eradication of FGM and that , to sever the link between FGM and religion , clitoridectomy should no longer be referred to as sunna . 
 The Inter @-@ African Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children , founded in 1984 in Dakar , Senegal , called for an end to the practice , as did the UN 's World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in 1993 . The conference listed FGM as a form of violence against women , marking it as a human @-@ rights violation , rather than a medical issue . 
 = = = United Nations = = = 
 In December 1993 the United Nations General Assembly included FGM in resolution 48 / 104 , the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women . From 2003 the UN began sponsoring an International Day of Zero Tolerance to Female Genital Mutilation , which is held every 6 February . 
 UNICEF began in 2003 to promote an evidence @-@ based social norms approach to the evaluation of intervention , using ideas from game theory about how communities reach decisions about FGM , and building on the work of Gerry Mackie on the ending of footbinding in China . In 2005 the UNICEF <unk> Research Centre in Florence published its first report on FGM . 
 UNFPA and UNICEF launched a joint programme in Africa in 2007 to reduce FGM by 40 percent within the 0 – 15 age group and eliminate it entirely from at least one country by 2012 , goals that were not met . 
 In 2008 several United Nations bodies , including the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , published a statement recognizing FGM as a human @-@ rights violation . In December 2012 the General Assembly passed resolution 67 / 146 , " Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations . " In July 2014 UNICEF and the UK government co @-@ hosted the first Girl Summit , aimed at ending FGM and child marriage . 
 = = = Legislation in Africa and the Middle East = = = 
 Throughout the 1990s and 2000s governments in Africa and the Middle East passed legislation banning or restricting FGM . In 2003 the African Union ratified the Maputo Protocol on the rights of women , which supported the elimination of FGM . By 2015 laws restricting FGM had been passed in at least 23 of the 27 African countries in which it is concentrated , although several fell short of a ban . 
 = = = Non @-@ practising countries = = = 
 = = = = Overview = = = = 
 As of 2013 legislation banning FGM had been passed by 33 countries outside Africa and the Middle East . As a result of immigration the practice spread to Australia , New Zealand , Europe , North America and Scandinavia , all of which outlawed it entirely or restricted it to consenting adults . Sweden outlawed it in 1982 , the first Western country to do so . Several former colonial powers , including Belgium , Britain , France and the Netherlands , followed suit , either with new laws or by making clear that it was covered by existing legislation . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Canada recognized FGM as a form of persecution in July 1994 , when it granted refugee status to Khadra Hassan Farah , who had fled Somalia to avoid her daughter being cut . In 1997 section 268 of its Criminal Code was amended to ban FGM , except where " the person is at least eighteen years of age and there is no resulting bodily harm . " As of May 2016 there had been no prosecutions . 
 In the United States the Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) estimated in 2015 that 513 @,@ 000 women and girls living there had experienced FGM or were at risk , as of 2012 ; their previous estimate was 168 @,@ 000 as of 1990 . A Nigerian woman successfully contested deportation in March 1994 on the grounds that her daughters might be cut , and in 1996 Fauziya Kasinga from Togo became the first to be granted asylum to escape FGM . 
 In 1996 the Federal Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act made it illegal to perform FGM on minors for non @-@ medical reasons , and in 2013 the Transport for Female Genital Mutilation Act prohibited transporting a minor out of the country for the purpose of FGM . In addition , 24 states have legislation banning FGM . The American Academy of Pediatrics opposes all forms of the practice ; in 2010 it suggested that " pricking or incising the clitoral skin " was a harmless procedure that might satisfy parents , but it withdrew the statement after complaints . The first FGM conviction in the US was in 2006 , when Khalid Adem , who had emigrated from Ethiopia , was sentenced to ten years after severing his two @-@ year @-@ old daughter 's clitoris with a pair of scissors . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 According to the European Parliament , 500 @,@ 000 women in Europe had undergone FGM as of March 2009 . France is known for its tough stance against FGM . Up to 30 @,@ 000 women there were thought to have experienced FGM as of 1995 . Colette <unk> , a family @-@ planning counsellor , writes that when FGM was first encountered in France , the reaction was that Westerners ought not to intervene , and it took the deaths of two girls in 1982 , one of them three months old , for that attitude to change . 
 The practice is outlawed by a provision of France 's penal code dealing with violence against children . All children under six who were born in France undergo medical examinations that include inspection of the genitals , and doctors are obliged to report FGM . The first civil suit was in 1982 and the first criminal prosecution in 1993 . In 1999 a woman was given an eight @-@ year sentence for having performed FGM on 48 girls . By 2014 over 100 parents and two practitioners had been prosecuted in over 40 criminal cases . 
 Around 137 @,@ 000 women and girls living in England and Wales were born in countries where FGM is practised ( as of 2011 ) . Performing FGM on children or adults was outlawed under the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985 . This was replaced by the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 and Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation ( Scotland ) Act 2005 , which added a prohibition on arranging FGM outside the country for British citizens or permanent residents . The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women asked the government in 2013 to " ensure the full implementation of its legislation on FGM . " The first charges were brought the following year against a physician and another man , after the physician stitched an infibulated woman after opening her for childbirth . Both men were acquitted in 2015 . 
 = = Criticism of opposition = = 
 = = = Tolerance versus human rights = = = 
 Anthropologist Eric Silverman wrote in 2004 that FGM had " emerged as one of the central moral topics of contemporary anthropology . " Anthropologists have accused FGM <unk> of cultural colonialism . In turn , anthropologists have been criticized for their moral relativism and failure to defend the idea of universal human rights . 
 According to the opposition 's critics , the biological reductionism of the opposition to FGM , and the failure to appreciate FGM 's cultural context , serves to " other " the people who practice it and undermines their agency – in particular when African parents are referred to as " mutilators . " Africans who object to the tone of the opposition to FGM risk appearing to defend the practice . Feminist theorist <unk> <unk> – herself strongly opposed to FGM ( " If one is circumcised , it is one too many " ) – argues that the impact of renaming it female genital mutilation cannot be underestimated : 
 In this name game , although the discussion is about African women , a subtext of barbaric African and Muslim cultures and the West 's relevance ( even indispensability ) in purging the barbarism marks another era where colonialism and missionary zeal determined what " civilization " was , and figured out how and when to force it on people who did not ask for it . 
 Ugandan law professor Sylvia Tamale argues that early Western opposition to FGM stemmed from a Judeo @-@ Christian judgment that African sexual and family practices – including dry sex , polygyny , bride price and levirate marriage – were primitive and required correction . African feminists " do not condone the negative aspects of the practice " , writes Tamale , but " take strong exception to the imperialist , racist and dehumanising infantilization of African women . " 
 The debate has highlighted a tension between anthropology and feminism , with the former 's focus on tolerance and the latter 's on equal rights for all women . Anthropologist Christine Walley writes that a common trope within the anti @-@ FGM literature has been to present African women as victims of false consciousness participating in their own oppression , a position promoted by several feminists in the 1970s and 1980s , including Fran Hosken , Mary Daly and Hanny Lightfoot @-@ Klein . It prompted the French Association of Anthropologists to issue a statement in 1981 , at the height of the early debates , that " a certain feminism resuscitates ( today ) the moralistic arrogance of yesterday 's colonialism . " 
 As an example of the disrespect arguably shown toward women who have undergone FGM , commentators highlight the appropriation of the women 's bodies as exhibits . Historian Chima <unk> cites the publication in 1996 of the Pulitzer @-@ prize @-@ winning photographs ( above ) of a 16 @-@ year @-@ old Kenyan girl undergoing FGM . The photographs were published by 12 American newspapers , but according to <unk> the girl had not given permission for the images to be taken , much less published . 
 = = = Comparison with other procedures = = = 
 <unk> argues that the crucial question , broader than FGM , is why the female body is subjected to so much " abuse and indignity " around the world , including in the West . Several authors have drawn a parallel between FGM and cosmetic procedures . <unk> Conroy of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland wrote in 2006 that cosmetic genital procedures were " driving the advance of female genital mutilation " by encouraging women to see natural variations as defects . Anthropologist <unk> El <unk> compares FGM to breast enhancement , in which the maternal function of the breast becomes secondary to men 's sexual pleasure . <unk> <unk> made a similar point in 1975 , citing FGM and cosmetic surgery as sexist and patriarchal . 
 Carla Obermeyer maintains that FGM may be conducive to women 's well @-@ being within their communities in the same way that rhinoplasty and male circumcision may help people elsewhere . In Egypt , despite the 2007 ban , women wanting FGM for their daughters discuss the need for <unk> <unk> ( cosmetic surgery ) to remove what is viewed as excess genital tissue for a more acceptable appearance . 
 The WHO does not cite procedures such as <unk> and clitoral hood reduction as examples of FGM , but its definition aims to avoid loopholes , so several elective practices on adults do fall within its categories . Some of the laws banning FGM , including in Canada and the US , focus only on minors . Several countries , including Sweden and the UK , have banned it regardless of consent , and the legislation would seem to cover cosmetic procedures . Sweden , for example , has banned " [ o ] <unk> on the external female genital organs which are designed to mutilate them or produce other permanent changes in them ... regardless of whether consent to this operation has or has not been given . " <unk> Birgitta <unk> and anthropologist Sara <unk> note that it seems the law distinguishes between Western and African genitals , and deems only African women ( such as those seeking <unk> after childbirth ) unfit to make their own decisions . 
 Arguing against suggested similarities between FGM and dieting or body shaping , philosopher Martha Nussbaum writes that a key difference is that FGM is mostly conducted on children using physical force . She argues that the distinction between social pressure and physical force is morally and legally salient , comparable to the distinction between seduction and rape . She argues further that the literacy of women in practising countries is generally poorer than in developed nations , and that this reduces their ability to make informed choices . 
 Several commentators maintain that children 's rights are violated with the genital alteration of intersex children , who are born with anomalies that physicians choose to correct . Legal scholars Nancy Ehrenreich and Mark Barr write that thousands of these procedures take place every year in the United States , and say that they are medically unnecessary , more extensive than FGM , and have more serious physical and mental consequences . They attribute the silence of anti @-@ FGM campaigners about intersex procedures to white privilege and a refusal to acknowledge that " similar unnecessary and harmful genital cutting occurs in their own backyards . " 
 = Cocker Spaniel = 
 Cocker Spaniels are dogs belonging to two breeds of the spaniel dog type : the American Cocker Spaniel and the English Cocker Spaniel , both of which are commonly called simply Cocker Spaniel in their countries of origin . In the early 20th century , Cocker Spaniels also included small hunting Spaniels . 
 Cocker Spaniels were originally bred as hunting dogs in the United Kingdom , with the term cocker deriving from their use to hunt the Eurasian woodcock . When the breed was brought to the United States , it was bred to a different standard , which enabled it to specialize in hunting the American woodcock . Further physical changes were bred into the cocker in the United States during the early part of the 20th century . 
 Spaniels were first mentioned in the 14th century by Gaston III of Foix @-@ Béarn in his work the Livre de Chasse . The " cocking " or " cocker spaniel " was a type of field or land spaniel in the 19th century . Prior to 1901 , Cocker Spaniels were only separated from Field Spaniels and Springer Spaniels by weight . Two dogs are considered to be the foundation sires of both modern breeds , the English variety are descended from Ch . Obo , while the American breed descends from Obo 's son , Ch . Obo II . In the United States , the English Cocker was recognized as separate from the native breed in 1946 ; in the UK , the American type was recognized as a separate breed in 1970 . In addition , there is a second strain of English Cocker Spaniel , a working strain which is not bred to a standard but to working ability . Both breeds share similar coat colors and health issues with a few exceptions . 
 = = History = = 
 While their origins are unknown , " <unk> " are mentioned in 14th century writings . It is commonly assumed that they originated in Spain , and Edward of Norwich , 2nd Duke of York in his 15th century work The Master of Game introduces them as " Another kind of hound there is that be called hounds for the hawk and spaniels , for their kind cometh from Spain , notwithstanding that there are many in other countries . " The Master of Game was mostly an English translation of an earlier 14th century Old French work by Gaston III of Foix @-@ Béarn entitled Livre de Chasse . 
 In 1801 , Sydenham Edwards wrote in <unk> Britannica that the " Land Spaniel " is divided into two types : the hawking , springing / springer and the cocking / cocker spaniel . The term cocker came from the dog 's use in hunting woodcocks . During the 19th century a " cocker spaniel " was a type of small Field Spaniel ; at the time , this term referred to a number of different spaniel hunting breeds , including the Norfolk Spaniel , Sussex Spaniel , and Clumber Spaniel . While there were no Sussex Cockers or Clumber Cockers , there were dogs known as Welsh Cockers and Devonshire Cockers . The Welsh or Devonshire were considered cockers until 1903 when they were recognized by The Kennel Club as the Welsh Springer Spaniel . 
 Prior to the 1870s , the only requirement for a dog to be classed as a Cocker Spaniel was that it needed to weigh less than 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) , although breeders separated the cocker from the King Charles Spaniel which remains a smaller breed of spaniel . This maximum weight limit remained on the Cocker Spaniel until 1900 , with larger dogs being classed as Springer Spaniels . The colors of the Devonshire and Welsh Cockers were described by John Henry Walsh under the pseudonym Stonehenge in his book The Dog in Health and Disease as being a deeper shade of liver than that of the Sussex Spaniel . Following the formation of The Kennel Club in the UK in 1873 , efforts were made by breeders to record the pedigrees of cockers and <unk> . In 1892 , English Cocker Spaniels and English Springer Spaniels were recognized as separate breeds by The Kennel Club . 
 There are two dogs which are thought to be the foundation sires of both modern breeds of cocker spaniels . Ch . Obo is considered by breed enthusiasts to be the father of the modern English Cocker Spaniel , while his son , Ch . Obo II , is considered to be the progenitor of the American Cocker Spaniel . Obo was born in 1879 , at which point registration as a cocker was still only by size and not by ancestry . He was the son of a Sussex Spaniel and a Field Spaniel . Although Obo was an English dog , Obo II was born on American shores – his mother was shipped to the United States while pregnant . During his lifetime , it was claimed in advertisements that Obo II was the sire or grandsire of nearly every prize winning cocker in America . 
 = = Modern breeds = = 
 There are two modern breeds of cocker spaniel , the English Cocker Spaniel and the American Cocker Spaniel . They were bred as gun dogs ; to use their sense of smell to cover low areas near the handler in order to flush birds into the air to be shot , and to use their eyes and nose to locate the bird once downed , and then to retrieve the bird with a soft mouth . The major differences between the English and American varieties is that the American is smaller with a shorter back , a domed head and a shorter muzzle , while the English variety is taller with a narrower head and chest . 
 Cocker spaniel coats come in a variety of colors including black , liver , red and golden in solids . There are also black and tan , and sometimes liver and tan , as well as a variety of color mixtures of those solid colors including <unk> , roan and tans , tricolors and those solid colors with additional white markings . 
 Rare colours can appear unexpectedly in certain lines , for instance while an all @-@ white cocker is usually bred by selective breeding of very light golden strains , they can still appear very uncommonly to parents who are dark colored . A noted occurrence of this happened in 1943 , when a grandson of My Own Brucie , Best in Show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1940 and 1941 , was born all @-@ white . 
 In its native United States , the American Cocker Spaniel was ranked the 23rd most popular breed according to registration statistics of the AKC in 2009 , a decrease in popularity since 1999 when it was ranked 13th . For twenty five years the American Cocker Spaniel was the most popular dog in America . It was ranked number one first in 1936 prior to the English Cocker Spaniel being recognized as a separate breed , and held onto the spot until 1952 when Beagles became the most popular dog . It regained the spot in 1983 and held on at number one until 1990 . In the UK , the American Cocker Spaniel is far less popular than its English cousin with 322 registrations compared to the English Cocker 's 22 @,@ 211 in 2009 . 
 = = = English Cocker Spaniel = = = 
 Called simply Cocker Spaniel in the UK , this is the breed that was originally recognized by The Kennel Club ( KC ) in 1892 . The American Kennel Club ( AKC ) recognized the English Cocker Spaniel as a separate breed in 1946 . 
 The size of the English Cocker Spaniel according to the KC is 15 @.@ 5 – 16 inches ( 39 – 41 cm ) at the withers for males , and 15 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 – 39 cm ) for females . The weight of a show dog should be 28 – 32 pounds ( 13 – 15 kg ) . 
 The English Cocker Spaniel is the most successful breed at the most popular dog show in the UK , Crufts , with seven best @-@ in @-@ show wins since the prize was first awarded in 1928 . This was mostly due to the success of dog breeder H.S. Lloyd 's Ware Kennel , dogs of which won best @-@ in @-@ show on six occasions between 1930 – 1950 . They are the second most popular dog breed in the UK according to statistics released by the KC with 22 @,@ 211 registrations in 2009 , beaten only by the Labrador Retriever with 40 @,@ 943 . In third place was the English Springer Spaniel with 12 @,@ 700 . The English Cocker 's popularity has increased steadily since 1999 in the United States when they were ranked 76th in registrations by the AKC , to 2009 when they were ranked 66th . 
 There are physical differences between the show strains and working strains in the UK . While the show strain is bred to the conformation standard , the working strain is bred for working ability and as such several physical differences have appeared . Working type dogs tend to be larger with flatter heads and shorter ears . The coat also tends to be shorter and finer than the show variety and have less feathering . The working strain seems to be more energetic than the show strain . 
 = = = American Cocker Spaniel = = = 
 Cocker Spaniels were recognized by the AKC in 1878 . Generally smaller than its English cousin , separate classes were created for the two types in America in 1935 and the Cocker Spaniel Club of America discouraged breeding between the two types in 1938 . The American Cocker Spaniel was recognized as a separate breed by the KC in the UK in 1970 . The American Cocker Spaniel is referred to as the Cocker Spaniel within the United States . 
 The American Cocker Spaniel was bred smaller as American woodcocks are smaller than their European cousins , and the breeds appearance changed slightly during the first part of the 20th century as the preference by American breeders was for a more stylized appearance . The standard size according to the AKC is between 14 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 37 – 39 cm ) at the withers for males and 13 @.@ 5 – 14 @.@ 5 inches ( 34 – 37 cm ) for females . The weight of the breed is on average between 24 – 30 pounds ( 11 – 14 kg ) . 
 At the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show , the most prestigious dog show in the United States , the American Cocker Spaniel has won Best in Show on four occasions since its first award in 1907 . The most successful breed is the Wire Fox Terrier with thirteen wins . The American Cocker Spaniel is judged in three separate breed classes under AKC rules ; " black " , " parti @-@ color " , and " any solid color other than black ... " ( ASCOB ) . Sophia and Olivia won the gold medal of dog showing in 2012 . 
 = = Common health issues = = 
 In a survey conducted by the Kennel Club ( UK ) , the American Cocker Spaniels had a median age of death of ten years and four months , while the English Cocker Spaniel had a median age of eleven years and two months . According to the survey , the most common cause of death for both breeds was cancer , while old age was the second most common cause . The two modern breeds are susceptible to several health problems . Issues common to the two breeds include ear infections , and a variety of eye problems . A large number of breeds are susceptible to hip dysplasia . In a survey conducted by Orthopedic Foundation for Animals , the American Cocker Spaniel was ranked 115th out of 157 different breeds , with 1 being the highest percentage dysplastic and 157 being the lowest percentage dysplastic . The English Cocker was ranked 129th . 
 = = = Otitis externa = = = 
 Cocker spaniels and other dogs that have long , pendulous ears are more predisposed to ear problems than some other breeds . The fold of the ear can prevent air from entering , and it also creates a warm , moist environment where organisms can grow . Otitis externa is an inflammation of the ear canal which can be caused by a variety of factors including parasites , microorganisms , foreign bodies , tumors , and underlying dermatological disease . Ear mites can cause otitis externa ; ticks and fleas can also live in dogs ' ear canals . 
 The most common types of canine ear infections are caused by microorganisms , including yeast and bacterial infections . The most common variety of this is Malassezia <unk> . Symptoms can include the dog shaking its head or scratching at its ears more frequently . The ear canal will appear inflamed , a pus @-@ like substance will be discharged in some cases , and the ear will smell quite pungent in most cases . Treatment for the more common causes of otitis externa in dogs often includes oral antibiotics and flushing the ears with an antibacterial solution . In some cases , anti @-@ inflammatory medication is prescribed . Some conditions can increase the chance of ear infections , including living in a humid environment and frequent swimming or bathing without adequate drying of the ear afterwards . Keeping the hair on the ears short can be used as a preventative method to ear problems . 
 = = = Eye conditions = = = 
 Progressive retinal atrophy ( PRA ) is a group of diseases that affect a dog 's eyesight and can lead to blindness . It has been documented in a large number of different dog breeds including both the American and English Cocker Spaniels . The two types of Cockers are susceptible to a specific type of PRA called Progressive rod @-@ cone degeneration ( PRCD ) , symptoms include night blindness leading to total blindness between the ages of three and five . PRCD is the most widespread hereditary retinal disease which may lead to blindness in dogs . 
 Another leading cause of blindness is Canine glaucoma . This is an increase in the pressure of the fluid in the eye which , if left untreated , can cause visual impairment and eventual loss of sight . The condition can be inherited ( Primary glaucoma ) or a secondary condition to a variety of other eye issues including tumors or lens luxation . Both breeds are affected by juvenile cataracts which can occur at up to four years of age . Symptoms can include discoloring of the pupil , and treatment may include surgery to remove the cataract . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Cocker Spaniel is featured in the 1955 Disney film Lady and the Tramp who is Lady . 
 = Falun Gong outside mainland China = 
 Falun Gong , a qigong practice that combines meditation with the moral philosophy articulated by founder Li Hongzhi , first began spreading widely in China in 1992 . Li 's first lectures outside mainland China took place in Paris in 1995 . At the invitation of the Chinese ambassador to France , he lectured on his teachings and practice methods to the embassy staff and others . From that time on , Li gave lectures in other major cities in Europe , Asia , Oceania , and North America . He has resided permanently in the United States since 1998 . Falun Gong is now practiced in some 70 countries worldwide , and the teachings have been translated to over 40 languages . The international Falun Gong community is estimated to number in the hundreds of thousands , though participation estimates are imprecise on account of a lack of formal membership . 
 Since 1999 , the Chinese Communist Party has persecuted Falun Gong in mainland China . In response , Falun Gong practitioners around the world have conducted activities aimed at raising awareness about the related human rights issues . These include lobbying , passing out of flyers , participating in sit @-@ ins in front of Chinese embassies and consulates , and staging parades and demonstrations . They have established media outlets , have founded advocacy and research organizations to report information on the persecution in China , and launched lawsuits against the alleged architects and participants of the persecution campaign . 
 Several foreign governments , the United Nations , and human rights organizations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have expressed their concerns over allegations of torture and ill @-@ treatment of Falun Gong practitioners in China . Nonetheless , some observers have noted that Falun Gong has failed to attract the level of sympathy and sustained international attention afforded to Tibetans , Chinese Christians or democracy activists . This has been attributed to the group 's unsophisticated PR skills , the impact of the Communist Party 's propaganda against the practice , or the foreign nature of its teachings , which identify with Buddhist and Daoist traditions . 
 = = History = = 
 From 1992 – 1994 , Li Hongzhi traveled throughout China giving week @-@ long seminars on Falun Gong 's spiritual philosophy and exercises and meditation practices . In late 1994 , he declared that he had finished his work of teaching the practice in China , and the content of his lectures was compiled in the book <unk> Falun , published in January 1995 . Later that year , Li left China and began teaching the practice overseas , beginning with a stop at the Chinese embassy in Paris in March 1995 , followed by lectures in Sweden in May 1995 . Between 1995 and 1999 , Li gave lectures in the United States , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Germany , Switzerland , and Singapore . Falun Gong associations and clubs began appearing in Europe , North America and Australia , with activities centered mainly on university campuses . 
 As the practice began proliferating outside China , Li was the recipient of a measure of recognition in the United States and elsewhere in the western world . In August 1994 , the city of Houston named Li as an honorary citizen and goodwill ambassador for his " unselfish public service for the benefit and welfare of mankind . " In May 1999 , Li was welcomed to Toronto with greetings from the mayor and the provincial governor general , and in the two months that followed also received recognition from the cities of Chicago and San Jose . 
 Translations of Falun Gong teachings began appearing in the late 1990s . Although the practice was beginning to attract an overseas constituency , it remained relatively unknown in the Western world until the Spring of 1999 , when tensions between Falun Gong and Communist Party authorities became a subject of international media coverage . With the increased attention , the practice gained a greater following outside China . Following the launch of the Communist Party 's persecution of Falun Gong , the overseas presence became vital to the practice 's resistance in China and its continued survival . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Falun Gong embraces a minimal organizational structure , and does not have a rigid hierarchy , physical places of worship , fees , or formal membership . As a matter of doctrinal significance , Falun Gong is intended to be " formless , " having little to no material or formal organization . Practitioners of Falun Gong are forbidden to solicit donations or charge fees for the practice , and are similarly forbidden teach or interpret the teachings for others . 
 In the absence of membership or initiation rituals , a Falun Gong practitioner can be anyone who chooses to identify themselves as such . Students participate in the practice and follow its teachings as much or as little as they like , and practitioners do not instruct others on what to believe or how to behave . 
 Falun Gong can be said to be highly centralized in the sense that neither spiritual nor practical authority is dispersed . Li Hongzhi 's spiritual authority within the practice is absolute , yet the organization of Falun Gong works against <unk> control . Li does not intervene in the personal lives of practitioners , who have little to no contact with Li , except through the study of his teachings . Volunteer " assistants " or " contact persons " coordinate local activities , but they do not hold authority over other practitioners , regardless of how long they have practiced Falun Gong ; they cannot collect money , conduct healings , or teach or interpret doctrine for others . 
 Falun Gong 's nebulous structure and lack of membership makes it difficult to gauge the scope and size of Falun Gong communities outside China . Local groups post their practice site times on Falun Gong websites , but do not attempt to keep up with how many practitioners there are in certain areas . University of Montreal historian David Ownby notes that there are no " mid- or upper @-@ level tiers of the organization where one might go for such information . " He says that practitioners are not " members " of an " organization " , and do not fill out any forms at any point . 
 To the extent that organization is achieved in Falun Gong , it is accomplished partly through a global , networked , and often virtual community . In particular , electronic communications , email lists and a collection of websites are the primary means of coordinating activities and disseminating Li Hongzhi 's teachings . In addition to disseminating teachings , the internet serves to forge and maintain community , and is used as a medium for raising awareness of the persecution in China . Practitioners maintain hundreds of websites around the world . Most contain content in both Chinese and English , while others include German , French , Russian , Portuguese , Spanish , Japanese , and other languages . 
 Falun Gong 's reliance on the internet as a means of organizing has led to the group 's characterization by some observers as " a virtual religious community , " though other scholars are wary about overstating the significance of the internet . Scott Lowe , for instance , believes that the Internet is not a significant factor in attracting people to the practice ; instead , the influence of family and friends , as well as the prospect of better health , seem far more important in establishing initial interest . 
 Although the spiritual practice of Falun Gong has little clear organization , practitioners of Falun Gong have organized considerably among themselves since 1999 , establishing their own research and advocacy organizations , media groups , and arts companies . 
 = = Group exercise and study = = 
 Outside mainland China , a network of volunteer " contact persons , " regional Falun Dafa Associations and university clubs exists in approximately 70 countries . In most mid- to large @-@ sized cities , Falun Gong practitioners organize regular group meditation or study sessions in which they practice Falun Gong exercises and read ( or re @-@ read ) Li Hongzhi 's writings . The exercise and meditation sessions are described as informal groups of practitioners who gather in public parks — usually in the morning — for one to two hours . Group study sessions typically take place in the evenings in private residences or university or high school classrooms , and are described by David Ownby as " the closest thing to a regular ' congregational experience ' " that Falun Gong offers . Individuals who are too busy , isolated , or who simply prefer solitude may elect to practice privately . 
 Large Falun Gong " experience @-@ sharing " conferences are also held every several months in major metropolitan areas , in which Falun Gong students read prepared testimonials detailing their experiences in the practice . These conferences , which can attract audiences of thousands , also provide a venue for Li Hongzhi to address practitioners . 
 = = Evangelism = = 
 Practitioners of Falun Gong are encouraged to engage in Hong Fa activities , meaning " making known the way . " The Chinese term " Hong Fa " may be interpreted to refer to proselytizing , yet because Falun Gong espouses a belief that individuals are either predestined or not to obtain the practice , practitioners of Falun Gong do not actively attempt to convert people . Hong Fa activities include handing out flyers in the subway or at the mall , leaving Falun Gong literature in stores , libraries , etc . , and participating in activities such as marches , parades , and Chinese cultural events . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Ownby confirms estimates that Falun Gong is practiced by hundreds of thousands of people outside China , with the largest communities found in Taiwan and in North American cities with large Chinese populations , such as New York and Toronto . Demographic surveys by sociologist Susan Palmer and David Ownby in North American communities found that 90 % of practitioners were ethnic Chinese ( in Europe , there are proportionally more Caucasians ) . The average age was approximately 42 . Among survey respondents , 56 % were female and 44 % male ; 80 % were married . The surveys found the respondents to be highly educated : 9 % held PhDs , 34 % had master 's degrees , and 24 % had a bachelor 's degree . 
 Most of the Falun Gong practitioners in North America were among the Chinese students who emigrated in the 1980s and 1990s . In Craig <unk> 's ethnographic research of Ohio practitioners , he found that 85 – 90 % were Chinese graduate students or their family members . Similar results for North American practitioners were borne out by Scott Lowe , a professor of Philosophy and Religious Studies at the University of Wisconsin @-@ Eau Claire . In a 2003 Internet survey , Lowe found that the Chinese respondents living in Western nations were " uniformly well educated , clearly representing the expatriate elite " , with all respondents holding a master 's degree or higher . Respondents from Singapore and Malaysia had a more mixed educational profile , with a minority holding university degrees . 
 The preponderance of North American practitioners learned Falun Gong after leaving China . Ownby suggests that Falun Gong appealed to a broad spectrum of social groups , " including university professors and students , high party and government officials , well @-@ educated cadres and members of the comfortable middle class , and [ ... ] the old , the infirm , the unemployed , and the desperate . " In contrast to the typical mainland Chinese practitioner , who is likely to be a female retiree , Ownby 's survey at practitioners ' conferences in Montreal , Toronto , and Boston between 1999 and 2002 found the average Chinese practitioner in North America to be " young , urban , dynamic " . Non @-@ Chinese Falun Gong practitioners tend to fit the profile of non @-@ conformists and " spiritual seekers " — people who had tried a variety of qigong , yoga , or religious practices before finding Falun Gong . This stands in contrast to the standard profile of Chinese , whom Ownby described as " the straightest of straight arrows " . 
 = = Reasons for practicing Falun Gong = = 
 In surveys of the Falun Gong practitioners in North America , the most commonly reported reasons for being attracted to the practice were the teachings , cultivation exercises , and health benefits . In a study conducted by David Ownby , close to 30 % of practitioners said they were attracted to Falun Dafa for its " intellectual content " , 27 % for " spiritual enlightenment " , 20 % for " health benefits " , 15 % the exercises , 7 % for Li Hongzhi himself , and 2 % for the community . The " intellectual content " , according to Ownby , refers to the value of Falun Dafa doctrine in describing the " functioning of the moral and physical universe . " 
 Scott Lowe 's survey found that Falun Gong 's spiritual teachings and promise of good health were the most common reasons for people to have taken up the practice . In Lowe 's survey , 22 respondents gave " Master Li 's philosophy and his answers to life 's most difficult questions " as their primary attraction to the practice , while another twenty were attracted for health benefits . Nine were drawn by the moral principles , twelve by the books , ten by the exercises , and small numbers of others by a variety of other factors . Several respondents apparently realized that other forms of qigong were " shallow , <unk> , and superficial , " while they came to believe that Falun Gong is the " most complete , efficacious , and comprehensive system of spiritual cultivation on the planet . " 
 In Lowe 's survey , The practitioners were asked if their attraction to and focus on Falun Gong practice had changed over time . Ten claimed that they had no change , since they started Falun Gong with the intention of gaining enlightenment , which is the goal of practice . Others , over time , put less emphasis on the health improvements they experienced , which they came to see " as a relatively trivial result of cultivation . " Twenty @-@ six respondents said they felt a newfound sense of moral certitude and spiritual growth , while ten " discovered a firm determination to carry their cultivation through to the end goal of enlightenment or consummation , no matter what obstacles might appear in their path . " 
 = = Overseas responses to persecution in China = = 
 In July 1999 , the Communist Party initiated a campaign to persecute Falun Gong , including through the use of extralegal imprisonment , torture and other coercive measures , and propaganda . Falun Gong communities inside and outside China have adopted a variety of approaches to resist and mitigate the persecution in China . These tactics range from engagement with the media , lobbying of governments and NGOs , public protests and demonstrations , and attempts to seek legal redress . As the persecution in China progressed , overseas Falun Gong efforts increasingly tied their pleas for relief to Western human rights discourse , emphasizing the implications for freedom of speech , assembly , and conscience . 
 = = = Legal initiatives = = = 
 Lawyers acting on behalf of Falun Gong practitioners have filed dozens of largely symbolic lawsuits around the world against Jiang Zemin , Luo Gan , and other Chinese officials alleging genocide and crimes against humanity . According to International Advocates for Justice , Falun Gong has filed the largest number of human rights lawsuits in the 21st century and the charges are among the most severe international crimes defined by international criminal laws . As of 2006 , 54 civil and criminal lawsuits were under way in 33 countries . 
 In some instances , courts have refused to adjudicate Falun Gong cases against Chinese officials on the grounds of sovereign immunity . In November 2009 , however , Jiang Zemin and Luo Gan were indicted by a Spanish court on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity for their involvement in the persecution of Falun Gong . One month later , an Argentine judge concluded that Jiang and Luo had adopted a " genocidal strategy " in pursuing the eradication of Falun Gong , and asked Interpol to seek their arrest . 
 In May 2011 , a lawsuit was filed on behalf of Falun Gong practitioners against technology giant Cisco . The suit alleges , based mainly on internal Cisco documents , that the technology company " designed and implemented a surveillance system for the Chinese Communist Party , knowing it would be used to root out members of the Falun Gong religion and subject them to detention , forced labor and torture . " Cisco denies customizing its products to facilitate censorship or repression . 
 In addition to high @-@ profile lawsuits against Chinese officials and corporations , Falun Gong practitioners have filed a number of complaints and civil suits alleging discrimination outside China , most of them centered within the Chinese diaspora community . Several complaints have been made after Falun Gong groups were barred from participating in parades or events , with mixed results . In Canada and in New York , Falun Gong practitioners won judgments against Chinese businesses or community organizations for discriminating against them on the basis of their religious creed . 
 Practitioners of Falun Gong have been involved in a number of defamation cases against Chinese @-@ language media outlets or agents of the Chinese government . In 2004 , a Canadian Falun Gong practitioner Joel Chipkar won a libel case against Pan <unk> , an officer at the Chinese consulate in Toronto , who had called Chipkar a member of a " sinister cult " in a newspaper article . Pan was ordered to pay $ 10 @,@ 000 in damages to Chipkar , but left the country before paying . In 2008 , the Appeals Court of Quebec , Canada , ruled that a Chinese language newspaper " Les Presses <unk> " had defamed Falun Gong when it depicted the practice as dangerous and perverse . The court did not award damages , however , on the basis that the defamation targeted the group , rather than the individual plaintiffs 
 = = = Media organizations = = = 
 In the early 2000s , Falun Gong practitioners in the United States began establishing their own Chinese @-@ language media organizations to gain wider exposure for their cause and challenge the narratives of the dominant Chinese state @-@ run media . These include The Epoch Times newspaper , New Tang Dynasty Television , and Sound of Hope radio station . In addition to carrying content related to Falun Gong , they became vocal critics of Communist Party policies more generally , carrying reports on other human rights issues in China , on corruption , environment and public health issues , and other topics . According to communications professor Yuezhi Zhao , these media organizations are an example of how Falun Gong entered into a " de facto media alliance " with China 's democracy movements in exile , as demonstrated by its frequent printing of articles by prominent overseas Chinese critics of the mainland Chinese government . 
 Although initially created to address the needs of the Chinese @-@ language media market , the media organizations have expanded into dozens of additional languages ; The Epoch Times newspaper is distributed across over 30 countries in 17 languages , and NTD Television has a satellite or cable presence in North America , Europe , and Asia , and produces programs in 18 languages . The organizations maintain that they are not formally affiliated with Falun Gong , which lacks both a centralized organization and funds . However , most of their staff are Falun Gong practitioners , and many contribute on a volunteer basis . 
 = = = Demonstrations and sit @-@ ins = = = 
 After the launch of the persecution campaign in 1999 , practitioners outside China began holding frequent protests , rallies , and appeals . These include large @-@ scale marches , demonstrations , and vigils to coincide with notable anniversaries , such as April 25 , 1999 , and July 20 , 1999 . Marches typically involve participants holding signs and banners , devoting different sections of the parade to different aspects of the persecution . There is usually a section involving participants wearing only white ( symbolizing mourning ) and holding photos of those killed in China . 
 Practitioners also stage sit @-@ ins and demonstrations outside Chinese embassies and consulates . Falun Gong practitioners in Vancouver , Canada continue to stage the world 's longest , continuous protest against the persecution . It which runs twenty @-@ four hours a day at the entrance to the PRC consulate on Granville Street . In June 2006 , it was announced by the mayor of Vancouver that the protest signs and structures must be taken down in accordance with a by @-@ law against building permanent structures on public property . In 2010 , the B.C. Court of Appeal ruled that the city 's order to remove the protest structures was unconstitutional , and the structure was restored . 
 Anniversaries of significant dates in the persecution are marked with protests by Falun Gong communities around the world , . In Washington DC , for instance , the anniversary of 20 July 1999 is marked by a rally at the U.S. capitol attended by several thousand practitioners . Diplomatic visits by high @-@ ranking Chinese officials are also met with demonstrations by Falun Gong practitioners . 
 = = = Parades = = = 
 In contrast to marches , which focus on bringing attention to the persecution in China , celebratory Falun Gong parades usually incorporate traditional @-@ style Chinese dances , costumes , song , exercise demonstrations , drumming , floats , and banners . Practitioners regularly hold parades or public exhibitions of Chinese cultural performances to coincide with May 13 , the anniversary of the practice 's first public teaching in China . Practitioners also utilize various parade venues around the world to publicize their group and its message . 
 = = = Arts and culture = = = 
 A number of Falun Gong practitioners and organizations outside China are engaged in the promotion of classical visual and performing arts . Practitioners frame Falun Gong as being part of the wider cultural tradition that gave rise to Chinese arts , which they describe as having been persecuted and attacked under Communist Party rule . 
 Falun Gong devotees trained in the visual arts have held exhibitions of their works as a means of representing their beliefs and practice , and raising awareness of the persecution in China . These include Zhang <unk> , an Australian painter who was imprisoned in China for practicing Falun Gong , and Zhang Kunlun , a Canadian citizen and former professor who was also imprisoned in China . Zhang Kunlun is part of a collective of twelve Falun Gong visual artists whose exhibit " The Art of Zhen Shan Ren " travels internationally . 
 In 2006 , Falun Gong practitioners with backgrounds in classical Chinese dance and music established Shen Yun Performing Arts in New York state . Shen Yun comprises three separate companies of dancers and musicians that tour internationally . Its stated mission is " reviving 5 @,@ 000 years of divinely inspired Chinese culture . " Shen Yun 's performance programs consists of classical Chinese dance , ethnic folk dance , solo musicians , and narrative dances that portray Falun Gong . Local productions of Shen Yun are often presented by the host city 's Falun Dafa Association . 
 New Tang Dynasty , the television station founded by Chinese @-@ American practitioners of Falun Gong , organizes a variety of cultural outreach programs as part of its mission to promote " appreciation and awareness of traditional Chinese culture . " In 2008 , the station began organizing a series of annual competitions open to ethnic Chinese participants in fields of classical Chinese dance , martial arts , traditional clothing design , painting , music , photography , and Chinese cooking . 
 = = = Research and advocacy organizations = = = 
 Supporters and practitioners of Falun Gong have established a number of research and advocacy organizations involved in reporting on human rights abuses in China and presenting this information to Western governments , NGOs , and multilateral organizations . These include the Falun Dafa Information Center , a volunteer @-@ run organization which presents itself as the " official source on Falun Gong and the human rights crisis in China , " and functions largely as a press office , publishing press releases and annual reports . The Falun Gong Human Rights Working Group conducts similar research and issues reports on the persecution in China , often presenting these findings to the United Nations . The World Organization to Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong ( <unk> ) is as a research organization dedicated to investigating " the criminal conduct of all institutions , organizations , and individuals involved in the persecution of Falun Gong . " Falun Gong supporters and sympathizers have also founded groups such as Friends of Falun Gong and the Committee to Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = <unk> tools = = = 
 Roughly coinciding with the launch of the persecution in 1999 , Chinese authorities began establishing and fortifying a system of internet censorship and surveillance , sometimes referred to as the " golden shield . " Since that time , information relating to Falun Gong has consistently been among the primary targets of censorship and monitoring on the internet , with several Falun Gong practitioners reportedly being captured and sent to prison or labor camps for downloading or distributing information online . 
 In 2000 , North American Falun Gong computer scientists began developing circumvention and <unk> tools to enable those in mainland China to access information on Falun Gong . Their software tools , such as Freegate and <unk> , have since become a popular means of evading government controls of the internet in several other countries . 
 = = = Other initiatives and campaigns = = = 
 Practitioners of Falun Gong have launched a number of other campaigns to bring attention to the treatment of Falun Gong in China . Notable examples include the Human Rights Torch Relay , which toured to over 35 countries in 2007 and 2008 ahead of the 2008 Beijing Olympics . The relay was intended to draw attention to a range of human rights issues in China in connection with the Olympics , especially those related to Falun Gong and Tibet , and received support from hundreds of elected officials , past Olympic medallists , human rights groups and other concerned organizations . 
 Some practitioners of Falun Gong both inside and outside China are also involved in the promotion of the <unk> movement , a dissident phenomenon catalyzed by an editorial series in The Epoch Times in late 2004 . The movement encourages Chinese citizens to renounce their affiliations to the Chinese Communist Party , including ex post facto renunciations of the Communist Youth League and Young Pioneers . Practitioners of Falun Gong outside China make phone calls or faxes to mainland China to inform citizens of the movement and solicit renunciation statements . 
 = = Attempts at persecution overseas by the Communist Party = = 
 The Communist Party 's campaign against Falun Gong has extended to diaspora communities , including through the use of media , espionage and monitoring of Falun Gong practitioners , harassment and violence against practitioners , diplomatic pressure applied to foreign governments , and hacking of overseas websites . According to a defector from the Chinese consulate in Sydney , Australia , " The war against Falun Gong is one of the main tasks of the Chinese mission overseas . " 
 In 2004 the U.S. House of Representatives unanimously passed a resolution condemning the attacks on Falun Gong practitioners in the United States by agents of the Communist Party . The resolution reported that party affiliates have " pressured local elected officials in the United States to refuse or withdraw support for the Falun Gong spiritual group , " that Falun Gong spokespeople have had their houses have been broken into , and individuals engaged in peaceful protest actions outside embassies have been physically assaulted . 
 The overseas campaign against Falun Gong is described in documents issued by China 's Overseas Chinese Affairs Office ( OCAO ) . In a report from a 2007 meeting of OCAO directors at the national , provincial , and municipal level , the office stated that it " coordinates the launching of anti- ' Falun Gong ' struggles overseas . " OCAO exhorts overseas Chinese citizens to participate in " resolutely implementing and executing the Party line , the Party 's guiding principles , and the Party 's policies , " and to " aggressively expand the struggle " against Falun Gong , ethnic separatists , and Taiwanese independent activists abroad . Other party and state organs believed to be involved in the overseas campaign include the Ministry of State Security ( MSS ) , 6 @-@ 10 Office , and People 's Liberation Army , among others . 
 = = = Surveillance and espionage = = = 
 In 2005 , Chen <unk> , a political consul from the Chinese consulate in Sydney , and Jennifer Zeng , a Falun Gong victim of torture from China , both sought asylum in Australia while making claims that Chinese agents were engaged in large @-@ scale operations to monitor , intimidate , and undermine support for Falun Gong outside China . Chen alleged that his primary function at the consulate involved efforts to monitor and harass Falun Gong and to minimize support for the practice from Australian media and elected officials . Zeng stated that " espionage and intimidation against [ Falun Gong ] practitioners overseas is so common that many of us have become accustomed to it . " 
 Hao Fengjun , another defector to Australia , had worked for the 610 Office of Tianjin city and claims that his job involved the collection and analysis of intelligence reports on Falun Gong from Europe , Australia , and North America . The implication was that local 610 offices are involved in the espionage efforts abroad . Another defector from China 's Ministry of State Security — which conducts both domestic and international intelligence — claimed that the repression and monitoring of underground Christians and Falun Gong practitioners is a major focus of the ministry . 
 In 2005 , a Ministry of State Security ( MSS ) agent working with the Chinese embassy in Berlin recruited a German Falun Gong practitioner Dr. Dan Sun to act as an informant . The MSS agent reportedly arranged a meeting for Sun with two men who purported to be scholars of Chinese medicine interested in researching Falun Gong , and Sun agreed to pass information to them , ostensibly hoping to further their understanding of the practice . The men were in fact high @-@ ranking agents of the 610 Office in Shanghai . Sun maintained that he had no knowledge the men he was corresponding with were Chinese intelligence agents , but was he nonetheless convicted of espionage in 2011 . According to Der Spiegel , the case demonstrated " how important fighting [ Falun Gong ] is to the [ Chinese ] government , " and " points to the extremely offensive approach that is sometimes being taken by the Chinese intelligence agencies . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Chinese authorities reportedly maintain lists of high @-@ profile overseas Falun Gong practitioners , and they use these blacklists to impose travel and visa restrictions on practitioners . Chen <unk> , the defector from the Chinese consulate in Sydney , said in 2005 that approximately 800 Australian Falun Gong practitioners had been blacklisted ( Chen claimed he sought to remove most of these names ) . 
 In order to prevent potential protests during the 2008 Beijing Olympics , authorities imposed a blacklist on overseas Falun Gong practitioners , preventing them from traveling to China . 42 other categories of individuals , including Tibetans and " counter @-@ revolutionary figures , " were also blacklisted . Chinese authorities tolerated Bibles and other religious items at the Olympics , with the exception of Falun Gong materials . Ahead of the Olympic Games , Chinese public security bodies reportedly requested lists of Japanese Falun Gong practitioners from the government of Japan . The request was denied . 
 In June 2002 , when Jiang Zemin visited Iceland , Icelandic authorities complied with requests from the Chinese government to deny entry to Falun Gong practitioners who sought to enter the country to protest . Using a blacklist provided by China , hundreds of Falun Gong practitioners were turned away by the national airline or detained if they managed to make it to the country . The blacklisting ignited protests by Icelandic citizens and members of parliament . In 2011 , Iceland 's foreign minister Össur <unk> issued an apology for violating Falun Gong practitioners ' freedom of expression and movement . 
 In August 2010 , an airline hostess from the Australian airline , Qantas , was demoted to short haul flights after being threatened by Chinese officials in Beijing , in spite of having flown there several times before . 
 Although Falun Gong is practiced freely within Hong Kong , Falun Gong practitioners from abroad have also reported being blacklisted from entering the territory . In 2001 , Hong Kong officials admitted that they had used a blacklist to deny entry to approximately 100 Falun Gong practitioners during a visit by then @-@ Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin . In 2004 , a Canadian Falun Gong practitioner on a book tour was denied entry to the territory , and in 2008 , two Falun Gong practitioners from the United States and Switzerland were separately denied entry while on professional and research trips . 
 In 2003 , 80 Taiwanese practitioners were blocked from entering Hong Kong , and again in 2007 , hundreds more Taiwanese were blocked from entering Hong Kong or detained at the airport , These events set off a six @-@ year human rights case that tested the integrity of the one country , two systems arrangement . In 2009 , Falun Gong 's case against the Hong Kong immigration department was dismissed . Months later , Hong Kong immigration officials denied visas to several members of the Falun Gong @-@ affiliated Shen Yun dance company , which was scheduled to perform in the territory in January 2010 . Democratic Party chairman Albert Ho said the denial of the visas was a worrying new erosion of Hong Kong 's freedoms , and damaged the reputation of Hong Kong as a liberal and open society . A court ruling in March 2010 overturned the Immigration Department 's decision . 
 = = = Disruption , monitoring of electronic communications = = = 
 Since 1999 , Falun Gong practitioners outside China have reported having their telephone lines tapped and electronic correspondence monitored . Falun Gong websites based outside China were the earliest targets of Chinese denial of service attacks , according to Chinese internet expert Ethan Gutmann . In 2011 , dated stock footage aired on China Central Television of People 's Liberation Army staff carrying out attacks on U.S.-based Falun Gong websites . 
 = = = Violence = = = 
 In isolated instances , violence against practitioners of Falun Gong has reportedly been committed by agents of the Chinese government abroad , though the connection to Chinese authorities is sometimes tenuous or difficult to verify . 
 In September 2001 , five Falun Gong practitioners were assaulted while demonstrating outside the Chinese consulate in Chicago . The assailants , who were later convicted of battery , were members of a Chinese @-@ American association with connections to the Chinese consulate . In 2002 , 25 @-@ year @-@ old Ottawa practitioner Leon Wang reported being kicked , dragged , and beaten inside the Chinese embassy after he was caught taking pictures of an anti @-@ Falun Gong exhibit being held there . The embassy responded that Wang had " sneaked in . . . and disrupted its normal functioning " of the event . 
 In June 2004 , Australian Falun Gong practitioner David Liang was injured in a drive @-@ by shooting while in South Africa . The purpose of his visit was to protest outside the South Africa @-@ China Binational Commission ( BNC ) meetings and to launch a lawsuit against high @-@ ranking Chinese officials for their involvement in the persecution of Falun Gong . Practitioners allege that the drive @-@ by shooting was an assassination attempt , and noted that the assailants made no attempt to rob them . Chinese Embassy officials denied involvement . In December 2005 , Argentine Falun Gong practitioners filed a lawsuit against former 610 Office chief and Politburo member Luo Gan while he visited the country . During Luo 's visit , practitioners were beaten by Chinese assailants in Buenos Aires 's Congress Square . Police were reportedly ordered not to intervene . Amnesty International 's Argentina director suggested the assaults may have been " connected to officials of the Chinese government . " 
 In the spring and summer of 2008 , practitioners of Falun Gong in New York became the targets of sustained violence within the largely ethnic Chinese neighborhood of Flushing , Queens . Groups of Chinese reportedly punched , assaulted , and threw rocks at Falun Gong practitioners , leading to multiple arrests . The Chinese consul general in New York , Peng <unk> , was reportedly involved in inciting the violence against Falun Gong and providing " guidance " to the assailants . 
 = = = Diplomatic and commercial pressure = = = 
 Representatives of the party @-@ state , typically acting through China 's overseas diplomatic mission , have applied diplomatic and commercial pressure on foreign governments , media organizations , and private enterprises with regards to Falun Gong . 
 In North America , Chinese agents have reportedly visited newspaper offices to " extol the virtues of Communist China and the evils of Falun Gong . " There have also been instances where international media organizations have cancelled programing or print articles about Falun Gong in response to requests from the Chinese government . In 2008 , for instance , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation succumb to pressure from the Chinese embassy in Ottawa to pull a documentary on Falun Gong hours before it was set to air . In 2009 @-@ 2010 , the Washington Post commissioned a feature article on Falun Gong . The article was killed " immediately after the Chinese embassy became aware of it , " according to the journalist . 
 Chinese diplomats also exhort politicians not to support or recognize Falun Gong , and threaten that expressions of support for Falun Gong will jeopardize trade relations with China . In 2002 , the Wall Street Journal reported that hundreds of American municipalities had received letters from Chinese diplomatic missions urging them to shun or persecute Falun Gong , using approaches that " combine gross disinformation with scare tactics and , in some cases , slyly implied diplomatic and commercial pressure . " 
 According to Perry Link , pressure on Western institutions also takes more subtle forms , including academic self @-@ censorship , whereby research on Falun Gong is avoided because it could result in a denial of visas for fieldwork in China . Ethan Gutmann also noted that media organizations and human rights groups also self @-@ censor on the topic , given the PRC government 's attitude toward the practice , and the potential repercussions that may follow for making overt representations on Falun Gong 's behalf . 
 Governments and private enterprises have also come under pressure from China to censor media organizations operated by Falun Gong practitioners . In 2008 , for instance , French satellite provider Eutelsat suspended its Asian broadcasts of New Tang Dynasty Television in response to pressure from China 's State Administration of Radio , Film and Television . The move was viewed as a quid pro quo attempt to secure access to the Chinese market . 
 In 2011 , under pressure from Chinese authorities , the Vietnamese government tried two Falun Gong practitioners who had been operating a shortwave radio station and broadcasting information into China . The pair was charged with unlicensed broadcasting , and sentenced to 2 and 3 years in prison . Earlier in the same year , another radio station operated by Falun Gong practitioners in Indonesia , Radio <unk> , was shuttered under diplomatic pressure from China . 
 = = International reception and response = = 
 Western governments and human rights organizations have expressed condemnation of the suppression in China and sympathized with Falun Gong 's plight . Since 1999 , members of the United States Congress have made public pronouncements and introduced several resolutions in support of Falun Gong . In 2010 , House Resolution 605 described Falun Gong as a set of " spiritual , religious , and moral teachings for daily life , meditation , and exercise , based upon the principles of truthfulness , compassion , and tolerance , " called for " an immediate end to the campaign to persecute , intimidate , imprison , and torture Falun Gong practitioners , " condemned the Chinese authorities ' efforts to distribute " false propaganda " about the practice worldwide , and expressed sympathy to persecuted Falun Gong practitioners and their families . 
 United Nations Special Rapporteurs on Torture , Extrajudicial executions , Violence against Women and Freedom of Religion or Belief have issued numerous reports condemning the persecution of Falun Gong in China , and relayed hundreds of cases of concern to Chinese authorities . In 2003 , for instance , The Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial Killings wrote that reports from China " describe harrowing scenes in which detainees , many of whom are followers of the Falun Gong movement , die as a result of severe ill @-@ treatment , neglect or medical attention . The cruelty and brutality of these alleged acts of torture defy description . " In 2010 , the special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief condemned the defamation against minority religious groups , singling out the governments of Iran and China for their treatment of the Bahá 'í Faith and Falun Gong , respectively . " Small communities , such as Jehovah 's Witnesses , Baha 'is , Ahmadis , Falun Gong and others are sometimes stigmatized as " cults " and frequently meet with societal prejudices which may escalate into fully fledged conspiracy theories , " said the rapporteur at the UN general assembly . 
 Although the persecution of Falun Gong has drawn considerable condemnation outside China , some observers note that Falun Gong has failed to attract the level of sympathy and sustained attention afforded to other Chinese dissident groups . Katrina Lantos Swett , vice chair of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom , notes that most Americans are aware of the persecution of " Tibetan Buddhists and unregistered Christian groups or pro @-@ democracy and free speech advocates such as Liu Xiaobo and Ai Weiwei , " and yet " know little to nothing about China ’ s assault on the Falun Gong . " 
 From 1999 – 2001 , Western media reports on Falun Gong — and in particular , the mistreatment of practitioners — were frequent , if mixed . By the latter half of 2001 , however , the volume of media reports declined precipitously , and by 2002 , coverage of Falun Gong by major news organizations like the New York Times and Washington Post had almost completely ceased , particularly from within China . In a study of media discourse on Falun Gong , researcher <unk> Lemish found that Western news organizations also became less balanced , and more likely to uncritically present the narratives of the Communist Party , rather than those of Falun Gong or human rights groups . 
 Adam Frank writes that foreign media adopted a variety of frames in reporting on Falun Gong , including linking Falun Gong to historical antecedents in China , reporting on human rights violations against the group , and practice @-@ based reporting on the experience of Falun Gong . Ultimately , Frank writes that in reporting on the Falun Gong , the Western tradition of casting the Chinese as " exotic " took dominance , and that " the facts were generally correct , but the normalcy that millions of Chinese practitioners associated with the practice had all but disappeared . " David Ownby observes that sympathy for Falun Gong is further undermined by the impact of the " cult " label applied to the practice by the Chinese authorities , which never entirely went away in the minds of some Westerners , and the stigma of which still plays a role in public perceptions of Falun Gong . 
 Ethan Gutmann , a journalist reporting on China since the early 1990s , has attempted to explain the apparent dearth of public sympathy for Falun Gong as stemming , in part , from the group 's shortcomings in public relations . Unlike the democracy activists or Tibetans , who have found a comfortable place in Western perceptions , " Falun Gong marched to a distinctly Chinese drum , " according to Gutmann . This , coupled with western skepticism of persecuted refugees , has resulted in a perception that Falun Gong practitioners tended to exaggerate , or " spout slogans rather than facts . " Gutmann also observes that Falun Gong also lacks robust backing from the American constituencies that usually support religious freedom : liberals are wary of Falun Gong 's conservative morality , Christian conservatives don 't accord the practice the same space as persecuted Christians , and the political center is wary of disrupting commercial and political relations with the Chinese government . Thus , Falun Gong practitioners have largely had to rely on their own resources in responding to the persecution . 
 = SMS Monarch = 
 SMS Monarch ( " His Majesty 's Ship Monarch " ) was the lead ship of the Monarch @-@ class coastal defense ships built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the 1890s . After their commissioning , Monarch and the two other Monarch @-@ class ships made several training cruises in the Mediterranean Sea in the early 1900s . Monarch and her sisters formed the 1st Capital Ship Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy until they were replaced by the newly commissioned Habsburg @-@ class predreadnought battleships at the turn of the century . In 1906 the three Monarchs were placed in reserve and only recommissioned during the annual summer training exercises . After the start of World War I , Budapest was recommissioned and assigned to 5th Division together with her sisters . 
 The division was sent to Cattaro in August 1914 to attack Montenegrin and French artillery that was bombarding the port , and Monarch remained there for the rest of the war . The ship was decommissioned in early 1918 and became an accommodation ship . She was awarded to Great Britain by the Paris Peace Conference in 1920 . The British sold her for scrap and she was broken up in Italy beginning in 1921 . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 At only 5 @,@ 785 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 694 long tons ) maximum displacement , the Monarch class was less than half the size of the battleships of other major navies at the time , and were officially designated as coast defense ships . Austria @-@ Hungary 's only coastline was on the Adriatic Sea , and the Austro @-@ Hungarian government believed that the role of its navy was solely to defend the nation 's coast . 
 Monarch had an overall length of 99 @.@ 22 meters ( 325 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 17 meters ( 55 ft 9 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 4 meters ( 21 ft 0 in ) . Her two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines produced a total of 8 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 300 kW ) using steam from five cylindrical boilers . These gave the ship a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . Monarch 's maximum load of 500 metric tons ( 490 LT ) of coal gave her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . She was manned by 26 officers and 397 enlisted men , a total of 423 personnel . 
 The armament of the Monarch class consisted of four 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) Krupp K / 94 guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . The ships carried 80 rounds for each gun . Their secondary armament was six 150 @-@ millimeter ( 6 in ) Škoda guns located in casemates in the superstructure . Defense against torpedo boats was provided by ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Škoda guns and four 47 @-@ millimeter QF Hotchkiss guns . The ships also mounted two 450 @-@ millimeter ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside . Each torpedo tube was provided with two torpedoes . 
 The ship 's nickel @-@ steel waterline armor belt was 120 – 270 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the gun turrets were protected by 250 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The casemates had 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides while the conning tower had 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) of armor . Monarch 's deck armor was 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . 
 The Monarch @-@ class ships were ordered in May 1892 , with Monarch to be built at the Pola Naval Arsenal ( <unk> ) . The ship was laid down on 31 July 1893 , and she was launched on 9 May 1895 by Archduchess Maria Theresa , wife of Archduke Karl Ludwig . She was commissioned on 11 May 1898 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Monarch and her sisters formed the Navy 's 1st Capital Ship Division ( I. Schwere Division ) in 1899 , and the division made a training cruise to the Eastern Mediterranean where they made port visits in Greece , Lebanon , Turkey and Malta later that year . In early 1902 , they made another training cruise to the Western Mediterranean with port visits in Algeria , Spain , France , Italy , Corfu , and Albania . The ship was fitted with a Siemens @-@ Braun radio early the following year . The ships of the division were inspected by Archduke Franz Ferdinand , the heir to the throne , in March 1903 at Gravosa . In 1904 , the Monarch @-@ class ships formed the 2nd Capital Ship Division , and they took part in the 1904 cruise of the Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas as well as training exercises in which the three Habsburg @-@ class battleships engaged the Budapest and her sisters in simulated combat . Those maneuvers marked the first time two homogeneous squadrons consisting of modern battleships operated in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . In the summer of 1905 , Wien ran aground during a night exercise off <unk> Island ; it took two tries by Budapest and Habsburg to pull her off . 
 The Monarchs were relegated to the newly formed Reserve Squadron on 1 January 1906 , and were only recommissioned for the annual summer exercises . They participated in a fleet review by Archduke Franz Ferdinand , conducted in the <unk> Channel near Šipan , in September . The ships were briefly recommissioned at the beginning of 1913 , as the 4th Division after the start of the Second Balkan War , but were decommissioned again on 10 March . In early 1914 , Monarch made a cruise in the Levant with the dreadnoughts Viribus Unitis , Tegetthoff and the predreadnought Zrínyi . Two of the ship 's crew came down with smallpox and cerebrospinal meningitis in Egypt and caused the ship to be quarantined for several weeks in Pola . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 With the beginning of World War I the three Monarchs were recommissioned as the 5th Division . They were sent down to the Bay of Kotor in August 1914 , to attack Montenegrin artillery batteries on Mount Lovćen bombarding the Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Cattaro and the fortifications defending it . Monarch and her sisters arrived on 13 August , but their guns could not elevate enough to engage all of the enemy artillery , which was reinforced by eight French guns on 19 October . The battleship Radetzky was summoned to deal with the guns two days later , and she managed to knock out several French guns and forced the others to withdraw by 27 October . Monarch remained at Cattaro for the rest of the war to deter any further attacks . The ship 's crew joined in the Cattaro Mutiny in early February 1918 . Six weeks later she became an accommodation ship for the submarine crews based at nearby <unk> . Monarch was handed over to Great Britain as war reparations in January 1920 and broken up for scrap in Italy in 1921 . 
 = Ambler 's Texaco Gas Station = 
 Ambler 's Texaco Gas Station , also known as Becker 's Marathon Gas Station , is a historic filling station located at the intersection of Old U.S. Route 66 and Illinois Route 17 in the village of Dwight , Illinois , United States . The station has been identified as the longest operating gas station along Route 66 ; it dispensed fuel for 66 continuous years until 1999 . The station is a good example of a domestic style gas station and derives its most common names from ownership stints by two different men . North of the station is an extant outbuilding that once operated as a commercial icehouse . Ambler 's was the subject of major restoration work from 2005 – 2007 , and reopened as a Route 66 visitor 's center in May 2007 . It was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2001 . 
 = = History = = 
 Located at the intersection of U.S. Route 66 and Illinois Route 17 in Dwight , Illinois , United States , Ambler 's Texaco Station was built in 1933 by Jack Schore on property originally owned by Otto <unk> . The gas station is no longer in operation as a filling station , but when it closed , it held the record as the longest operating gas station along the historic Route 66 . The station last dispensed gasoline in 1999 . In 1936 , the station was leased to Vernon Von Qualen and became known as Vernon 's Texaco Station . Over the next two years , Von Qualen purchased the station from Schore , and sold it in 1938 to Basil " Tubby " Ambler . Ambler owned the station from 1938 – 1966 . Ambler 's ownership was the longest of any owner during the most historically significant period ; as a result , the station was known as Ambler 's longer than by any other name . 
 The owner at the time of the building 's nomination to the National Register of Historic Places , Phil Becker , grew up living on Mazon Street ( Illinois Route 17 ) . He had been hanging out at the station since he was nine and began working at the station in 1964 . One year after Becker 's employment began , Ambler sold the station to Earl Kochler . Kochler sold the station to Royce McBeath , who ran it between 1965 – 1970 . The station changed hands once again when Becker bought the station from McBeath on March 4 , 1970 . About a year after Becker took over operation of the station , Texaco suddenly stopped supplying the location with gasoline and Becker contracted with Marathon Oil . The brand change was accompanied by a name change to Becker 's Marathon Gas Station , a name the station would be known by for over 26 years . Becker operated the station , along with his wife Debbie , from the time of purchase until 1996 . After closing the station , the couple leased the building out as an auto repair shop and eventually donated the building to the village of Dwight . 
 In 2005 , a project to restore the old gas station began . The village of Dwight applied for and received a US $ 10 @,@ 400 federal cost @-@ share grant from the U.S. National Park Service and its Route 66 Corridor Preservation Program . The grant required the village to present matching funds in the amount of the grant . The restoration 's ultimate goal was to reopen the station as a rest stop and interpretive center along the historic roadway . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The combined grant and village @-@ funded restoration included door , window , and roof repairs , along with interior and exterior repainting . The repainting matched the station 's 1940s color scheme . On April 24 , 2007 , the National Park Service presented a plaque commemorating the restoration project at the station . In early May 2007 , with the restoration completed , Ambler 's Texaco Gas Station reopened as a visitor 's center . 
 Following the restoration , the station evokes the 1940s ; the interior is complete with a potbelly stove , tiny Coca @-@ Cola bottle and antique Dwight Lumber / Route 66 advertising <unk> . Also inside are an old cash register , old 7 Up bottles and a plaid stamp saver book . The restored station is owned by the village of Dwight . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Ambler 's Texaco Station is built in a common gas station style known as " house and canopy " style or " domestic style . " The style was developed by Standard Oil of Ohio in 1916 , and consisted of a small house @-@ like building with an attached canopy . The canopy extended out over the pumps to protect customers from the weather . The style was meant to evoke feelings of home and comfort in travelers and , in turn , to make people more at ease buying goods from the station . 
 The one @-@ story building has no basement and originally consisted of only the house and canopy portion , and three Texaco gas pumps . The house , or main office portion of the station includes the interior office and the men 's and women 's restrooms . The men 's restroom is accessed from the interior office and the women 's restroom is accessed via an outside door on the south side of the building . The original " <unk> " sign still protrudes from the wall above the entrance . The entire house section of the station is 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) by 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . The exterior of the building is wood and sided with clapboard , save the garage bay area which is concrete block . The bay was built during World War II , between 1941 – 45 , and material shortages forced the use of the differing building material . 
 The building has a wooden , side gabled roof covered with asphalt shingles , which extends over the station 's canopy . The canopy supporting piers originally " flared out " and have been altered since the building 's original construction . The three original Texaco pumps were replaced with 1960s era Marathon pumps , which are on display in the service bay . The Marathon change @-@ over also resulted in a sign being attached to the roof of the service bay which read " Marathon , " this sign is no longer extant . 
 = = Icehouse = = 
 Located on the property of Ambler 's Texaco Gas Station , just north of the station , is a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) by 16 foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) wood clad , wooden frame building that once housed a commercial icehouse . Though its exact dates of operation are unknown , it is believed the icehouse was established by a member of Jack Schore 's family during the 1930s . While the icehouse was in business , there was a small pond located about 200 feet ( 61 m ) east of the property . Operators cut ice from the pond and stored it in the building until sale . After the icehouse ceased operation , a date that is also unknown , the building was used as a storage shed for the gas station . The building features a double wall with sawdust stuffed in between the walls to provide insulation . The wooden roof has asphalt shingles . Ambler 's Texaco Station listing on the National Register lists the icehouse building as a contributing property . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The building is a good example of the house and canopy style , and for its architectural and commercial significance it was nominated to the National Register of Historic Places in October 2001 and listed on November 29 , 2001 . Commercially , the station is most significant for the services and products it provided travelers along U.S. Route 66 , including fuel , oil and automobile repairs . The gas station met all criteria listed in the National Register of Historic Places Multiple Property form as requirements for adding gas stations to the listing . In order for gas stations along U.S. Route 66 in Illinois to qualify for listing on the National Register , they must show a clear connection to and raise feelings associated with early traffic and tourism along Route 66 . A gas station listed for its architecture , such as Ambler 's , must be a " good example " of an architectural style or type through many details from design to location , all of which must convey a connection with its historic appearance along Route 66 . 
 = Angel One = 
 This article is for the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode . For the cable channel known as " Angel One " , see Sky Angel . 
 " Angel One " is the 14th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . It was first broadcast on January 25 , 1988 , in the United States in broadcast syndication . It was written by Patrick Barry and was directed by Michael Ray Rhodes . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , an away team visits a world dominated by women to search for survivors of a downed freighter , while the crew of the Enterprise suffer from the effects of a debilitating virus . 
 The episode was intended to be commentary on Apartheid in South Africa , using gender role reversal . However , there were problems between the cast and director during filming , and Patrick Stewart sought to have the sexist nature of the episode changed . The resulting episode was not well liked by members of the production team , and the response from reviewers was negative . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise arrives at the planet Angel One , where its native population is run as an oligarchy , with women in the dominant position of power . The ship is looking for survivors from the shipwrecked freighter Odin , 7 + years after having been evacuated . The freighter was missing 3 escape pods and the only planet in range was Angel One . An away team consisting of Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) , Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) , Lt. Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) , and Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) beam down to the surface . They attempt to negotiate with Beata ( Karen Montgomery ) , the " Elected One " of the native inhabitants , to let them search for the survivors . Time is of the essence however , as the Enterprise must travel to a Federation outpost near the Romulan Neutral Zone ( where a group of Romulan Battlecruisers has been detected ) as soon as they resolve their investigation into the Odin survivors . 
 Beata reveals that they are aware of four male survivors of the Odin who have caused disruption in their society , and are considered fugitives . Beata requests Riker stay with her ( and later requests that he orders Troy , Data , and Yar to track down the survivors ' camp and their leader Ramsey ( Sam Hennings ) , while he stay and dine with her ) . After some back and forth the Data concludes Ramsey and the survivors of the Odin would have Platinum with them , and Angel One is naturally devoid of Platinum , allowing the Enterprise to easily detect them . Meanwhile , Riker dresses in the garb given to him for his dinner with Beata , Troy and Yar taunt him for dressing in clothes that <unk> him and in some ways demean him , and he is only doing it to win favor with Beata . He responds by saying he is honoring the local customs , and acknowledges Beata 's beauty , and that the garb is rather comfortable . 
 The Enterprise searches while in orbit of Angel One . Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) relieves Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) of duty after he and most of the crew have fallen ill to a random virus on board , that gives the sense of an odd smell to its victims at the time of infection . The Captain leaves Lieutenant Geordi La Forge ( Levar Burton ) in command ( Geordi 's first time in Acting Command of a Starship ) . Shortly after , they find Ramsey and transmit his location to the Away Team , who beam directly to there . 
 When confronted by Data , Yar , and Troy , Ramsey and his men , having taken wives and started families during the seven years , refuse to leave , Geordi informs Yar of the medical situation on board , and that more Romulan ships have been detected near the Neutral Zone . Riker learns from Beata that their society structure has already been collapsing , but Ramsey and his men have served to accelerate its decline . Riker argues that it may just be the course of evolution taking place . On the Enterprise , systems are becoming harder to maintain with more crew succumbing the virus . Geordi ( after a friendly reminder from a <unk> Worf ( Michael Dorn ) ) remembers that in command , he must delegate others perform tasks so he can stay on the Bridge . Dr. Crusher finds that the virus is an airborne organism that produces a sweet smell , to encourage inhalation , after which becomes viral inside the body . 
 Riker gets up to date with the situation , and decides that while Ramsey and his group are at large and refusing to leave the planet , there is little they can do . Before leaving they find that one of Beata 's assistants , Ariel ( Patricia McPherson ) , has married Ramsey , and was followed by Beata 's men to their camp , where they arrested the survivors and their families . The Away Team attempt to explain to Beata the reason for Ramsey 's refusal to leave . Beata and her council reject his reasoning , and threatens to execute them the following day . After failing to convince Ramsey and his group to leave with them , Riker contacts the Enterprise , in hopes to transport Ramsey and his group without their consent ( despite it being a violation of the Prime Directive , and almost certainly an end to his career ) , but Dr. Crusher ( while treating an incapacitated Geordi in the Captain 's chair ) refuses to allow anyone to beam aboard for fear of being infected , but allows Data , as an android , to return . Riker orders Data to take command and get the Enterprise to the Neutral Zone before it 's too late . 
 The following morning the Away Team is invited to witness the execution of Ramsey and his followers . Moments after Riker rejects their invitation Data makes contact and informs them that there is a 48 @-@ minute window for which Dr. Crusher has to find a cure , and for Riker to defuse the situation on the planet before the ship must leave to the Neutral Zone . On the planet , Ramsey and his men are prepared to be executed by disintegration despite Ariel 's pleas , while Dr. Crusher discovers a cure for the virus . Riker is prepared to have the away team and the Odin survivors beamed to the Enterprise , but Beata announces that she will stay the execution and banish Ramsey , his men , their families , and any others that support them to the far side of the planet . She explains that their banishment will not stop the fall of the oligarchy , but will slow it down enough that Beata will not be around to see its end . The away team return to the ship and Picard , already recovering from the virus but hardly having a voice , orders the ship to the Neutral Zone at high warp . 
 = = Production = = 
 Producer Herbert Wright explained that the episode was to be a commentary on Apartheid in South Africa , with men on the planet representing black people . The original plot by Patrick Berry would have seen Riker and Data travel to the surface with an otherwise all female away team , which offended the planet 's leader to the extent that Yar stuns him with a phaser as a show of strength in order to prevent his immediate execution . Riker is imprisoned as one of the marooned men , named Lucas Jones , begins an uprising . Jones is killed , but his death inspires his followers to assault the government . In that version , Picard is the only one to fall ill on board the Enterprise . The reverse role society had already been included in Gene Roddenberry 's 1974 TV pilot / movie Planet Earth , and Wright described it as " being done a thousand times already " . In her book Sexual Generations : " Star Trek , the Next Generation " and Gender ( University of Illinois Press , 1999 ) , Robin Roberts points out that a similar plot was used by Walter Besant in his 1882 anti @-@ feminist dystopia , The Revolt of Man . " Angel One " featured the first mention of the Romulans , who would appear later in the season one finale , " The Neutral Zone " . 
 Michael Ray Rhodes directed the episode as part of a deal with The Bronx Zoo , another television show filmed at Paramount Studios . Rhodes had previously won Emmy Awards on four occasions for his work on the television series Insights between 1981 and 1984 . Wil Wheaton later recalled that there were some issues between the main cast and the director , but didn 't know what they were about as he only worked for one day of the shoot . Gates McFadden described it as " one of the most sexist episodes we ever had " , and Patrick Stewart sought to have the episode changed to reduce those elements . Some of the production crew subsequently thought poorly of " Angel One " . Executive producer Maurice Hurley described it as " Terrible . Just terrible . One of the ones you 'd just as soon erase " . Producer Herbert Wright felt that the " sexual places it was dragged to were absurd " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Angel One " first aired in the United States in broadcast syndication on January 25 , 1988 . It received an 11 @.@ 4 rating , meaning that it was seen by 11 @.@ 4 percent of all households . This was an increase from the previous week 's " Datalore " which received a rating of 10 @.@ 3 . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode following the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com. He described the episode as being " one of the most sexist episodes of Star Trek ever produced under the veneer of feminism " , and that the virus subplot was " filler , and boring filler at that " . Overall , he said that it was " one of the absolute low points of the show " , giving it a score of two out of ten . Cast member Wil Wheaton watched it for AOL TV , and thought that it started well but soon descended into the appearance of an episode from The Original Series with Riker in the Kirk role . He also noted that if the speech that Riker gave towards the end of the episode had been given to Yar or Troi then the overall message would have been more subtle . He gave it a grade of D overall . 
 James Hunt for Den of Geek said that the episode was not as bad as " Code of Honor " , but that it contained " almost every terrible cliché about seen in TNG 's first season in one episode " . He summed it up , saying " We 've seen all of this before , and it was barely interesting the first time around . The second time , it 's just tedious . A horrible episode on so many levels . " Zack Handlen watched the episode for The A.V. Club and said that he " expected more from TNG " , saying that he was not sure what the reversal of gender roles in the episode was meant to achieve . He described the virus subplot as " absurd " and gave the episode an F grade . The episode was included in a couple of worst episode lists , including in one compiled by Scott Thrill for Wired magazine , and it was ranked the fourth worst episode by Jay Garmon at the website TechRepublic . 
