 Emery was chosen 99th overall by the Senators in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . During the 2006 – 07 season , Emery signed a three @-@ year deal with the Senators worth $ 9 @.@ 5 million . 
 Emery began his NHL career in 2005 – 06 by setting a record for wins to start a career , winning his first 9 games , moving ahead of Bob Froese , who started the 1982 – 83 season with eight wins while playing for the Philadelphia Flyers . In March of the same season , Emery won 12 games , tying Bernie Parent 's 1974 record for the most wins in a month . 
 At the beginning of the 2005 – 06 season , Emery had won nine @-@ straight games during the regular season as the back @-@ up to Dominik Hašek . When Hašek injured his groin during the 2006 Winter Olympics , Emery became the team 's de facto starter , with Mike Morrison , claimed off of waivers from the Edmonton Oilers , as Emery 's backup . Emery would be the starting goaltender for the rest of the season , leading the Senators to the second round of the 2006 Stanley Cup playoffs . 
 After the 2005 – 06 season , the Senators opted not to bring back Hašek , instead acquiring Martin Gerber to compete with Emery for the starter position . Gerber was the starter at the beginning of the season , but due to his poor play , Emery replaced him in mid @-@ November . On February 10 , 2007 , Emery was suspended three games from the NHL for striking Montreal Canadiens forward Maxim Lapierre with his stick on his face after Lapierre crashed into Emery 's net . 
 Twelve days later , after his suspension had ended , Emery was involved in a mêlée between the Senators and the Buffalo Sabres . He and Sabres goaltender Martin Biron left their creases to fight each other . After the first fight was finished , Sabres ' enforcer Andrew Peters grabbed Emery and a second fight ensued . Both goaltenders received game misconducts , and Emery had the rare feat ( for a goaltender ) of receiving two five @-@ minute majors for fighting in the same incident . In total , Emery received 22 penalty minutes ( two five @-@ minute majors for fighting , a two @-@ minute minor for leaving the crease and the 10 @-@ minute game misconduct ) for this altercation . After the altercation , fans and media have dubbed him " Sugar Ray " in reference to retired boxer Sugar Ray Robinson and Emery 's reputation as a fighter . Then @-@ teammate Brian McGrattan opined that if Emery were a position player and not a goalie , he would likely rank among the top five fighters in the NHL . 
 Prior to the 2007 playoffs , Emery and the Senators won 5 – 2 against Montreal on March 30 , 2007 , which was his 100th NHL game . Emery 's strong play in the season continued in the playoffs , as the Senators defeated the Pittsburgh Penguins , New Jersey Devils and Buffalo Sabres each in five @-@ game series en route to their first Stanley Cup Final appearance since the team returned to the NHL in 1992 , where the Senators ultimately lost to the Anaheim Ducks in five games . He became a restricted free agent after the end of the season and filed for salary arbitration , later agreeing to a three @-@ year deal with the Senators worth $ 9 @.@ 5 million before the hearings were held . 
 By the pre @-@ season of the 2007 – 08 campaign , Emery was injured for a lengthy time due to a wrist injury that limited him to just 40 minutes of the pre @-@ season and forced him to miss several games early in the Senators ' season . 
 On April 18 , 2008 , Murray announced to the media in an end @-@ of @-@ season press conference that Emery would not return to the Senators for the 2008 – 09 season . On June 20 , 2008 , Emery was waived by the Senators , and cleared them three days later ; as a result , he became a free agent . 
 = = = <unk> Moscow ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Emery signed a one @-@ year , $ 2 million contract with <unk> Moscow Oblast of the newly formed Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) on July 9 , 2008 . As a foreign goaltender , Emery was only allowed to play in 65 % of his team 's 56 regular season games due to rules that encourage the development of Russian goaltenders . He split duties for the season with former Colorado Avalanche goaltender Vitaly Kolesnik and completed the season as a top goaltender in the KHL with a .926 save percentage & 1 @.@ 86 GAA . 
 = = = Philadelphia Flyers ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 On June 10 , 2009 , the Philadelphia Flyers announced that they had agreed to terms on a one @-@ year contract worth $ 1 @.@ 5 million with Emery . After a successful training camp , he marked his return to the NHL with a 2 – 0 shutout victory against the Carolina Hurricanes in the first game of the season . In his second regular season game with the Flyers , against the New Jersey Devils , he stopped 24 of 26 shots in a 5 – 2 victory . 
 On December 8 , Emery was placed on injured reserve to have surgery on a torn muscle in his abdomen . Originally expected to miss about six weeks , the prognosis changed when it was discovered that he had avascular necrosis . In March 2010 , Flyers General Manager Paul Holmgren announced that Emery would be out for remainder of the season due to the diagnosis and that a bone graft would be done to alleviate his hip issues . 
 Doctors were able to catch the disease early on before it spread , unlike the case of baseball and American football player Bo Jackson . As a result , in April , doctors announced an extremely successful surgery . Jackson spoke out about Emery , speculating that they were the only two athletes to come back after the disease . Jackson added , " I take my hat off [ to him ] . I want him to know I am in his corner . It 's a lot of hard work . To come back and play , it takes a very , very special and driven person . He 's got a different makeup to want to do all the little things he needs to compete on a professional level . " Unlike Jackson , who required numerous hip replacements , Emery had the benefit of advancements in modern medicine , undergoing a very specialized and complex procedure that involved removing 13 centimetres from his right fibula , and then grafting it to the femur to re @-@ introduce a proper blood supply to the area . Holmgren said that while the surgery went better than expected , he did not know exactly how long Emery 's recovery would take . 
 On July 1 , Emery became an unrestricted free agent as his injury deemed him unable to play until he recuperates . In August , he was given the go ahead to begin the grueling and tedious workout and rehabilitation process . In November 2010 , TSN visited Emery during an on @-@ ice workout and were surprised to see him get down into the butterfly position and play for the first time since surgery . Emery stated that he did not " care if [ he could ] walk in seven years , " and he " just [ wanted ] to play . " To the surprise of his doctors and trainers , Emery has been doing better than expected . In January 2011 , Emery began skating with an OHL team , taking shots and training with Eric Lindros , working with personal trainer Matt Nichol and goalie coach Eli Wilson . According to Wilson , Emery was " as sharp and ready now as he was the summer before Ottawa 's Stanley Cup Final run . " 
 In March 2011 , Emery 's injury and undefeated return to the NHL with the Anaheim Ducks garnered much media attention and fascination , with a special segment featured on CBC 's Hockey Night in Canada . Remarkably , Emery currently has 13 centimetres of bone missing from his leg . This later garnered him a nomination for the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy . 
 = = = Anaheim Ducks ( 2011 ) = = = 
 On February 7 , 2011 , Emery signed a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract with the Anaheim Ducks , allowing him to the standard two @-@ week conditioning AHL stint . Three other NHL teams showed interest in signing Emery . He was then assigned to the Syracuse Crunch to begin conditioning . Emery went on to play a total of five games for the Crunch in their 2010 – 11 season , posting a 4 – 1 – 0 , 1 @.@ 98 GAA and <unk> save percentage . 
 On February 23 , 2011 , upon completion of his conditioning stint , Emery was called to the Anaheim Ducks . Emery made his Anaheim Ducks debut on March 11 , 2011 , against the Phoenix Coyotes when he replaced goaltender Dan Ellis making it his first NHL appearance since he last played in March 2010 with the Flyers . 
 Emery went on to win six straight starts to open his Anaheim career , falling one shy of matching the Ducks record for consecutive wins by a goaltender , to Guy Hebert . 
 In the week of March 14 , Emery was honored with NHL 's Second Star of the Week after going 2 – 0 – 0 with a 0 @.@ 99 GAA and <unk> save percentage . 
 Emery led the Ducks into the playoffs , finishing tied for fourth in the League and posting a 7 – 2 – 0 record with 2 @.@ 28 GAA and .926 save percentage in 10 regular season NHL appearances . 
 In April , Emery 's remarkable comeback was recognized when the Anaheim chapter of the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association ( <unk> ) named Ray Emery as their nominee for the 2011 Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy . The NHL also nominated Emery for the Masterton , making him one of three finalists . 
 = = = Chicago Blackhawks ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On July 27 , 2011 , Emery signed a tryout contract with the Chicago Blackhawks . He was then signed to a one @-@ year contract for the 2011 – 12 season on October 3 . 
 By the end of season , Emery compiled a 15 – 9 – 4 record and 2 @.@ 81 GAA in 34 regular @-@ season appearances , posting a 10 – 0 – 3 record and 2 @.@ 15 GAA in 16 appearances at Chicago 's United Center . Emery was again nominated , this time by the Chicago Blackhawks , for the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy , honoring dedication and perseverance . 
 In April 2012 , the Blackhawks signed Emery to a one @-@ year extension worth $ 1 @.@ 15 million to continue into the 2012 – 13 season . 
 In March 2013 , Emery made NHL history becoming the first goaltender to ever start a season with 10 straight wins , going 10 – 0 – 0 . Emery improved his NHL record , with 11 straight wins , going 11 – 0 – 0 against the Colorado Avalanche on March 18 . Emery surpassed his own record making NHL history yet again , going 12 – 0 – 0 in a shutout win against the Calgary Flames which happened to be his 200th NHL start On April 10 , Emery made franchise history recording his third shutout in the last five games helping him third overall in the NHL for GAA , posting a 1 @.@ 90 and seventh in save percentage at .924 with a 15 – 1 – 0 record . Emery proved his previous injuries were no longer an issue , posting career highs . 
 In April 2013 , Emery won the award for the NHL 's best combined GAA , the 2013 William M. Jennings Trophy awarded to the goaltender who give up the fewest goals in the season , along with teammate Corey Crawford . Emery finished the season with a 1 @.@ 94 GAA and a .922 save percentage . His 17 wins included 12 @-@ straight to start the year , the best such streak in NHL history . Emery won his first Stanley Cup when the Blackhawks defeated the Boston Bruins in six games during the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 = = = Return to Philadelphia ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = 
 On July 5 , 2013 , Emery signed a one @-@ year deal with the Philadelphia Flyers worth $ 1 @.@ 65 million to serve as the backup to starting goaltender Steve Mason . On July 1 , 2014 , he re @-@ signed for another year in the same role for $ 1 million . 
 = = = 2015 @-@ 2016 = = = 
 On September 8 , 2015 , the Tampa Bay Lightning announced that Emery would be attending training camp on a PTO ( professional tryout ) . Following the conclusion of camp he was released from this PTO on September 27 . In October & November 2015 , Emery trained with the Ontario Reign of the AHL , affiliate to the Los Angeles Kings It was announced on December 18 , 2015 , that Emery had signed a professional tryout agreement with the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , who are associated with the Toronto Maple Leafs . Emery has been credited with his leadership & mentoring abilities , on January 24 , 2016 , upon goaltender Corey Crawford recording his league leading seventh shutout of the season with the Chicago Blackhawks after a win against the Blues , Crawford credited Emery for turning around his work habits . Crawford cited his focus & preparation before a game & during practice to Emery 's work habits , stating " As a goalie , I 've never seen a guy be so focused and ready for a game , " Crawford said . " I was kind of doing the opposite — being nonchalant and doing other stuff and not having a routine . You get in that physical routine that just makes you ready mentally . You trick yourself into knowing that it 's game time and time to play . " Kyle <unk> , assistant GM of the Toronto Marlies cited Emery for his mentorship towards the team . On February 5 , 2016 , Emery signed with Adler Mannheim of the German elite league Deutsche Eishockey Liga for the remainder of the season , thus ending his professional tryout with the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) On March 29 , 2016 , he signed a tryout contract with the Philadelphia Flyers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and on April 1 , 2016 , the Philadelphia Flyers announced signing Emery for the remainder of the season 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In June 2010 , Emery began dating Canadian singer Keshia Chanté . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Richard D 'Oyly Carte = 
 Richard D 'Oyly Carte ( 3 May 1844 – 3 April 1901 ) was an English talent agent , theatrical impresario , composer and hotelier during the latter half of the Victorian era . Rising from humble beginnings , Carte built two of London 's theatres and a hotel empire , while also establishing an opera company that ran continuously for over a hundred years and a management agency representing some of the most important artists of the day . 
 Carte started his career working for his father , Richard Carte , in the music publishing and musical instrument manufacturing business . As a young man , he conducted and composed music , but he soon turned to promoting the entertainment careers of others through his management agency . Carte believed that a school of wholesome , well @-@ crafted , family @-@ friendly , English comic opera could be as popular as the risqué French works dominating the London musical stage in the 1870s . To that end , he brought together the dramatist W. S. Gilbert and composer Arthur Sullivan and , together with his wife Helen Carte , he nurtured their collaboration on a series of thirteen Savoy operas . He founded the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company and built the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art Savoy Theatre to host the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . 
 Carte also built the Savoy Hotel in London , and acquired other luxury hotels . In addition , he erected the Palace Theatre , London , which he had intended to be the home of a new school of English grand opera , although this ambition was not realised beyond the production of a single grand opera by Sullivan , Ivanhoe . Nevertheless , his partnership with Gilbert and Sullivan , and his careful management of their operas and relationship , created a series of works whose success was unprecedented in the history of musical theatre . His opera company , later operated by Helen and then by his son , Rupert , and granddaughter , Bridget , promoted those works for over a century , and they are still performed regularly today . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carte was born in Greek Street in the West End of London on 3 May 1844 . He was the eldest of six children . His father , Richard Carte ( originally Cart ; 1808 – 1891 ) , was a flautist , and his mother was the former Eliza Jones ( 1814 – 1885 ) ; they had eloped , to the disappointment of her father , Thomas Jones , a clergyman . His siblings were Blanch ( 1846 – 1935 ) , Viola ( 1848 – 1925 ) , Rose ( b . 1854 ) , Henry ( 1856 – 1926 ) and Eliza ( 1860 – 1941 ) . Carte was of Welsh and Norman ancestry ; D 'Oyly is a Norman French name which " was a forename ( not part of a double surname ) " . To supplement his income as a performer , Carte 's father joined the firm of Rudall , Rose & Co . , musical instrument makers and music publishers , in 1850 . After he became a partner in the business , it changed its name to Rudall , Rose , Carte and Co. and later to Rudall , Carte & Co . 
 Carte was brought up in Dartmouth Park Road . His cultured mother exposed her family to art , music and poetry , and young Carte studied the violin and then the flute at an early age . The family spoke French at home two days a week , and his parents often took their children to the theatre . He was educated at University College School , which he left in 1860 . In 1861 , he achieved First Class level in the matriculation examination and then attended University College , London . However , he left later that year to work in his father 's business , along with his brother , Henry . He studied music during this time and composed some pieces , which he dedicated to the actress Kate Terry . He also acted in amateur theatricals . 
 = = Career = = 
 Between 1868 and 1877 , Carte wrote and published the music for a number of his own songs and instrumental works , as well as several comic operas : Doctor <unk> – His Secret , at St. George 's Hall ( 1868 ) ; Marie , with librettist E. Spencer Mott , at London 's Opera Comique in 1871 ; and Happy Hampstead , with librettist Frank Desprez , which debuted on an 1876 provincial tour and then played at the Royalty Theatre in 1877 . On tour in 1871 , Carte conducted Cox and Box by composer Arthur Sullivan and dramatist F. C. Burnand , in tandem with English adaptations of two Offenbach pieces , called Rose of Auvergne and Breaking the Spell , in which Carte 's client Selina Dolaro appeared . Carte 's musical talent would be helpful later in his career , as he was able to audition singers himself from the pianoforte . 
 During the late 1860s and early 1870s , from within his father 's firm in Charing Cross and , by late 1874 , from a nearby address in Craig 's Court , Carte began to build an operatic , concert and lecture management agency . His two hundred clients eventually included Charles Gounod , Jacques Offenbach , Adelina Patti , Mario , Clara Schumann , Antoinette Sterling , Edward Lloyd , Mr. and Mrs. German Reed , George Grossmith , Matthew Arnold , James McNeill Whistler and Oscar Wilde . Hesketh Pearson said of Carte : " His acute business sense was aided by a frank and agreeable manner .... He took what other people thought were risks , but he felt were certainties . He knew everyone worth knowing ... and his practical judgement was as sure as his sense of artistry . " 
 = = = Founding his opera company = = = 
 In 1874 , Carte leased the Opera Comique , a small theatre off the Strand , where he presented a Brussels company in the British premiere of the operetta <unk> @-@ <unk> by Charles Lecocq , followed by The Broken Branch , an English adaptation of Gaston <unk> 's La branche cassée . Carte announced his ambitions on the front of the programme for the latter : " It is my desire to establish in London a permanent abode for light Opera . " The Observer reported , " Mr D 'Oyly Carte is not only a skilful manager , but a trained musician , and he appears to have grasped the fact that the public are beginning to become weary of what is known as a genuine opera bouffe , and are ready to welcome a musical entertainment of a higher order , such as a musician might produce with satisfaction " . 
 Carte later said it was " the scheme of my life " to found a school of high @-@ quality , family @-@ friendly English comic opera , in contrast to the bawdy burlesques and adaptations of French operettas that dominated the London musical stage at that time . His experience in writing operettas , however , had convinced him that his own creative talents were inadequate for the task . He later wrote to dramatist W. S. Gilbert , " I envy your position but I could never attain it . If I could be an author like you I would certainly not be a manager . I am simply the tradesman who sells your works of art . " Furthermore , in 1874 Carte did not yet have the resources to make his idea into reality , and after his season at the Opera Comique , he terminated his lease . In the same year , he arranged for his client , Offenbach , to collaborate with H. B. <unk> to write a new operetta on the theme of Dick Whittington and His Cat , which played during the Christmas season at the Alhambra Theatre . 
 In 1875 , Carte became the business manager of the Royalty Theatre , under the direction of his client , the popular singing actress Madame Selina Dolaro . There he programmed Offenbach 's La Périchole . To fill out the evening ( as long programmes were the fashion in Victorian theatre ) , he needed another piece . He remembered a libretto for a one @-@ act comic opera that W. S. Gilbert had written and shown to him in 1873 , called Trial by Jury . Meanwhile , Sullivan 's popular 1867 opera , Cox and Box , had been revived at the Gaiety Theatre in 1874 , and Carte had already asked him to write a piece for the Royalty . Carte knew that Gilbert had worked with Sullivan to create Thespis in 1871 , and he now suggested that Sullivan could write the music for Trial by Jury . Because Gilbert and Sullivan shared his vision of increasing the quality and respectability of English musical theatre , and so broadening its audience through the promotion of well @-@ crafted English light operas , Carte gave them wider authority as director and music director than was customary at that time . Trial by Jury , a comic treatment of an English courtroom , was an unexpected hit , outrunning La Périchole , and becoming the first step in Carte 's scheme to establish a new genre of English comic opera . 
 Carte managed the first tour of Trial by Jury , which stopped at the Theatre Royal in Dublin , Ireland , in September 1875 . While there , he met a young Scottish actress , Susan Couper Black , who used the stage name Helen Lenoir . She became fascinated by his vision for establishing a company to promote English comic opera and gave up her next engagement to join his theatrical organisation as his secretary . Well @-@ educated , with an organisational ability , business acumen , focus on detail and diplomatic skills that surpassed even Carte 's , Lenoir gradually became intensely involved in all of his business affairs . Carte and Lenoir married in 1888 , three years after the death of his first wife . 
 Even after the initial production of Trial by Jury , however , Carte continued to produce continental operetta , touring in the summer of 1876 with a repertoire consisting of English adaptations of French opera bouffe ( Offenbach ’ s La Périchole , and La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein , Lecocq 's La fille de Madame <unk> and Léon Vasseur 's La <unk> d 'argent ) , paired with two one @-@ act English after @-@ pieces ( Happy Hampstead and Trial by Jury ) . Carte acted as the musical director of this travelling company that included W.H. Denny . 
 Encouraged by the success of Trial by Jury , Carte made attempts in 1875 – 76 to raise money for either a revival of Thespis or a new piece . A year later , he finally found four backers and formed the " Comedy Opera Company " to produce the future works of Gilbert and Sullivan , along with the works of other British author / composer teams . This allowed Carte to lease the Opera Comique and to give Gilbert and Sullivan firm terms for a new opera . By this time , Helen Lenoir had been promoted from Carte 's secretary to his assistant . The first comic opera produced by the new company was Gilbert and Sullivan 's The Sorcerer in 1877 , with a plot involving a tradesmanlike London magician and his patented love potion . Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte were able to select their own cast , instead of using the players under contract to the theatre where the work was produced , as had been the case with their earlier works . They chose talented actors , few of whom were well @-@ known stars , and Carte 's agency provided many of the artists . The reception of the piece showed that Carte had been right : there was a promising future in family @-@ friendly English comic opera . 
 The Sorcerer was followed by H.M.S. Pinafore in 1878 . Business for the new opera was slow at first . Carte 's investors in the Comedy Opera Company advocated cutting their losses and closing the show . After promotional efforts by Carte and Sullivan , who included some of the Pinafore music in several promenade concerts at Covent Garden , Pinafore became a hit . Carte persuaded Gilbert and Sullivan that when their original agreement with the Comedy Opera Company expired in July 1879 , a business partnership among the three of them would be to their advantage . The three each put up £ 1 @,@ 000 and formed a new partnership under the name " Mr Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's Opera Company " . Under the partnership agreement , once the expenses of mounting the productions had been deducted , each of the three men was entitled to one third of the profits . 
 On 31 July 1879 , the last day of their agreement with Carte , the directors of the Comedy Opera Company attempted to repossess the Pinafore set by force during a performance , causing a celebrated fracas . Carte 's stagehands managed to ward off their backstage attackers and protect the scenery and props . The Comedy Opera Company opened a rival production of H.M.S. Pinafore in London , but it was not as popular as the D 'Oyly Carte production and soon closed . Legal action over the ownership of the rights ended in victory for Carte , Gilbert and Sullivan . From 1 August 1879 , the new company , later called the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , became the sole authorised producer of the works of Gilbert and Sullivan . 
 = = = Early opera successes ; property interests = = = 
 H.M.S. Pinafore was so successful that Carte soon sent two additional companies out to tour in the provinces . The opera ran for 571 performances in London , the second @-@ longest run in musical theatre history up to that time . Over 150 unauthorised productions sprang up in America alone , but because American law then offered no copyright protection to foreigners , Carte , Gilbert and Sullivan were not able to demand royalties from , or to control the artistic content of , these productions . 
 To try to counter this copyright piracy and make some money from the popularity of their opera in America , Carte travelled to New York with the authors and the company to present an " authentic " production of Pinafore there , beginning in December 1879 , as well as American tours . Carte 's assistant , Helen Lenoir , who became his wife in 1888 , made fifteen visits to America in the 1880s and 1890s to promote Carte 's interests , superintending arrangements for American productions and tours of each of the new Gilbert and Sullivan operas . Beginning with Pinafore , Carte licensed the J. C. Williamson company to produce the works in Australia and New Zealand . 
 In an effort to head off unauthorised American productions of their next opera , The Pirates of Penzance , Carte and his partners opened it in New York on 31 December 1879 , prior to its 1880 London premiere . They hoped to forestall further " piracy " by establishing the authorised production and tours in America before others could copy it and by delaying publication of the score and libretto . They did succeed in keeping for themselves the direct profits of the venture , but they tried without success for many years to control the American performance copyrights over their operas . Pirates was an immediate hit in New York , and later London , becoming one of the most popular Gilbert and Sullivan operas . To secure the British copyright , there was a perfunctory performance the afternoon before the New York premiere , at the Royal Bijou Theatre , Paignton , Devon , organised by Helen Lenoir . 
 The next Gilbert and Sullivan opera , Patience , opened at the Opera Comique in April 1881 and was another big success , usurping Pinafore 's position as the longest running piece in the series with the second @-@ longest run in musical theatre history . Patience satirised the self @-@ indulgent aesthetic movement of the 1870s and ' 80s in England . To popularise the opera in America , in 1882 Carte sent one of the artistes under his management , the young poet Oscar Wilde , on a lecture tour to explain to Americans what the aesthetic movement was about . Carte told an interviewer at that time that he had fifteen theatrical companies and performers touring simultaneously in Europe , America and Australia . 
 Carte had been planning to build a new theatre for several years to promote English comic opera and , in particular , the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . With profits from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas and his concert and lecture agency , he bought property along the Strand in 1880 with frontage onto the Thames Embankment , where he built the Savoy Theatre in 1881 . Carte chose the name in honour of the Savoy Palace , which had been built on the site in the thirteenth century by Peter , Count of Savoy . It later passed to John of Gaunt but was destroyed in the Peasants ' Revolt in 1381 . The Savoy Theatre was a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facility , setting a new standard for technology , comfort and decor . It was the first public building in the world to be lit entirely by electric lights and seated nearly 1 @,@ 300 people ( compared to the Opera Comique 's 862 ) . 
 Patience was the first production at the new theatre , transferring there on 10 October 1881 . The first generator proved too small to power the whole building , and though the entire front of house was electrically lit , the stage was lit by gas until 28 December 1881 . At that performance , Carte stepped on stage and broke a glowing lightbulb before the audience to demonstrate the safety of the new technology . The Times concluded that the theatre " is admirably adapted for its purpose , its acoustic qualities are excellent , and all reasonable demands of comfort and taste are complied with . " Carte and his manager , George Edwardes ( later famous as manager of the Gaiety Theatre ) , introduced several innovations at the theatre including free programme booklets , the orderly " queue " system with numbered tickets for the pit and gallery ( an American idea ) , tea served at the interval and a policy of no tipping for cloakroom or other services . Daily expenses at the theatre were about half the possible takings from ticket sales . The last eight of Gilbert and Sullivan 's comic operas were premiered at the Savoy , and all of their operas came to be known as Savoy operas . 
 The Savoy Hotel , designed by the architect Thomas Edward <unk> , opened in 1889 . Financed by profits from The Mikado , it was the first hotel lit by electric lights and the first with electric lifts . In the 1890s , under its famous manager , César Ritz , and chef Auguste Escoffier , it became a well @-@ known luxury hotel and would generate more income and contribute more to the D 'Oyly Carte fortunes than any other enterprise , including the opera companies . Carte later acquired and refurbished Claridge 's ( 1893 ) , The Grand Hotel in Rome ( 1896 ) , Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand ( 1898 ) and The Berkeley ( 1900 ) . 
 = = = Peak years for the opera company = = = 
 During the years when the Gilbert and Sullivan operas were being written , Richard D 'Oyly Carte also produced operas and plays by other writing teams , as well as other works to fill the Savoy Theatre in between new operas . Many of these were companion pieces to the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , as the Victorian audiences preferred long evenings in the theatre . Some , however , were new full @-@ length pieces either for the Savoy or for Carte 's touring companies , which toured the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , and these new works , extensively . Carte and Lenoir also continued to run his management agency . As an example of their level of activity , an 1881 souvenir programme commemorating the 250th performance of Patience in London and its 100th performance in New York states that , in addition to these two productions of Patience , Carte was simultaneously producing many other projects . These included two companies touring with Patience , two touring with other Gilbert and Sullivan operas , one touring with the operetta Olivette ( co @-@ produced with Charles Wyndham ) , one with Claude Duval in America , a production of Youth running at a New York theatre , a lecture tour by Archibald Forbes ( a war correspondent ) and productions of Patience , Pirates , Claude Duval and Billee Taylor in association with J. C. Williamson in Australia , among other things . 
 Carte also introduced the practice of licensing amateur theatrical societies to present works for which he held the rights , increasing the works ' popularity and the sales of scores and libretti , as well as the rental of band parts . This had an important influence on amateur theatre in general . Cellier and Bridgeman wrote in 1914 that , prior to the creation of the Savoy operas , amateur actors were treated with contempt by professionals . After the formation of amateur Gilbert and Sullivan companies licensed to perform the operas , professionals recognised that the amateur societies " support the culture of music and the drama . They are now accepted as useful training schools for the legitimate stage , and from the volunteer ranks have sprung many present @-@ day favourites . " Cellier and Bridgeman attributed the rise in quality and reputation of the amateur groups largely to " the popularity of , and infectious craze for performing , the Gilbert and Sullivan operas " . The National Operatic and Dramatic Association was founded in 1899 . It reported , in 1914 , that nearly 200 British societies were producing Gilbert and Sullivan operas that year . 
 After Patience , Carte produced Iolanthe , which opened in 1882 . During its run , in February 1883 , Carte signed a five @-@ year partnership agreement with Gilbert and Sullivan , obliging them to create new operas for him upon six months ' notice . Sullivan had not intended to immediately write a new work with Gilbert , but he suffered a serious financial loss when his broker went bankrupt in November 1882 and must have felt the long @-@ term contract necessary for his security . Gilbert scholar Andrew Crowther comments , " Effectively , [ the contract ] made [ Gilbert and Sullivan ] Carte 's employees – a situation which created its own resentments . " The partnership 's next opera , Princess Ida , opened in January 1884 . Carte soon saw that Ida was running weakly at the box office and invoked the agreement to call upon his partners to write a new opera . The musical establishment constantly pressured Sullivan to abandon comic opera in favour of serious music , and after he was knighted in 1883 , the pressure only increased . He soon regretted having signed the five @-@ year contract . In March 1884 , Sullivan told Carte that " it is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself . " 
 During this conflict and others during the 1880s , Carte and Helen Lenoir frequently worked to smooth over the partners ' differences using a mixture of friendship and business acumen . Sullivan asked to be released from the partnership on several occasions . Nevertheless , Carte was able to coax eight comic operas out of his partners in the 1880s . When Princess Ida closed after a comparatively short run of nine months , for the first time in the partnership 's history , the next opera was not ready . Gilbert first suggested a plot in which people fell in love against their wills after taking a magic lozenge – a scenario that Sullivan had previously rejected . Gilbert eventually came up with a new idea and began work in May 1884 . 
 Carte produced the first revival of The Sorcerer , together with Trial by Jury , and matinees of The Pirates of Penzance played by a cast of children , while he waited for his partners to finish writing the new work . This became the partnership 's most successful opera , The Mikado , which opened in March 1885 . The piece satirised British institutions by setting them in a fictional Japan and took advantage of the Victorian craze for the exotic and " picturesque " Far East . The Mikado became the partnership 's longest @-@ running hit , lasting for 672 performances at the Savoy Theatre , and supplanting Patience as the second @-@ longest @-@ running work of musical theatre up to that time . It was extraordinarily popular in the US and worldwide and remains the most frequently performed Savoy Opera . 
 The partnership 's next opera was Ruddigore , which opened in January 1887 . The piece , though a financial success , was a relative disappointment after the extraordinary run of The Mikado . When Ruddigore closed after nine months , Carte mounted revivals of earlier Gilbert and Sullivan operas at the Savoy for almost a year . After another attempt by Gilbert to persuade Sullivan to set a " lozenge plot " , Gilbert met his collaborator half way by writing a serio @-@ comic plot for The Yeomen of the Guard , which premiered in October 1888 . The opera ran for over a year , with strong New York and touring productions . This was a happy time for Carte , with a long @-@ running opera , new marriage and new hotel and opera house under construction . When Carte asked his partners for a new work , Sullivan again expressed reluctance to write another comic opera , asking if Gilbert would write a " dramatic work on a larger musical scale " . Gilbert declined but offered a compromise that Sullivan ultimately accepted : the two would write a light opera for the Savoy , and at the same time , Sullivan could work on a grand opera that Carte would produce at a new theatre he was planning to build to present British grand opera . The new comic opera was The Gondoliers , which opened in December 1889 and became one of the partnership 's greatest successes . 
 During these years , Carte was not just the manager of the theatre . He was a full participant in the producing partnership with Gilbert and Sullivan , involved in casting and finding designers ; in charge of publicity ; directing and hiring designers for the non @-@ Gilbert works , including the many companion pieces ( sometimes with the help of assistants ) ; and casting , directing and rehearsing the touring companies , among other duties . According to Henry Lytton , " Mr. Carte was a great stage manager . He could take in the details of a scene with one sweep of his eagle eye and say unerringly just what was wrong . " The quality of Carte 's productions created a national and international taste for them , and he sent touring companies throughout the British provinces , to America ( generally managed by Helen ) , Europe and elsewhere . Queen Victoria honoured the company by calling for a Royal Command Performance of The Gondoliers at Windsor Castle in 1891 . Following the libretto closely , she noticed additions to the text made by some of the actors and asked Carte to explain why this was done . Carte replied that they " are what we call ' gags ' " . The queen answered that she had always understood that " gags were things that were put by authority into people 's mouths . " Carte rejoined , " These gags , Your Majesty , are things people put into their own mouths without authority . " George Bernard Shaw , writing in The World in October 1893 , stated : 
 Those who are old enough to compare the Savoy performances with those of the dark ages , taking into account the pictorial treatment of the fabrics and colors on the stage , the cultivation and intelligence of the choristers , the quality of the orchestra , and the degree of artistic good breeding , so to speak , expected from the principals , best know how great an advance has been made by Mr. D 'Oyly Carte . 
 = = = End of the partnership and last years = = = 
 On 22 April 1890 , during the run of The Gondoliers , Gilbert discovered that maintenance expenses for the theatre , including a new £ 500 carpet for the front lobby of the theatre , were being charged to the partnership instead of borne by Carte . Gilbert angrily confronted Carte , but Carte refused to reconsider the accounts . Even though the amount of the charge was not great , Gilbert felt that it was a moral issue involving Carte 's integrity , and he could not look past it . Gilbert stormed out and wrote to Sullivan that " I left him with the remark that it was a mistake to kick down the ladder by which he had risen " . Helen Carte wrote that Gilbert had addressed Carte " in a way that I should not have thought you would have used to an offending menial . " Matters deteriorated further , and Gilbert brought a lawsuit . Sullivan sided with Carte , who was building the Royal English Opera House , the inaugural production of which was to be Sullivan 's forthcoming grand opera . Gilbert won the dispute and felt vindicated , but his actions had been hurtful to his partners , and the partnership disbanded . 
 Carte 's first production at the Royal English Opera House was of Sullivan 's only grand opera , Ivanhoe , which opened in January 1891 . It played for an initial run of 155 performances , a record for an opera , but no other operas shared the new opera house with it . Instead , Ivanhoe was presented every night with alternating casts . When Ivanhoe finally closed in July , Carte had no new work ready to play at the opera house , and so it had to close . The opera house re @-@ opened in November 1891 with André Messager 's La Basoche at first alternating in repertory with Ivanhoe , and then La Basoche played alone , closing in January 1892 . Carte again had no new opera to present at the house , and the venture soon failed . Sir Henry Wood , who had been répétiteur for the production , recalled in his autobiography , " If D 'Oyly Carte had had a repertory of six operas instead of only one , I believe he would have established English opera in London for all time . Towards the end of the run of Ivanhoe I was already preparing The Flying Dutchman with Eugène Oudin in the name part . He would have been superb . However , plans were altered and the Dutchman was shelved . " Carte leased the theatre to Sarah Bernhardt for a season and finally abandoned the project . He sold the opera house at a loss to producer Augustus Harris . It was then converted into a music hall , the Palace Theatre of Varieties , and later became the Palace Theatre . 
 Because of the carpet quarrel , Gilbert had vowed to write no more for the Savoy . When The Gondoliers closed in 1891 , Carte needed new authors and composers to write works for the Savoy Theatre . He turned to old friends George Dance , Frank Desprez and Edward Solomon for his next piece , The Nautch Girl , which ran for a satisfying 200 performances in 1891 – 92 . Carte then revived Solomon and Sydney Grundy 's The Vicar of Bray , which ran through the summer of 1892 . Next came Grundy and Sullivan 's Haddon Hall , which held the stage until April 1893 . While Carte presented new pieces and revivals at the Savoy , his touring companies continued to play throughout Britain and in America . In 1894 , for example , Carte had four companies touring Britain and one playing in America . 
 Gilbert 's aggressive , though successful , legal action had embittered Carte and Sullivan , but the partnership had been so profitable that Carte and his wife eventually sought to reunite the author and composer . After several attempts by the Cartes , the reconciliation finally came through the efforts of Tom Chappell , who published the sheet music to their operas . In 1893 , Gilbert and Sullivan produced their penultimate collaboration , Utopia , Limited . While Utopia was being prepared , Carte produced Jane Annie , by J. M. Barrie and Arthur Conan Doyle , with music by Ernest Ford . Despite the popularity of Barrie and Conan Doyle , the show was a flop , closing after only 51 performances . 
 Utopia was Carte 's most expensive production to date , but it ran for a comparatively disappointing 245 performances , until June 1894 . Carte then played first Mirette , composed by André Messager , then The Chieftain , by F. C. Burnand and Sullivan . These ran for 102 and 97 performances , respectively . The company then toured the London suburbs , and the theatre was dark during the summer of 1895 , reopening in November for a revival of The Mikado . This was followed in 1896 by The Grand Duke , which ran for 123 performances and was Gilbert and Sullivan 's only financial failure . The Gondoliers turned out to be Gilbert and Sullivan 's last big hit , and after The Grand Duke , the two men never collaborated again . At the Savoy , Carte produced His Majesty ( 1897 ) , The Grand Duchess of Gerolstein ( 1897 ) , The Beauty Stone ( 1898 ) and The Lucky Star ( 1899 ) , as well as revivals of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . 
 Though the 1890s brought Carte more disappointments than hits in the theatre , his hotel business prospered and grew . He acquired Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand and Claridge 's Hotel , both of which he entirely rebuilt . There was one grave setback , in 1897 , when he had to dismiss his manager , Ritz , and his star chef , Escoffier , for financial misconduct . Carte 's choice as successor to Ritz was George Reeves @-@ Smith , manager and part @-@ owner of the Berkeley Hotel . To secure his services , Carte bought the Berkeley in 1900 and promoted Reeves @-@ Smith to be managing director of the whole Savoy Group . Carte had used the same method , a year earlier , to secure a new maître d 'hôtel . He was determined to engage M. Joseph , proprietor of the Marivaux Restaurant in Paris , then at the height of its fame . Carte was seriously ill , but he insisted on being carried to the boat @-@ train . In Paris he bought the Marivaux and returned with Joseph to the Savoy . 
 Throughout the later 1890s , Carte 's health was in decline , and Helen assumed more and more of the responsibilities for the opera company . She profitably managed the theatre and the provincial touring companies . In 1894 , Carte had hired his son , Rupert , as an assistant . While Carte was ill , in 1897 , Rupert assisted Mrs. Carte and W. S. Gilbert with the first revival of The Yeomen of the Guard at the Savoy . The Savoy put on a number of shows for comparatively short runs during this period , including Sullivan 's The Beauty Stone , which ran for only 50 performances , in 1898 . In 1899 , Carte finally had a new success with Sullivan and Basil Hood 's The Rose of Persia , which ran for 213 performances . Neither Carte nor Sullivan lived to see the production of the next piece by Hood , The Emerald Isle , for which Edward German completed Sullivan 's unfinished score . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Carte was married twice . His first wife was Blanche Julia Prowse ( 1853 – 1885 ) , the daughter of William Prowse , a piano manufacturer , music publisher and booking agent . As a teenager , she had participated in amateur theatricals with Carte . They married in 1870 and had two sons , Lucas ( 1872 – 1907 ) and Rupert . Blanche died of pneumonia in 1885 , and in 1888 , Carte married his assistant , Helen . Their wedding took place in the Savoy Chapel , with Arthur Sullivan as the best man . Rupert received training in an accounting firm and then became his father 's assistant in 1894 . Lucas , who was not involved in the family businesses , became a barrister . He was appointed Private Secretary to Lord Chief Justice Charles Russell in 1899 in connection with the Venezuelan boundary arbitration in Paris . There he contracted tuberculosis and later died of that disease at the age of 34 . 
 Carte 's London house was at the Adelphi , not far from the Savoy . Passionate about the visual arts as well as the performing arts , Carte invited his friend , the artist James McNeill Whistler , to decorate the house . Whistler had the entire billiard room painted the colour of the billiard cloth , and elsewhere painted his favourite yellow with his own hand . Equally enthusiastic for technological innovation , Carte installed a lift , the first in a private house in England . Around 1890 , he bought a small island in the River Thames , between Weybridge and Shepperton , called Folly Eyot , which he renamed D 'Oyly Carte Island . He wanted to use the island as an annex to his new Savoy Hotel , but the local authorities refused to grant him a drinks licence for the property . Instead , he built Eyot House , a large house and garden on the island , that he used as a residence . In later years , Carte displayed his macabre sense of humour by keeping a crocodile on the island . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Carte died at his London home from dropsy and heart disease in 1901 , just short of his 57th birthday . He is buried in the churchyard of St. Andrew 's church in Fairlight , East Sussex , near his parents ' graves . A memorial service was held at the Chapel Royal of the Savoy , where a memorial stained glass window was later dedicated to him . He left an estate valued at £ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 Carte was instrumental in bringing the British theatre from its low status in the mid @-@ Victorian age to a position of respectable eminence , with knighthoods for actors , such as Henry Irving , and for dramatists , including Gilbert . George Bernard Shaw wrote of Carte 's theatrical legacy , " Mr D 'Oyly Carte founded a new school of English comic opera ; raised operatic <unk> to the rank of a fine art ; and finally built a new English Opera House and made a magnificent effort to do for English grand opera what he had done for comic opera . " In Carte 's obituary , The Times noted , " By his refined taste he raised the reputation of the mise en scène of the Savoy operas to a very high pitch . He set a high standard " . Beyond this , however , Carte 's influence , through the production of the Savoy operas , heavily influenced the course of the development of modern musical theatre . 
 Carte was also a prime mover in making hotels respectable and respected : in the words of the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography : " Led by the prince of Wales [ the Savoy ] became the meeting place for London high society and the nouveaux riches of the British empire .... [ The ] food and the ambience lured people from the clubs to dine in public and give great parties there . It allowed ladies , hitherto fearful of dining in public , to be seen in full regalia in the Savoy dining and supper rooms . " 
 Carte left the theatre , opera company , hotels and his other business interests to Helen . Her London and touring companies continued to present the Savoy Operas in Britain and overseas . In 1901 she leased the Savoy Theatre to William Greet , overseeing his management of a revival of Iolanthe and several new comic operas . Rupert became chairman of the Savoy Hotel by 1903 , which Helen continued to own . In late 1906 , Helen staged a Gilbert and Sullivan repertory season at the Savoy Theatre . The season , and the following one , which were both directed by Gilbert , earned excellent reviews and sold well , revitalising the company . After the second repertory season concluded in 1909 , however , the company did not perform in London again until 1919 , only touring throughout Britain during that time . 
 At her death in 1913 , Helen passed the family businesses to Carte 's son , Rupert . He maintained the hotel business , disposing of the Grand Hotel in Rome , but expanding the group in London . The Savoy Group remained under the control of the Carte family and its associates until 1994 . Carte 's hotels have remained among the most prestigious in London , with the London Evening Standard calling the Savoy " London 's most famous hotel " in 2009 . 
 Rupert D 'Oyly Carte refreshed the opera company 's productions and added London seasons , beginning in 1919 , as well as provincial and foreign tours . In 1948 Rupert died , leaving a strong company to his daughter Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . However , the rising costs of mounting professional light opera without any government support eventually became too much for the company . Bridget was forced to close the company in 1982 . Nevertheless , the Gilbert and Sullivan operas continue to be produced frequently today throughout the English @-@ speaking world and beyond , and Carte 's vision of wholesome light operas that celebrate Great Britain endures . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 = = = Operettas = = = 
 Dr. Ambrosius – His Secret ( 1868 ) 
 Marie ( 1871 ) , with librettist E. Spencer Mott 
 Happy Hampstead ( 1876 ) , with librettist Frank Desprez ( Carte wrote the music for this short piece under the pen name " Mark Lynne " ) . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Carte 's Parlour songs include : 
 " Come Back to Me " , words and music by Carte . 
 " Diamond Eyes " , words by L. H. F. du <unk> . 
 " The Maiden 's Watch " , words by Amy Thornton , composed for and sung by Adelaide Newton 
 " The Mountain Boy " , sung by Florence Lancia 
 " Pourquoi ? " <unk> , dedicated to Selina Dolaro 
 " Questions " , words by Desprez 
 " The Setting Sun " ( with obbligato flute accompaniment ) 
 " Stars of the Summer Night " , Serenade , with poetry by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 
 " Twilight " , <unk> 
 " Waiting " , words by Adelaide Procter . 
 " Wake , Sweet Bird " ( with obbligato flute accompaniment ) 
 " Why so pale and wan , fond lover " 
 = New York State Route 86 = 
 New York State Route 86 ( NY 86 ) is a 39 @.@ 11 @-@ mile ( 62 @.@ 94 km ) long state highway located within Adirondack Park in northern New York , in the United States , linking Franklin County to Essex County . The western terminus of the route is at NY 30 in the hamlet of Paul Smiths . The eastern terminus is at NY 9N in Jay . Although largely a two @-@ lane road , NY 86 is one of only two east – west highways in the High Peaks area of the Adirondack Park ( the other being NY 73 ) , providing a major link between hamlets and tourist destinations . 
 NY 86 was established in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , largely replacing a realigned NY 3 . North of Saranac Lake , NY 86 initially followed modern NY 186 before being rerouted onto its modern alignment . The portion of NY 86 north of Harrietstown was once NY 192 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 86 begins at NY 30 in Paul Smiths , Franklin County . The route heads east through the town of Brighton , providing mountain views of Adirondack Park . After passing through the tiny communities of Easy Street and Gabriels and traversing the southern edge of Paul Smiths College , NY 86 turns south to serve Harrietstown , where it meets NY 186 at the hamlet of the same name . NY 86 continues southward to Saranac Lake , the largest community on NY 86 in Franklin County . Moving through Saranac Lake , the business and tourism anchor for the area , NY 86 is well marked , but follows local roads to an intersection with NY 3 in the village center . The routes briefly overlap before splitting at the northern edge of Lake Flower . 
 East of NY 3 , NY 86 becomes the primary lakeside roadway as it follows the northern and eastern extents of Lake Flower into Essex County . Roughly 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) into the county , NY 86 leaves the lakeshore and turns northeastward toward the small hamlet of Ray Brook . Farther east , the highway travels through the Clifford R. Pettis Memorial Forest before arriving in the village of Lake Placid as Saranac Avenue . 
 NY 86 proceeds eastward through the village , coming within view of Lake Placid before turning south onto Main Street at the western shore of Mirror Lake . As Main , NY 86 runs through the village and along Mirror Lake as the major tourist thoroughfare , passing numerous businesses and the sites of the 1936 and 1980 Winter Olympics . At the southern edge of the village , Route 86 intersects the western terminus of NY 73 . 
 Outside of Lake Placid , NY 86 enters the town of Wilmington , home of the Olympic Ski Center at Whiteface Mountain . Through Wilmington , the road largely follows the Ausable River northeastward , providing scenic views as it heads through " Wilmington Notch , " noted for trout fishing . At an intersection with the eastern terminus of NY 431 in the hamlet of Wilmington , NY 86 turns eastward and crosses into the town of Jay , where it terminates at NY 9N at the town 's village green . 
 Route 86 runs adjacent to the west branch of the Ausable River through a stretch that Trout Unlimited 's Guide to America 's 100 Best Trout Streams describes as one of the finest river fishing spots in the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now NY 86 from Paul Smiths to Jay via Saranac Lake and Lake Placid was originally part of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway , an auto trail extending across the North American continent from the Pacific Ocean to the Atlantic Ocean . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , NY 3 was assigned to the entirety of the highway within New York . 
 NY 3 remained in place up to the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York when it was rerouted onto its modern alignment through the North Country . The portion of former NY 3 from Harrietstown to Jay , as well as a section of former NY 10 ( modern NY 186 ) from Harrietstown to Lake Clear , was redesignated as NY 86 . North of Harrietstown , the former alignment of NY 3 became NY 408 from Harrietstown to Gabriels and the western half of NY 192 from Gabriels to Paul Smiths . NY 408 was co @-@ designated as part of NY 365 c . 1932 , and ultimately supplanted by NY 365 c . 1938 . NY 365 was rerouted in the mid @-@ 1940s , leaving the Harrietstown – Gabriels roadway unnumbered . 
 In the early 1950s , NY 365 's old routing between Harrietstown and Gabriels was designated as NY 192A , a spur route of NY 192 . NY 192A was removed from the state highway system on January 7 , 1980 , when NY 192 was rerouted east of Gabriels to follow NY 192A . On March 28 , 1989 , NY 192 was eliminated in much the same way as its spur route as NY 86 was rerouted to follow NY 192 through Gabriels to Paul Smiths . NY 86 's former routing past the Adirondack Regional Airport became NY 186 . 
 = = NY 86A = = 
 NY 86A was a spur route connecting NY 86 in Lake Placid to NY 9N in Keene . It was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and replaced by an extended NY 73 in the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = The Climb ( Miley Cyrus song ) = 
 " The Climb " is a song performed by American singer Miley Cyrus , for the 2009 film Hannah Montana : The Movie . The song was written by Jessi Alexander and Jon Mabe , and produced by John Shanks . It was released on March 12 , 2009 , as the lead single of the film 's soundtrack by Walt Disney Records . The song is a power ballad with lyrics that describe life as a difficult but rewarding journey . It is styled as a country pop ballad , and was Cyrus ' first solo song to be released to country radio . The instrumentation includes piano , guitar and violins . 
 The song received a nomination for the Best Song Written for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media at the 52nd Grammy Awards . However , the song was withdrawn from consideration by Walt Disney Records because it had not been written specifically for a movie as the category 's eligibility rules required . The song became a top ten single on charts in Australia , Canada , Norway and the United States . In the United States , it peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and became the eighth best selling digital single of 2009 . Five months after its release , the single was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Matthew Rolston , and depicts scenes of Cyrus climbing a mountain or singing , intercut with clips of Hannah Montana : The Movie . Cyrus promoted the song with several live performances . The first , at the Kids Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event on January 19 , 2009 , was the first time the song had ever been publicly heard . Cyrus also performed the song as the closing number of her Wonder World Tour . The song was also performed during the Gypsy Heart Tour . " The Climb " has been covered by several artists and was the most popular choice of song among auditioners for the ninth season of the American singing contest , American Idol , with Hollie Cavanagh performing it in the top 6 of the eleventh season . Simon Cowell , creator of the British television talent show The X Factor , chose " The Climb " to be the debut single of the winner of the competition 's sixth series . Winner Joe McElderry 's cover , released on December 14 , 2009 by Syco Music , was produced by Quiz & <unk> and topped the Irish Singles Chart and the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Climb " was not intentionally written for the 2009 musical film Hannah Montana : The Movie . Co @-@ writer Jessi Alexander conceived the song 's melody while driving to the home of songwriting partner Jon Mabe . Once she arrived , she and Mabe developed a song about overcoming life 's obstacles inspired by their personal struggles in the music industry . Alexander referred to the process as a form of " therapy " and recalled , 
 " I was just driving to work one day . It 's just a typical day , nothing really special about that day . And I just had this melody in my head . And I couldn 't get to my co @-@ writer Jon Mabe or my guitar fast enough because I just wanted to play what I was hearing . And , you know , we just kinda put it down pretty fast and didn 't really think anything about it . The lyrics kinda started to come , I think for both of us , being kinda underdogs in the business . My co @-@ writer was a <unk> , just turned songwriter , and I 'd had record deals and ups and downs in the music business . I think for both of us , we just came from a place of , you know , ' it 's not a race ' . " 
 The song they created was titled " It 's the Climb " and was written in third person . Alexander described the original song as " more spiritual " than the version that was released , and said it contained lines about prayer . However , she claimed she knew it was pop and suitable for The Walt Disney Company . 
 Before reaching Cyrus , the song had been rejected by several country artists . It was eventually picked up by Peter Chelsom , director of Hannah Montana : The Movie , who gave it to Cyrus to record for the film . Chelsom found what would become " The Climb " while visiting Nashville , Tennessee , during a quest to find eleven new songs for Hannah Montana : The Movie . After hearing Alexander 's music , Chelsom asked her to submit songs for consideration . Alexander recorded " It 's the Climb " on a CD and gave it to him . Several weeks later , Chelsom called to say that " the song was gonna be an integral part of the movie " . However , he wanted Mabe and Alexander to rework some of the song 's content and to change the song from third person to first person . Alexander felt the changes amounted to a " substantial amount of the song " and commented , " For me , when you change something from third person to first person , it can change the whole meaning of a line . " She and Mabe " <unk> [ ed ] over taking words out " and how much they could change while maintaining the song 's integrity . After a number of drafts , Mabe and Alexander finally created a version they felt was " perfect for the movie " . 
 Upon receiving the final draft , filmmakers told the songwriters , " This is perfect for Miley , it ’ s gonna change her life , gonna change your life . " Chelsom commented that the song " turned up " the film 's music level by tapping into Cyrus 's newfound vocal range . As with the other songs featured in Hannah Montana : The Movie , the song is " tightly woven into the fabric of the story and the characters " . In the film , Cyrus plays Miley Stewart , a character with a secret double life as superstar Hannah Montana . Keeping this secret causes trouble between Miley and many of the other characters in the film , and leaves Miley confused and contrite . She expresses her emotions by writing " The Climb " . According to film producer Alfred Gough , " The song is her journey , the lessons she 's learned in the movie . It 's an epic [ ... ] power ballad that encapsulates Miley 's journey and the message of the film . " 
 " The Climb " was chosen as the lead single from the soundtrack due to its country elements , which introduced Cyrus to listeners beyond her usual pop audience . The song is Cyrus 's first solo effort marketed directly to country radio , though she had previously recorded and released a country duet with her father , Billy Ray Cyrus , which was titled " Ready , Set , Don 't Go " , in 2007 . Warren Truitt of About.com referred to the song as " Miley 's serious attempt to break into the contemporary country world . " " The Climb " was leaked to the Internet on February 4 , 2009 , two days prior to its official release for airplay . In October 2009 , it was re @-@ released to countries outside the United States in the international version of Cyrus ' extended play , The Time of Our Lives . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " The Climb " is a country pop power ballad that incorporates soft rock and pop rock styles and lasts three minutes and 55 seconds . However , at two minutes and forty @-@ five seconds , a " sudden , spiky burst of violins " enters the song , and the song switches to full power . Todd Martens , co @-@ editor of The Los Angeles Times music column , says Cyrus uses " a raspy voice [ that ] brings a bit of country grit " to the song . " The Climb " is set in common time at a moderate tempo of 80 beats per minute . The song is sung in the key of E major and Cyrus 's vocals span one and a half octaves , from E3 to C # 5 . The song uses a standard issue ballad arrangement with the chord progression , E5 — <unk> — F ♯ <unk> . 
 According to music reviewer Fraser McAlpine of the BBC , the song 's lyrics assert that life should be viewed as " a journey which is difficult but rewarding " . Both Martens and McAlpine took special interest in the line " It 's always gonna be an uphill battle / Sometimes I 'm gonna have to lose " . Martens interpreted the line as an acknowledgment by the singer of her own mistakes in life , while McAlpine wrote , " In this song which is about plugging away at things , the writers have slipped in [ ... ] that the occasional setback isn 't the end of the world . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception for the song was generally positive . Fraser McAlpine of the BBC felt the song 's lyrics were generic , but complimented Cyrus vocals : " Miley acquits herself well vocally — there are moments where her voice sounds a tad strained , but it 's good to hear her on a track that 's a little more subdued and with less frantic production than the uptempo , sassy pop songs we 're used to . " Michael Menachem of Billboard magazine called the song " one of the year 's strongest ballads " . Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe praised " The Climb " for being a " pretty liberation anthem " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said , " On tunes like [ ... ] ' The Climb ' , the 16 @-@ year @-@ old Tennessee native turns up her homegrown inflections , but a few elongated r 's won 't exactly shut out her huge pop audience . " Todd Martens of The Los Angeles Times believed that " The Climb " was " buried in cheese " and described it as " pre @-@ Valentine 's Day <unk> " . However , Martens said , " ' The Climb ' is the rare Miley ballad that 's on par with some of her more spunky teen pop . " 
 Heather Phares of Allmusic said , " the best songs that Cyrus sings on the soundtrack have her own name on them " . She also made musical comparisons to Shania Twain and described the song as " natural , [ ... ] down to earth and grown @-@ up " . While reviewing The Time of Our Lives , Michael Hann of The Guardian called " The Climb " a " one rather superior ballad " , compared to " When I Look at You " and " Obsessed " . Hann said the song was added to the extended play in order to " add some ballast since this collection 's US release . " Jon <unk> of The New York Times described " The Climb " as an " appealing new single [ that ] is just the sort of demure , inspirational country @-@ rock that could easily be mistaken for self @-@ reckoning . " While reviewing a concert performance , James Reed of The Boston Globe called the song " bland but inspirational fare " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " The Climb " won " Best Song from a Movie " at the 2009 MTV Movie Awards and " Music Choice : Single " at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards . At the 52nd Grammy Awards , " The Climb " received a nomination for the Best Song Written for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media , a songwriter 's award . However , Walt Disney Records withdrew the song from consideration because the song was not " written specifically for a motion picture , television or other visual media " , as the Grammy eligibility rules dictated . According to Rolling Stone magazine , " The Climb " was submitted for consideration by mistake . The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences ( NARAS ) , the presenters of the Grammy Awards , released a statement stating , " Walt Disney Records was proactive and forthcoming to our awards department and verified that the song was not written specifically for the film Hannah Montana : The Movie . Based on this information , the Academy has complied with the label 's request . " NARAS replaced the nomination with the song with the next highest initial vote count , " All is Love " , which was written by Karen O and Nick Zinner for the film Where the Wild Things Are . Dan Milliken of Country Universe gave the song a D + . His review consisted solely of two motivational posters : one reading " Life : Its [ sic ] not about the destination , but the journey " to describe the song 's content , and a mock poster reading " Success : Everything is easy when you 're cute " for his actual review . He later expanded his review , calling it " a soulless rephrasing of an extremely famous philosophical message ( so famous it borders on cliche ) that doesn ’ t provide an emotionally coherent context or justification " . Milliken gave the song a higher grade because " she ’ s a pretty good singer for someone her age " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending March 7 , 2009 , " The Climb " debuted at number 48 on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs . It was , incidentally , the same week that " Back to Tennessee " , by Cyrus 's father , Billy Ray Cyrus , debuted at number 59 , the first time a father and daughter had separate charting songs on the chart since Johnny and Rosanne Cash charted in 1990 with " Silver Stallion " and " One Step over the Line " , respectively . " The Climb " eventually peaked at number 25 on the country @-@ genre chart . For the week ending March 21 , 2009 , the song debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 due to sales of 166 @,@ 000 digital downloads , thus making " The Climb " Cyrus 's highest @-@ charting effort at the time , surpassing her previous best @-@ charting effort " 7 Things " , which peaked at number nine in July 2008 . For the week ending May 2 , 2009 , the song reached its peak at number four on the Hot 100 . " The Climb " also peaked at number seven on the Pop 100 chart , 42 on Hot Christian Songs , and at number one for 15 consecutive weeks on Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . Cyrus became the youngest artist to top Adult Contemporary since LeAnn Rimes entered the chart in 1997 with " How Do I Live " . According to Billboard , " The Climb " was the eighth best selling digital single of 2009 . The single was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for the sales of over two million copies . As of January 2014 , " The Climb " has sold 3 @,@ 709 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In Canada , " The Climb " entered at number 17 and eventually peaked at number five . The single was certified triple platinum by Music Canada for the sales of 240 @,@ 000 digital downloads . 
 " The Climb " was also a success in Australia and New Zealand . The song made its debut on the Australian Singles Chart at number 46 on April 19 , 2009 . After ten weeks on the chart , " The Climb " reached number five on the chart , where it stayed for two consecutive weeks . " The Climb " was placed at number 84 on the decade @-@ end Australian Singles Chart . The song has been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales above 70 @,@ 000 . " The Climb " debuted in the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 25 on April 13 , 2009 and reached its peak at number 12 on June 15 , 2009 . On September 4 , 2009 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales exceeding 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 In the UK Singles Chart , " The Climb " made its entry at number 82 on March 28 , 2009 and reached its peak at number 11 on June 16 , 2009 . With its peak at number 11 , it tied for Cyrus 's best @-@ charting effort on the chart with " See You Again " from October 2008 . The single was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for the shipment of over 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , the song also peaked at number 11 . In mainland Europe , the song peaked at number 23 on Eurochart Hot 100 Singles , number eleven on Belgian Tip Singles Chart ( Flanders ) , and number five on Norwegian Singles Chart . The song experienced similar commercial outcomes throughout the rest of Europe ; it appeared within the top 30 of charts in Austria , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , and France . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Matthew Rolston directed the music video for " The Climb " , which premiered on Cyrus 's Myspace page on February 11 , 2009 . The video commences with a shot of Cyrus holding a guitar and a suitcase as she begins to walk down a long path extending through a valley . At the end of the valley , the sun breaks out over a distant mountain . The entire scene is enhanced with computer @-@ generated imagery . Cyrus has her hair tied in a bun and wears a traveling jacket , a gray tank top and cowboy boots . In a separate setting , Cyrus , wearing a gray short sleeve shirt and her hair loose , begins to sing " The Climb " beneath a blue spotlight in a purple room . The two settings alternate throughout the video . A vignetted scene from Hannah Montana : The Movie appears in front of Cyrus as she walks on the path . The video zooms into the scene and a montage of film clips plays , featuring Cyrus 's character and her love interest , Travis Brody ( played by Lucas Till ) horseback riding . The video returns to Cyrus walking ; she picks up a rose fallen on the path , then throws it behind her . As the video progresses , she also sees things such as a herd of horses and a shooting star cross her path . A new setting enters the video in which Cyrus dances in a purple room with a countdown or , occasionally , film clips projected on the wall behind her . Rain begins to pour in the path setting . Cyrus puts down her jacket , guitar case , suitcase and boots , and continues onwards with only her guitar strapped to her shoulder . More film clip montages play in the same manner as the first . As the last montage ends , Cyrus finally reaches the summit of a reddish , CGI mountain and triumphantly looks over the cliff 's edge to watch the sun shining over a shimmering lake . An alternate version of the music video excluding the Hannah Montana : The Movie clips exists and was sent to several channels , including VH1 . 
 Todd Martens of The Los Angeles Times wrote that while he enjoyed the song , he was unsure about the video . He commented that while the video was an improvement since Cyrus 's video for " 7 Things " ( 2008 ) , the settings in " The Climb " music video looked as though they had been painted by Thomas Kinkade and Cyrus 's dancing appeared off @-@ beat . Travis of MTV described the video as " beautifully shot ( although heavily digitized ) " . Lyndsey Parker of Yahoo ! Music remarked that the summit setting was similar to that of the music video for Britney Spears ' " I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman " . Parker also felt the scene in which Cyrus looks out over the cliff , shot using large sweeps with an aerial camera , had been " lifted straight out of an ' 80s Bon Jovi video " . In 2009 , the video received a MuchMusic Video nomination for Best International Artist Video , but lost to Lady Gaga 's music video for " Poker Face " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus opened the Kids ' Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event with the premiere of " The Climb " . The event was held on January 19 , 2009 , in Washington D.C. at the Verizon Center to celebrate the inauguration of Barack Obama as President of the United States . Cyrus , dressed in an embroidered red ball gown made by Reem Acra , dedicated the song to Obama 's daughters , Sasha and Malia Obama . Following the song 's official release in March 2009 , Cyrus resumed promotion for " The Climb " , performing live for shows including American Idol , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , the 44th annual Academy of Country Music Awards , Good Morning America , and Live with Regis and Kelly throughout April . On April 13 , Cyrus performed " The Climb " as part of her set for the AOL Sessions . On April 24 , Cyrus sang " The Climb " and other songs in a London Apple Store . The performances were recorded and sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as a live extended play titled iTunes Live from London . On June 7 , 2009 , Cyrus performed the song at the 20th annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival , an outdoor carnival supporting the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation . Cyrus also sang " The Climb " on The Today Show on August 28 and at the first D23 Expo on September 11 , 2009 . 
 To promote the Hannah Montana : The Movie soundtrack , Cyrus performed " The Climb " on a six @-@ day , five @-@ city acoustic radio promo tour that reached over 250 radio shows . The song was also used as the closing number of Cyrus ' 2009 Wonder World Tour , her first world tour . During the tour performances , Cyrus performed in a white tank top and shorts , boots , and a metallic vest , while giant overhead video screens displayed sunsets . After finishing , Cyrus exited through a passageway in the stage while the images of shooting stars and the earth in space appeared on the screen . Melinda M. Thompson of The Oregonian described the performance as " really a moment to remember — Miley 's soulful and touching rendition of ' The Climb ' " , while Jim Harrington of The Oakland Tribune said the performance was a " tender closer " that drew a large response at the September 18 concert in Oakland , California , at the Oracle Arena . Cyrus later performed the song at the Rock in Rio concert in Lisbon , Portugal and the London , England nightclubs Heaven and G @-@ A @-@ Y. 
 Cyrus performed the song during the Gypsy Heart Tour . She also performed this song on CNN Heroes on December 11 , 2011 . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " The Climb " has been covered by several amateurs and established acts . Mirror Image Records ' indie rock group <unk> covered the song and released it as a digital single in March 2009 . At auditions for the ninth season of the television singing competition American Idol , " The Climb " was the most popular choice of song amongst contestants . Mandi Bierly , writing for Entertainment Weekly , commented , " it sounds like we could get an Idol whose voice actually suits the inspirational tune that he or she will be forced to record as a first single . ( Though the odds of that song being anywhere as good as ' The Climb ' ... ) " . While informing Cyrus of its popularity on American Idol , the series ' host Ryan Seacrest commented that the contestants " believe [ it is ] a song that will make an impression and [ ... ] will get them into that next level " . Cyrus said she was pleased because the song was about " following your dreams and not giving up " . 
 = = Joe McElderry version = = 
 = = = Background and composition = = = 
 In the same year of " The Climb " ' s original release , British executive Simon Cowell chose for Joe McElderry , Olly Murs , and Stacey Solomon , the three finalists of the sixth series of the British television talent contest The X Factor , to record the song in preparation for a single release as soon as the winner was announced . After Solomon 's elimination , Murs and McElderry sang the song on December 13 , 2009 , as their final performance in the competition . Upon winning the competition , McElderry 's version of " The Climb " , produced by Quiz & <unk> , was released on December 14 , 2009 by Syco Music as the first single from his debut studio album Wide Awake ( 2010 ) . 
 McElderry said that the lyrics to " The Climb " meant a lot to him : " It 's an emotional song because it 's what 's been happening in the last few months . It all feels very , very surreal . " According to Peter Robinson of The Guardian , the cover has a " plinky " piano in its introduction . In regards to lyrics , Robinson interpreted , " lines about ' uphill battles ' and ' having to lose ' do seem to talk of Joe 's probable future . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Peter Robinson of The Guardian described " The Climb " as a " controversially uncontroversial choice " for a cover and continued , " While ' The Climb ' might be a suitable choice for a winner 's single , the fact that it 's a cover of such a recent song means that it 's still slightly odd . " 
 On the week ending 26 December 2009 , " The Climb " debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart ; its debut position was influenced by a campaign composed of Facebook group members , aimed at getting Rage Against the Machine 's 1992 single " Killing in the Name " to the top position during Christmas week . In the following week , the song reached number one , becoming the final number one of the 2000s decade , where it maintained for a week . The single was certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments exceeding 600 @,@ 000 copies . The song has sold 810 @,@ 000 copies in the UK as of January 2015 . 
 " The Climb " debuted at number one on the Irish Singles Chart on the week ending December 17 , 2009 , where it maintained in the top position for four consecutive weeks . In mainland Europe , the song charted in the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles at number four on the week ending January 9 , 2010 . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The video was shot on 16 December 2009 , in London , England . The video begins with footage from The X Factor and then transitions to a close @-@ up shot of McElderry in the main setting , a flooded cityscape — the scene was shot in a flooded set with a cityscape backdrop . McElderry is clothed by a grey vest and a grey shirt , as he stands in the setting and performs . Throughout the entire video , scenes alternate between the flooded cityscape setting and recycled footage from The X Factor , which are in black and white until it shows him in the live shows in colour . The video concludes with McElderry being informed he won the competition , hugging his peers . 
 = = = Track listings = = = 
 Digital download 
 " The Climb " – 3 : 36 
 CD single 
 " The Climb " – 3 : 36 
 " Somebody to Love " – 2 : 38 
 " Don 't Let the Sun Go Down on Me " – 2 : 27 
 = = = Charts and certifications = = = 
 = Philippine Idol = 
 Philippine Idol is the first version of the Idol series in the Philippines , the 35th country in the world to air a local Idol adaptation and the sixth in Asia . The franchise was first awarded by FremantleMedia , 19 Entertainment and <unk> , Inc. to ABC Development Corporation ( ABC now TV5 ) in 2006 and then to GMA Network in 2008 . Just like the premise of original show Pop Idol , Philippine Idol aims to find the best singer in the country who can be defined as the " national " singer . Local television personality Ryan Agoncillo hosted the program . Ryan Cayabyab ( musical composer ) , Pilita Corrales ( singer , known as Asia 's Queen of Songs ) and Francis Magalona ( rapper and producer ) were also judges of the show . Agoncillo , Corrales and Magalona auditioned to be part of the program , while Cayabyab was chosen by the program 's producers . Meanwhile , actress Heart Evangelista hosted the daily updates program I ♥ Philippine Idol : Exclusive . Composer Mel Villena was the show 's musical director . 
 Mau Marcelo , an aspiring singer from Lucena City , defeated two other contenders on the show 's Finale to become the first Philippine Idol . FremantleMedia subsequently awarded the franchise to GMA Network and their version of the program was named Pinoy Idol , which does not recognize the results of ABC 's franchise . 
 = = Production = = 
 ABC started negotiating with FremantleMedia in order to acquire a Philippine franchise of Idol in 2004 , when Filipino @-@ American Jasmine Trias placed third in American Idol 's third season . It reportedly cost millions of dollars . During the program 's development stage , notable personalities in music and recording industries tried out to become Idol judges , including former <unk> vocalist Ely Buendia , singer @-@ actress Pinky Marquez , and talent manager <unk> Tracy . The chosen judges were addressed according to their agreed @-@ upon nicknames : Cayabyab was called " Mr. C " , Corrales called " <unk> " , and Magalona , " Kiko " . 
 Before it was launched , there was skepticism among the local entertainment press about Philippine Idol as singing contests are common in local television , with recent ones branded as Idol knockoffs . The Filipino culture of " westernized conservatism " was also noted , as Pinoys tend to shy away from direct criticism especially in front of cameras . Promotion began during the Finale of American Idol season 5 . One of its taglines reads , " Hindi lang STAR , <unk> lang <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( Not just a STAR , not just a <unk> , but a <unk> <unk> ) . This was in reference to two singing contests being held during that time — Search for the Star in a Million on ABS @-@ CBN and Pinoy Pop Superstar on GMA Network . Initially , the program was scheduled to begin on July 29 , 2006 , but ABC moved it to July 30 , 2006 . On its premiere , Philippine Idol registered a 7 @.@ 7 % rating according to an independent survey , in contrast to GMA Network 's Mel and Joey at 21 % and ABS @-@ CBN 's Rated K at 26 @.@ 7 % . ABC officials , however , were overwhelmed at the results , considering they were up against " giant networks " . They also noted that ratings for Philippine Idol increased to as much as 12 % towards the final 30 minutes of first episode . 
 Early reviews compared the show with American Idol , which was shown locally on ABC . Entertainment writers said that the local Idol franchise was not as glossy as its American counterpart , but it was able to succeed because of promising elements such as human interest , talent , and proper casting of judges and host . Meanwhile , reviews during the Finale were mixed , with Nestor Torre of the Philippine Daily Inquirer commenting that the Performance Show was phlegmatic and anticlimactic as the Final Three failed to rise up to the challenge and instead played safe , while Results Show was stretched out with one unspectacular number after another . He also noticed sound glitches , which he blamed on faulty equipment and lax personnel . In contrast , Billy Balbastro of <unk> Tonite wrote that he was impressed with the show 's " flow " , song choices , pacing , and camera shots . He also noted that the Finale did not have melodrama and lingering shots for the sake of effects . 
 = = Auditions = = 
 The main auditions were held in three cities , each representing a major island group : Pasay ( advertised as Manila ) for Luzon , on June 3 , 2006 , in Philippine International Convention Center ; Davao for Mindanao , on June 23 , 2006 , in Waterfront Insular Hotel ; and Cebu for Visayas , on July 4 , 2006 , in Bigfoot Entertainment ’ s International Academy of Film and Television . Meanwhile , Fast @-@ Track Screenings were also held in SM <unk> located in Baguio , Lucena , Batangas , Iloilo , and Cagayan de Oro between May and June 2006 . Screenings were also held in cities without an SM Mall such as Dagupan , <unk> in Isabela , Tacloban , and Zamboanga . Applicants were asked to fill out necessary forms and perform two songs before a set of judges , usually from local radio and music industries . Successful applicants were given a pass for the Main Auditions . ABC and its media partners Radio Mindanao Network and Manila Broadcasting Company provided free transportation , food and lodging to those who were eligible for Theater <unk> . 
 The Luzon Main Auditions and Fast @-@ Tracks yielded over 10 @,@ 000 registrants , with Contestant no . 0001 arriving at the audition venue at 1 : 00 a.m. , auditions starting at 9 : 00 a.m. The Main Auditions were composed of three stages — passing the first two stages gave the participant a blue form , allowing them to face the Idol judges about a week later . The Idol judges were so overwhelmed with the amount of talent presented to them that it was difficult for them to say " no " to hopefuls who did not pass their standards . Cayabyab exasperatedly stated during the Luzon Main Auditions , 
 He admitted becoming angry at times and felt like he was the anti @-@ hero because of intense reactions from rejects who viewed the competition as a ticket out of poverty . The judges even allowed candidates to sing up to five " redemption songs " after saying " no " for the first time . After seeing the auditions , FremantleMedia supervising producer Sheldon Bailey said that she was amazed at the abundance of musical talent in the Philippines as well as the amount of touching human stories . 
 = = Theater round = = 
 The Theater Round was held between August 1 and August 3 , 2006 at the Cultural Center of the Philippines . A total of 169 competitors received the Gold Pass from the three main judges , 119 from Luzon and Metro Manila , 17 from Davao , and 33 from Cebu . However , only 157 showed up for the Theater Round as other Gold Passers either backed out or were allegedly " pirated " to join rival talent search Pinoy Dream Academy . They were billeted at the Bayview Park Hotel , where Gold Passers from outside Luzon arrived after a first @-@ class trip in Super Ferry , while the Luzon contenders were picked up in selected SM Malls . The contestants were divided into 11 groups with 15 members . Each contestant performed an a cappella , after which the judges selected who would go home and advance to the next round . From 157 contestants , 84 were chosen to proceed to the group performance , with each group having three members . The list was trimmed down further to 40 contestants , each of which sang solo with a piano accompaniment . Eventually the judges selected the 24 contestants who would compete in the Semi @-@ Final Round . The Top 24 was officially announced on August 27 , 2006 . 
 = = Semifinal round = = 
 The Semi @-@ Finalists were then divided by gender , with the two groups performing alternately at SM Megamall Cinema 3 on a stage built specifically for the live shows . The viewers voted for their favorites by dialing a toll @-@ free telephone number or sending an SMS as often as possible from the end of the show until 8 : 30 p.m. the following day . The four contestants of each group who received the highest number of votes entered the Finals . Ten of the remaining 16 semi @-@ finalists then performed in a Wildcard round , with four contestants with the highest number of votes completing the Top 12 Finalists . Candidates for the Wildcard were announced after the second Semi @-@ Finals Results Show , although it was shown on television a day later in Philippine Idol : Exclusive . 
 = = Final round = = 
 The Final Round started on September 30 , 2006 , in which each finalist sang one to three songs within a specified theme and received comments from each of the judges . The viewers continued to vote for their favorites until 8 : 30 p.m. the following day , which was shortened to two hours from the Fifth Finals Week . The finalist with the lowest number of votes was eliminated during the Results Show every week . However , there were special circumstances that did not result in eliminations during the Results Show , but then the votes were carried over the week after and eventually eliminated two finalists . The 12 Finalists also recorded a compilation album entitled Philippine Idol : The Final 12 , consisting of Original Pilipino Music songs they have performed during the first Finals Week . The remaining three contenders , namely Gian Magdangal , Jan Nieto , and Mau Marcelo , competed in the Finale , instead of the usual two contestants in most Idol shows , held on December 9 and December 10 , 2006 , at the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City . 
 = = = Weekly themes = = = 
 September 30 – OPM songs dedicated to a special someone 
 October 7 – Soul / R & B 
 October 14 – Songs from the Metropop Song Festival 
 October 21 – Contemporary Filipino rock 
 October 29 – Personal theme songs 
 November 5 – Dance music 
 November 12 – Radio hits 
 November 19 – Movie themes , and Broadway show tunes 
 November 26 – Big band 
 December 9 – Personal choice , Judges ' and Musical director 's choice , and Record company 's choice 
 = = = Guest judges = = = 
 A guest judge was enlisted each week for five weeks beginning on October 14 while resident judge Magalona was away on a tour in Europe . Additionally , a sixth guest judge supplemented the panel on the week of Magalona 's return . Each guest judge generally had expertise relating to that week 's theme . 
 October 14 – Hajji Alejandro ( interpreter of the first winning song of the Metropop Song Festival ) 
 October 21 – <unk> Cornejo ( songwriter and front man of <unk> ) 
 October 29 – Luke <unk> ( solo artist and former vocalist of South Border ) 
 November 5 – Regine Tolentino ( professional dancer , former MTV VJ and TV personality ) 
 November 12 – Mo Twister ( radio DJ and talk show host ) 
 November 19 – Lea Salonga ( Tony Award @-@ winning singer and musical theatre performer ) 
 = = = Notable events = = = 
 On the first Finals Week , no contestants were eliminated due to disrupted telephone and mobile phone services in many areas of Luzon , caused by Typhoon Xangsane . In the results show , finalists still went through a familiar elimination routine . Agoncillo called three contestants to an area dubbed the " Hot Spot " before revealing that no one would be eliminated and the votes would be carried over to the succeeding week . This was done because there were no official results to be announced . According to sources from the network , the votes were not yet counted at the time . ABC @-@ 5 Director for Creative and Entertainment Production <unk> <unk> stated that the three finalists who were put in the " Hot Spot " ( Marcelo , <unk> Cruz and <unk> Mateo ) were not necessarily the Bottom Three . <unk> said , " We were not allowed to announce who the Bottom Three were because the votes will be carried over next week and it might affect the voting if people knew who the Bottom Three were . " As a result , two contenders — Stef Lazaro and <unk> <unk> — were eliminated the following week . Another non @-@ elimination occurred on the fourth Finals Week due to reports of disrupted voting ( among Sun Cellular and Smart subscribers ) . The votes amassed for this week were carried over to Week 5 . Through the rest of the results night , each of the judges picked one finalist to give an encore performance : Cornejo picked Cruz , Corrales chose Marcelo , and Cayabyab picked Magdangal . 
 Schedules were changed starting the Fifth Finals Week , with performances held on Sundays while elimination nights were on Mondays , as opposed to the previous arrangement of Saturday performances and Sunday eliminations . The voting time was also shortened from 21 to 2 hours . Agoncillo explained that this change was adopted ( partly due to public clamor ) from the voting period of American Idol . Mateo and Cruz were eliminated because of the non @-@ elimination on the previous week . 
 On the Seventh Finals Week , each finalist sang a song chosen for them by a fellow Idol based on these assigned pairings : Magdangal and Nieto , Marcelo and Mendoza , Chavez and Dingle . After the night 's performances , guest judge Mo Twister confidently said that Dingle would be eliminated the next night and even wagered that he would go to work in a dress for a week if his prediction proved wrong . Dingle was indeed eliminated the following night . The Big Band Week became a " mini @-@ concert " , as each of the remaining four finalists performed two song numbers with a short spiel to the audience in between . The following week featured special segments about the final three contenders : Marcelo , Magdangal , and Nieto . 
 = = = Finale = = = 
 Philippine Idol held its Performance Night Finale on December 9 , 2006 , at the Araneta Coliseum , which was dubbed The Big 3 at the Big Dome . Each of the three remaining contenders performed three songs , one personally chosen by the contestant , one by the judges and one by Sony BMG Music Philippines . Agoncillo hosted the performance night alone ; he was joined the next night by Heart Evangelista . Each song was performed with Villena 's " mega band " and the San Miguel Philharmonic Orchestra . The next night at the same venue , the star @-@ studded results show was held , headlined by Magdangal , Marcelo , and Nieto together with the rest of the Final 12 . The show also included performances from <unk> , <unk> <unk> , the <unk> Girls , G <unk> , Hajji Alejandro , and Gary <unk> , as well as resident judges Francis Magalona and Pilita Corrales . Ryan Cayabyab also performed his compositions by joining the finalists through his piano accompaniment . In what can be regarded as the climax of the show , the Final 12 and resident judges Corrales and Cayabyab performed a medley of songs composed by Cayabyab , including an original one which he made with finalist Miguel Mendoza entitled " Here I Am " . 
 Marcelo was voted as the first Philippine Idol , amassing about 35 @.@ 26 % of the vote . The vote was a hotly contested one with the runners @-@ up earning about 33 @.@ 84 % and 30 @.@ 90 % of the votes . It was not revealed , however , which runner @-@ up garnered which percentage , but they each received ₱ 250 @,@ 000 . Aside from the title , Marcelo also earned a contract with Sony BMG Music Philippines , a management contract with an agency of FremantleMedia 's choice , a ₱ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 non @-@ exclusive contract with ABC , and ₱ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cash prize . 
 = = Elimination chart = = 
 1 Due to the power interruptions and network problems , no elimination was held on October 1 . All votes cast for the week were carried over to the following <unk> Two contestants were eliminated this week in lieu of the non @-@ elimination the week <unk> Due to network problems , no contestant was eliminated . All votes <unk> for the week were carried over to the following week . This serves as Philippine Idol 's Second Non @-@ elimination <unk> Two contestants were eliminated this week in lieu of the non = elimination the week before . This also marks the first Monday elimination , as performance nights were moved to Sundays , with eliminations moved to Mondays . 
 = = Kakaibang Idol = = 
 Kakaibang Idol was a special episode of Philippine Idol held on September 23 , 2006 , a week after the Top 12 Finalists have been named . It was an interactive reality singing competition consisting of notable auditionees who either did not pass or failed to make it through Semifinals . The program was named Kakaibang Idol ( A Different Kind of Idol ) because the seven contestants made an impact among viewers . The twelve finalists were present that night , but only performed at the beginning and end of the show . Likewise , Magalona , Corrales , and Cayabyab took a back seat , appearing in clips taking their " times off " . Taking over jury duties that night were comedic performers Ethel Booba , Arnell Ignacio , and Tuesday Vargas . Although the event served as a breather , voting was still active , involving viewers picking the performer who should be proclaimed Kakaibang Idol . The next night , with finalists and judges present , Kenneth Paul " <unk> " Alonzo — a transgender call center agent from Cebu City — was chosen by viewers as Kakaibang Idol . 
 = = I ♥ Philippine Idol : Exclusive = = 
 I ♥ Philippine Idol : Exclusive , originally Philippine Idol : Exclusive , is a thirty @-@ minute daily program that features updates , news and behind @-@ the @-@ scene footages of the show . Since its premiere on August 14 , 2006 , a male voice talent ( who also voices the plugs for ABC programs ) has been facilitating the program , with appearances by <unk> <unk> who is also a production associate of Philippine Idol . Actress Heart Evangelista took over on September 4 , 2006 . Accordingly , Philippine Idol : Exclusive was renamed I Love Philippine Idol : Exclusive with a heart shape reflecting the new host . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Auditions = = = 
 A Fast @-@ Track audition that was to be held at SM City Sta . Mesa was canceled , leading to complaints from hopefuls and their parents . After hours of waiting , a representative of ABC arrived and relocated each of the 160 frustrated applicants to other scheduled screening . Meanwhile , Filipinos living in Mindanao reacted negatively to what Philippine Idol judges said after a low Gold Pass turnout at the Davao Main Auditions , with Corrales ( a <unk> herself ) saying that " Davao is not the place to look for an Idol " and " all the good ones are in Cebu " . Corrales later clarified in the Wildcard Round that she said such a statement because of the low turnout in the Davao auditions and the even lower Gold Pass output . She added that " Davao 's best talents " might have probably auditioned earlier in Manila . 
 = = = Talent piracy = = = 
 ABC confirmed that a Gold Passer ( later identified in the show 's official website as <unk> Rose Rosales ) was pirated by ABS @-@ CBN 's Pinoy Dream Academy , the Philippine franchise of Star Academy . Sources said that representatives of ABS @-@ CBN even approached a judge to " just let ( some of ) the contestants go " . This came after news that ABS @-@ CBN wanted to co @-@ produce Philippine Idol with ABC , but was denied . ABS @-@ CBN sent a letter to the Philippine Daily Inquirer , which published the said report denying the allegations . The network added that they successfully staged competitions without taking contestants from other contests and would fully respect a contestant 's choice as to which competition they would join . Auditions for Pinoy Dream Academy were being held before the Theater eliminations . ABC then sent a formal letter of complaint to ABS @-@ CBN , alleging that three Gold Passers of Philippine Idol became contestants of Pinoy Dream Academy . The latter did not comment on the letter , as neither of the three talents questioned became a finalist of that show . 
 = = = Vote padding = = = 
 Upon the announcement of the first four male finalists , there were viewers of the show who had negative reactions regarding its format . They were shocked , disappointed , and were left complaining as two of the contestants that were favored by the judges based on their performances failed to make the cut . Instead , two others who had rather bad reviews from the jurors took the spots . Viewers critical to the program concluded that it was just another " popularity contest " rather than a singing competition . Cayabyab mentioned that people should not be complacent regarding the contestants ' status on the show , and advised them to keep on voting for their favorites because of the show 's uncertainty . This criticism was also reflected during the Women 's Semi @-@ finals , as talent critics believed two contenders that failed to make the cut should have become finalists . Critics also noted that viewers did not take heed to the judges ' remarks about performance . Torre stated in his article that the results of Philippine Idol Semi @-@ finals revealed that viewers were not yet knowledgeable or objective enough to pick the first Idol , and pointed to the compromised voting based on " subjective campaigns " from some of the semi @-@ finalists ' backers . He later commented that the show did not affirm a contestant 's popularity but " the determination and deep pockets of his supporters . " This was supported on a report published by the Manila Bulletin about contestants who " buy their way to the top " . Cayabyab divulged that he did not expect the way people voted and would see if that trend would continue in the coming weeks . However , he admitted that such campaigns were part of the game . 
 = = = Looks over talent = = = 
 During the Results Show of the Wildcard Round , Marcelo jokingly said that Philippine Idol is not a singing contest but a " <unk> " ( beauty contest ) , which received a thunderous applause and laughter ( especially from Cayabyab ) . Her statement was interpreted in two ways : as a way of venting out her frustrations in the voting process or as a means of sarcasm . She later made it to the Finals . In a later interview in I ♥ Philippine Idol : Exclusive , she said that she did not mean anything . Marcelo later apologized for her remarks during the Finale 's post @-@ results show press conference . The judges were also scored by viewers for their constant comments about contestants who should lose weight , especially Marcelo . Marcelo admitted getting hurt by comments on so @-@ called physical flaws , adding that she entered a " singing contest " not a " dancing competition " . Cayabyab said that he avoids commenting on the singer 's physical attributes . 
 = = = Cayabyab losing cool = = = 
 Cayabyab had shown signs of frustration during Results Shows where the best performers of the previous night got eliminated . He finally expressed his disgust over the results after <unk> 's elimination , calling it " dreadful " . He also appeared to have surrendered the prospect of finding the best singer in the contest , predicting that it would be a " lightweight competition " with contestants singing nursery rhymes . 
 = = Transition to Pinoy Idol = = 
 Although it had previously announced that it would , ABC did not produce a second season of Philippine Idol ' Sources stated that ABC had incurred large losses producing the first season due to lower than expected advertising revenue . 
 On September 16 , 2007 , FremantleMedia officially announced that the Idol franchise would be given to GMA Network under the name Pinoy Idol . FremantleMedia representative Geraldine Bravo said that it was " very fortunate " to find a new partner , while GMA Network 's Senior Vice President for Entertainment Wilma <unk> added that both parties agreed that the network " has the experience , the resources , and the people to mount talent @-@ search programs " . Reports said that GMA was planning to treat Pinoy Idol as a completely different show , without referring to Philippine Idol as its " first season " and not recognizing Marcelo as the " first winner " . Agoncillo and Cayabyab would not reprise their roles in the new Idol show as they appeared in the second season of Pinoy Dream Academy . 
 In an article published before Pinoy Idol 's premiere , Torre gave the lapses in Philippine Idol which he hoped Pinoy Idol should not replicate , such as Agoncillo 's less than effective hosting style and the somewhat scripted and less wise comments of Magalona and Corrales . 
 = Båtsfjord Airport = 
 Båtsfjord Airport ( Norwegian : Båtsfjord lufthavn , IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is a regional airport serving Båtsfjord in Finnmark , Norway . It consists of a 1 @,@ 000 by 30 meters ( 3 @,@ 281 by 98 ft ) runway and served 12 @,@ 363 passengers in 2014 . Scheduled services are provided by Widerøe using the Dash 8 to Kirkenes , Hammerfest and other communities in Finnmark . The airport is owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor . 
 It is the second airport in Båtsfjord . The first was built in 1973 , but only had a gravel runway . When Widerøe replaced their smaller de Havilland Canada Twin Otters with the Dash 8 , a new airport was needed to serve Båtsfjord . The new airport cost 178 million Norwegian krone and opened on 9 September 1999 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first airline to operate to Båtsfjord was Varangfly , later renamed Norving , who flew seaplane taxi and ambulance flights in the early 1960s . Construction of an airfield in <unk> was started by the aviation club Båtsfjord Flyklubb in 1972 and completed in May 1973 . It consisted of an 800 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) gravel runway and was served with regular flights by Norving . The municipality took over ownership of the airport in 1976 . Norving remained the sole operator until 1990 , when the routes were taken over by Widerøe using the Twin Otter . 
 The Ministry of Transport and Communications announced in February 1993 that they were considering taking over ownership and operations of the airport through the Civil Aviation Administration ( CAA , later renamed Avinor ) . In December , Widerøe articulated that Båtsfjord Airport did not meet the demands for future operation as it lacked proper navigational aids and an asphalt runway . Widerøe stated that with the introduction of the Dash 8 , which would be phased in between 1993 and 1995 , they would no longer be able to serve the airport . The CAA stated , instead , that the new airport should be built , estimated to cost between 70 and 80 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The main reason was that the former airport was poorly located in relation to the terrain , being located in a valley . In April 1994 the ministry stated that they were considering closing many of the smallest regional airports , including Båtsfjord . 
 In April 1995 , when Parliament decided to nationalize twenty @-@ six regional airports owned by their respective municipalities , they also debated a proposal to build a new airport in Båtsfjord . At the time Widerøe was obliged to operate routes to the airport until 31 March 1997 . In December 1995 , Widerøe took delivery of their fifteenth Dash 8 and thus their only need for a Twin Otter was to serve Båtsfjord . From 1994 to 1997 , the cost estimates for the new airport increased from NOK 95 to 125 million . By June 1998 , Parliament approved additional funding which brought the cost to NOK 178 million , including a new county road for NOK 8 million . The airport opened on 9 September 1999 . From the opening Widerøe used the Twin Otter until 1 April 2000 , when the route was taken over by larger Dash 8 aircraft . Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The terminal consists of a single building , with an integrated control tower , capable of handling 120 passengers per hour . The facade is covered in Russian larch ; the focus on wood as a dominant material was common for Norwegian architecture the 1990s , and is also seen at Oslo Airport , Gardermoen ( opened in 1998 ) and for the venues of the 1994 Winter Olympics . The terminal was designed by Alta @-@ based architect Solveig Thorsen and is shaped like an aircraft wing , similar to the terminal building at Gardermoen . There is a single gate at the airport , which prior to the installation of security control was 17 steps from the entrance . 
 The airport resides at an elevation of 149 meters ( 489 ft ) above mean sea level . The runway is designated 03 – 21 , with an asphalt surface measuring 1 @,@ 000 by 30 meters ( 3 @,@ 281 by 98 ft ) . SCAT @-@ I , a Global Positioning System @-@ based landing system , is under deployment . It is possible to extend the runway to 1 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) if desirable in the future . The tarmac has space for three simultaneous aircraft . The airport is located ten minutes ' drive ( 7 km / 4 mi ) from the town center . There are taxis , paid parking and car rental available , but no bus service . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 All services from the airport are operated by Widerøe with 39 @-@ seat Dash @-@ 8 @-@ 100 aircraft . All routes , though not necessarily direct , fly to either Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen , Hammerfest Airport or Tromsø Airport . The routes from Båtsfjord are operated on a public service obligation with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . The airport served 12 @,@ 363 passengers , 2 @,@ 494 aircraft movements and handled 3 tons of cargo in 2012 . The airport operated with a deficit of NOK 20 million in 2012 . 
 = Maryland Route 16 = 
 Maryland Route 16 ( MD 16 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 51 @.@ 06 miles ( 82 @.@ 17 km ) from Taylors Island east to the Delaware state line in Hickman , where the highway continues as Delaware Route 16 ( DE 16 ) . MD 16 connects Cambridge with several communities in northern Dorchester County and southwestern Caroline , including East New Market and Preston . The state highway runs concurrently with U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) near Cambridge , MD 331 between East New Market and Preston , and both MD 404 and MD 313 near Andersontown . MD 16 was constructed between Church Creek and Preston as one of the original state roads in the early and mid @-@ 1910s . The highway was extended in both directions in the late 1910s : north to what was to be designated MD 313 near Denton and west to Taylors Island . MD 16 was extended through Andersontown to the Delaware state line in the early 1930s . MD 16 's bypass of Cambridge was constructed in the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 16 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from <unk> Road at the western city limit of Cambridge east to US 50 in Cambridge . The highway is also a part of the main National Highway System along its concurrencies with US 50 near Cambridge and MD 404 near Denton . 
 = = = Dorchester County = = = 
 MD 16 begins on Taylors Island a short distance west of the bridge over Slaughter Creek to the mainland . The roadway continues west as county @-@ maintained <unk> Neck Road , which provides access to the historic <unk> Farm , Grace Episcopal Church Complex , and Bethlehem Methodist Episcopal Church . MD 16 heads northeast from the island as two @-@ lane Taylors Island Road . The state highway crosses Parsons Creek and passes through the hamlets of Madison and Woolford on its way to the town of Church Creek , where MD 16 intersects MD 335 ( Golden Hill Road ) . MD 16 continues northeast as Church Creek Road toward Cambridge , where the state highway intersects MD 341 ( Race Street ) , which is the old alignment of MD 16 , just beyond Cambridge @-@ South Dorchester High School along the southern edge of the city . MD 16 continues east and intersects the Seaford Line of the Maryland and Delaware Railroad , then curves north to US 50 ( Ocean Gateway ) . The state highway joins US 50 in a concurrency along the four @-@ lane divided highway . US 50 and MD 16 intersect Bucktown Road , which leads southeast to Cambridge @-@ Dorchester Airport , and both ends of MD 750 ( Old Route 50 ) before reaching the eastern end of the concurrency in the community of Whitehall , also known as Mount Holly . 
 MD 16 heads northeast from US 50 as two @-@ lane Mount Holly Road . As the state highway approaches East New Market , the western terminus of MD 14 ( Secretary Road ) heads north toward Secretary and MD 392 ( East New Market Bypass ) heads northeast toward Hurlock . MD 16 turns north into the town , where the highway passes through the East New Market Historic District as Main Street . The stat just west of the town of La Plata east to US 301 in La <unk> highway intersects MD 14 ( Railroad Avenue ) before leaving town as East New Market Ellwood Road . MD 16 crosses the Warwick River and Cabin Creek before meeting MD 331 ( Waddells Corner Road ) at Waddells Corner . MD 16 joins MD 331 in a concurrency that crosses Gravel Creek and passes Beulah Road , the old alignment of MD 16 and MD 331 through Ellwood . After an at @-@ grade crossing of the Preston Branch of the Seaford Line of the Maryland and Delaware Railroad , the two state highways intersect MD 318 ( Preston Road ) and continue northwest as Preston Road , which passes near the Jacob and Hannah <unk> House before crossing Hunting Creek into Caroline County . 
 = = = Caroline County = = = 
 The MD 16 – MD 331 concurrency continues northwest through Linchester , where the highway passes both ends of MD 817 ( Linchester Road ) , which provides access to the historic Linchester Mill . The state highways continue through the town of Preston as Main Street . Unsigned MD 324 ( Maple Avenue ) heads south from MD 16 and MD 331 before the two highways split on the west side of town . MD 16 heads north as Harmony Road through the hamlet of Grove and intersects MD 578 ( Bethlehem Road ) in the community of Harmony . The state highway crosses <unk> Creek and Robins Creek and passes through the hamlet of Two Johns , which is also known as Bureau . 
 As MD 16 passes to the west of Williston Lake , an impoundment of Mill Creek , the highway closely parallels its old alignment , MD 617 . The state highway passes through the Williston Mill Historic District just east of the community of Williston , which contains the historic homes Potter Hall and Memory Lane . MD 16 continues northeast until reaching an intersection with MD 404 and MD 313 ( Shore Highway ) south of Denton . MD 16 turns southeast onto Shore Highway , a four @-@ lane divided highway that reduces to two lanes east of the intersection , to form a triple state highway concurrency . The three state highways continue east to Andersontown , where MD 313 heads south as Federalsburg Highway . A short distance to the east , MD 404 continues straight southeast while MD 16 turns northeast onto Greenwood Road . Shortly thereafter , MD 16 reaches its eastern terminus at the Delaware state line in Hickman . The highway continues east as DE 16 ( Hickman Road ) toward Greenwood . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of MD 16 between Church Creek and East New Market via Cambridge was chosen as one of the original state roads by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . The portion of the highway between Bureau and the western junction with MD 313 and MD 404 south of Denton was also included in the planned state road system ; that piece of highway was the first part of modern MD 16 completed in 1910 . MD 16 was completed from Mount Holly to East New Market in 1911 , from Cambridge to Mount Holly in 1913 , from East New Market to Preston via Linchester in 1914 , and from Church Creek to Cambridge in 1915 . The gap in the state highway within East New Market was closed in 1917 . The segment of highway between Preston and Grove was surfaced by 1915 . MD 16 between Grove and Bureau was under construction by 1919 and finished around 1920 . The state highway was constructed from the bridge to Taylor 's Island to Church Creek between 1917 and 1919 . 
 When numbers were assigned to state highways in Maryland in 1927 , MD 16 had a concurrency with US 213 between Waddell 's Corner and Preston . Greenwood Road from MD 404 in Andersontown to the Delaware state line was built between 1930 and 1933 , concurrent with the completion of the connecting section of MD 404 . MD 16 was extended north and east through Andersontown to the Delaware state line by 1939 , giving the state highway additional concurrencies with MD 313 and MD 404 . Also in 1939 , US 213 between Easton and Vienna was transferred to a new route via Cambridge ; the old portion of US 213 was designated MD 331 and the new section of US 213 became concurrent with MD 16 between Cambridge and Mount Holly . Within Cambridge , MD 16 followed Race Street north to Washington Street , which the highway followed east toward Mount Holly . 
 The next changes in MD 16 occurred in the 1950s . MD 16 was extended west across Slaughter Creek to Taylors Island when a new bridge was completed in 1950 . MD 313 was moved to its present alignment between Federalsburg and Denton in 1954 ; as a result , MD 16 became the sole route from Bureau to MD 404 south of Denton and part of a triple concurrency from there to Andersontown . US 50 , which had replaced US 213 from Ocean City to Wye Mills in 1949 , was expanded to a divided highway along its concurrency with MD 16 by 1955 . MD 331 and MD 16 were realigned around Ellwood and Linchester around 1960 . MD 16 was relocated to bypass Cambridge in 1967 ; the state highway 's old route through the city was transferred to newly designated MD 341 and an extension of MD 343 east to US 50 . MD 16 was relocated at Williston Lake shortly after the construction of a new bridge across the lake 's outlet , Mill Creek , in 1968 . The state highway was straightened out through Madison in 1970 , leaving behind Old Madison Road . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD 16A is the designation for the 0 @.@ 04 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 064 km ) section of Beauchamp Branch Road between MD 16 and its old alignment , MD 617 , just south of Williston Lake near Williston . 
 = The Make @-@ Up = 
 The Make @-@ Up was an American post @-@ punk band from Washington , D.C. formed in 1995 , consisting of ex @-@ Nation of Ulysses frontman Ian Svenonius on vocals , James Canty on guitar and organ , Steve Gamboa on drums , and Michelle Mae on bass guitar . The Make @-@ Up were joined in late 1999 by a fifth member , Alex Minoff ( of the groups Golden and Extra Golden ) , who played guitar with the group until the band 's dissolution in early 2000 . 
 The Make @-@ Up combined garage rock , soul , and a self @-@ styled liberation theology to make a new genre they called " Gospel Yeh @-@ Yeh " . This style led to an emphasis on live performances and interaction between the band and their audience , incorporating the audience into the performances as a " fifth member " , creating what one reviewer described as " " highly energetic and participatory live shows " . Parallel to the band 's gospel musical stylings , the Make @-@ Up produced music under a communism @-@ influenced political philosophy that they saw as counter to the capitalist form of modern rock and roll and pop music . 
 The Make @-@ Up released four studio albums , two live albums , a compilation release collecting several singles and B @-@ sides , and a number of vinyl singles , all released on independent record labels such as Dischord Records , K Records , and Southern Records . Svenonius , Mae , and Minoff are now part of the group Weird War . Svenonius has since released a solo album under the pseudonym David Candy . Canty went on to play with Ted Leo and the Pharmacists and French Toast . The Make @-@ Up , after much prodding by Les <unk> Fav , reformed in 2012 to perform at I 'll Be Your Mirror . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the formation of the Make @-@ Up , Svenonius , Canty , and Gamboa were members of The Nation of Ulysses and the short @-@ lived Cupid Car Club . Before joining the Make @-@ Up , Mae played with the Northwest group The <unk> . In a post @-@ Nation of Ulysses interview , Svenonius explained the formation of the Make @-@ Up from the ashes of his former band : " Nation of Ulysses broke up because the epoch changed with the advent of digital music and the Nirvana explosion . We were faced with what 's now known as indie rock , a sort of vacuous form . We had to determine our next move and this [ the forming of Make @-@ Up ] is it " . The Make @-@ Up released records through many independent record labels , most notably Dischord Records , K Records , Southern Records , and their own Black Gemini Records . On their numerous releases , the Make @-@ Up recorded with a number of producers , including Brendan Canty , Calvin Johnson , Guy <unk> , Royal Trux ( " Adam and Eve " ) , John Loder , and Ian MacKaye . They toured extensively with many groups such as Dub Narcotic Sound System , Royal Trux , Sonic Youth , Fugazi , Ted Leo , Slant 6 , <unk> , Mr. <unk> , Les <unk> Fav , Blonde Redhead , among others . 
 In 2000 , after releasing their fifth studio album , the Make @-@ Up dissolved , reportedly " due to the large number of counter @-@ gang copy groups which had appropriated their look and sound and applied it to vacuous and counter @-@ revolutionary forms " . Svenonius also added in retrospect , " [ The Make @-@ Up ] went on for five years . We had a five year plan like Stalin . It was becoming redundant and people were copying us . That 's fine . We don 't have to do it anymore because they can " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 During the Make @-@ Up 's five years of activity , they released four studio albums , a live album , a compilation of singles and B @-@ sides , and a number of singles and splits . A posthumous live album was also released in 2006 . The band was also the subject of the short film Blue is Beautiful by James Schneider , later repackaged as part of In Film / On Video in 2006 . 
 While the Make @-@ Up released both " live " and " studio " records , their recordings were all created with an eye to spontaneity . Most studio songs were cut as they occurred to the group at that moment . Therefore , the Make @-@ Up 's studio records were in a sense , quite " live " . 
 The Make @-@ Up 's first release in 1995 was " Blue is Beautiful " , a 7 @-@ inch single released on the band 's own Black Gemini Records – a label which only released a handful of the Make @-@ Up 's releases , many of which used a characteristically simple single @-@ color album sleeve . Their second and third releases were also 7 @-@ inch singles : a split with the Meta @-@ <unk> , again on Black Gemini , and another split with Slant 6 on Time Bomb Records . 
 The band 's first full @-@ length studio album , Destination : Love - Live ! At Cold Rice , was released in 1996 . The album was touted as a live release , though it was actually recorded in a studio with " live " sounds added into the mix later . In 1997 , the band released two more albums less than a month apart : After Dark , a live @-@ recording from London , and Sound Verite , a studio album . The two albums shared a number of tracks , recorded either live or in @-@ studio . The same year the Make @-@ Up released " Free Arthur Lee , " a 7 @-@ inch single promoting the release from jail of Love singer Arthur Lee , who was incarcerated in 1996 . Also in 1997 , the Make @-@ Up were the subject of James Schneider 's fictionalized tour @-@ documentary Blue is Beautiful . 
 The following year , The Make @-@ Up released their fourth studio album , In Mass Mind , as well as a split 7 @-@ inch with Scottish band <unk> . In 1999 , the Make @-@ Up released I Want Some , a compilation album of previous singles and B @-@ sides . A month later , the band released what would be their fifth and final studio album Save Yourself . 
 A posthumous live album , Untouchable Sound , was released in 2006 by Drag City and Sea Note . The album included the addition of Alex Minoff on guitar . The same year , Dischord Records released In Film / On Video , a DVD collection of live performances , music videos , and Blue is Beautiful . 
 = = Politics = = 
 As the Make @-@ Up 's frontman and mouthpiece , Ian Svenonius often contextualized the band 's music in terms of larger socio @-@ political themes . Svenonius typically described the band and its gospel attitude in Marxist and socialist terms , in opposition of what he saw as the capitalist , bourgeois , machismo paradigm of rock and roll . This political position was typically presented during live performances and interviews with Svenonius , rather than in the music itself or its lyrics . Svenonius compared the Make @-@ Up 's ideology to the Situationist International group of the 1950s and 1960s , since both presented a critique of the modern , capitalist lifestyle , specifically of capitalism 's effect on popular and consumable culture , such as rock and roll and pop music . When asked if , in line with the title of The Nation of Ulysses ' 1991 album 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America , he still hoped to " destroy America " , Svenonius responded simply : " Of course " . This aversion to American culture was crystallized through their self @-@ style musical genre " Gospel Yeh @-@ Yeh , " a belief system through which they advocated to their audience to " get theirs " and to " off the pigs in all their forms " . 
 The Make @-@ Up 's aversion to capitalist American culture was echoed in the 1998 short film Blue is Beautiful , in which the band starred . The film follows the band 's fictionalized escape from America as " cultural refugees " , where they are hunted by mysterious government agencies and find refuge in coffeehouses and underground night clubs . Much like the assumed personae and personalities of all of Svenonius ' bands and projects , a make @-@ believe mythos and back @-@ story surrounds the Make @-@ Up , primarily based on the band 's gospel approach and its pseudo @-@ political , socialist aesthetics . The political identity of the Make @-@ Up was ideologically and semantically similar to Svenonius ' other bands and projects , all of which culminate in his collection of essays , The Psychic Soviet , published through Drag City Press in 2006 . 
 = = Musical ideology and style = = 
 The Make @-@ Up intended to create ad @-@ lib performances in order to re @-@ energize what they saw as the stale , bland , and formal ritual of rock and roll . <unk> gospel music 's use of the congregate as a " fifth member " , the Make @-@ Up incorporated audience participation through call and response vocals , lyrical " discussion " techniques , and destruction of the fourth wall by physical transgression . 
 Discussing the appropriation of the form of gospel music ( as opposed to its content ) , Svenonius said : 
 One concern of the group was to keep their music " stripped down " and minimal . This was indicative of the Make @-@ Up 's aversion to letting communication be upstaged by technology . Svenonius explained that " the problem is that the high creatures are the server mechanisms of the technology and the system they have created , meaning that we 're dictated to as much by cars . We 've turned the world into a parking lot . Similarly we use musical technology that we create , and it finds a use for itself " . 
 Due to the Make @-@ Up 's consideration of the audience and the special techniques they applied to performing , their live shows exhibited a convergence of soul , surf , and punk – an example of which is their single " I Want Some " from their 1999 album of the same name . Citing the Make @-@ Up 's soul influences , one reviewer stated " If you didn 't know it , you 'd swear that the four members of The Make Up had stolen the soul from James Brown himself " . The Make @-@ Up were also highly influenced by bubblegum music , particularly the French variety called Yé @-@ yé . The factory style of production Yé @-@ yé music had utilized interested the group , who were interested in expanding the labor force involved in the production of pop music , a movement which they saw as in opposition to the rock and roll trend ( begun by The Beatles ) toward self @-@ sufficiency and " downsizing " labor . Through the synthesis of these two disparate and contradictory forms – gospel and Yé @-@ yé – the Make @-@ Up devised a hybrid style they called " Gospel Yeh @-@ Yeh " . Live interpretations of this style can be found on the Make @-@ Up 's two full @-@ length live releases , After Dark and Untouchable Sound , including " They Live by Night , " a song recorded both in studio and live , on Destination : Love - Live ! and Untouchable Sound respectively . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Make @-@ Up 's gospel attitude was related to utilization of the audience as a group member , which Svenonius likened to the rise of the 90s dance music scene : " We 're not interested in countering it . It makes sense to me that techno , rave and dance music should go over in the face of rock and roll because it 's democratic for everybody to express themselves . Whereas a lot of rock and roll isn 't even entertaining at all , let alone allowing people the voice for expression . That 's what the Make @-@ Up has come to remedy . We want to be at once entertaining and inclusive in terms of using the gospel form to sort of breathe life into the old Frankenstein monster " . Svenonius would often interact with the audience in a number of ways , including call and response lyrics , direct address , and leaving the stage and going out into the crowd . 
 Despite the band 's " gospel " and " ad @-@ libbed " approach to recording , the Make @-@ Up 's live performances were often quite structured , as opposed to the typical " jam session " . Svenonius explained that " there 's a skeleton that we create and the form of our shows is unchanging - there 's an intro , an outro , a middle break . It 's very vaudevillian in form " . The Make @-@ Up always wore matching uniforms on stage . Like most of the Make @-@ Up 's identity , the uniforms were an ideological statement , meant to " [ destroy ] individualism . Instead of there being this person [ or ] this member , and them having their separate personalities , or having them as separate entities . We 're trying to create a unification . A one @-@ ness . That 's basically what it is : they 're uniforms " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Destination : Love - Live ! at Cold Rice ( Dischord ) ( 1996 ) 
 Sound Verite ( K Records ) ( 1997 ) 
 In Mass Mind ( Dischord ) ( 1998 ) 
 Save Yourself ( K Records ) ( 1999 ) 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 I Want Some ( singles compilation ) ( K Records - 1999 , M <unk> 's Records - re @-@ issued 2012 ) 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 After Dark ( Dischord ) ( 1997 ) 
 Untouchable Sound ( Drag City / Sea Note ) ( 2006 ) 
 = = = DVD / video = = = 
 Blue is Beautiful ( included on In Film / On Video ) ( Dischord ) ( 1998 ) 
 In Film / On Video ( Dischord ) ( 2006 ) 
 = 1924 – 25 Nelson F.C. season = 
 The 1924 – 25 season was the 44th in the history of Nelson Football Club , and their fourth as a professional team in the Football League . The campaign saw the team return to the Third Division North , having finished in the relegation zone of the Second Division in 1923 – 24 . Despite losing only one match all season at Seedhill , Nelson 's home ground , the team struggled in away matches . Nelson ended the campaign on 53 points , with a record of 23 wins , 7 draws and 12 losses , and finished as runners @-@ up to Darlington in the league table . Nelson reached the Sixth Qualifying Round of the FA Cup , beating non @-@ League Winsford United before being knocked out of the competition by Coventry City . The team progressed past the first round of the Lancashire Senior Cup with a win against Wigan Borough , but were defeated in the following round by Blackburn Rovers . 
 A total of 23 different players were used by Nelson during their 44 competitive matches , less than half of whom had played for the club in previous campaigns . Goalkeeper Harry Abbott and half @-@ back Ernie Braidwood were the two ever @-@ presents for Nelson during 1924 – 25 . Centre forward Joe Eddleston scored 26 goals in 43 games to become the team 's top goalscorer for the fourth consecutive season . Two Nelson records were set during the campaign , although one was later broken ; the seven @-@ goal winning margin against Crewe Alexandra was never bettered in Football League matches , while the attendance of 13 @,@ 500 for the visit of Darlington in April 1925 was the largest ever seen at Seedhill at that time . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 1924 – 25 season marked Nelson 's return to the Football League Third Division North following their relegation from the Second Division at the end of the previous campaign . It was the club 's fourth season in the Football League , having previously competed in the Central League . Former Scotland international defender David Wilson retired from his player @-@ manager role in the summer of 1924 in order to take up the managerial post full @-@ time . Thomas Jacques , who had played for Nelson during their inaugural season in the Football League , was hired as the assistant coach and groundsman . Unlike the previous summer , when Nelson had embarked on a pre @-@ season tour of Spain , the team did not play any friendly matches during the build @-@ up to the campaign . The club strip remained unchanged from the previous season ; a blue jersey , white shorts and black socks with white and blue trim . 
 While there were several changed to the playing staff , the core of the team that had played in the Second Division remained intact . Centre forward Joe Eddleston , Nelson 's top goalscorer in each of the previous three seasons , was retained along with captain Clem Rigg , Welsh half @-@ back Jack Newnes and goalkeeper Harry Abbott . The two most senior squad members , David Wilson and goalkeeper Joseph Birds , retired from professional football aged 40 and 36 respectively . Inside forward Dick Crawshaw , who had been the team 's second @-@ highest scorer in 1923 – 24 with five goals , moved to Stalybridge Celtic . Scottish forward Mike McCulloch ended his two @-@ year association with the club by joining Chesterfield on a free transfer , while half @-@ back Leigh Collins signed for New Brighton . Other players , including William <unk> and Ernest Gillibrand , left Nelson having failed to establish themselves in the first @-@ team during their time with the club . Manager Wilson spent a total of £ 750 ( £ 35 @,@ 000 as of 2011 ) on new players in the summer of 1924 . Billy Bottrill and Bill Ellerington arrived from Middlesbrough , while Barrow full @-@ back James <unk> was signed to bolster the defensive line . Several young players were acquired from local non @-@ League football during the close season , including Ambrose Harris from <unk> and Billy Harper , formerly of <unk> . The Nelson squad was considered by the local newspaper to be stronger than the one which had won the Third Division North two seasons earlier . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 = = Football League Third Division North = = 
 Nelson began their league campaign on 30 August 1924 with an away match at Southport , who had ended the previous season in seventh position . New signings Billy Bottrill , Bill Ellerington and Joseph O 'Beirne went straight into the starting line @-@ up but they could not prevent Southport winning by a single goal from Jack Barber , giving them their first ever League win against Nelson . A week later , Nelson played their first home game of the season , in which James <unk> made his debut for the club . A crowd of around 6 @,@ 000 saw Ashington beaten 4 – 0 thanks to goals from Bottrill , Joe Eddleston , Jack Newnes and Sid Hoad . Three days later , Eddleston scored twice as Doncaster Rovers were defeated by three goals to nil in the first midweek match of the campaign . However , Nelson could not continue their winning streak as they lost 0 – 2 against Accrington Stanley at Peel Park in the following fixture . On 16 September , Nelson achieved their biggest victory in the Football League at that time with a 7 – 1 win over Durham City at Seedhill . The game saw Eddleston score his first hat @-@ trick since the 3 – 0 victory away at Rochdale in January 1923 , and O 'Beirne and Eddie Cameron score their first goals of the season . Four days later , Nelson suffered their third consecutive defeat away from home , losing 0 – 3 to Barrow at Holker Street . The team continued their good home form the following week with a narrow win against Lincoln City . Nelson named the same team for the seventh game in succession for the trip to Tranmere Rovers on 4 October , but the side were beaten for the fourth straight away match thanks to goals from Dixie Dean and Jimmy Moreton . 
 A week later Eddleston took his tally of goals to eight , scoring twice as Nelson overcame Walsall 2 – 1 at Seedhill . He scored again in the next match as the team gained their first point of the season away from home , drawing 1 – 1 at Wigan Borough , who had been Nelson 's first ever opponents in the Football League over three years previously . Half @-@ back Ernie Braidwood scored his first goal of the campaign in the 2 – 1 win against Halifax Town . Eddie Cameron also scored for the home side , and Walter Moore made his senior debut in the match . November began badly for Nelson as they suffered their heaviest defeat of the season , a 0 – 5 loss away at New Brighton . Allan Mathieson and Joe Wilcox scored two goals each as New Brighton won the first ever competitive meeting between the two sides . Nelson moved up to sixth place in the league following the next match , a 1 – 0 win at home to Grimsby Town . However , the team continued their poor form away from Seedhill , losing 1 – 3 to table @-@ topping Darlington on 15 November . Seven days later , Bottrill scored the only goal of the match as Nelson beat Rochdale to record their eighth consecutive home win . 
 In the first game of December , Nelson failed to win at Seedhill for the first time in the season . Despite a tenth goal of the campaign from Eddleston and a penalty kick scored by captain Clem Rigg , the team could only draw with Bradford Park Avenue . After a two @-@ week break from League football because of the FA Cup , Nelson returned to action with a 4 – 1 home win over Rotherham County in the only match ever played between the two sides at Seedhill . On Christmas Day , half @-@ back Ambrose Harris made his first appearance for Nelson as the side beat Chesterfield 1 – 0 thanks to Bill Ellerington 's first goal for the club . The same team was defeated by the same scoreline the following day in the reverse fixture at Saltergate . Inside forward Arthur Wolstenholme scored the only goal of the match as Nelson recorded their first away victory of the season in the final fixture of 1924 . 
 Nelson started the new year with a 1 – 1 draw at Ashington ; Ellerington scored for the second time in three matches but it was cancelled out by a goal from Bill Watson . A week later , half @-@ back Ernie Braidwood netted his first of the season as the team secured another 1 – 1 draw away at Wrexham 's Racecourse Ground . In the first home match of the new year , on 17 January 1925 , Nelson atoned for their defeat to Accrington Stanley earlier in the season with a 4 – 1 win thanks to two goals from Eddleston , one from Chadwick , and a first goal in almost three months for Cameron . Clem Rigg scored two penalties the following week as the side beat Barrow to move above Bradford Park Avenue into fifth position in the Third Division North . On 7 February Nelson won their third consecutive home fixture , beating Tranmere Rovers by four goals to one . Left @-@ half Herbert Butterworth made his senior debut for the club against Tranmere , despite signing from Wolverhampton Wanderers almost two years previously , while Chadwick scored twice in one game for the first time . A trip to Walsall seven days later brought a first away victory of 1925 for the team as goals from Chadwick and Hoad gave Nelson a 2 – 1 win , which elevated them to third place in the league . A narrow win against Wigan Borough at Seedhill on 21 February lifted Nelson further up the table into second position , behind only Darlington . The team ended a successful February with a fourth victory of the month , beating Halifax Town 4 – 2 before a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 spectators at The Shay . 
 Nelson carried their good form into March ; Bottrill scored for the first time in over two months to help the team defeat New Brighton by five clear goals . This seventh straight win closed the gap between Nelson and Darlington to five points , with the league leaders having played three more matches . In an attempt to push for the title the Nelson directors invested in two new players in March ; inside forward John Stevenson arrived from Second Division side Bury for a fee of £ 500 , while Fred Laycock joined Nelson from Barrow . However , the team suffered their first loss of 1925 in of the following match away at Grimsby Town as goals from Joe Cooper and Frank McKenna gave the home side a 2 – 0 win . This was followed by another defeat four days later ; a goal on debut for Stevenson could not prevent Lincoln City winning by two goals to one . On 21 March Nelson returned to winning ways with a 2 – 0 defeat of Hartlepools United at Seedhill , and later the same week Eddleston scored his second hat @-@ trick of the campaign as struggling Hartlepools were beaten 4 – 2 in the reverse fixture . A first goal in Nelson colours for Laycock secured a third successive win away at Rochdale on 28 March . 
 A then @-@ record crowd of 13 @,@ 500 descended on Seedhill for the visit of Darlington on 4 April , but the top two teams in the division could not be separated as the game finished in a 1 – 1 draw . Nelson remained second in the table going into the Easter period , during which teams played four matches in the space of five days . The first of these games ended in a 2 – 1 defeat away at Crewe Alexandra , despite Newnes ' first goal since September . John Stevenson then scored his second Nelson goal the following day in a 1 – 1 draw with Bradford Park Avenue . On 13 April , the team avenged their loss to Crewe with a comprehensive 7 – 0 victory at Seedhill , their biggest winning margin in the Football League . Joe Eddleston opened the scoring and went on to net his third hat @-@ trick of the season , taking his tally of goals to 25 , a total that would never be beaten during Nelson 's time in the League . The other goals were added by Laycock , who scored twice , Chadwick and Cameron , who netted his last goal for Nelson . However , the team then took just three out of an available ten points at the end of the season , ending their hopes of returning to the Second Division . Following a 1 – 1 draw at Doncaster Rovers , Nelson suffered their first and only home defeat of the season , losing 4 – 2 to Wrexham . On 21 September the team achieved their final win of the campaign , beating Southport 2 – 1 thanks to two goals from Laycock . The 1924 – 25 season ended with consecutive away losses at Durham City and bottom @-@ of @-@ the @-@ league Rotherham County , leaving Nelson with second in the Third Division North on 53 points , ahead of third @-@ placed New Brighton on goal average . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 Key 
 Results 
 = = = Final league position = = = 
 = = Other first @-@ team matches = = 
 Nelson 's first match outside the league in the 1924 – 25 season came in the Lancashire Senior Cup . The team entered the competition in the First round , and were drawn against Wigan Borough at Seedhill . Nelson progressed to the next stage of the cup with a comprehensive 4 – 0 win and were handed another home tie in the second round , against First Division side Blackburn Rovers . A 2 – 1 win for the away team ended Nelson 's participation in the cup for the season . 
 Nelson entered the FA Cup , the foremost cup competition in England , in the Fifth Qualifying Round along with all the other teams in the Third Division North . For their first match , played on 29 November 1924 , the team was drawn to play Winsford United of the Cheshire County League at Seedhill . Nelson won the first ever meeting between the two clubs 4 – 1 with goals from Braidwood , Eddleston , O 'Beirne and Wolstenholme , to progress to the Sixth Qualifying Round for the first time in three years . In the next round Nelson were again given a home tie , against Second Division outfit Coventry City , who would be relegated to the Third Division North at the end of the 1924 – 25 campaign . Nelson made only one change from the side that had defeated Winsford , with Eddie Cameron replacing Arthur Wolstenholme . In front of a crowd of 7 @,@ 000 spectators , one of the highest attendances at Seedhill of the season , Coventry won 1 – 0 to progress to the first round proper of the competition . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 Results 
 = = Player details = = 
 Nelson used a total of 23 players during the 1924 – 25 season and there were 13 different goalscorers . There were also four squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . The team played in a 2 – 3 – 5 formation ( the standard formation at the time ) throughout the campaign , with two full @-@ backs , three half @-@ backs , two outside forwards , two inside forwards and a centre forward . Two players , goalkeeper Harry Abbott and half @-@ back Ernie Braidwood , appeared in all 44 Third Division and FA Cup matches . Joe Eddleston missed just one game , the defeat against Durham City on 29 April , while Welsh international Jack Newnes made 42 appearances in the season . Two players played only once during the season ; Fred Smith deputised for Edgar Chadwick at inside @-@ left in the win against Southport on 21 April , and Allan Bottrill appeared in the final match of the season in place of Eddleston . Neither ever played another senior match for the club . 
 The team scored a total of 88 goals in all competitions . The highest scorer was Eddleston , with 26 goals , followed by Chadwick , who scored 10 goals in 20 outings . Billy Bottrill netted eight times during his first season as a Nelson player , while Fred Laycock scored seven despite only playing for the last two months of the campaign . Club captain Clem Rigg was the highest @-@ scoring defender , netting four penalties . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Key to positions 
 Statistics 
 = Nathan F. Cobb = 
 The Nathan F. Cobb was a three @-@ masted schooner named after the shipbuilder and founder of Cobb ’ s Salvaging Company whose many rescues of stranded ships help lead to the formation of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service . Despite its namesake 's history of shipwreck rescues , the Nathan F. Cobb capsized in heavy seas on 1 December 1896 en route from Brunswick , Georgia to New York with a cargo of timber and cross ties . The cook and a shipmate drowned when they were swept overboard in violent seas . The crew righted the vessel by removing the three masts and they drifted for four days until they became grounded on a sandbar off Ormond Beach , Florida . Rescue attempts led to the drowning of volunteer Ferd Waterhouse , whose body was never recovered , but no other crew members were lost . A plaque commemorates Ferd Waterhouse ’ s rescue efforts . The Cobb Cottage , a structure built using materials salvaged from the ship , is part of Ormond Beach ’ s Historic Trail . 
 = = History = = 
 Nathan F. Cobb of Rockland , Maine was a three @-@ masted , square rigged schooner constructed in 1890 . Information related to many ships built in Rockland between the years of 1837 and 1920 is generally sparse . In his six volume set titled Merchant Sail , William Armstrong Fairburn describes the landscape regarding construction and registration information for ships built in Rockland during the aforementioned era : 
 It is to be regretted that the desired data covering construction and registration at most Maine ports have not been preserved , recorded , and made available for inspection locally ; that the records still in existence — and that have not been destroyed or lost — are scattered ; the tabulations of the data on hand attempted during recent years by the <unk> ( Pemaquid Watershed Association ) are incomplete ; and that such records as have been made available are for vessels catalogued alphabetically instead of chronologically . 
 Fairburn cites Customhouse Records with recording information about 275 vessels registered as built in Rockland between 1837 and 1920 . Among the vessels listed is the Nathan F. Cobb , which ranged 167 @.@ 2 feet ( 51 m ) in length , weighed 656 tons , drafted 12 @.@ 7 feet ( 4 m ) of water and had a beam width of 35 @.@ 1 feet ( 11 m ) . 
 = = Final voyage = = 
 On its last voyage the Cobb was scheduled to transport a cargo of timber and cross ties from Brunswick , Georgia to New York . On Tuesday , 1 December 1896 , after leaving port from Brunswick , the schooner fell victim to the strong winds and high seas associated with Nor 'easters . Gale force winds ripped the vessel 's sails from their masts and rough seas capsized the ship to its beam ends . The crew was able to right the distressed vessel by removing the main and mizzen masts , but this left the Cobb vulnerable since it was powerless and waterlogged . Despite the cabin being swept away by the sea , the ship 's hull was kept relatively intact during this sequence of events . Unfortunately , both a cook and a shipmate drowned in the violent seas . On the morning of 5 December 1896 the Nathan F. Cobb ran aground on a near shore sandbar roughly 1000 feet off the coast of Ormond Beach , Florida . 
 = = Rescue efforts = = 
 J.D. Price and John Anderson built the Ormond Hotel in 1888 and sold it to Henry Flagler in 1891 . While Flagler took over ownership responsibilities , he retained Price as the hotel 's manager . On the morning of 5 December 1896 , then Ormond Hotel manager J.D. Price , noticed the stranded vessel in the surf and gathered a group of people to assist in the rescue efforts . After learning of the disaster , Superintendent Hiram B. Shaw of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service 's Seventh Life @-@ Saving District , hastened to the scene to assess the situation . Shaw quickly telegraphed for permission to have a life saving beach apparatus sent to him by train from Jupiter , Florida where the Jupiter Inlet Life Saving Station was located , approximately 180 miles south of Ormond Beach . This was quickly granted by General Superintendent Sumner Increase Kimball . Because of the proximity and travel time from the Jupiter Inlet Station to Ormond Beach , Shaw had his small surf boat wheeled down to the beach on a man @-@ drawn wagon . He then went into town to procure necessary equipment and rope lines for the rescue . 
 In total , about fifty people came together on the beach . Due to the tumultuous conditions , it was decided that no rescue attempts would be made until low tide at 11 : 00 a.m. The first rescue boat set out at nearly low tide . With a rope attached to its stern from shore , hotel painter Edward DeCourcy and another hotel staff member manned Shaw 's small rowboat . Although they successfully made it beyond the breakers , the rowboat succumbed to the strong southerly current ; missing the float line thrown from the schooner by five feet . They were forced to come in . Five more unsuccessful attempts were made to reach the grounded vessel . 
 Next , a small metallic dingy , known as an iron yawl , was carried down to the beach . Tom Fagen and Freed Waterhouse manned the yawl , in another attempt to reach the grounded schooner . Through skilled seamanship , they made it to the second set of breakers , only a short distance from the vessel . When they tried to reach the float line , a large wave struck them leaving their boat filled with water . The two men abandoned their yawl . Fagen managed to swim ashore and was met by volunteers close to the beach half @-@ drowned . Waterhouse decided against swimming to shore . When he saw that the yawl had flipped , he swam back to it and straddled the hull . The men on the shore began pulling the flipped boat in , but another wave broke on top of it throwing Waterhouse into the water and righting the yawl . Waterhouse climbed back into the boat and began getting pulled in again , only to be capsized shortly thereafter . This time Waterhouse surfaced , appearing dazed and grasping onto an oar . Shaw 's rescue boat was put back in the water , but Waterhouse had already gone under and presumably drowned to death a short time later . F Waterhouse 's body was never recovered , despite several searches . 
 Hiram B. Shaw had just returned to the beach when this casualty occurred . After supplying his small rescue boat with more rope lines , he and Edward DeCourcy removed their outer clothing and prepared to embark . The men on the Cobb , who had just witnessed Waterhouse 's drowning , prompted the captain of the schooner to give an impassioned address in which he said , " They have sacrificed one man in their efforts to save us ; now I 'll risk my life in an attempt to get ashore . " The captain tied a rope around his waist and jumped into the water , just as the rescue boat had set out from shore . After battling against the current and waves , he was met by Shaw 's rescue boat and clung to its stern until they reached land . Making use of the captain 's line , the men on shore tied a life preserver to it . One at a time , the five stranded crewmen pulled the flotation device out to the schooner , fastened it to their bodies and were pulled to safety by the people on the shore . After receiving a cup of hot coffee , a drink of whiskey and a blanket , the Cobb 's crew were taken to Coquina , Ormond Beach 's area hospital . 
 Upon hearing the story , General Superintendent Sumner Increase Kimball of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service wrote a letter of praise to Edward DeCourcy for his selflessness and bravery ; also acknowledging the many others involved . 
 = = Cobb Cottage = = 
 The Cobb Cottage was built using materials salvaged from the ship . William " Billy " C. Fagen was given permission to use the material to aid in the construction of the three bedroom cottage . Materials used from the wreck included railroad ties to form the exterior and railings for porch decorations . The schooner 's wooden name plate , with " Nathan F. Cobb " engraved into it , hangs over the fireplace . The house is now part of Ormond Beach 's Historic Trail . 
 = = Location = = 
 The location of Nathan F. Cobb 's wreck is designated by a sign to warn swimmers . It is anchored in or near the water 's edge depending on the tide . The hull of the ship became visible for brief period in May 2004 after shifting sands and a very low tide coincided simultaneously . The sign is located at 29 ° 16 ′ 38 ″ N 81 ° 1 ′ 53 ″ W on Ormond Beach . Previously , a large boulder had been sent from Freed Waterhouse 's hometown of Cape Elizabeth , Maine , decorated with a bronze plaque commemorating his brave rescue efforts . This monument was prominently placed in the sand dunes near the site where the ship ran aground , but in July 1972 the plaque was vandalized and broken off . After the plaque was reattached to the boulder , it was relocated to the east side of the Casa Del Mar Beach Resort , where it currently sits . The sign is on the wall north of the steps leading up to the pool . 
 = = Newspaper coverage = = 
 Despite limited information about its service routes and construction , the Nathan F. Cobb was the subject of two separate New York Times articles during its short career . One article reported the wreck the day after it occurred , the other article came from 20 June 1892 and chronicled a disturbance between mates . The Cobb was still in tow only three miles outside Mobile Bay , beginning its route from Mobile , Alabama to New York , when mate Henry Shaffer jumped over board to avoid a beating . Another mate , J. Trott had already used a <unk> pin to half kill another seaman on the schooner and Shaffer was fearful for his life . Shaffer began swimming towards a nearby light house and was picked up nearly five miles from where he jumped over board . The captain of the towboat reported that Captain Cookson of the Cobb , mentioned incidentally they had lost a crewman . Both Cookson and Trott already had pending charges against them for cruelty and marooning of sailors , stemming from an incident in May 1891 at Calcasieu Pass , Louisiana . 
 = = Forerunner of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service = = 
 Nathan F. Cobb was named after a ship builder , born in 1797 from Eastham , Massachusetts on Cape Cod . Cobb and his family moved from Eastham to Northampton County , Virginia before purchasing Sand Shoal Island , which later became Cobb Island . It was on Cobb Island , in 1839 , that Nathan founded Cobb 's Salvaging Company with his sons . They specialized in wrecking and salvaging stranded vessels along the shallow Mid @-@ Atlantic coastline . The Cobbs had a remarkable record ; not one person drowned in any of the rescue efforts for the 37 or more ships stranded off their island . The success of the salvaging company earned them the sobriquet " Rothschilds among the toilers of the sea " . Despite the company 's notable prosperity , the Cobbs were often praised for their humanity and general regard for human life , " Often a crew of ten or twenty would be landed on the island from stranded vessels without a penny , and they were tenderly cared for as though they were millionaires . " This practice was a rare creed among wreckers in the 19th century . The Cobbs and others like them transformed the act of salvaging which led way to the forming of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service ; this later merged into what is now the United States Coast Guard . 
 = Amanita ceciliae = 
 Amanita ceciliae , commonly called snakeskin grisette and strangulated amanita , is a basidiomycete fungus in the genus Amanita . First described in 1854 by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Christopher Edmund Broome , it was given its current name by Cornelis Bas in 1984 . It is characterized by bearing a large fruit body with a brown cap 5 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) across . The cap has charcoal @-@ grey patches , which are easily removable . The stipe is 7 – 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , white in colour , and there is no ring on it . It is slightly tapered to the top , and has irregular cottony bands girdling the base . The universal veil is grey . Spores are white , spherical in shape , non @-@ amyloid , and measure 10 @.@ 2 – 11 @.@ 7 micrometres . The mushrooms are considered edible , but field guides typically advise caution in selecting them for consumption , due to risks of confusion with similar toxic species . A. ceciliae is found in woods throughout Europe and North America , where it fruits during summer and autumn . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 Amanita ceciliae was first described by Miles Joseph Berkeley , an English <unk> and clergyman , and Christopher Edmund Broome , a British mycologist , in 1854 . It is placed in the genus Amanita and section <unk> . Section <unk> consists of mushrooms with special characteristics – such as the absence of a ring , and very few clamp connections at the bases of the basidia . 
 The name Amanita <unk> , given by Swiss mycologist Louis Secretan in 1833 , has also been used for this species . In 1978 , the name was declared nomenclaturally incorrect according to the rules of International Code of Botanical Nomenclature . Other synonyms are Agaricus ceciliae , Amanitopsis <unk> and Amanitopsis ceciliae . The present name , Amanita ceciliae , was given by Cornelis Bas , a Dutch mycologist , in 1984 . 
 The species is commonly called " snakeskin grisette " . Another common name is " strangulated amanita " , referring to the tightly clasping volva . It is also called Cecilia 's ringless amanita after Cecilia Berkeley , the wife of M. J. Berkeley . The name was meant " to record the services which have been rendered to Mycology by many excellent illustrations and in other ways " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Amanita ceciliae is characterized by bearing a large fruit body with a brown cap 5 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) across . The cap has charcoal @-@ grey patches , which are easily removable . The stipe is 7 – 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , white in colour , and there is no ring on it . It is slightly tapered to the top , and has irregular cottony bands girdling the base . 
 The universal veil is grey . Spores are white , spherical in shape , non @-@ amyloid , and measure 10 @.@ 2 – 11 @.@ 7 micrometres . 
 The cap is 5 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) across , shape ranging from convex to flat . It is upturned , and has a deep @-@ coloured margin . There is a low umbo . It is grey to a brownish black in colour , darkest in the center and paler towards the margin . Generally smooth , the cap surface is slightly sticky when moist . The cap surface is characterized by having loose , <unk> , charcoal @-@ grey patches of volval remnants scattered across it . The patches are easily removed . The margin is strongly striated . The cap colour may vary , and pale forms are known to exist , for example , as in the types A. c. f. <unk> and A. c. var. pallida . A. c. var. <unk> , first described by mycologist L. Maire in 2008 and occurring in France , is a cinder black @-@ capped variation . 
 Gills are free and closely spaced , and white in colour . They can be thick , and are often forked . The stem is 7 – 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , and 120 – 200 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) x 20 – 40 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 57 in ) thick . It is lightly stuffed ( filled with a cottony tissue ) and then hollow , and there is a slight tapering to the top . It is white in colour , with flat grey hairs , often in a zig @-@ zag pattern . It does not bear a ring and has fragile , cottony , brownish or charcoal @-@ coloured oblique girdles of volval remnants around the stem base and lower stem . The volva is white to grey , powdery and delicate . The flesh is white and does not change colour when cut . Although it lacks any distinctive odor , it tastes sweet . 
 Spores are white in colour , spherical and are not amyloid . They measure 10 @.@ 2 – 11 @.@ 7 µm . A few large @-@ sized spores are commonly found in a mount of gill tissue . <unk> are not found at bases of basidia . 
 = = = Lookalikes = = = 
 Amanita <unk> ( occurring in North America ) looks quite similar , but it has a sack @-@ like volva , unlike A. ceciliae . A. <unk> , of the Antilles islands , is somewhat the same , but it has ellipsoid spores unlike the spherical ones of A. ceciliae . A. ceciliae is often used as a misnomer for A. <unk> , which largely occurs in North America . A. <unk> is a provisional name , and the species has not yet been validly published . The spores of A. ceciliae highly resemble those of A. cinctipes ( mainly found in Singapore ) , though the former has larger spores . The discolouration in the volva of A. <unk> ( from Colombia , as its name states ) probably shows a relationship between the mushroom and A. ceciliae . A. <unk> is another lookalike . This Colombian and Mesoamerican species is often mistaken for A. ceciliae , as both mushrooms have a volva with a weak structure and greying gills . The notable difference is the strong yellow colour of the cap in immature A. ceciliae mushrooms . A. <unk> is not yet validly published , and currently is a newly accepted name . The Chinese species A. liquii is similar but the yellow @-@ brown , red @-@ brown or green @-@ brown coloured cap of A. ceciliae are much different from the brown @-@ black cap of A. liquii . Also , the volval remnants of A. ceciliae converge at the base to form a ring @-@ like zone , unlike A. liquii . Apart from this , the cellular pigments in the sterile strip around the gills and volval remnants are much darker in colour compared to A. ceciliae . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Amanita ceciliae is considered an edible mushroom and used as food , although many field guides recommend to avoid eating it . A study of 16 edible mushrooms was done to learn about their chemical compositions and antioxidant activities . Among these species , A. ceciliae and Pleurotus ostreatus were the two mushrooms that showed most powerful radical scavenging activities . 
 = = Ecology and habitat = = 
 Europe 
 In Europe , Amanita ceciliae is widespread everywhere , though infrequently encountered . It often inhabits deciduous forests with hornbeam ( Carpinus ) , oak ( Quercus ) , beech ( Fagus ) and birch ( Betula ) , but it can also rarely occur with conifers : pine ( Pinus ) , fir ( Abies ) , spruce ( Picea ) and cedar ( <unk> ) . It has a preference for neutral to calcareous soils . 
 North America 
 In North America , it is found mainly in areas east of the Mississippi River , but similar mushrooms also occur in the Pacific Northwest , the Southwest , and Texas . Its range also stretches south into Mexico . They are ecologically mycorrhizal , and habitats include hardwood forests and coniferous forests . The mushroom grows alone , scattered , or in groups during summer and autumn . It is primarily eastern in distribution but also reported in the Pacific Northwest , the Southwest , and Texas ( with an apparent association with pecan trees ) . 
 = = = Introduced species = = = 
 Apart from its native area , A. ceciliae has also been reported from Asia . These regions include Japan , Azad Kashmir and Iran . There is speculation that North American collections could possibly be an undescribed species differing from the European A. ceciliae . 
 = Pre @-@ dreadnought battleship = 
 Pre @-@ dreadnought battleships are sea @-@ going battleships built between the mid- to late 1880s and 1905 , before the launch of HMS Dreadnought . Pre @-@ dreadnoughts replaced the ironclad battleships of the 1870s and 1880s . Built from steel , and protected by hardened steel armour , pre @-@ dreadnought battleships carried a main battery of very heavy guns in barbettes ( open or with armored gunhouses ) supported by one or more secondary batteries of lighter weapons . They were powered by coal @-@ fuelled triple @-@ expansion steam engines . 
 In contrast to the chaotic development of ironclad warships in preceding decades , the 1890s saw navies worldwide start to build battleships to a common design as dozens of ships essentially followed the design of the British Majestic class . The similarity in appearance of battleships in the 1890s was underlined by the increasing number of ships being built . New naval powers such as Germany , Japan , the United States , and – to a lesser extent – Italy and Austria @-@ Hungary , began to establish themselves with fleets of pre @-@ dreadnoughts , while the navies of Britain , France , and Russia expanded to meet these new threats . The decisive clash of pre @-@ dreadnought fleets was between the Imperial Russian Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy during the Battle of Tsushima on 27 May 1905 . 
 These battleships were abruptly made obsolete by the arrival of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . Dreadnought followed the trend in battleship design to heavier , longer @-@ ranged guns by adopting an " all @-@ big @-@ gun " armament scheme of ten 12 @-@ inch guns . Her innovative steam turbine engines also made her faster . The existing pre @-@ dreadnoughts were decisively outclassed , and new and more powerful battleships were from then on known as dreadnoughts while the ships that had been laid down before were designated pre @-@ dreadnoughts . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The pre @-@ dreadnought developed from the ironclad battleship . The first ironclads — the French Gloire and HMS Warrior — looked much like sailing frigates , with three tall masts and broadside batteries , when they were commissioned at the start of the 1860s . Only eight years later HMVS Cerberus , the first breastwork monitor , was launched . Only three years later followed HMS Devastation , a turreted ironclad which more resembled a pre @-@ dreadnought than previous and contemporary turretless ironclads . Each ship lacked masts and carried four heavy guns in two turrets fore and aft . Devastation was the first ocean @-@ worthy breastwork monitor , built to attack enemy coasts and harbours ; because of her very low freeboard , she could not fight on the high seas as her decks would be swept by water and spray , interfering with the working of her guns . Navies worldwide continued to build masted , turretless battleships which had sufficient freeboard and were seaworthy enough to fight on the high seas . 
 The distinction between coast @-@ assault battleship and cruising battleship became blurred with the Admiral class , ordered in 1880 . These ships reflected developments in ironclad design , being protected by iron @-@ and @-@ steel compound armour rather than wrought iron . Equipped with breech @-@ loading guns of between 12 @-@ inch and 16 ¼ -inch ( 305 mm and 413 mm ) calibre , the Admirals continued the trend of ironclad warships towards gigantic weapons . The guns were mounted in open barbettes to save weight . Some historians see these ships as a vital step towards pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; others view them as a confused and unsuccessful design . 
 The subsequent Royal Sovereign class of 1889 retained barbettes but were uniformly armed with 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns ; they were also significantly larger ( at 14 @,@ 000 tons displacement ) and faster ( due to triple @-@ expansion steam engines ) than the Admirals . Just as importantly , the Royal Sovereigns had a higher freeboard , making them unequivocally capable of the high @-@ seas battleship role . 
 The pre @-@ dreadnought design reached maturity in 1895 with the Majestic class . These ships were built and armoured entirely of steel , and their guns were mounted in fully enclosed barbettes , inevitably referred to as turrets . They also adopted a 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main gun , which , due to advances in casting and propellant , was lighter and more powerful than the previous guns of larger calibre . The Majestics provided the model for battleship building in the Royal Navy and many other navies for years to come . 
 = = Armament = = 
 Pre @-@ dreadnoughts carried guns of several different calibres , for different roles in ship @-@ to @-@ ship combat . The main armament was four heavy guns , mounted in two centre @-@ line turrets fore and aft . Very few pre @-@ dreadnoughts deviated from this arrangement . These guns were slow @-@ firing , and initially of limited accuracy ; but they were the only guns heavy enough to penetrate the thick armour which protected the engines , magazines , and main guns of enemy battleships . 
 The most common calibre for the main armament was 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) s , although some ships used smaller guns because they could attain higher rates of fire ; British battleships from the Majestic class onwards carried this calibre , as did French ships from the Charlemagne class ( laid down in 1894 ) . Japan , importing most of its guns from Britain , used 12 @-@ inch guns . The United States used both 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) and 13 @-@ inch ( 330 mm ) guns for most of the 1890s until the Maine class ( not to be confused with the earlier Maine of Spanish – American War notoriety ) , laid down in 1899 , after which the 12 in. gun was universal . The Russians used both 12 and 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) as their main armament ; the Petropavlovsk class , Retvizan , Tsesarevich , and Borodino class had 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main batteries while the Peresvet class mounted 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns . The first German pre @-@ dreadnought class used an 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) gun but decreased to a 9 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 239 mm ) gun for the two following classes and returned to 11 @-@ inch guns with the Braunschweig class . 
 While the calibre of the main battery remained quite constant , the performance of the guns improved as longer barrels were introduced . The introduction of slow @-@ burning nitrocellulose and cordite propellant allowed the employment of a longer barrel , and therefore higher muzzle velocity — giving greater range and penetrating power for the same calibre of shell . Between the Majestic class and Dreadnought , the length of the British 12 @-@ inch gun increased from 35 calibres to 45 and muzzle velocity increased from 706 metres ( 2 @,@ 317 ft ) per second to 770 metres ( 2 @,@ 525 ft ) per second . 
 Pre @-@ dreadnoughts also carried a secondary battery . This consisted of smaller guns , typically 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , though any calibre from 4 to 9 @.@ 4 inches ( 100 to 240 mm ) could be used . Virtually all secondary guns were " quick firing " , employing a number of innovations to increase the rate of fire . The propellant was provided in a brass cartridge , and both the breech mechanism and the mounting were suitable for rapid aiming and reloading . The role of the secondary battery was to damage the less well @-@ armoured parts of an enemy battleship ; while unable to penetrate the main armour belt , it might score hits on lightly armoured areas like the bridge , or start fires . Equally important , the secondary armament was to be used against enemy cruisers , destroyers , and even torpedo boats . A medium @-@ calibre gun could expect to penetrate the light armour of smaller ships , while the rate of fire of the secondary battery was important in scoring a hit against a small , manoeuvrable target . Secondary guns were mounted in a variety of ways ; sometimes carried in turrets , they were just as often positioned in fixed armoured casemates in the side of the hull , or in unarmoured positions on upper decks . 
 Some of the pre @-@ dreadnoughts carried an " intermediate " battery , typically of 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) to 10 @-@ inch calibre . The intermediate battery was a method of packing more heavy firepower into the same battleship , principally of use against battleships or at long ranges . The United States Navy pioneered the intermediate battery concept in the Indiana , Iowa , and Kearsarge classes , but not in the battleships laid down between 1897 and 1901 . Shortly after the USN re @-@ adopted the intermediate battery , the British , Italian , Russian , French , and Japanese navies laid down intermediate @-@ battery ships . This later generation of intermediate @-@ battery ships almost without exception finished building after Dreadnought , and hence were obsolete before completion . 
 During the ironclad age , the range of engagements increased ; in the Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 5 battles were fought at around 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 5 km ) , while in the Battle of the Yellow Sea in 1904 , the Russian and Japanese fleets fought at ranges at 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 5 km ) . The increase in engagement range was due in part to the longer range of torpedoes , and in part to improved gunnery and fire control . In consequence , shipbuilders tended towards heavier secondary armament , of the same calibre that the " intermediate " battery had been ; the Royal Navy 's last pre @-@ dreadnought class , the Lord Nelson class , carried ten 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns as secondary armament . Ships with a uniform , heavy secondary battery are often referred to as " semi @-@ dreadnoughts " . 
 The pre @-@ dreadnought 's armament was completed by a tertiary battery of light , rapid @-@ fire guns . These could be of any calibre from 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) down to machine guns . Their role was to give short @-@ range protection against torpedo boats , or to rake the deck and superstructure of a battleship . 
 In addition to their gun armament , many pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were armed with torpedoes , fired from fixed tubes located either above or below the waterline . By the pre @-@ dreadnought era the torpedo was typically 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) in diameter and had an effective range of several thousand meters . However , it was virtually unknown for a battleship to score a hit with a torpedo . 
 = = Protection = = 
 Pre @-@ dreadnought battleships carried a considerable weight of steel armour . Experience showed that rather than giving the ship uniform armour protection , it was best to concentrate armour over critical areas . The central section of the hull , which housed the boilers and engines , was protected by the main belt , which ran from just below the waterline to some distance above it . This " central citadel " was intended to protect the engines from even the most powerful shells . The main armament and the magazines were protected by projections of thick armour from the main belt . The beginning of the pre @-@ dreadnought era was marked by a move from mounting the main armament in open barbettes to an all @-@ enclosed , turret mounting . 
 The main belt armour would normally taper to a lesser thickness along the side of the hull towards bow and stern ; it might also taper up from the central citadel towards the superstructure . The deck was typically lightly armoured with 2 to 4 inches of steel . This lighter armour was to prevent high @-@ explosive shells from wrecking the superstructure of the ship . 
 The battleships of the late 1880s , for instance the Royal Sovereign class , were armoured with iron and steel compound armour . This was soon replaced with more effective case @-@ hardened steel armour made using the Harvey process developed in the United States . First tested in 1891 , Harvey armour was commonplace in ships laid down in 1893 – 5 . However , its reign was brief ; in 1895 , the German Kaiser Friedrich III pioneered the even better Krupp armour . Europe adopted Krupp plate within five years , and only the United States persisted in using Harvey steel into the 20th century . The improving quality of armour plate meant that new ships could have better protection from a thinner and lighter armour belt ; 12 inches ( 305 mm ) of compound armour provided the same protection as just 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 190 mm ) of Harvey or 5 @.@ 75 inches ( 133 mm ) of Krupp . 
 = = Propulsion = = 
 Almost all pre @-@ dreadnoughts were powered by reciprocating steam engines . Most were capable of top speeds between 16 and 18 knots ( 21 mph ; 33 km / h ) . The ironclads of the 1880s used compound engines , and by the end of the 1880s the even @-@ more efficient triple expansion compound engine was in use . Some fleets , though not the British , adopted the quadruple @-@ expansion steam engine . 
 The main improvement in engine performance during the pre @-@ dreadnought period came from the adoption of increasingly higher pressure steam from the boiler . Scotch marine boilers were superseded by more compact water @-@ tube boilers , allowing higher @-@ pressure steam to be produced with less fuel consumption . Water @-@ tube boilers were also safer , with less risk of explosion , and more flexible than fire @-@ tube types . The Belleville @-@ type water @-@ tube boiler had been introduced in the French fleet as early as 1879 , but it took until 1894 for the Royal Navy to adopt it for armoured cruisers and pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; other water @-@ tube boilers followed in navies worldwide . 
 The engines drove either two or three screw propellers . France and Germany preferred the three @-@ screw approach , which allowed the engines to be shorter and hence more easily protected ; they were also more maneuverable and had better resistance to accidental damage . Triple screws were , however , generally larger and heavier than the twin @-@ screw arrangements preferred by most other navies . The French also built the only class of turbine powered pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , the Danton class of 1907 . 
 Coal was the almost exclusive fuel for the pre @-@ dreadnought period , though navies made the first experiments with oil propulsion in the late 1890s . An extra knot or two of speed could be gained by applying a ' forced draught ' to the furnaces , where air was pumped into the furnaces , but this risked damage to the boilers . 
 = = Pre @-@ dreadnought fleets and battles = = 
 The pre @-@ dreadnought battleship in its heyday was the core of a very diverse navy . Many older ironclads were still in service . Battleships served alongside cruisers of many descriptions : modern armoured cruisers which were essentially cut @-@ down battleships , lighter protected cruisers , and even older unarmoured cruisers , sloops and frigates whether built out of steel , iron or wood . The battleships were threatened by torpedo boats ; it was during the pre @-@ dreadnought era that the first destroyers were constructed to deal with the torpedo @-@ boat threat , though at the same time the first effective submarines were being constructed . 
 The pre @-@ dreadnought age saw the beginning of the end of the 19th century naval balance of power in which France and Russia vied for competition against the massive British Royal Navy , and saw the start of the rise of the ' new naval powers ' of Germany , Japan and the USA . The new ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy and to a lesser extent the U.S. Navy supported those powers ' colonial expansion . 
 While pre @-@ dreadnoughts were adopted worldwide , there were no clashes between pre @-@ dreadnought battleships until the very end of their period of dominance . The First Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1894 – 95 influenced pre @-@ dreadnought development , but this had been a clash between Chinese battleships and a Japanese fleet consisting of mostly cruisers . The Spanish – American War of 1898 was also a mismatch , with the American pre @-@ dreadnought fleet engaging Spanish cruisers . Not until the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 did pre @-@ dreadnoughts engage on an equal footing . This happened in three battles : the Russian tactical victory during the Battle of Port Arthur on 8 – 9 February 1904 , the indecisive Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August 1904 , and the decisive Japanese victory at the Battle of Tsushima on 27 May 1905 . These battles upended prevailing theories of how naval battles would be fought , as the fleets began firing at one another at much greater distances than before ; naval architects realized that plunging fire ( explosive shells falling on their targets largely from above , instead of from a trajectory close to horizontal ) was a much greater threat than had been thought . 
 Gunboat diplomacy was typically conducted by cruisers or smaller warships . A British squadron of three protected cruisers and two gunboats brought about the capitulation of Zanzibar in 1896 ; and while battleships participated in the combined fleet Western powers deployed during the Boxer rebellion , the naval part of the action was performed by gunboats , destroyers and sloops . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 European navies remained dominant in the pre @-@ dreadnought era . The British Royal Navy remained the world 's largest fleet , though both Britain 's traditional naval rivals and the new European powers increasingly asserted themselves against its supremacy . 
 In 1889 , Britain formally adopted a ' Two Power Standard ' committing it to building enough battleships to exceed the two largest other navies combined ; at the time , this meant France and Russia , who became formally allied in the early 1890s . The Royal Sovereign class and Majestic class were followed by a regular programme of construction at a much quicker pace than in previous years . The Canopus , Formidable , Duncan and King Edward VII classes appeared in rapid succession from 1897 to 1905 . Counting two ships ordered by Chile but taken over by the British , the Royal Navy had 39 pre @-@ dreadnought battleships ready or building by 1904 , starting the count from the Majestics . Over two dozen older battleships remained in service . The last British pre @-@ dreadnoughts , the Lord Nelson class , appeared after Dreadnought herself . 
 France , Britain 's traditional naval rival , had paused its battleship building during the 1880s because of the influence of the Jeune Ecole doctrine , which favoured torpedo boats to battleships . After the Jeune Ecole 's influence faded , the first French battleship laid down was Brennus , in 1889 . Brennus and the ships which followed her were individual , as opposed to the large classes of British ships ; they also carried an idiosyncratic arrangement of heavy guns , with Brennus carrying three 13 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns and the ships which followed carrying two 12 @-@ inch and two 10 @.@ 8 @-@ inch in single turrets . The Charlemagne class , laid down 1894 – 96 , were the first to adopt the standard four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) gun heavy armament . The Jeune Ecole retained a strong influence on French naval strategy , and by the end of the 19th century France had abandoned competition with Britain in battleship numbers . The French suffered the most from the Dreadnought revolution , with four ships of the Liberté class still building when Dreadnought launched , and a further six of the Danton class begun afterwards . 
 Germany 's first pre @-@ dreadnoughts , the Brandenburg class , were laid down in 1890 . By 1905 , a further 19 battleships were built or under construction , thanks to the sharp increase in naval expenditure justified by the 1898 and 1900 Navy Laws . This increase was due to the determination of the navy chief Alfred von Tirpitz and the growing sense of national rivalry with the UK . Besides the Brandenburg class , German pre @-@ dreadnoughts include the ships of the Kaiser Friedrich III , Wittelsbach , and Braunschweig classes — culminating in the Deutschland class , which served in both World Wars . On the whole , the German ships were less powerful than their British equivalents but equally robust . 
 Russia equally entered into a programme of naval expansion in the 1890s ; one of Russia 's main objectives was to maintain its interests against Japanese expansion in the Far East . The Petropavlovsk class begun in 1892 took after the British Royal Sovereigns ; later ships showed more French influence on their design , such as the Borodino class . The weakness of Russian shipbuilding meant that many ships were built overseas for Russia ; the best ship , the Retvizan , being largely constructed in America . The Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 was a disaster for the Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; of the 15 battleships completed since Petropavlovsk , eleven were sunk or captured during the war . One of these , the famous Potemkin , mutinied and was scuttled , however she was later raised and recommissioned . After the war , Russia completed four more pre @-@ dreadnoughts after 1905 . 
 Between 1893 and 1904 , Italy laid down eight battleships ; the later two classes of ship were remarkably fast , though the Regina Margherita class was poorly protected and the Regina Elena class lightly armed . In some ways , these ships presaged the concept of the battlecruiser . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire also saw a naval renaissance during the 1890s , though of the nine pre @-@ dreadnought battleships ordered only the three of the Habsburg class arrived before Dreadnought herself made them obsolete . 
 = = = America and the Pacific = = = 
 The United States started building its first battleships in 1891 . These ships were short @-@ range coast @-@ defence battleships that were similar to the British HMS Hood except for an innovative intermediate battery of 8 @-@ inch guns . The US Navy continued to build ships that were relatively short @-@ range and poor in heavy seas , until the Virginia class laid down in 1901 – 02 . Nevertheless , it was these earlier ships that ensured American naval dominance against the antiquated Spanish fleet — which included no pre @-@ dreadnoughts — in the Spanish – American War , most notably at the Battle of Santiago de Cuba . The final two classes of American pre @-@ dreadnoughts ( the Connecticuts and <unk> ) were completed after the completion of the Dreadnought and after the start of design work on the USN 's own initial class of dreadnoughts . The US Great White Fleet of 16 pre @-@ dreadnought battleships circumnavigated the world from 16 December 1907 , to 22 February 1909 . 
 Japan was involved in two of the three major naval wars of the pre @-@ dreadnought era . The first Japanese pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , the Fuji class , were still being built at the outbreak of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 95 , which saw Japanese armoured cruisers and protected cruisers defeat the Chinese Beiyang Fleet , composed of a mixture of old ironclad battleships and cruisers , at the Battle of the Yalu River . Following their victory , and facing Russian pressure in the region , the Japanese placed orders for four more pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; along with the two <unk> these battleships formed the core of the fleet which twice engaged the numerically superior Russian fleets at the Battle of the Yellow Sea and the Battle of Tsushima . After capturing eight Russian battleships of various ages , Japan built several more classes of pre @-@ dreadnought after the Russo @-@ Japanese War . 
 = = Obsolescence = = 
 In 1906 , the commissioning of HMS Dreadnought brought about the obsolescence of all existing battleships . Dreadnought , by scrapping the secondary battery , was able to carry ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns rather than four . She could fire eight heavy guns broadside , as opposed to four from a pre @-@ dreadnought ; and six guns ahead , as opposed to two . The move to an ' all @-@ big @-@ gun ' design was a logical conclusion of the increasingly long engagement ranges and heavier secondary batteries of the last pre @-@ dreadnoughts ; Japan and the United States had designed ships with a similar armament before Dreadnought , but were unable to complete them before the British ship . It was felt that because of the longer distances at which battles could be fought , only the largest guns were effective in battle , and by mounting more 12 @-@ inch guns Dreadnought was two to three times more effective in combat than an existing battleship . 
 The armament of the new breed of ships was not their only crucial advantage . Dreadnought used steam turbines for propulsion , giving her a top speed of 21 knots , against the 18 knots typical of the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . Able both to outgun and outmaneuver their opponents , the dreadnought battleships decisively outclassed earlier battleship designs . 
 Nevertheless , pre @-@ dreadnoughts continued in active service and saw significant combat use even when obsolete . Dreadnoughts and battlecruisers were believed vital for the decisive naval battles which at the time all nations expected , hence they were jealously guarded against the risk of damage by mines or submarine attack , and kept close to home as much as possible . The obsolescence and consequent <unk> of the pre @-@ dreadnoughts meant that they could be deployed into more dangerous situations and more far @-@ flung areas . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During World War I , a large number of pre @-@ dreadnoughts remained in service . The advances in machinery and armament meant that a pre @-@ dreadnought was not necessarily the equal of even a modern armoured cruiser , and was totally outclassed by a modern dreadnought battleship or battlecruiser . Nevertheless , the pre @-@ dreadnought played a major role in the War . 
 This was first illustrated in the skirmishes between British and German navies around South America in 1914 . While two German cruisers menaced British shipping , the Admiralty insisted that no battlecruisers could be spared from the main fleet and sent to the other side of the world to deal with them . Instead the British dispatched a pre @-@ dreadnought of 1896 vintage , HMS Canopus . Intended to stiffen the British cruisers in the area , in fact her slow speed meant that she was left behind at the disastrous Battle of Coronel . Canopus redeemed herself at the Battle of the Falkland Islands , but only when grounded to act as a harbour @-@ defence vessel ; she fired at extreme range ( 13 @,@ 500 yards ) on the German cruiser SMS Gneisenau , and while the only hit was from an inert practice shell which had been left loaded from the previous night ( the ' live ' shells of the salvo broke up on contact with water ; one inert shell ricocheted into one of Gneisenau 's funnels ) , this certainly deterred Gneisenau from a potentially damaging raid on a British squadron which was still taking on coal . The subsequent battle was decided by the two Invincible @-@ class battlecruisers which had been dispatched after Coronel . This appears to have been the only meaningful engagement of an enemy ship by a British pre @-@ dreadnought . 
 In the Black Sea five Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts saw brief action against the Ottoman battlecruiser Yavuz during the Battle of Cape Sarych in November 1914 . 
 The principle that disposable pre @-@ dreadnoughts could be used where no modern ship could be risked was affirmed by British , French and German navies in subsidiary theatres of war . The German navy used its pre @-@ dreadnoughts frequently in the Baltic campaign . However , the largest number of pre @-@ dreadnoughts was engaged at the Gallipoli campaign . Twelve British and French pre @-@ dreadnoughts formed the bulk of the force which attempted to ' force the Dardanelles ' in March 1915 . The role of the pre @-@ dreadnoughts was to support the brand @-@ new dreadnought HMS Queen Elizabeth engaging the Turkish shore defences . Three of the pre @-@ dreadnoughts were sunk by mines , and several more badly damaged . However , it was not the damage to the pre @-@ dreadnoughts which led to the operation being called off . The two battlecruisers were also damaged ; since Queen Elizabeth could not be risked in the minefield , and the pre @-@ dreadnoughts would be unable to deal with the Turkish battlecruiser lurking on the other side of the straits , the operation had failed . Pre @-@ dreadnoughts were also used to support the Gallipoli landings , with the loss of three more : HMS Goliath , HMS Triumph and HMS Majestic . 
 A squadron of German pre @-@ dreadnoughts was present at the Battle of Jutland in 1916 ; German sailors called them the " five minute ships " , which was the amount of time they were expected to survive in a pitched battle . In spite of their limitations , the pre @-@ dreadnought squadron played a useful role . As the German fleet disengaged from the battle , the pre @-@ dreadnoughts risked themselves by turning on the British battlefleet as dark set . Nevertheless , only one of the pre @-@ dreadnoughts was sunk : SMS Pommern went down in the confused night action as the battlefleets disengaged . 
 Following the November 1918 Armistice , the U.S. Navy converted fifteen older battleships , eight armoured cruisers and two larger protected cruisers for temporary service as transports . These ships made one to six trans @-@ Atlantic round @-@ trips each , bringing home a total of more than 145 @,@ 000 passengers . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 After World War I , most battleships , dreadnought and pre @-@ dreadnought alike , were disarmed under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . Largely this meant the ships being broken up for scrap ; others were destroyed in target practice or relegated to training and supply duties . One , Mikasa , was given a special exemption to the Washington Treaty and was maintained as a museum and memorial ship . 
 Germany , which lost most of her fleet under the terms of the Versailles treaty , was allowed to keep eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts ( of which only six could be in active service at any one time ) which were counted as armoured coast @-@ defence ships ; two of these were still in use at the beginning of World War II . One of these , Schleswig @-@ Holstein , shelled the Polish Westerplatte peninsula during the opening of the German invasion of Poland . Schleswig @-@ Holstein served for most of the War as a training ship ; she was sunk while under refit in December 1944 , and broken up in situ in January 1945 . The other , Schlesien , was mined and then scuttled in March 1945 . 
 A number of the inactive or disarmed pre @-@ dreadnoughts were nevertheless sunk in action during World War II , such as the Greek pre @-@ dreadnoughts Kilkis and Lemnos , bought from the U.S. Navy in 1914 . While neither of the ships was in active service , they were both sunk by German divebombers after the German invasion in 1941 . In the Pacific , the U.S. Navy submarine USS Salmon sank the disarmed Japanese pre @-@ dreadnought Asahi in May 1942 . A veteran of Tsushima , she was serving as a repair ship . 
 = = = Post World War II = = = 
 No pre @-@ dreadnoughts served post – World War II as armed ships , the last serving pre @-@ dreadnought was the former SMS Hessen , which was used as a target ship by the Soviet union into the early 1960s as the Tsel . The hulk of the ex @-@ USS Oregon ( BB @-@ 3 ) was used until 1956 , after which she was scrapped . 
 = = Lone survivor = = 
 The only pre @-@ dreadnought preserved today is the Japanese Navy 's flagship at the Battle of Tsushima , the Mikasa , which is now located in Yokosuka , where it has been a museum ship since 1925 . Two smaller cruisers from a similar period are also preserved , the USS Olympia , and the Russian cruiser Aurora — itself a survivor of the Battle of Tsushima against the IJN . 
 = Squeeze ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Squeeze " is the third episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on September 24 , 1993 . " Squeeze " was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong and directed by Harry Longstreet , with Michael Katleman directing additional footage . The episode featured the first of two guest appearances by Doug Hutchison as the mutant serial killer Eugene Victor Tooms , a role he would reprise in " Tooms " . " Squeeze " is the first " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode of The X @-@ Files , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' overarching mythology . 
 The show 's main characters are FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of ritualistic killings by somebody seemingly capable of squeezing his body through impossibly narrow gaps . The agents deduce that their suspect may be a genetic mutant who has been killing in sprees for ninety years . 
 Production of " Squeeze " was problematic ; creative differences between Longstreet and the crew led to him being replaced as director , while some missing scenes needed to be shot after the initial filming . Because of this turbulence , the completion of the episode relied on post @-@ production techniques . However , " Squeeze " has received positive reviews from critics , mostly focusing on Hutchison 's performance and the resonance of his character . The episode has subsequently been described by The Star as " the episode that really sold The X @-@ Files idea to the masses " . Academics have examined " Squeeze " for its portrayal of the politics of law enforcement , highlighting the tension — evident throughout the series — between the agents ' desire to find the truth and their duty to secure criminal convictions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Baltimore , businessman George Usher arrives at his office building . He is watched from a storm drain by someone who then sneaks into the building by climbing through the elevator shaft into the ventilation system , and kills Usher by removing his liver . The investigation into Usher 's murder — the latest of three such killings — is assigned to careerist FBI agent Tom Colton ( Donal Logue ) , who turns to academy colleague Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) for help . 
 The case baffles Colton , as the only common elements in the murders are the lack of entry points and the apparent removal of the victims ' livers with bare hands . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) looks over the case and notes their similarity to earlier murder sprees that occurred in 1933 and 1963 . At the crime scene , Mulder notices an elongated fingerprint on the air vent , which he also finds to be similar to some documented in the X @-@ Files . He concludes that because five murders occurred during the earlier sprees , the investigators should expect two more . 
 Because Scully believes that the killer will return to the scenes of his earlier crimes , she and Mulder wait in the parking garage of Usher 's office building . There , they catch a man named Eugene Victor Tooms ( Doug Hutchison ) climbing through the air vents . Tooms is given a polygraph test , which includes questions written by Mulder linking him to murders dating as far back as 1903 . After Tooms passes the test easily , Colton dismisses Mulder 's queries as being ridiculous and lets Tooms go . However , Mulder later digitally elongates and narrows Tooms ' fingerprints to show Scully that they match the prints at the crime scene . Mulder believes that Tooms is able to stretch and squeeze his body through narrow spaces . That night , Tooms demonstrates this by squeezing down a chimney to claim another victim . 
 Mulder and Scully find no documentation on Tooms ' life . They visit Frank Briggs ( Henry Beckman ) , a former detective , who recounts his experiences of the investigation into the 1933 murders . Briggs brings out old photographs of Tooms — who has not aged in sixty years — and gives them the address of Tooms ' former apartment building . There , Mulder and Scully find a " nest " constructed out of newspaper and bile in the building 's crawl space , as well as several trophy items taken from past victims . Mulder suspects that Tooms is a mutant who can hibernate for thirty years at a time after consuming five human livers . As the two leave , Tooms , who is hiding in the rafters , stealthily takes the necklace Scully is wearing as a new trophy . 
 Mulder and Scully put the apartment under surveillance , but Colton has them taken off the job . Mulder finds Scully 's necklace in Tooms ' apartment and tries to call his partner , but her phone line has been cut . Tooms breaks into her apartment through a tiny air vent to kill her , but Mulder rushes there and apprehends him first . Tooms is put in an institution for the criminally insane where he begins to build another nest using newspaper . At the institution , Scully informs Mulder that medical tests on Tooms show an abnormal skeletal and muscle system , and a rapidly declining metabolism . When Tooms is given food through a slot in the door , he stares at the thin slot and grins . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Coming after two episodes focused on the series ' " mythology " , or fictional history , " Squeeze " helped establish that the show could cover other paranormal subjects , and was the first " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode of The X @-@ Files . Series creator Chris Carter thought that the show could not sustain its momentum unless it branched out from the previously UFO @-@ centered plots . Co @-@ writers Glen Morgan and James Wong were inspired to write the episode when they looked at a ventilation shaft outside of their office and thought about whether someone could crawl inside it . Although the episode has parallels with the second Kolchak film , The Night Strangler ( 1973 ) , which featured a man who commits murders every 21 years , Morgan and Wong have stated they were inspired by the serial killers Jack the Ripper and Richard Ramirez . After eating foie gras during a trip to France , Carter proposed the idea that the villain should consume human livers . Morgan noted that the writers settled on the liver because it was " funnier " than any other organ . The idea to have Tooms use a nest for hibernation came from Morgan and Wong ; they liked that if the agents were unable to catch Tooms , he could return after weeks of dormancy . 
 Actor Doug Hutchison was 33 when he auditioned for the part of Tooms , but the producers initially considered him too young for the role ; Glen Morgan thought that Hutchinson " looks twelve years old " . However Hutchison impressed the writers with his ability to suddenly transition into attacking behavior , which convinced them to hire him . He related that his portrayal of Tooms was inspired by the " stillness " of Anthony Hopkins ' acting in The Silence of the Lambs . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode 's establishing exterior shots , and those of Tooms ' house , were filmed around Hastings Street in Vancouver . When filming the first shot of Tooms ' eyes glowing from a storm drain , the production crew arrived too late to secure the street for filming , and a nearby construction crew were temporarily drafted to guard the area . The ventilation system through which the first victim is attacked at night was meant to be of a multistory car park . However , to avoid a costly tenting operation to simulate night @-@ time , a replica of the necessary parts of the ventilation system was built in a lower level of the car park . Exterior shots of Scully 's apartment were also filmed in Vancouver , at the same location used in the pilot episode . However , this location 's use was later discontinued owing to the limited range of shots it afforded ; most reverse angles would show a large car park across the street . 
 Wong was disappointed with director Harry Longstreet , claiming he did not have respect for the script . Longstreet had failed to film one of the script 's scenes , and had not obtained additional camera coverage for the scenes which had been filmed . As a result , Wong and another director , Michael Katleman , re @-@ shot several scenes for additional coverage to complete the episode , and filmed the omitted scene and some inserts . Hutchison also had difficulty with Longstreet 's directing ; he found the acting instructions he was given " ridiculous " . Morgan said that the episode 's production was problematic , feeling that " Squeeze " " was truly saved in postproduction " . Duchovny also found issue with Longstreet 's direction , and disagreed with the director 's take on how Fox Mulder should be portrayed . Describing their different opinions , Duchovny noted " the director wanted me to be mad about this horrible serial killer . I was like , ' No , this is an amazing discovery ! He 's not morally culpable , because he 's genetically driven . ' I judge no one " . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 For the shot in which Tooms slides through a chimney , the producers hired a contortionist who could squeeze through small spaces . They filmed the shot with the camera standing below the contortionist . The chimney , which was " more like a belt than a pipe " , was made to look much narrower than it actually was . Using computer @-@ generated imagery , they were able to produce and elongate shots of the contortionist 's fingers . Producer R. W. Goodwin believed that the contortionist — known only as " Pepper " — would only have limited success in fitting down the chimney set and would work mostly as a photo double . However , he was able to fit entirely inside the chimney ; the production crew only needed to add some sound effects " of bones snapping and cracking " . 
 The scene in which Tooms enters Scully 's home was initially filmed in Hutchison 's absence . The crew shot his entrance later , using a larger blue screen set . These shots were digitally merged so that Tooms would appear to emerge from a much smaller hatch than was filmed . The effect was kept to a minimum ; Hutchison 's footage was not " squeezed " too much , as both Carter and visual effects supervisor Mat Beck have stated their belief that " less is more : just a hint of the supernatural is all that is required " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although it did not directly impact the ongoing storyline of The X @-@ Files , " Squeeze " introduced key thematic elements to the series . " Squeeze " has been described as " the episode where Dana Scully must publicly pick a side " . She had previously confronted military officials in " Deep Throat " , and has " carefully worded " her reports to protect her partner Mulder from ridicule , but an encounter with former colleague Tom Colton forces her to openly choose between Mulder and the politics of careerism . These developments with Colton " [ tether ] another thread between her career and the rest of the FBI " , highlighting a sense of " exasperation and derision " from her colleagues , whose mindsets represent " institutionally acceptable " models of reality . 
 This hostility suggests that the series ' problems are " not epistemological ; they are political " — the agents , Scully in particular , have to balance a search for " the truth " with the need to secure criminal convictions in their cases . This balancing act " between investigating to discover the truth and gathering evidence to support a court case " has been compared to the perceived stance of the FBI during the series ' tenure . The bureau had at this time seen itself as a law enforcement agency responsible for amassing evidence to prosecute criminal cases . There is a disparity between this approach and public perception of the FBI 's role as an organization investigating an objective and apolitical truth ; this led to public frustration " because [ people ] incorrectly believe that a courtroom is designed to discover the truth " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Squeeze " premiered on the Fox network on September 24 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 3 , 1994 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 8 million households and 11 @.@ 1 million viewers . " Squeeze " earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 2 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . 
 Glen Morgan was very pleased with Hutchison 's performance , describing him as an " ace in the hole " and calling his work " outstanding " . Morgan went on to write " Tooms " , another first season episode in which the character returns . The Vince Gilligan @-@ penned second season episode " Soft Light " would also make reference to the character . Hutchison wrote a prequel to " Squeeze " titled " Dark He Was and Golden @-@ Eyed " and sent it to Carter , but the script was returned unread for legal reasons . " Squeeze " has been described as the first episode of The X @-@ Files to branch out into horror , which came to be one of the defining genres of The X @-@ Files . The plot of " Squeeze " was adapted as a novel for young adults in 1996 by Ellen Steiber . The episode also inspired " Folding Man " , a first season episode of the television series Sanctuary . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Squeeze " was rated B + ; it was called " an important episode " , and Hutchison 's portrayal of Tooms was described as " profoundly creepy " . However , Thomas Sutcliffe of The Independent was more critical , deriding the premise as " entirely ludicrous " , and sarcastically described Mulder 's deduction of Tooms ' abilities as " clearly another triumph for the deductive method " . An article in the Vancouver Sun listed " Squeeze " as one of the best stand @-@ alone episodes of the show , saying , " The X @-@ Files became known for its creepy , monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episodes , and Squeeze was the one that started it all " , and that , together with " Tooms " , it " remains one of the scariest things ever seen on television " . Connie Ogle from PopMatters listed Tooms amongst the greatest monsters of the series . 
 Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , praised the episode , rated it an A − , and described Hutchison 's role as " the part that would launch [ him ] as a go @-@ to character actor for creep parts " . Phipps felt the climactic scene in which Tooms infiltrates Scully 's home is " the scene that makes the episode " , noting that there was " a real sense of peril " despite it being clear that Scully , a lead character , was not going to come to harm . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , note that the episode 's premise is the first in the series " not to rely upon accepted urban legends " . It conveys its " absurd " plot through suggestion , leaving any special @-@ effects sequences of Tooms ' abilities until the audience is " already suitably adjusted to the absurdity " . However , Shearman and Pearson found the monologue likening the crimes committed by Tooms to the Holocaust , given by the retired detective Briggs , to be " not only unnecessary but tasteless to boot " . They rated the episode four stars out of five . Mumtaj Begum , writing for Malaysia 's The Star , described " Squeeze " as " the episode that really sold The X @-@ Files idea to the masses " , and called it " simply brilliant " . 
 The character of Eugene Tooms has also attracted positive criticism . In a guest column for Entertainment Weekly 's 1000th issue , author Neil Gaiman listed Tooms as one of his favorite monsters , while UGO Networks listed the character in a countdown of the " Best TV Serial Killers " , and described Hutchison 's acting as " uber @-@ creepy " . IGN 's Christine Seghers listed Hutchison as the fourth @-@ best guest star of the series in a top @-@ ten countdown , complimented his " brilliantly perverse " performance , and wrote : " Even when he doesn 't appear to be doing anything , Hutchinson [ sic ] can still make your skin crawl with his dead , shark @-@ like stare " . 
 = Little Girl in the Big Ten = 
 " Little Girl in the Big Ten " is the twentieth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 12 , 2002 . In the episode , Lisa befriends two college students at a gym and attends college with them . Meanwhile , after being bitten by a mosquito from a Chinese @-@ made toy , Bart is infected with the " panda virus " and is placed in a plastic bubble to prevent others from infection . 
 " Little Girl in the Big Ten " was directed Lauren MacMullan and written by Jon Vitti . The episode 's main plot was pitched by Vitti , who suggested an episode in which Lisa meets girls who thought she was a college student . The subplot was pitched by the Simpsons writing staff , who wanted it to be completely different from the main story . The episode features former three @-@ time U.S. Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky as himself . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 6 @.@ 8 million viewers and finished in 40th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release on August 24 , 2010 , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa finds herself unable to do any sports in PE class , taught by <unk> <unk> , and finds herself failing physical education . She then signs up to do gymnastics with Coach <unk> . There , she receives encouragement from the ghost of John F. Kennedy in a vision . With boosted self @-@ confidence , and her large head which gives her perfect balance , Lisa passes with flying colors . Lisa also meets two girls and becomes friends with them , but with their fractals and parking permits , she realizes they are college students " with small gymnast bodies ! " They give Lisa a ride home , and she acts like a college student to keep their friendship . The two girls invite her to a poetry reading by Robert Pinsky soon after . Lisa begins to wear a beret to help her fit in better . 
 Meanwhile , Bart gets bitten by a Chinese mosquito that was in his Krusty @-@ saurus toy , and becomes infected with " Panda virus " . To prevent others from getting sick , Dr. Hibbert puts Bart in a plastic bubble . Bart has trouble adapting to life in the bubble even though Hibbert emphasized just how " normal " it would feel ; he has trouble eating and Homer gives him a bath by filling up the bubble with the hose and rolling Bart around outside of the house . Lisa is able to keep up her double life , attending a poetry reading by former Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky at night and attending her second grade class during the day . While going to Springfield University , she is tracked by Milhouse , Martin , and Database when Milhouse saw Lisa ride away . At a lecture about Itchy & Scratchy cartoons , Milhouse blows Lisa 's cover and she is no longer welcome by her college friends . 
 Lisa tries to convince Homer and Marge that college suits her , but they refuse to listen , saying that college is no place for her . Lisa is also ridiculed by Groundskeeper Willie and all of her friends at school , saying that she is too " college for them " . In the meantime , Bart gets used to his bubble , as it brings him a lot of popularity . Bart tells Lisa what she should do to get her friends back : she has to pull a prank on Principal Skinner . The next day , Chalmers is dedicating the Seymour Skinner parking annex . While Martin takes pictures of Skinner posing next to a giant chocolate cake in his dress polyester , Bart rolls Lisa ( inside his bubble ) to the edge of the school 's roof . He then pushes her over the edge , splattering the cake all over Skinner . Lisa gets her friends back , while Bart goes paranoid after being outside of his bubble for the first time in days . He stays in an air vent , but gets sucked in . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Little Girl in the Big Ten " was written by producer Jon Vitti and directed by Lauren MacMullan . The idea for the episode was pitched by Vitti , who suggested an episode in which Lisa meets girls who thought she was a college student . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on May 12 , 2002 . Jean thought the idea was " brilliant " , and the subplot involving Bart in a " germ @-@ free " plastic bubble was conceived by the writers wanting to make " the most different subplot from [ ... ] an intellectual college plot " they could think of . A scene in the episode shows Lisa talking to Bart on the branch of a tree in their garden . Bart says the line " You can 't believe what that sunset looks like to me " , to which Lisa replies " That 's not a sunset , that 's a bird on fire . " Originally , Lisa 's line read " [ ... ] that 's a plane on fire , " however , after the September 11 attacks , the line was considered offensive and was changed . " [ ... ] since we work so far ahead we usually do these things that are sort of timeless stories , " Jean said , " but every once in a while there 's something that turns out to be ironic in a bad way , then we have to change it . " 
 The Itchy & Scratchy cartoon " Butter Off Dead " was , according to Jean , " completely improv [ ise ] d " by director MacMullan . Usually , the episodes are too " narrow " for there to be any room for improvisation , but MacMullan was an exception , since her improvisations " always turned out great " . The writers came up with the cartoons title and its " template " , however " the way the death proceeded and the different digestion [ s ] " were " All Lauren [ MacMullan ] " . The sequence in which Pinsky is reading the poem was " very hard to do " , since the animators did not have access to computers at the time . One of the audience members in the scene was designed after staff writer Matt Warburton . 
 The episode features former poet laureate Robert Pinsky as himself . Pinsky was chosen to guest star because the writers wanted an intellectual reference for Lisa , and because they knew that Pinsky was a fan of the show , having read an article of The Time in which Pinsky stated that he " admired the writing " of The Simpsons . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , Pinsky stated that he flew to the Simpsons recording studios in Los Angeles on September 10 , 2001 , and , following the September 11 attacks , was " stranded " there for four days , since no planes were flying following the attacks . Pinsky enjoyed his stay however ; " Ian [ Maxtone @-@ Graham ] and The Simpsons people were very nice to me , " he said . " ... One of the things they did for me is they invited me to a table @-@ read of another episode [ ... ] Thursday the 13th [ ... ] I remember everybody laughed like hell [ ... ] It felt really good . People just went to work and everybody laughed a lot . " 
 Pinsky stated that he felt " really inept " when recording his dialogue . He said : " Amongst my friends I 'm funny . In that context of Dan Castellaneta ... I would say it was like a disaster movie , and I was that character played by Susan Hayward . " The poem Pinsky reads in the episode was picked by the Simpsons writing staff , " The poem has two jokes in it , " Pinsky said , " and when I say jokes I don 't mean witty remarks . It 's more like an optician , the pope and a zebra go into the bar and then there 's a punch line at the end . " He stated that the poem was " an elegy for a friend of mine who liked jokes " . He added that his appearance on the show gave him " a lot more prestige " when visiting high schools and colleges . The episode also features Karl Wiedergott as the professor at the Springfield University . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's subplot was based on the 1976 made @-@ for @-@ TV movie The Boy in the Plastic Bubble ( Lenny also addresses as Bart as Bubble Boy in one scene , which was the name of the film 's 2001 remake ) in which a boy born with an improperly functioning immune system lives out his life in incubator @-@ like conditions . In one of Lisa 's college courses , the students are watching an Itchy & Scratchy cartoon title " Butter Off Dead " . The lecture was a reference to college courses which include The Simpsons episodes in their teachings . The gate to Springfield University was based " loosely " on the ivy gate at Harvard University . The episode also parodies the British anarcho @-@ punk band Chumbawamba , with Homer singing his own version of their song " <unk> " . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 12 , 2002 , " Little Girl in the Big Ten " received a 6 @.@ 4 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 6 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode finished in 40th place in the ratings for the week of May 6 – 12 , 2002 , making it the most watched program of the network tied with Malcolm in the Middle and Boston Public . On August 24 , 2010 , " Little Girl in the Big Ten " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Al Jean , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Matt Selman , Tom Gammill , Max Pross and Robert Pinsky participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Little Girl in the Big Ten " received mixed reviews from critics . Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu called it " An average episode , for the series as a whole , making it a great one for this season , " praising " a superb <unk> parody " which he thought was " way better than the R.E.M. lyrics gag earlier in the season . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote " Lisa @-@ based shows definitely fall into the hit or miss category , and “ Ten ” stays within those confines . " While he praised some of Homer 's scenes , including " his drunken versions of pop songs , " he maintained that " not much else connects . " He concluded his review by writing " Though we find the occasional laugh , the overall impact remains lackluster . " DVD Verdict 's Jennifer Malkowski gave the episode a B- , and wrote that " Homer 's answer to the rhetorical question about gymnastics ' Who wants to put on a leotard and get screamed at ? ' " was the episode 's " highlight " . 
 In March 2014 , The Simpsons writers picked " Butter Off Dead " from this episode as one of their nine favorite " Itchy & Stratchy " episodes of all time . 
 = Jonathan Pryce = 
 Jonathan Pryce , CBE ( born John Price ; 1 June 1947 ) is a Welsh actor and singer . After studying at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and meeting his longtime girlfriend , English actress Kate Fahy , in 1974 , he began his career as a stage actor in the 1970s . His work in theatre , including an award @-@ winning performance in the title role of the Royal Court Theatre 's Hamlet , led to several supporting roles in film and television . He made his breakthrough screen performance in Terry Gilliam 's 1985 cult film Brazil . 
 Critically lauded for his versatility , Pryce has participated in big @-@ budget films including Evita , Tomorrow Never Dies , Pirates of the Caribbean , The New World , GI Joe : The Rise of Cobra , GI Joe : Retaliation as well as independent films including Glengarry Glen Ross and Carrington . His career in theatre has also been prolific , and he has won two Tony Awards — the first in 1977 for his Broadway debut in Comedians , the second for his 1991 role as The Engineer in the musical Miss Saigon . Beginning in 2015 , Pryce became a guest actor on the HBO series Game of Thrones as the High Sparrow before being upgraded to a regular cast member in 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born John Price in Carmel , Flintshire , he is the son of Margaret Ellen ( née Williams ) and Isaac Price , a former coal miner who , along with his wife , ran a small general grocery shop . Price has two older sisters . He was educated at Holywell Grammar School ( today Holywell High School ) , and , at the age of 16 , he went to art college and then started training to be a teacher at Edge Hill College ( now Edge Hill University ) in Ormskirk . While studying , he took part in a college theatre production . When he joined Equity , the British actors ' trade union , he used Jonathan Pryce as a stage name because Equity can only have one actor with any particular name on its books . 
 An impressed tutor suggested he became an actor and on Pryce 's behalf sent off to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art for an application form , and Pryce was awarded a scholarship to RADA . While at RADA Pryce worked as a door @-@ to @-@ door salesman of velvet paintings . Pryce was part of ' new wave ' of actors to emerge from the Academy . Others included Bruce Payne , Juliet Stevenson , Alan Rickman , Anton Lesser , Kenneth Branagh and Fiona Shaw . 
 Despite finding RADA " straight @-@ laced " , and being told by his tutor that he could never aspire to do more than playing villains in Z @-@ Cars , when he graduated he joined the Everyman Theatre Liverpool Company , eventually becoming the theatre 's Artistic Director and went on to perform with the Royal Shakespeare Company and at the Nottingham Playhouse . 
 To gain his Equity card to work in Liverpool , he made his first screen appearance in a minor role on a 1972 episode of the British science fiction programme Doomwatch , called " Fire & Brimstone " . He then starred in two television films , both directed by Stephen Frears , Daft as a Brush and Playthings . After the Everyman , Pryce joined the director Sir Richard Eyre at the Nottingham Playhouse and starred in the Trevor Griffiths play Comedians in a role specially written for his talents , Gethin Price . The production then transferred to London 's Old Vic Theatre and in 1976 he reprised the role on Broadway , this time directed by Mike Nichols , for which he won the 1977 Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play , his first Tony Award . It was around this time that he appeared in his first movie role , playing the character Joseph <unk> in the film drama Voyage of the Damned , starring Faye Dunaway . He did not , however , abandon the stage , appearing from 1978 to 1979 in the Royal Shakespeare Company 's productions of The Taming of the Shrew as Petruchio , and Antony and Cleopatra as Octavius Caesar . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 In 1980 , his performance in the title role of Hamlet at the Royal Court Theatre won him an Olivier Award , and was acclaimed by some critics as the definitive Hamlet of his generation . That year , Pryce had a small but pivotal role as Zarniwoop in the 12th episode of the Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy radio series , one that he reprised for the Quintessential Phase which was broadcast in 2005 . In his original role as Zarniwoop , Pryce 's character questions the " ruler of the Universe " , a solipsist who has been chosen to rule arguably because of either his inherent <unk> , or immunity therefrom , on his philosophical opinions . Around the same time , he also appeared in the film Breaking Glass ( 1980 ) . 
 Pryce played the role of the sinister Mr. Dark in Something Wicked This Way Comes ( 1983 ) , based on the Ray Bradbury novel of the same title . After appearing mostly in films , such as the Ian McEwan @-@ scripted The <unk> 's Lunch , and Martin Luther , Heretic ( both also 1983 ) , he achieved a breakthrough with his role as the subdued protagonist Sam Lowry in the Terry Gilliam film , Brazil ( 1985 ) . After Brazil , Pryce appeared in the historical thriller The Doctor and the Devils ( also 1985 ) and then in the Gene Wilder @-@ directed film Haunted Honeymoon ( 1986 ) . During this period of his life , Pryce continued to perform on stage , and gained particular notice as the successful but self @-@ doubting writer Trigorin in a London production of Anton Chekhov 's The Seagull in late 1985 . From 1986 to 1987 Pryce played the lead part in the Royal Shakespeare Company 's production of Macbeth , which also starred Sinéad Cusack as Lady Macbeth . Also in 1986 he starred in the film Jumpin ' Jack Flash . 
 Pryce worked once again with Gilliam in The Adventures of Baron Munchausen ( 1988 ) , playing " The Right Ordinary Horatio Jackson " . The film was a notorious financial fiasco , with production costing more than $ 40 million , when the original budget was $ 23 @.@ 5 million . The following year Pryce appeared in three of the earliest episodes of the improvisation show Whose Line Is It Anyway ? , alongside Paul Merton and John Sessions , and in Uncle Vanya , again a play by Chekhov , at the Vaudeville Theatre . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 After a series of major dramatic roles on stage , including Vanya and Macbeth , Pryce decided he wanted to do musicals after seeing his friend Patti LuPone in the original London production of Les Misérables . He would successfully return to the stage originating the role of The Engineer , a Eurasian pimp , in the West End musical Miss Saigon . His performance was praised in England where he won the Olivier and Variety Club awards , but when the production transferred to Broadway the Actors ' Equity Association ( AEA ) would not allow Pryce to portray The Engineer because , according to their executive secretary , " [ t ] he casting of a Caucasian actor made up to appear Asian is an affront to the Asian community . " Cameron Mackintosh , the show 's producer , decided to cancel the $ 10 million New York production because , he said , he would not let the freedom of artistic expression be attacked . Realizing that its decision would result in the loss of many jobs , and after Pryce received much support from the acting community ( both Charlton Heston and John Malkovich threatened to leave the union if Pryce was not allowed to perform ) the AEA decided to make a deal with Mackintosh , allowing Pryce to appear in the production . He would then , in 1991 , win a Tony Award for his performance . Made in the same period , Pryce starred in the ITV mini @-@ series Selling Hitler ( 1991 ) as Gerd Heidemann . Pryce returned to the London stage the following year to star for one night only at the Royal Festival Hall for an AIDS charity alongside Elaine Paige and <unk> <unk> in the 1992 revival of the Federico Fellini @-@ inspired musical Nine . 
 Pryce featured , alongside Kathy Burke and Minnie Driver , in the BBC serial Mr. Wroe 's Virgins ( 1993 ) , directed by Danny Boyle . Pryce played Henry Kravis in the HBO produced made @-@ for @-@ TV movie Barbarians at the Gate ( 1993 ) . He was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award and for a Golden Globe Award for his role . Also during 1993 , Pryce starred alongside River Phoenix and Judy Davis in the unfinished film Dark Blood , but production had to be shut down when , 11 days short of completion , Phoenix died from a drug overdose . Director George <unk> , who owns the rights to what has been filmed , has made available some of the raw material , which features Pryce and Phoenix on a field in Utah , on his personal website . Between 1993 and 1997 , Pryce , on a multimillion @-@ dollar contract became the spokesman for the Infiniti automobile marque in a series of American television commercials , in particular for the Infiniti J30 and Infiniti Q45 . In one of these advertisements Pryce appeared alongside jazz singer Nancy Wilson in a Prague nightclub . In 1994 , Pryce portrayed Fagin in a revival of the musical Oliver ! , and starred alongside Emma Thompson in the film Carrington ( 1995 ) , which centres on a platonic relationship between gay writer Lytton Strachey and painter Dora Carrington . For his portrayal of Strachey , Pryce received the Best Actor Award at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival . 
 Pryce then starred with Madonna and Antonio Banderas in his first musical film , Evita ( 1996 ) . In this adaptation of Andrew Lloyd Webber 's stage musical , Pryce portrayed the Argentinian president Juan Perón . The movie 's soundtrack was an international success . It contains over 30 songs sung mainly by Madonna , Banderas and Pryce , of which two are solos for Pryce : " She Is A Diamond " and " On The Balcony Of The Casa Rosada " . After Evita , Pryce went on to portray Elliot Carver in the James Bond film Tomorrow Never Dies ( 1997 ) . During the rest of the decade Pryce would play to his new acquired fame as a villain , portraying an Irish terrorist in Ronin ( 1998 ) , a corrupt Cardinal in the controversial Stigmata ( 1999 ) and , for Comic Relief , the Master in the Doctor Who special , Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death . About this time Pryce sang at the Hollywood Bowl alongside opera singer Lesley Garrett in highlights from My Fair Lady and in 1998 , he performed in Cameron Mackintosh 's gala concert Hey , Mr Producer ! , also as Professor Henry Higgins from My Fair Lady and reprising his role as the Engineer from Miss Saigon . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 During the early 2000s Pryce starred and participated in a variety of movies , such as The Affair of the Necklace ( 2001 ) , Unconditional Love ( 2002 ) , What a Girl Wants ( 2003 ) , and Terry Gilliam 's aborted project , The Man Who Killed Don Quixote . While the success of some of these films was variable , the 2001 London stage production of My Fair Lady and his portrayal of Professor Henry Higgins was acclaimed by observers . This production turned out to be very stressful for Pryce because Martine McCutcheon , who portrayed Eliza Doolittle , was sick during much of the show 's run . McCutcheon was replaced by her understudy Alexandra Jay , who would also fall sick hours before a performance , forcing her understudy , Kerry Ellis , to take the lead . Pryce was understandably upset and on her first night introduced Ellis to the audience before the show by saying " This will be your first Eliza , my second today and my third this week . Any member of the audience interested in playing Eliza can find applications at the door . Wednesday and Saturday matinee available . " Pryce ended up dealing with four <unk> during the course of 14 months . Despite the difficulty , the show was nominated for four Laurence Olivier Awards on 2001 : Best Actress in a Musical for Martine McCutcheon , Outstanding Musical Production , Best Theatre Choreographer and Best Actor in a Musical for Pryce . Pryce lost to Philip Quast , although ironically McCutcheon won in her category having played fewer performances than any of her understudies . Pryce did express interest in doing My Fair Lady in New York , but when asked if he would do it with McCutcheon he said that " there 's as much chance of me getting a date with Julia Roberts as doing My Fair Lady in New York with Martine McCutcheon . " 
 In April 2003 Pryce returned to the non @-@ musical stage with A Reckoning , written by American dramatist Wesley Moore . The play co @-@ starred Flora Montgomery and after premiering at the Soho Theatre in London was described by The Daily Telegraph as " one of the most powerful and provocative new American plays to have opened since David Mamet 's <unk> . " Pryce had a role in Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl ( 2003 ) , in which he portrayed a fictional Governor of Jamaica , Weatherby Swann , a film he has described as " one of those why @-@ not movies . " After Pirates , Pryce appeared in several large @-@ scale motion pictures , such as De @-@ Lovely ( 2004 ) , his second musical film , a chronicle of the life of songwriter Cole Porter , for which Kevin Kline and Pryce covered a Porter song called " Blow , Gabriel , Blow " . The Brothers Grimm ( 2005 ) , Pryce 's third completed film with Terry Gilliam , starred Matt Damon and Heath Ledger , and The New World ( 2005 ) , in which he had a cameo role as King James I. In 2005 , Pryce was nominated for another Olivier Award in the best actor category for his role in the 2004 London production of The Goat or Who is Sylvia ? , where he played Martin , a goat @-@ lover who has to face the recriminations of his cheated @-@ on wife , played by his real @-@ life wife Kate Fahy . Pryce 's performance was highly praised , but he lost the Olivier to Richard Griffiths . 
 Pryce lent his voice to the French animated film , Renaissance ( 2006 ) , which he stated he wanted to do because he had never " done anything quite like it before . " He reprised the role of Governor Weatherby Swann for the Pirates of the Caribbean sequels , Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest ( 2006 ) and Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End ( 2007 ) . Both were filmed at the same time but released a year apart . Pryce returned to the Broadway stage replacing John Lithgow , from January to July 2006 , as Lawrence Jameson in the musical version of Dirty Rotten Scoundrels . During early 2007 , the BBC serial Sherlock Holmes and the Baker Street <unk> was first broadcast with Pryce in the lead . From September 2007 through June 2008 , he returned to the theatre portraying Shelly Levene in a new West End production of David Mamet 's Glengarry Glen Ross at the Apollo Theatre , London . He later appeared in the BBC Three comedy series Clone as Dr. Victor Blenkinsop also starring Stuart McLoughlin and Mark Gatiss . In 2009 he appeared at the Donmar Warehouse theatre in the title role of Dimetos written by Athol Fugard , and later that year made a sentimental journey back to Liverpool to appear as Davies in Harold Pinter 's The Caretaker directed by Christopher Morahan . This transferred to London 's Trafalgar Studios in early 2010 . On television he appeared as Mr Buxton in Return to Cranford ( 2009 ) , for which he was nominated for an Emmy Award as Best Supporting Actor in a Mini Series . 
 In 2015 he joined the cast of the HBO series Game of Thrones in Season 5 as the High Sparrow . Pryce admitted that one of the main reasons he took on the role was because of how influential the character is plot @-@ wise . While initially being quite sceptical about " sword and sorcery " shows , Pryce later had a change of heart after his positive experiences on the Thrones sets . In 2015 he also appeared at The Globe Theatre as Shylock in The Merchant of Venice . His real life daughter Phoebe played Shylock 's daughter Jessica . In 2015 , he joined the cast of The Healer starring with Oliver Jackson @-@ Cohen , Camilla Luddington , and Jorge Garcia . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While working at the Everyman Theatre in 1972 , Pryce met actress Kate Fahy . They based their home in London , where they currently live . They have three children : Patrick ( born 1983 ) , Gabriel ( born 1986 ) and Phoebe ( born 1990 ) . 
 In 2006 , Pryce was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by the University of Liverpool . He is a fellow of the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama and a Companion of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts . He is a patron of the children 's charity Friendship Works and of the surgical charity Saving Faces . 
 Pryce was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 2009 Birthday Honours . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 The Churchill Play ( 1974 ) as Mike McCulloch 
 Comedians ( 1975 ) as Gethin Price ( first appearance in America , 1977 ) 
 Measure for Measure RSC ( 1979 ) 
 Hamlet ( 1980 ) as Hamlet – Olivier Award for Best Actor 
 Accidental Death of an Anarchist ( 1984 ) as The Fool 
 Uncle Vanya ( 1989 ) as Astrov 
 Miss Saigon ( 1989 ) as The Engineer – Olivier Award for Best Actor in a Musical , Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical 
 Nine ( 1992 London concert performance ) as Guido <unk> 
 Oliver ! ( 1994 revival ) as Fagin – Olivier Award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical 
 My Fair Lady ( 2001 revival ) as Professor Higgins – Olivier Award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical 
 A Reckoning ( 2003 ) as Spencer 
 The Goat , or Who Is Sylvia ? ( 2004 ) as Martin Gray 
 Dirty Rotten Scoundrels ( 2006 ) as Lawrence Jameson 
 Glengarry Glen Ross ( 2007 London production ) as Shelly Levene 
 Dimetos ( 2009 at the Donmar Warehouse in London ) as Dimetos 
 The Caretaker ( 2010 at Trafalgar Studios ) as Davies 
 King Lear ( 2012 at Almeida Theatre ) as Lear 
 The Merchant of Venice ( 2015 at Shakespeare 's Globe ) as Shylock 
 = = = Other contributions = = = 
 When Love Speaks ( 2002 , EMI Classics ) – Shakespeare 's " Sonnet 65 " ( " Since brass , nor stone , nor earth , nor boundless sea " ) 
 HR , a six @-@ part comedy drama series on BBC Radio 4 about a middle @-@ aged Human Resources ( HR ) officer , played by Nicholas le Prevost , and his colleague , played by Pryce . The series was written by Nigel Williams and directed by Peter Kavanagh , and first broadcast in 2009 . 
 Portrayed The Master in the 1999 Comic Relief parody Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death . 
 Cranford ( 2009 , BBC ) – Mr. Buxton 
 Read from The Rings of Saturn by W. G. Sebald for the film Patience ( After Sebald ) , directed by Grant Gee . 
 <unk> in the BBC Television series Clone . 
 = 2008 – 09 Pittsburgh Penguins season = 
 The 2008 – 09 Pittsburgh Penguins season was the 42nd season of Pittsburgh Penguins in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . The regular season began with two games against the Ottawa Senators in Stockholm , Sweden on October 4 and October 5 , 2008 . 
 On February 15 , the team had a record of 27 – 25 – 5 and was five points out of playoff position . The organization fired head coach Michel Therrien and replaced him with Dan Bylsma , head coach of the organization 's American Hockey League affiliate in Wilkes @-@ Barre . On February 26 , the team traded defenseman Ryan Whitney to the Anaheim Ducks in return for Chris Kunitz . Before the trade deadline on March 4 , they acquired Bill Guerin from the New York Islanders . Under Bylsma , the team went 18 – 3 – 4 , including 10 – 1 – 2 in March , and lost only one home game . 
 The Penguins qualified for the playoffs for the third consecutive season . They did not repeat as champions of the Atlantic Division , but earned the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference with 99 points . They began the 2009 Stanley Cup playoffs on April 15 against the Philadelphia Flyers . They beat the Flyers , Washington Capitals , and Carolina Hurricanes to earn a second @-@ straight berth in the Stanley Cup Final . In the Finals , the Penguins defeated the Detroit Red Wings in seven games in a rematch of the previous season 's Stanley Cup Final to win the franchise 's third league title . 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 Due to their appearance in the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals , the Penguins had less than three weeks before free agency began to settle numerous contract decisions . The Penguins added nine free agents and lost ten to other teams . Head Coach Michel Therrien also signed a new three @-@ year contract that replaced the last year of his existing contract , with an increase in salary . The new contract was projected to keep him with the Penguins through the 2010 – 11 season . 
 The Penguins renewed 99 % of their season ticket sales from the 2007 – 08 season ; having sold out 67 consecutive games at Mellon Arena dating back to the 2006 – 07 season . In July , ESPN named Pittsburgh the top team in the Eastern Conference , and Sporting News predicted the team would finish in the league 's fifth overall position . 
 The team commenced training camp on September 16 , 2008 in Pittsburgh . They played five pre @-@ season games in preparation for the season , finishing with a 4 – 0 – 1 record . The team concluded its preparation for the season with practices in Stockholm . Defensemen Sergei Gonchar was injured in the pre @-@ season opener and originally anticipated to miss " four to six months . " He appeared for the first time on February 14 , 2009 . With Gonchar out of the lineup and previous season 's two other alternate captains Ryan Malone and Gary Roberts departed , the Penguins began the season with no returning alternate captains in the lineup . Therrien selected two alternate captains each month ; Evgeni Malkin and Brooks Orpik served the role throughout the opening month . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = October = = = 
 On September 27 , the Penguins embarked on a trip for Sweden where they opened the season against the Ottawa Senators , at the Stockholm Globe Arena . The Penguins were one of four teams to participate in NHL Premiere which began the season with games in Prague , Czech Republic and Stockholm , Sweden . Pittsburgh won the opening game of the season in overtime , getting two goals from Tyler Kennedy , including the game @-@ winner . The game was broadcast on Mellon Arena 's JumboTron where 2 @,@ 300 spectators watched the game . The team returned to Pittsburgh after ten days in Europe and a 1 – 1 – 0 record . The Penguins hosted the Trib Total Media Faceoff Festival 2008 prior to their first four home games , allowing fans to watch the games on 9 @-@ by @-@ 12 foot LED screen outside of Mellon Arena . On October 18 , Sidney Crosby scored one goal in addition to three assists to surpass benchmarks of 100 goals , 200 assists , and 300 total points for his career . In the same game , Evgeni Malkin assisted on four goals , giving him 200 total career points . 
 The Penguins received continued fan support from their previous season . In addition to extending a home sellout streak to 72 games on October 23 , the Penguins ranked 113 % above the national average for male television viewers aged 18 to 34 . The franchise ranked as the 18th most valuable in the league at US $ 195 million , marking a 26 % increase from the past season . According to Forbes , the franchise 's revenue would likely put the Penguins into the top ten after their new arena , Consol Energy Center , opened in 2010 . The Penguins finished October with a 3 – 1 – 1 record in Pittsburgh and concluded the month with three consecutive road losses . 
 = = = November = = = 
 The Penguins won their first six games in November before losing in a shootout on November 18 . Rob Scuderi and Hal Gill were selected by Therrien to be November 's alternate captains , taking over for Brooks Orpik and Malkin who served in October . On November 11 , the Penguins returned to Detroit for the first time since the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals . The third goal of Jordan Staal 's second career hat @-@ trick came with 22 @.@ 8 seconds remaining in regulation , sending the game into overtime where the Penguins achieved a 7 – 6 victory . Malkin 's 13 @-@ game point streak ended on November 18 , during the streak he scored 27 points . Through November 19 , the Penguins led the league in overtime games with nine of 18 games taking extra time to decide . Through the first 20 games of the season , Mike Zigomanis led the league in faceoff percentage and Alex Goligoski led rookie defensemen in points . After an injury to Marc @-@ Andre Fleury , Dany Sabourin and rookie John Curry split goaltending duties in his multi @-@ game absence in which the team was 5 – 6 – 2 . On November 26 , Malkin scored three goals for his third career hat @-@ trick , three days later Sidney Crosby also achieved a hat trick — the second of his career . After the team 's final game of the month , Malkin and Crosby ranked first and second in league scoring with 39 and 34 points respectively . Malkin also ranked first in the league with 29 assists , and was named the NHL 's second Star of the Month . 
 = = = December = = = 
 Therrien named Jordan Staal and Matt Cooke December 's alternate captains . " I think it 's important for our young group to try to extend the leadership group , " the coach said of the decision . A survey by <unk> Sports & Entertainment released on December 2 that surveyed fans of all 122 NFL , NBA , NHL and MLB teams ranked the Penguins eighth . The survey consisted of 21 categories such as entertainment value , commitment to winning , ticket value and likeability of the players and owners . Ranked 20th in the same poll in 2007 , the Penguins were the second @-@ ranked NHL team , behind the Detroit Red Wings . The Penguins began the month with seven games in eleven days in which they were 2 – 4 – 1 . As of December 10 , Crosby and Malkin continued to lead the league in points as well as leading voting for the All @-@ Star Game in Montreal . On December 11 , after losing three consecutive games , Petr Sykora and Pascal Dupuis each scored their first career hat @-@ tricks in a 9 – 2 victory over the New York Islanders in Pittsburgh . It was the seventh time in the Penguins ' history that two players scored a hat @-@ trick in the same game , the first since 1993 . 
 On December 21 , Sidney Crosby surpassed the record for most All @-@ Star Game votes at 1 @,@ 020 @,@ 736 , set by Jaromir Jagr , then with the Penguins , in 2000 . Crosby broke the record with 13 days remaining in voting . Defenceman Ryan Whitney made his first appearance of the season on December 23 , after missing 33 games with a foot injury . On December 26 , Marc @-@ Andre Fleury made 37 saves in Pittsburgh 's first shutout of the season , defeating the New Jersey Devils , 1 – 0 . After concluding the month with a 5 – 8 – 1 record , the team held a players @-@ only meeting on December 30 . " The attitude is a little off right now , " said Brooks Orpik , " It 's easy to be a good team when you 're winning games . When you 're going through rough batches like this , it 's what tests guys ' character . " 
 = = = January = = = 
 The Penguins began 2009 with three consecutive losses , extending their losing streak to five games — the most consecutive since 2006 . During the streak , the Penguins fell from second to ninth place in the Eastern Conference and failed to score on 32 consecutive power plays . 
 Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin led all players in voting for the 2009 All @-@ Star Game . However , Crosby did not play due to a knee injury . The top vote @-@ getter for the second year in a row , Crosby also missed the 2008 All @-@ Star Game . On January 8 , the team announced that they had agreed to a four @-@ year contract extension with Jordan Staal worth $ 16 million . Staal 's rookie contract was set to expire at the end of the season . He was the Penguins first round pick , second overall in 2006 . 
 The team suffered from injuries , culminating in January where at one point they had eight starters injured . Mike Zigomanis had been inactive since December 3 and Ruslan Fedotenko was ruled out for four to six weeks after breaking his hand on January 6 . Sergei Gonchar practiced with the team for the first time on January 16 after suffering a separated shoulder during the pre @-@ season . By that time , the Penguins had lost 173 man @-@ games due to injury , after losing 239 in the entire 2007 – 08 season . With a 3 – 0 victory over the New York Rangers on January 18 , the Penguins won a second consecutive game for the first time since November 15 . However , the team was unable to capitalize and lost their last game before the All @-@ Star break to the Carolina Hurricanes . The Penguins entered the break with a 23 – 21 – 4 record . The team 's 50 points put them in tenth place in the Eastern Conference , two spots out of the playoffs . 
 = = = February = = = 
 On February 14 , Sergei Gonchar made his season debut and Ruslan Fedotenko returned to the line @-@ up after missing over a month due to a hand injury . On February 15 — with the Penguins five points out of the playoffs — Therrien was replaced by Dan Bylsma , the coach of the Penguins ' AHL affiliate Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton , on an interim basis . Tom Fitzgerald was promoted from Director of Player Development to assistant coach for forwards , while Mike Yeo , already with the team , became assistant for the defensemen . Assistant Andre Savard was reassigned within the organization . 
 On February 21 , Crosby recorded his 250th career assist in a 2 goal , 2 assist victory over the Philadelphia Flyers . On February 25 , Fleury recorded his third shutout of the season , as the Penguins defeated the Islanders 1 – 0 ; the team remained two points out of the playoffs after the win . The day after the shutout , Ryan Whitney was traded to the Anaheim Ducks for Chris Kunitz and signing rights to prospect Eric <unk> . In his first game after being traded to Pittsburgh , Kunitz recorded a goal and an assist as the Penguins defeated the Chicago Blackhawks in overtime . 
 = = = March = = = 
 The Penguins began March with five of six games on the road , before a homestand of eight consecutive games . Upon the Penguins ' win on March 1 , the team moved into eighth place in the Eastern Conference with 70 points . The NHL trade deadline was on March 4 . On March 3 , the Penguins placed Miroslav Satan on waivers to clear roster space for a trade . Before the deadline , the Penguins acquired New York Islanders ' captain Bill Guerin in exchange for a conditional draft pick in the 2009 draft . The Penguins also exchanged minor league defensemen , sending Danny Richmond to the St. Louis Blues organization for Andy <unk> . They also claimed winger Craig Adams off waivers from the Chicago Blackhawks . Dan Bylsma surpassed Herb Brooks ' record for the best record in his first ten games as a Penguins ' coach . The team went a franchise @-@ first 5 – 0 – 0 on a road trip at the beginning of March . 
 On March 15 , the Penguins <unk> their 100th consecutive game at the Mellon Arena . Evgeni Malkin recorded his 100th point of the season while tying a career @-@ high five point game against the Atlanta Thrashers on March 17 . On March 20 , Vince <unk> , Penguins and Pittsburgh Pirates organist of 33 years , died . Vice President of Communications Tom McMillan said , " [ <unk> ] probably is the only organist in the history of professional sports to be inducted into a team Hall of Fame . " The Penguins concluded March with eight consecutive games at the Mellon Arena — their longest homestand of the season . 
 = = = April and season results = = = 
 Pittsburgh finished their homestand with a 6 – 1 – 1 record , moving into fourth place in the Eastern Conference . The final game of the homestand was the most watched game of the season on FSN Pittsburgh , the Penguins regional television network . FSN Pittsburgh was the most @-@ watched regional Fox network in the NHL for the second consecutive season . On April 7 , Sidney Crosby scored his 100th point of the season , Evgeni Malkin acquired his 300th career point and Petr Sykora scored his 300th career goal , while the Penguins qualified for the post @-@ season for the third consecutive season with a 6 – 4 win over the Tampa Bay Lightning . Tickets for Pittsburgh 's first two opening round playoff games sold out within a few hours of going on sale . The team collected over $ 100 @,@ 000 for the families of three Pittsburgh Police officers who were killed days before the game . The Penguins finished their regular season on April 12 with a win over the Montreal Canadiens . Through his first 25 games as Penguins ' coach , Dan <unk> 's 18 – 3 – 4 record amounted to 40 points — the second @-@ most of any coach in NHL history through their first 25 games . The Penguins finished with a 45 – 28 – 9 record , for 99 points ; fourth place in the Eastern Conference and second place in the Atlantic Division . 
 Evgeni Malkin won the Art Ross Trophy as the league 's leading scorer with 113 points . Malkin followed Mario Lemieux , Jaromir Jagr and Crosby to become the fourth different Penguin to win the award . The award was the 13th overall for the Penguins since 1988 . 
 = = = Game log = = = 
 = = = Standings = = = 
 Divisional standings 
 Conference standings 
 bold – qualified for playoffs , y – division winner , z – placed first in conference ( and division ) 
 AT – Atlantic Division , NE – Northeast Division , SE – Southeast Division 
 = = = Detailed records = = = 
 Final 
 = = Stanley Cup playoffs = = 
 The Penguins advanced to the Stanley Cup playoffs for the third consecutive season . They earned the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference and home @-@ ice advantage in the opening round match @-@ up against the Philadelphia Flyers , following a loss by the Flyers on the last day of the regular season . For the second consecutive season , the Penguins erected a 12 by 16 foot LED screen on the lawn directly outside Mellon Arena , allowing fans to watch all playoff games , free of charge . After defeating Philadelphia , the Penguins beat the Washington Capitals and the Carolina Hurricanes to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals . The Penguins faced the Detroit Red Wings , defeating them in seven games to win their third Stanley Cup in franchise history . The final game of the season drew a 42 @.@ 2 television rating in Pittsburgh — the highest local rating in any city since the NHL began to track the figure . 
 = = = Eastern Conference Quarterfinals = = = 
 The Penguins won Game 1 of the series 4 – 1 , with goals from Sidney Crosby , Evgeni Malkin , Tyler Kennedy and defenseman Mark Eaton . " It was a good [ night ] for me , " said Malkin , " It was a good [ night ] for everybody . " Flyers Head Coach John Stevens was fined US $ 10 @,@ 000 and forward Daniel Carcillo was suspended by the NHL for the second game of the series for a hit to Maxime Talbot 's head immediately following a faceoff with seven seconds left in the game ; Carcillo was not penalized at the time of the hit . In Game 2 , Evgeni Malkin had a goal and an assist , while Marc @-@ Andre Fleury made 38 saves . Bill Guerin scored two goals , including the game winner in overtime , and the Penguins won 3 – 2 . With the Penguins up two games to zero , the series moved to Philadelphia for Game 3 . After falling behind 2 – 0 , goals from Malkin and Rob Scuderi tied the game . Malkin added his second goal of the game in the final period ; however , Philadelphia won the game 6 – 3 . In Game 4 , Fleury stopped 45 shots , giving up one goal as the Penguins won 3 – 1 . Crosby scored his second goal of the playoffs and Tyler Kennedy added the game winner . The Penguins were unable to clinch the series in Game 5 at Mellon Arena . A goal by Malkin was taken away after it was determined that he had kicked the puck into the net ; Martin Biron stopped 28 shots for the shutout . Pittsburgh viewers were unable to see approximately 30 minutes of the second period after a lightning strike at a FSN Pittsburgh network facility in Atlanta caused the station to temporarily black out . 
 In Game 6 , the Flyers lead 3 – 0 four minutes into the second period . Maxime Talbot fought Daniel Carcillo after the Flyers tallied their third goal and the Penguins , re @-@ energized by Talbot 's display , scored three goals in what remained of the second period to tie the game 3 – 3 . Sergei Gonchar scored his first goal of the series , his first in 23 playoff games dating back to game two of the Penguins ' first @-@ round series against Ottawa in 2008 , to break the tie at 2 : 19 of the third period . Crosby added an empty @-@ net goal and the Penguins eliminated the Flyers and advance to the Eastern Conference Semifinals . Three days after the Penguins series @-@ clinching victory of the Flyers , the Penguins announced that Head Coach Dan Bylsma had signed a multi @-@ year contract extension with the team . 
 = = = Eastern Conference semi @-@ finals = = = 
 The Penguins drew a matchup with the Washington Capitals in the second round semi @-@ finals . The anticipation for the series was high considering the rivalry between the teams and star players , most notably Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin of the Penguins and Alexander Ovechkin and Alexander Semin of the Capitals . The first three games in the series were scheduled for national television in the U.S. , with game one on NBC and games two and three on Versus . 
 Game 1 was held in Washington , where Capitals owner Ted Leonsis took steps to prevent Penguins ' fans from purchasing tickets , such as not selling tickets to customers whose 724 or 412 area code indicated they were from Western Pennsylvania . Crosby scored to give the Penguins a first period lead , but Washington scored two goals before the conclusion of the period . Mark Eaton tied the game in the second period , but Washington 's Semyon Varlamov held the Penguins scoreless for the remainder of the game as the Capitals took a 1 – 0 lead in the series . The game had 40 % more viewers than playoff games the previous season . In Game 2 , Ovechkin and Crosby scored three goals each , though Dave Steckel 's second period goal was the difference as Washington won 4 – 3 . 
 The series moved to Pittsburgh for Game 3 with the Penguins down 2 – 0 . Goals from Ruslan Fedotenko , Nicklas Backstrom , Ovechkin and Malkin left the game tied after regulation . Kris Letang scored a powerplay goal 11 minutes into overtime , winning the game for the Penguins . Pittsburgh tied the series at two games <unk> after a 5 – 3 Game 4 victory at Mellon Arena . After a Washington goal scored less than a minute into regulation , the Penguins responded with three goals in the first period . The Penguins ' five goals came from five different players . During the first period , Sergei Gonchar was forced to leave the game after a knee @-@ on @-@ knee hit from Ovechkin ; Gonchar returned to the Penguins ' line @-@ up for Game 7 . Game 5 took place in Washington , D.C. , the next day , due to the scheduling of a Yanni concert in Pittsburgh . After a scoreless first period , Washington took a 2 – 1 lead in the second . Fedotenko tied the game less than a minute into the third period , but a goal by Matt Cooke was matched by Ovechkin and the game went into overtime . With one second remaining in their second powerplay of the game , Malkin scored to give the Penguins their third consecutive victory . Game 6 was the third overtime game of the series . Washington forced a seventh game with a 5 – 4 victory . Nine different players scored goals in the game . 
 In the final game of the series , Pittsburgh scored two goals within eight seconds of one another to take a 2 – 0 lead after Fleury stopped Ovechkin on a breakaway . Pittsburgh scored three more goals in the second period , extending their lead to 5 – 0 , before Ovechkin scored his eighth goal of the series . Each team added a goal in the final period to end the game with a 6 – 2 final score . Ovechkin scored eight goals and added six assists in the series , while Crosby tallied eight goals and five assists . Crosby 's 13 @-@ point tally in the series totalled one less than Ovechkin 's 14 points , which was the highest single @-@ series point total since the 1995 playoffs . While shaking hands following the final game , Crosby told Ovechkin he had played a " great series , " to which Ovechkin responded , " win the Stanley Cup . " 
 = = = Eastern Conference Final = = = 
 Pittsburgh faced the Carolina Hurricanes in the Eastern Conference Final , after Carolina defeated the Boston Bruins and New Jersey Devils . The series opened in Pittsburgh , where Miroslav Satan and Philippe Boucher scored their first goals of the playoffs . Marc @-@ Andre Fleury was named the game 's third star after making 23 saves and helping the Penguins to a 3 – 2 victory . In Game 2 , Malkin scored a hat @-@ trick and Chris Kunitz scored his first goal of the playoffs as the Penguins won 7 – 4 , taking a two games to none series lead . In Game 3 , Malkin scored two goals and Crosby scored one as the Penguins took a 3 – 1 lead into the first intermission . After a scoreless second period , the Hurricanes came within a goal after Sergei Samsonov scored less than two minutes into the final period , but goals by Fedotenko , Craig Adams and Guerin gave the Penguins a 6 – 2 victory . The series concluded with the Penguins sweeping , four games to none . In the series ' fourth game , Pittsburgh gave up the initial goal less than two minutes into the opening period , but goals from Fedotenko and Talbot gave them the lead after the first period . A second period goal from Guerin and an empty netter from Adams sealed the Penguins ' victory in the game and the series . 
 = = = Stanley Cup Final = = = 
 For the second consecutive season , the Penguins played the Detroit Red Wings in the Stanley Cup Finals , marking the first time in 25 years that two teams played each other in consecutive Finals . Tickets for Games 3 and 4 , which were hosted at Mellon Arena , sold out in 10 minutes . In the first game of the series , the Red Wings scored the first goal when a puck shot by Brad Stuart ricocheted off the boards behind the goal , then bounced off Marc @-@ Andre Fleury and into the net . Ruslan Fedotenko , with an assist from Evgeni Malkin , tied the game before the conclusion of the first period . Detroit went on to score a goal in each of the final two periods to win Game 1 , 3 – 1 . Evgeni Malkin scored a powerplay goal in the first period of game two , but the Penguins were held scoreless for the remainder of the contest ; falling 3 – 1 for a second consecutive game . 
 With the Penguins down two games to none , the series shifted to Pittsburgh for Game 3 . After a 2 – 2 first period and a scoreless second period , Sergei Gonchar and Maxime Talbot each scored a goal in the third period to give the Penguins a 4 – 2 victory . In Game 4 , the Penguins tied the Red Wings at two games apiece with three unanswered goals in the second period , including a shorthanded goal by Jordan Staal . With the series returning to Detroit , the Red Wings took a three games to two lead in the series with a 5 – 0 win . Staal and Tyler Kennedy scored as the Penguins tied the series at three games apiece in a 2 – 1 game six victory . In the seventh and final game of the series , Maxime Talbot scored two goals and Fleury made 23 saves as the Penguins won their third Stanley Cup in franchise history . 
 Evgeni Malkin won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the MVP of the playoffs . Fans celebrated in the streets of Pittsburgh after the game , with the Stanley Cup victory coming four months after the Pittsburgh Steelers ' victory in Super Bowl XLIII . Two days after the victory , 375 @,@ 000 people attended a parade of the Cup through downtown Pittsburgh . 
 = = = Playoff log = = = 
 Scorer of game @-@ winning goal in italics 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Skaters 
 Goaltenders 
 † Denotes player spent time with another team before joining Team . Stats reflect time with the Team only . ‡ Denotes player was traded mid @-@ season . Stats reflect time with the Team only . 
 Bold / italics denotes franchise record 
 = = Awards and records = = 
 = = = Records = = = 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Prior to the team 's final home game on April 9 against the New York Islanders , the team announced its annual award winners . Awards were given by the Pittsburgh chapter of the Professional Hockey Writers Association , the Penguins Booster Club , as well as voted amongst the team . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 Concerns over future player contracts were raised just days after the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals . Approximately a dozen players , including Marian Hossa , Jarkko Ruutu , Ryan Malone and Brooks Orpik , had fulfilled the final year on their contracts . On June 28 , the Penguins traded the contract negotiation rights to Gary Roberts and Ryan Malone to the Tampa Bay Lightning for a conditional draft pick ; it became a third @-@ round pick when both Malone and Roberts signed with the Lightning on June 30 . Evgeni Malkin was offered a contract from a Russian team in the newly formed Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) worth approximately $ 12 @.@ 5 million , tax exempt , per year , which would make him the highest @-@ paid hockey player in the world . However , Malkin turned down the offer to remain with the Penguins , and the IIHF released a statement saying that it would not honor the offer , as Malkin was already under an existing contract with the Penguins at the time . Malkin agreed to a five @-@ year contract extension worth $ 8 @.@ 7 million per year — the same value as Sidney Crosby 's contract — with the Penguins on July 2 . On July 3 , the Penguins agreed to a seven @-@ year deal with restricted free agent goaltender Marc @-@ Andre Fleury in addition to one @-@ year contracts with free agents Miroslav Satan and Ruslan Fedotenko . On October 8 , the Penguins made several roster adjustments , placing Kris Beech , who was already in Europe looking for a new team , on unconditional waivers and sending Janne <unk> , John Curry and Jeff Taffe , who first had to clear waivers , to Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton . The next day , on October 9 , the Penguins acquired Michael Zigomanis from Phoenix for future considerations . On December 19 , the team extended their agreement with Maxime Talbot for an additional two seasons . 
 Trades 
 † Initially fifth @-@ round pick , fourth @-@ round pick if Penguins make playoffs , third @-@ round pick if Penguins win a playoff round and Guerin plays in 50 % of the games . 
 = = Draft picks = = 
 The 2008 NHL Entry Draft was held on June 20 – 21 , 2008 , in Ottawa , Ontario . The Penguins did not make their first selection until the fourth round , at 120th overall . 
 Draft notes 
 The Pittsburgh Penguins ' first @-@ round pick went to the Atlanta Thrashers as the result of a February 26 , 2008 trade that sent Marian Hossa and Pascal Dupuis to the Penguins in exchange for Angelo Esposito , Colby Armstrong , Erik Christensen and this pick . 
 The Pittsburgh Penguins ' second @-@ round pick went to the Toronto Maple Leafs as the result of a February 26 , 2008 trade that sent Hal Gill to the Penguins in exchange for a 2009 fifth @-@ round pick and this pick . 
 The Pittsburgh Penguins ' third @-@ round pick went to the Phoenix Coyotes as the result of a February 27 , 200 trade that sent Georges <unk> to the Penguins in exchange for Daniel Carcillo and this pick . 
 = = Farm teams = = 
 Pittsburgh 's American Hockey League affiliate , the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins , finished the 2008 – 09 season third in the East Division . 
 Chris Minard , the AHL 's leading goal scorer at time of announcement , was selected as a starter for Team Canada in the 2009 All Star Classic . Jeff Taffe and Ben Lovejoy were selected as reserves for the PlanetUSA team . All three players were under two @-@ way NHL contracts and played games with Pittsburgh during the season . In the game , Taffe scored three goals and recorded two assists . 
 Janne <unk> , who signed a contract with the Penguins in July 2008 , finished the 2008 – 09 season as the AHL 's fourth @-@ leading scorer , set a new record for points in a single season for the team , passing up Toby Peterson 's 67 @-@ point season of 2000 – 01 , and his 82 points were the most ever by a Finn in AHL history . 
 The ECHL affiliate Wheeling Nailers finished the season fourth in the Northern Division , and were eliminated in the first round of the 2009 Kelly Cup Playoffs . 
