 In season 3 , when the Underwoods are President and First Lady of the United States , Claire 's marriage to Frank begins to falter , and she ultimately decides he is no longer " enough " for her . She leaves him in the season finale , but comes back in the fourth season , treating their marriage as a purely political arrangement to further her own career . When he is shot during a campaign event , Claire privately admits that she feels nothing for him . Throughout the season , she works behind the scenes to undermine Frank 's election campaign , before finally joining forces with him in order to become his vice president . She also has an affair with her speechwriter Tom Yates ( Paul Sparks ) , with Frank 's approval . 
 = = Fictional character biography = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Claire is a lobbyist who runs an environmental group while serving as her husband 's primary accomplice . After President Garrett Walker ( Michel Gill ) goes back on his promise to make Frank Secretary of State , Frank enlists Claire to help him get revenge and propel them both to positions of power . She and Frank scheme nightly over a cigarette , and together they maneuver their way into Walker 's inner circle . Frank says of Claire : " I love that woman , I love her more than sharks love blood . " 
 Claire is aware of Frank 's sexual relationship with reporter Zoe Barnes ( Kate Mara ) , and approves of it as long as it achieves their ends . She herself has an affair with an old boyfriend , Adam Galloway ( Ben Daniels ) . 
 By the end of the season , Walker appoints Frank the Vice President of the United States , making Claire the Second Lady of the United States . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 Claire 's main storyline in season 2 is her advocacy , as Second Lady , for a sexual assault prevention bill . During her campaign for the bill , a skeleton from her college days emerges : During a nationally televised interview , she admits that she was raped in college , and that her rapist , Dalton McGinnis ( Peter Bradbury ) , is now a high @-@ ranking general . ( She had earlier had an uncomfortable encounter with McGinnis at a White House dinner , during which she had told Frank what the general had done to her . ) She also admits to having aborted a pregnancy that she claims was the result of the rape ; it is later revealed that she in fact aborted Frank 's child , with his consent . She then converts the focus on that issue into political support that becomes critical to the Underwoods ' ascension to the Oval Office . 
 Claire becomes increasingly ruthless as the season progresses . When Galloway leaks an intimate photo of Claire to appease his jealous fiancee , Claire intimidates him into publicly stating that he fabricated the picture , ruining his reputation . When Gillian Cole ( Sandrine Holt ) , a pregnant former employee , returns to demand health care as part of her severance , Claire says , " I am willing to let your child wither and die inside you , if that ’ s what ’ s required , ... Am I really the sort of enemy you want to make ? " Claire also manipulates First Lady Patricia Walker ( Joanna Going ) into believing that her husband is having an affair in order to distract President Walker from Frank 's machinations . She shows remorse for her actions only once . When another of McGinnis ' victims , Megan Hennessy ( Libby Woodbridge ) , comes forward , Claire uses her as the poster girl for the sexual assault bill , leaving the fragile young woman open to public scrutiny and reprisals from the bill 's opponents . Before she can testify about her ordeal before Congress , however , Megan suffers a breakdown and attempts suicide . Upon realizing what she has caused Megan to go through , Claire bursts into tears . 
 In the season finale , she urges Frank to humble himself before President Walker , with whom he has fallen out of favor , in order to complete the plan : " Cut out your heart and put it in his fucking hands . " The gambit works : Walker keeps Frank as his Vice President , allowing Frank to succeed him when he resigns . Frank is now President of the United States , with Claire as the First Lady of the United States . 
 According to Drew Grant of The New York Observer , Claire 's season @-@ long storyline was similar to the real life efforts of United States Senator Kirsten Gillibrand 's to legislate an end to military sexual assault . Based upon the 4 @-@ episode preview , Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times says that in season 2 Claire " is still ruthlessly pursuing her own agenda as well as her husband ’ s . She remains an enigma even as she reveals more and more disturbing secrets from her past . " Claire remains composed and stylish with or without her husband and plays the press with aplomb . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 In Season 3 , Claire feels the need to be something more " significant " than the First Lady , and asks Frank to nominate her to a United Nations post . He nominates her , but the Senate rejects her after a rocky hearing . Frank gives her the job anyway in a recess appointment , but her tenure is brief ; she ruins a treaty between the U.S. and Russia by publicly confronting Russian President Viktor Petrov ( Lars Mikkelsen ) about his anti @-@ gay policies , and is forced to resign when Petrov uses her as a bargaining chip during a diplomatic crisis . 
 During Frank 's election campaign , Claire begins to question whether she still loves him . In the season finale , she and Frank get into an ugly fight in which she says he is not enough for her ; Frank replies that without him , she is nothing . Season three ends with Claire leaving Frank as he prepares to go to the New Hampshire primary . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 After leaving Frank , Claire goes back to Texas , where she has a tense reunion with her mother , who is dying of lymphoma . She sets her sights on running for a House of Representatives seat in Texas , with help from political consultant LeAnn Harvey ( Neve Campbell ) . Frank persuades her to resume public appearances with him by promising to support her run . However , he sandbags her prospective candidacy by endorsing a political ally 's daughter , in order to keep Claire focused on his campaign . Claire retaliates on the day the South Carolina primary by covertly leaking a photo of Frank 's father with a Klansman , imperiling Frank 's candidacy . Frank figures out that she was behind the leak and confronts her . Claire calmly admits what she did , and proposes that she join him in the ticket as his vice president . Frank rejects the idea . 
 Shortly thereafter , Frank is shot by Lucas Goodwin in an assassination attempt , and falls into a coma . While Frank is in surgery , Claire helps guide Frank 's vice @-@ president Donald Blythe through diplomatic oil crisis with Russia . While Frank is receiving a liver transplant , she declines going to the hospital in favor of negotiating a treaty with Petrov , and strong @-@ arms him into accepting the U.S. ' terms . When Frank recovers from surgery , he agrees to let Claire be his vice president . He and Claire advocate for a controversial gun control bill for the sole purpose of creating an atmosphere divisive enough to pick off the potential running mates . In the ensuing open convention , they publicly endorse Secretary of State Catherine Durant ( Jayne Atkinson ) for the job , while working behind the scenes to undermine her and ensure that Claire wins enough delegates to be nominated . Meanwhile , she reluctantly honors her mother 's request to help her die . She and Frank then use the public sympathy from Elizabeth 's death to win the nomination ; they are now running mates . 
 When a group of homegrown ICO terrorists take an American family hostage , Claire negotiates with their imprisoned leader , Yusuf Al Ahmadi ( Farshad Farahat ) , who agrees to tell his followers to release the hostages . Al Ahmadi reneges on the deal , however , and tells them to kill the hostages . At the same time , Tom Hammerschmidt ( Boris McGiver ) publishes an investigative news story detailing Frank 's crimes . Claire gives Frank the idea to declare war on the terrorists and allow the public to see the hostage die in order to distract from the scandal and create an atmosphere of widespread fear that they can exploit . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wright 's performance is described as " nuanced and compelling " . Claire has " chilly poise " but the " coolly regal <unk> " softens over the course of the first season according to New Republic 's Laura Bennet . Wright plays the role with " an almost terrifying <unk> " . As a couple Frank and Claire are said to " reverberate with tension and wit " . Michael Dobbs , who wrote the trilogy of novels upon which the British miniseries is based , compares the compelling nature of the relationship between Frank and Claire favorably to the original characters in House of Cards and likens them to Macbeth and Lady Macbeth . He is not alone . In season 2 , she remains " equally steely " . Despite suggestions to the contrary , Wright insists that the character is not based on Hillary Clinton . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 On July 18 , 2013 , Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Award nominations for original online only web television for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards . Three of its web series , Arrested Development , Hemlock Grove , and House of Cards , earned nominations . Among those nominations was Wright 's portrayal of Claire Underwood for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series as well as Kevin Spacey 's portrayal of Frank Underwood for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Jason Bateman 's portrayal of Michael Bluth in Arrested Development for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , making these three roles the first three leading roles to be Primetime Emmy Award @-@ nominated from a web television series . The role has also earned Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama award at the 71st Golden Globe Awards on January 12 , 2014 . In so doing she became the first actress to win a Golden Globe Award for an online @-@ only web television series . 
 For season 2 , Wright earned a Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Drama Series nomination at the 4th Critics ' Choice Television Awards . Wright was again nominated for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards and Best Actress – Television Series Drama at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards . She was nominated for both Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 21st Screen Actors Guild Awards . 
 In season 3 , she was nominated for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series at the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards , Best Actress – Television Series Drama at the 73rd Golden Globe Awards , as well as both Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 22nd Screen Actors Guild Awards . 
 The season 4 performance earned a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead <unk> in a Drama Series at the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = The Utility of Force = 
 The Utility of Force : The Art of War in the Modern World is a treatise on modern warfare written by General Sir Rupert Smith and published in 2005 . Smith is a retired general who spent 40 years in the British Army ; he commanded the 1st Armoured Division in the First Gulf War and served as General Officer Commanding Northern Ireland at the end of the Troubles . He was motivated to write the book by his experiences in the Balkans . He commanded the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) in Bosnia from 1995 to 1996 , during which time the Srebrenica massacre occurred and the capital , Sarajevo , was under siege by Serb forces . Smith was instrumental in the lifting of the siege by arranging for NATO air strikes and an artillery barrage . This enabled a ground assault by Bosnian and Croatian forces that ended the siege and led to the Dayton Agreement . Smith 's second involvement with the Balkans was in 1999 during the Kosovo War , when he was serving as NATO 's Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe , overseeing air strikes against Serb targets . 
 Smith 's thesis , and the central theme of The Utility of Force , is that the world entered a new paradigm of conflict at the end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st centuries , which he calls " war amongst the people " , and that Western , industrialised armies are ill @-@ suited to the new style of warfare . The defining characteristics of " war amongst the people " are that conflicts tend to be timeless , more political in nature , and fought between parties that are part of , and in amongst , the civilian population rather than between uniformed armies on a battlefield . To prove his theory , Smith provides a detailed history starting with Napoleon , who invented what Smith calls " industrial warfare " — the paradigm in which the entire resources of the nation were mustered and which culminated in the two world wars . In the second half of the book , Smith states that the advent of nuclear weapons rendered industrial warfare obsolete , but that Western governments and generals refused to acknowledge the new paradigm , which led to several significant defeats in the second half of the 20th century . He provides six themes which characterise modern conflicts and proceeds to analyse each in detail , before dedicating his final chapter to his reflections on his command in Bosnia . He concedes that he did not foresee the <unk> massacre , but criticises UNPROFOR , believing that it was not in a position to act even had the massacre been foreseen and that it had no strategy for effectively intervening in the war . In his conclusion , Smith argues that military force is only part of the solution in modern conflicts , and that it must be combined with political initiatives which together will subdue but not necessarily end the conflict . 
 The Utility of Force was broadly praised by reviewers on both sides of the Atlantic . It was compared favourably with Carl von Clausewitz 's treatise On War and American reviewers felt that it contained important lessons for the United States military . Smith was criticised for over @-@ emphasising the paradigm shift , with several reviewers observing that conventional wars are still fought and that the threat of such wars still exists , and for drawing too clear a distinction between " war amongst the people " and conventional war , particularly with his opening sentence " war no longer exists " . Reviewers also felt that Smith under @-@ emphasised the extent to which " war amongst the people " has always existed . Nonetheless , reviewers praised Smith 's analysis of modern war and recommended that The Utility of Force ought to be read by politicians and military officers . 
 = = Background = = 
 General Sir Rupert Smith is a retired career military officer who served in the British Army for 40 years . At the height of his career , Smith held several significant commands in both conventional conflicts and " wars amongst the people " . As a major general , he commanded the 1st Armoured Division during the first Gulf War ( 1990 – 91 ) . He went on to serve as Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff for operations and security from 1992 to 1995 , during which time he came to the conclusion that military force could only achieve one of four things when used to intervene in a political conflict : " ameliorate , contain , deter or coerce , and destroy " . 
 Smith 's decision to write The Utility of Force was prompted by his experience in the Balkans . In late January 1995 , Smith was appointed to command the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) , sent to intervene in the Bosnian War . Smith was based in the Bosnian capital , Sarajevo , where he devised a strategy for the multi @-@ national UN force that had been deployed effectively to carry out mainly humanitarian tasks but without a plan to bring the war to a successful conclusion . At the time of Smith 's deployment , Sarajevo was in the middle of a siege , which Smith was instrumental in lifting after arranging for NATO air strikes and an artillery barrage against Serb forces commanded by Ratko <unk> . A ground campaign by Bosnian and Croatian forces eventually led to the Dayton Agreement , which brought the war to an end . It was also during Smith 's command of UNPROFOR that the Srebrenica massacre — recognised by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as an act of genocide — took place . Historian Niall Ferguson was adamant that Smith bore no responsibility for the events at Srebrenica and was indeed one of the few British officials " to emerge with distinction " from the intervention in Bosnia ; nonetheless , Ferguson believed that the experience illuminates Smith 's theoretical writings . 
 After UNPROFOR , Smith served as General Officer Commanding Northern Ireland from 1996 to 1998 towards the conclusion of the Troubles . In 1999 , during the Kosovo War , Smith was NATO 's Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe . NATO commenced air strikes against Serb forces led by Slobodan Milošević , again lacking defined objectives , while Smith worked to incorporate the bombing raids into an overall strategy . 
 = = Narrative = = 
 = = = Industrial war = = = 
 The book opens with the statement that " war no longer exists " ; that is , war as " battle in a field between men and machinery " or " a massive deciding event in a dispute in international affairs " is unlikely to happen again . The premise of the book is that the world is experiencing a new paradigm of war in the late 20th and early 21st centuries , which Smith dubs " war amongst the people " , in which nebulous , open @-@ ended conflicts have become the norm . Smith believes that Western , industrialised armies struggle to win in " wars amongst the people " because their opponents are not uniformed armies . He uses the term " <unk> " to describe terrorist and guerrilla movements ; he states his belief that such fighters can adapt much more easily than state institutions , and that they exhibit a greater understanding of the utility of force . Rather than being part of a recognisable army , the fighters are part of the civilian population , and their objectives are more political than military — they seek to " win hearts and minds " rather than take or hold territory . As a consequence , wars are no longer confined to a battlefield , but the theatre of operations is fluid , and commanders now operate inside the theatre . 
 To prove his theory , Smith provides a detailed history of modern warfare , using examples from history to illustrate his contentions . Throughout the book , Smith analyses the use of force in each of the examples , and how it was used to achieve particular aims . The discussion of history begins with Napoleon , who invented the paradigm of industrial warfare . Prior to Napoleon , wars were mostly fought for territory rather than ideology , and did not substantially alter the balance of power between nations . Napoleon 's concept of war involved using the entire resources of the nation with the aim of comprehensively defeating his opponent and replacing the political order ; in order to meet the new challenge , the Prussian Army undertook sweeping reforms . Napoleon 's strategy and the Prussian response influenced Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz in writing his treatise On War ( published posthumously in 1832 ) . Throughout the narrative , Smith analyses how armies applied force in order to achieve their objectives . He also discusses the emergence of guerrilla forces during the Peninsular War , which Smith believes was the first " war amongst the people " — irregular forces with no clear leadership structure conducting hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on Napoleon 's forces , fighting to preserve the ideology of Spanish independence rather than for a battlefield victory . The concept of industrial war culminated in the early 20th century with the two world wars . 
 = = = War amongst the people = = = 
 In the second half of the book , Smith states that the advent of the atomic bomb rendered industrial warfare obsolete , but that governments clung to the concept throughout the Cold War era — the Cold War itself being the last act of the old @-@ style industrial war . The belief in industrial war tactics and institutions continued into the post @-@ Cold War era , and Smith believes that political and military leaders refused to acknowledge the new paradigm of " war amongst the people " , which resulted in significant defeats , such as for France in Algeria , the United States in Vietnam , and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan , and caused problems for NATO operations in the Balkans , and later for the Western coalitions in Iraq and Afghanistan . Smith also notes that , in the new paradigm , soldiers are frequently being asked to undertake new tasks — such as humanitarian operations — while still equipped and trained for old @-@ paradigm conflicts between massed armies . 
 In the final third of the book , Smith uses six themes to describe the new paradigm of war : 
 The ends for which we fight are changing from the hard objectives that decide a political outcome to those of establishing conditions in which the outcome may be decided 
 We fight amongst the people , not on the battlefield 
 Our conflicts tend to be timeless , even unending 
 We fight so as to preserve the force rather than risking all to gain the objective 
 On each occasion new uses are found for old weapons and organizations which are the products of industrial war 
 The sides are mostly non @-@ state , comprising some form of multinational grouping against some non @-@ state party or parties . 
 Smith then proceeds to discuss each of the six themes in detail . Smith discusses modern guerrilla and insurgency campaigns , including various civil wars and ethnic conflicts in the Balkans , the Middle East , and Africa . The conflicts he discusses in the second half are almost all " wars amongst the people " and appear intractable to conventional forces . Smith analyses situations in which countries have adapted their tactics in order to respond to " war amongst the people " , such as those used by Israeli forces in response to the Palestinian Intifada , in which the Israelis resorted to targeted searches when superior firepower proved ineffective . He points out that modern wars are rarely fought between individual nations , but the parties often consist of supranational coalitions or sub @-@ state entities , and that Western governments in particular fight in such a way as to keep casualties and material losses to a minimum . Smith is critical of the conduct of the American @-@ led coalition in the Iraq War during the insurgency which followed the initial invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003 ; he opines that the soldiers undertaking the counter @-@ insurgency operations did not have the proper skills or equipment for the task . He believes that the commanders were working at a tactical rather than a strategic level , and that operations were not sufficiently guided by intelligence — relying too heavily on battlefield strength and assessments of the insurgents ' technical capabilities , rather than their political objectives . 
 Smith includes various anecdotes and personal reflections from his own career , and the final chapter of the book is dedicated to Smith 's reflections on his command of UNPROFOR in Bosnia . Ferguson describes Smith as " candid " in admitting that he did not foresee the events at <unk> in the summer of 1995 , but Smith suggests that , even had the genocide been foreseen , UNPROFOR was not in any position to prevent it . He described the force as " reinforced camps of international troops attempting to defend the delivery of humanitarian aid , and often themselves " . Smith 's belief was that none of the governments that contributed soldiers to UNPROFOR had any intention of committing them to fight — that they had decided " to deploy forces with no intention to employ their force " , having been scared into inaction by inaccurate reporting and a lack of understanding of the war . 
 In his conclusion , Smith states his belief that modern politicians and military leaders use force where it has no utility and commit military forces without fully defined political and strategic objectives . He believes that politicians and generals remain in the mindset of industrial war , which leads them to prepare for a decisive confrontation that never happens , and he condemns them for failing to recognise the shift in the way wars are fought . Discussing humanitarian interventions , such as those in the Balkans , Smith does not argue against intervention , but believes that the intervention must be based on a full understanding of the conflict and a clear strategy with defined objectives . According to Smith , " no act of force will ever be decisive " because the aim of modern conflicts is to win the will of the people , which will not be achieved by battlefield victory alone . He argues that whereas , in the industrial war paradigm , war led to victory and thus to peace , in the modern paradigm confrontation leads to conflict , which then reverts to confrontation . He asserts that force is only part of the solution to modern conflicts ; they require complex political and military solutions , which will subdue but not necessarily permanently end the conflict . 
 = = Release and critical reception = = 
 The Utility of Force was published in November 2005 by Allen Lane , an imprint of Penguin Books . 
 William Grimes , writing in the New York Times , described The Utility of Force as " a closely argued , searching textbook on strategy and the efficient use of military power in the post @-@ Cold War era " . Grimes also described it as a " difficult , challenging book " , saying " you can almost hear the pointer hit the blackboard as he works his way rigorously through each argument and sub @-@ arguments A , B and C , before proceeding to the next step . At times the history lecture becomes a forced march over very familiar terrain , but patient readers will discover that there is indeed a final destination " . In a second review for the New York Times in 2007 , Niall Ferguson , a history professor at Harvard University , described The Utility of Force as an update of Clausewitz 's On War " for our times " . Ferguson went on to criticise Smith for drawing too clear a distinction between " war amongst the people " and " war between peoples " , pointing out that in several conflicts there was no single , homogeneous " people " and that wars amongst the people can easily transform into wars between people , citing Bosnia as an example . Ferguson was underwhelmed by Smith 's recommendations for the future — Smith believes that new equipment and strategies are required in order for armies to be effective in the new paradigm , but does not offer any suggestions . Ferguson 's final criticism was what he described as the book 's " limited historical perspective " ; Smith argues that " war amongst the people " emerged in the second half of the 20th century during the proxy wars and de @-@ colonisation campaigns of the Cold War era , but Ferguson gave examples of similar campaigns which pre @-@ dated the Cold War , including the First Boer War ( 1880 – 81 ) and campaigns fought in Eastern Europe during the Second World War . Nonetheless , Ferguson concludes that The Utility of Force is " an impressive and absorbing work " , and described Smith as " the Clausewitz of low @-@ intensity conflict and peacekeeping operations " . 
 Academic Eliot A. Cohen , professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University wrote for The Washington Post that the British Army had " a higher quotient of sophisticated leaders who have thought hard about the profession of arms " than was found in other armed forces , including the US military , which he believed explained why it " produces generals who write [ ... ] serious , important books " such as the Utility of Force . Cohen wrote that Smith 's thesis , that the world has entered a new era of conflict , is of " central importance " for the United States military , which Cohen believed would have to undergo significant adaptation if Smith was correct . Cohen criticised the book for its limited historical perspective , noting that conventional wars are still fought ( for example the Kargil War in 1999 ) and that several confrontations in Asia threatened to spill over into conventional warfare . Nevertheless , Cohen concluded " Smith has clearly written one of the most important books on modern warfare in the last decade . We would be better off if the United States had a few more generals like him " . 
 The Guardian 's Martin Woollacott reviewed the book along with sociologist Martin Shaw 's The New Western Way of War : Risk @-@ Transfer War and its Crisis in Iraq , which he believes makes similar arguments to Smith 's , though the two reach slightly different conclusions — Smith that force should only be used as part of a wider political strategy , Shaw that war should be avoided where at all possible but that use of force is sometimes inevitable . Woollacott described Smith as " a soldier trying to wrest some continuing purpose for his profession " , and described both books as " very worthwhile efforts to map difficult ground " . 
 Sir Adam Roberts , professor of international relations at the University of Oxford , was more critical in reviewing The Utility of Force for The Independent . Roberts believed that Smith over @-@ stated the transformation into the new paradigm of war by playing down the extent to which there have always been wars amongst the people , over @-@ emphasised the role of technology in the shift from industrial warfare , and downplayed the continuation of industrial war . By way of example , Roberts points to the Iran – Iraq War and the role of precision bombing used by the United States in its campaigns since the end of the 20th century . In conclusion , Roberts states that " it is possible to quibble over many details " , but that " such quibbles miss the essential point of the book : that involvement in today 's crises , in the attempt to stop atrocities and bring wars to an end , requires a capacity for clear thought , a sensitivity to situation , and a talent for acting , that armed forces and their officers have not always possessed – and now badly need " . 
 Writing in the journal of the Royal United Services Institute ( RUSI ) , Christopher Coker , professor of international relations at London School of Economics , gave a detailed analysis of Smith 's opening sentence , " war no longer exists " . He concluded that war had <unk> , but that war was not over , and that Smith 's " eye @-@ catching quote detracts from the force of his own argument " . Nevertheless , Coker praises Smith for the latter 's criticism of those who failed to recognise the shift in the paradigm of war , and of the lack of strategy in the military campaigns of the late 20th and early 21st centuries . Coker concludes with the statement : " [ Smith 's ] experience , distilled in a book sometimes too controversial for its own good , should become standard reading in every military academy " . 
 In 2013 , General David Richards , then Chief of the Defence Staff , included The Utility of Force on a list of publications that he recommended to officers wishing to improve their leadership skills . 
 = Fighter Squadron RAAF = 
 Fighter Squadron was a flying unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in the early 1930s . It operated Bristol Bulldog single @-@ seat fighters . Along with Seaplane Squadron , Fighter Squadron was a component of No. 1 Flying Training School , based at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . As well as participating in training exercises , Fighter Squadron was frequently employed for aerobatic displays and flag @-@ waving duties . 
 = = History = = 
 Although the first entry in Fighter Squadron records is dated 12 February 1934 , the official history of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) between the wars refers to the unit as having been established for the specific purpose of operating Australia 's eight Bristol Bulldog fighters , which began entering service in May 1930 . Fighter Squadron was one of two formations raised at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , under the auspices of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , the other being Seaplane Squadron , which operated Supermarine Southamptons among other types . No. 1 FTS had been the first unit to be formed as part of the new Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 ( the prefix " Royal " was added in August that year ) . The single @-@ seat Bulldogs were procured to give the RAAF a dedicated air defence capability following the retirement of the Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 fighter in 1928 . Although only a " token " combat force according to the official history , the Bulldogs represented the latest technology available and gave Fighter Squadron the aura of an elite formation . 
 On 15 May 1930 , barely two weeks after delivery , one of the Bulldogs crashed due to structural failure while performing an inverted loop ; the pilot parachuted to safety , the first time an RAAF member had done so in an emergency . In September 1931 , Fighter Squadron began flight testing the prototype Wackett Warrigal general @-@ purpose biplane ; testing was still under way when the aircraft 's undercarriage collapsed during landing , putting off its service trials until the following January . 
 As well as participating in training exercises , Fighter Squadron was often employed for aerobatic displays and flag @-@ waving duties . The young Air Force was keen to show off its skills and equipment to the public , leading to regular participation in aerial pageants and races as far afield as Western Australia and Tasmania ; this had the added benefit of providing exposure to a variety of conditions on long @-@ distance flights , as pilots were required to fly their aircraft to and from displays in remote areas . The commanding officer of Fighter Squadron , Squadron Leader Johnny Summers , considered that it gave personnel " most useful experience in the handling and maintenance of their aircraft under adverse conditions " . One of No. 1 FTS 's leading instructors during the early 1930s , Flight Lieutenant Frederick Scherger , was also a flight commander in Fighter Squadron . In October 1931 , during a flight to Adelaide to take part in an aero club pageant , Scherger had to land at Nhill , Victoria , in strong winds ; his Bulldog finished up on its nose but the damage was slight , allowing him to complete the journey and win his air race with a top speed of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . 
 Fighter Squadron 's public displays often involved mock dogfights and simulated dive bombing , sometimes at night . On 12 February 1934 , Summers , Scherger and another pilot demonstrated night @-@ time combat tactics over the Exhibition Ground in Melbourne , the sky being lit with searchlights . In October and November that year , the Bulldogs took part in several aerial displays in Victoria to commemorate the visit of Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . The following month , Fighter Squadron aircraft escorted the Duke on his visit to Brisbane aboard HMAS Australia . The Bulldogs were also occasionally detailed for meteorological and photographic survey work . Throughout their existence , Fighter and Seaplane Squadrons remained under the control of No. 1 FTS and were " really little more than flights " , in the words of the official history . Fighter Squadron was dissolved in December 1935 when its six surviving Bulldogs were re @-@ designated as fighter @-@ bombers and transferred from Point Cook to nearby RAAF Laverton , where they joined the Hawker Demons of No. 1 Squadron . During its service with Fighter Squadron , the Bulldog had been the only single @-@ seat fighter in the RAAF 's inventory , and no specialist fighter type took its place for the remainder of the decade . 
 = One Times Square = 
 One Times Square , also known as 1475 Broadway , the New York Times Building , the New York Times Tower , or simply as the Times Tower , is a 25 story , 363 @-@ foot ( 111 @-@ metre ) -high skyscraper , designed by Cyrus L. W. <unk> ( HLW International ) , located at 42nd Street and Broadway in New York City . The tower was originally built to serve as the headquarters of the local newspaper , The New York Times ( which also gave its name to the area as a whole , known as Times Square ) ; however , the Times stayed in the building for less than 10 years before moving to a new building on 229 West 43rd Street . 
 Despite the Times leaving the building , One Times Square remained a major focal point of Times Square due to its annual New Year 's Eve " ball drop " festivities ( the ball itself has remained atop the tower year @-@ round since 2009 ) , and the introduction of an electronic news ticker at street @-@ level in 1928 . Following its sale to Lehman Brothers in 1995 , One Times Square was re @-@ purposed as an advertising location to take advantage of its prime location within the square . Most of the building 's interior remains vacant ( aside from its only major tenant , a Walgreens pharmacy which occupies its lower levels ) , while its exterior features a large number of traditional and electronic billboards . Due to the large amount of revenue that its ads pull , One Times Square is considered one of the most valuable advertising locations in the world . 
 = = Building history = = 
 The building , on the site of the Pabst Hotel , was originally completed in 1904 to serve as the new headquarters of The New York Times , which officially moved into the building in January 1905 . The paper 's owner , Adolph Ochs , also successfully persuaded the city to rename the surrounding area ( then known as Longacre Square ) after the newspaper , becoming Times Square . To help promote the new headquarters , the Times held a New Year 's Eve event on December 31 , 1903 , welcoming the year of 1904 with a fireworks display set off from the roof of the building at midnight . The event was a success , attracting 200 @,@ 000 spectators , and was continued annually until 1907 . For 1908 , Ochs replaced the display with what he thought would be a more spectacular event — the lowering of a lit ball down the building 's flagpole at midnight , patterned off the use of time balls to indicate a certain time of day ( the " ball drop " is still held on One Times Square to this day , attracting an average of one million spectators yearly ) . 
 In 1913 , only eight years after it moved to One Times Square , the Times moved its corporate headquarters to 229 West 43rd Street , which served as its home from 1913 to 2007 . The Times has since moved to The New York Times Building on nearby Eighth Avenue . After leaving One Times Square , the Times still maintained ownership of the tower . 
 On November 6 , 1928 , an electronic news ticker known as the <unk> News Bulletin ( colloquially known as the " zipper " ) was introduced near the base of the building . The zipper originally consisted of 14 @,@ 800 light bulbs , with the display controlled by a chain conveyor system inside the building ; individual letter elements ( a form of movable type ) were loaded into frames to spell out news headlines . As the frames moved along the conveyor , the letters themselves triggered electrical contacts which lit the external bulbs ( the zipper has since been upgraded to use modern LED technology ) . The first headline displayed on the zipper announced Herbert Hoover 's victory in that day 's presidential election . The zipper was used to display other major news headlines of the era , and its content later expanded to include sports and weather updates as well . On the evening of August 14 , 1945 , the zipper was famously used to announce Japan 's surrender from World War II to a packed crowd in Times Square . 
 The Times sold the building to advertising executive and sign designer Douglas Leigh in 1961 . Leigh then sold the building to Allied Chemical in 1963 . Allied Chemical greatly modified the building 's facade in a $ 10 million renovation , replacing intricate granite and terracotta elements with marble facing . In 1974 , the building was sold to investor Alex Parker for $ 6 @.@ 25 million , and then to the Swiss @-@ based investment group <unk> . <unk> later sold the tower to an investment group led by Lawrence I. <unk> in 1982 . <unk> promised further renovations to the building , including the possibility of using its north face for signage displays . Following the sale of the building by the Times , the zipper was operated on an inconsistent basis by various news outlets , and was shut off entirely between 1961 and 1965 , and again from 1977 to 1986 . In 1986 , the ticker was revived by Newsday , which operated it until December 31 , 1994 . The newspaper declined to renew its lease on the ticker , believing that they " [ didn 't ] get very much out of that sign " financially . Publishing company Pearson PLC operated the zipper for a period beginning on December 31 , 1994 , until ceding its role to Dow Jones & Company in June 1995 . 
 From 1990 to 1996 , Sony operated a Jumbotron on the exterior of the tower . Alongside its use for advertising and news , it was also frequently used by the producers of the late @-@ night talk show Late Show with David Letterman , who could display a live feed from its studio on the screen as well . As a cost @-@ saving measure , Sony declined to renew its lease of the space , leading to the subsequent removal of the Jumbotron in June 1996 . Due to its frequent use by Late Show , its producer Rob Burnett jokingly considered the removal of the Jumbotron to be " a sad , sad day for New York . " 
 = = Billboards = = 
 In 1992 , the owners of One Times Square filed for bankruptcy protection . In March 1995 , One Times Square was sold to the financial services firm Lehman Brothers for $ 27 @.@ 5 million . The new owners felt that it would not be cost @-@ effective to house new tenants in the tower due to the cost of the extensive renovation required in order to make it suitable for tenants as compared to the relatively small rental revenue that its limited floor space would have brought in . Instead , they decided to market the tower as a location for advertising to capitalize on its prominent location within the Square . The entire exterior of One Times Square above the ticker was modified to add a grid frame for mounting billboard signs . Throughout 1996 , One Times Square 's first electronic billboards were installed , such as , a Cup Noodles billboard with steam effects was added to the front of the tower , later accompanied by an animated Budweiser sign . In October , a new 55 @-@ foot video screen sponsored by ITT Corporation was introduced to the top of the tower , which would feature video advertisements and community service announcements . In December 1996 , a new Panasonic display operated by NBC known as Astrovision was introduced as a replacement for Sony 's Jumbotron at the base of the tower . 
 Lehman Brothers sold One Times Square in 1997 to the Jamestown , L.P. for $ 117 million . Filings related to the sale revealed that the billboards on the tower had been generating a net revenue of $ 7 million yearly , representing a 300 % profit . With growing tourism and high traffic in the Times Square area ( with a yearly average of over 100 million pedestrians — alongside its prominence in media coverage of New Year 's festivities , seen by a wide audience yearly ) , annual revenue from the signs grew to over $ 23 million by the year 2012 — rivaling London 's Piccadilly Circus as the most valuable public advertising space in the world . 
 Despite becoming primarily used for advertising , One Times Square continued to house tenants in its ground @-@ level floors : in the late 1990s , a Warner Bros. retail store filled the first three floors . In early 2006 , the floors were occupied by a J. C. Penney pop @-@ up store known as The J C. Penney Experience . In November 2008 , pharmacy chain Walgreens opened a new flagship store in the space , renting it in a lease valued at $ 4 million yearly . Walgreens also introduced a new digital sign to the building as part of its grand opening : designed by Gilmore Group and constructed by D3 LED , the 17 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 600 m2 ) sign runs diagonally up both sides of the building and contains 12 million LEDs , surpassing the nearby NASDAQ sign as the largest LED sign in Times Square . The former electrical room in the tower 's basement currently serves as a " vault " for the storage of items relating to New Year 's Eve celebrations at Times Square , including the ball itself ( prior to 2009 ) , spare parts , numeral signage and other memorabilia . 
 = = = Advertisers = = = 
 From 1996 to 2006 , Nissin Foods operated a Cup Noodles billboard with smoke effects ( an effect that had also been famously used by other Times Square billboards , such as the Camel Cigarettes sign ) . The Cup Noodles billboard was replaced in 2006 by a General Motors billboard featuring a Chevrolet branded clock ; however , as a part of cutbacks resulting from GM 's bankruptcy and re @-@ organization , the Chevrolet Clock was removed in 2009 and eventually replaced by the current Dunkin ' Donuts display . 
 On August 19 , 1998 , Discover Card replaced ITT Corporation as the operator and sponsor of the top @-@ most screen on One Times Square as part of a ten @-@ year deal . The deal came alongside the announcement that Discover Card would be an official sponsor of Times Square 's New Year 's Eve 2000 festivities . 
 In 2006 , News Corporation ( now 21st Century Fox ) replaced NBC as the operator and sponsor of the Astrovision screen . In 2010 , Sony returned to One Times Square by replacing the News Corp. Panasonic screen with a new high @-@ definition LED display . 
 In December 2007 , Toshiba took over sponsorship of the top @-@ most screen of One Times Square from Discover Card in a 10 @-@ year lease . Throughout 2008 , upgrades began to be made to the upper portion of One Times Square ; including the installation of new Toshiba high definition LED displays ( known as <unk> ) , and the redesign of its roof to accommodate a larger New Year 's Eve ball , which became a year @-@ round fixture of the building beginning in 2009 . 
 As of 2012 , advertising displays on the front of One Times Square currently include an Anheuser @-@ Busch display , a Dunkin ' Donuts display featuring photos posted by users on Facebook and Twitter , a TDK display , and the <unk> screens at the top of the tower . Toshiba 's Contract to display Toshiba Vision in Times <unk> expires in 2018 . 
 = USS Henry R. Mallory ( ID @-@ 1280 ) = 
 USS Henry R. Mallory ( ID @-@ 1280 ) was a transport for the United States Navy during World War I. She was also sometimes referred to as USS H. R. Mallory or as USS Mallory . Before her Navy service she was USAT Henry R. Mallory as a United States Army transport ship . From her 1916 launch , and after her World War I military service , she was known as SS Henry R. Mallory for the Mallory Lines . Pressed into service as a troopship in World War II by the War Shipping Administration , she was torpedoed by the German submarine U @-@ 402 in the North Atlantic ocean and sank with the loss of 272 men — over half of those on board . 
 = = World War I = = 
 SS Henry R. Mallory was built by the Newport News Shipbuilding & Drydock Co. of Newport News , Virginia ( yard no . 193 ) , and delivered to the Mallory Steamship Line on 21 October 1916 . Named for Mallory Lines president Henry R. Mallory , she operated on a New Orleans – New York route , carrying passengers and freight . 
 = = = U.S. Army service = = = 
 After the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917 , the United States Army , needing transports to get its men and materiel to France , had a select committee of shipping executives pore over registries of American shipping . The committee selected Henry R. Mallory and thirteen other American @-@ flagged ships that were sufficiently fast , could carry enough fuel in their bunkers for transatlantic crossings , and , most importantly , were in port or not far at sea . After Henry R. Mallory discharged her last load of passengers and cargo , she was officially handed over to the Army on 24 May , one of the first three ships acquired . 
 Before any troop transportation could be undertaken , all of the ships were hastily refitted . Of the fourteen ships , ten , including Henry R. Mallory , were designated to carry human passengers ; the other four were designated as animal ships . The ten ships designated to carry troops had all of their second- and third @-@ class accommodations ripped out and replaced with berths for troops . Cooking and toilet facilities were greatly expanded to handle the large numbers of men aboard . Gun platforms were installed on each ship before docking at the Brooklyn Navy Yard to have the guns themselves installed . All the ships were manned by merchant officers and crews but carried two U.S. Navy officers , Navy gun crews , quartermasters , signalmen , and wireless operators . The senior Navy officer on board would take control if a ship came under attack . 
 The American convoy carrying the first units of the American Expeditionary Force was broken into four groups ; Henry R. Mallory was in the third group with San Jacinto and Finland , and escorts consisting of cruiser Charleston , armed collier Cyclops , and destroyers Allen , Preston , and McCall . Henry R. Mallory departed with her group on 14 June for Brest , France , steaming at a 13 @-@ knot ( 24 km / h ) pace . A thwarted submarine attack on the first convoy group , and reports of heavy submarine activity off of Brest resulted in a change in the convoy 's destination to Saint @-@ Nazaire . 
 After her return from France , Henry R. Mallory sailed again in the 5th convoy on 31 July , the 7th convoy on 8 September , and the 12th convoy on 26 November , all of which sailed from the New York embarkation point in Hoboken , New Jersey . In January 1918 , Henry R. Mallory became the first transport to sail from the Newport News embarkation port , when — loaded with eight aero squadrons — she sailed on 17 January . Departing again from Hoboken on 14 March in the 24th convoy , Henry R. Mallory began her last journey under Army charter . After arriving in France on 26 March and landing her troops , Henry R. Mallory began her return to the United States with Army transport Tenadores and Navy transport Mercury . At 11 : 45 on 4 April , a German submarine fired torpedoes at the group . Through evasive maneuvers , none of the ships were hit , and with timely gunfire targeting the sub , no more was seen of the threat . Arriving back in the United States on 13 April , Henry R. Mallory was handed over to the U.S. Navy . 
 = = = U.S. Navy transport duties = = = 
 After problems with crew discipline aboard Army transports Antilles and Finland when they were torpedoed , the U.S. Navy , led by the recommendations of Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves , insisted that all troop transports be manned entirely by Navy personnel . This was accomplished soon after so as to avoid the need for what Gleaves called " ignorant and unreliable men " who were " the sweepings of the docks " . Accordingly , Henry R. Mallory was handed over to the Navy on 13 April 1918 and commissioned on 17 April . 
 Other than the official change command of the vessel , little else change for Henry R. Mallory . She sailed in her first convoy under Navy command on 23 April , and continued carrying troops to France , making five additional trips before the Armistice in November 1918 . In all , Henry R. Mallory carried 9 @,@ 756 troops to France . 
 With the fighting at an end , the task of bringing home American soldiers began almost immediately . Henry R. Mallory did her part by carrying home 14 @,@ 514 healthy and wounded men in seven roundtrips . Henry R. Mallory returned from her last Navy voyage on 29 August 1919 , and was returned to the Mallory Lines the following day . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In the early stages of World War II for the United States , the War Shipping Administration requisitioned Henry R. Mallory for use as a civilian @-@ manned troopship in July 1942 . Remaining under the operation of her owners , <unk> , Inc . , she began operation on U.S. Army schedules in July 1942 , when she sailed from New York to Belfast . After her return to New York in August , she made way to Boston from whence she sailed to Saint John , <unk> , Newfoundland ; Sydney , Nova Scotia ; and Halifax , before returning to New York in October . 
 After first sailing to Boston and Newport , Rhode Island , Henry R. Mallory departed New York as a part of Convoy SC @-@ 118 headed for Liverpool via Halifax on 24 January 1943 . The crew on board Henry R. Mallory consisted of 9 officers , 68 crewmen , and 34 Naval Armed Guards ( who manned the 11 guns on deck ) . Also on board were 383 passengers , consisting of 2 civilians , 136 from the U.S. Army , 72 from the U.S. Marine Corps , and 173 from the U.S. Navy . As the convoy , which consisted of 60 ships and 26 escorts , sailed near Iceland , a " wolfpack " of Kriegsmarine U @-@ Boats attacked the convoy repeatedly over a four @-@ day period . Some 20 U @-@ boats participated , ultimately sinking 12 Allied ships , including Henry R. Mallory ; three U @-@ boats were lost . 
 It was at 06 : 59 on 7 February 1943 when , traveling in station 33 of the convoy , Henry R. Mallory was hit by one torpedo launched from German submarine U @-@ 402 ( 2 ) around 600 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) south @-@ southwest of Iceland . Hit in the number three hold on the starboard side , the ship began settling by the stern and listing to port , and sank at about 07 : 30 . Of Henry R. Mallory 's ten lifeboats , only three were successfully launched , holding 175 men . Many other men jumped overboard for rafts in the water . 
 None of the other ships in the convoy were aware of the Mallory 's predicament . American destroyer Schenck — searching for survivors from the convoy 's sunken rescue ship , SS Toward , sunk three hours earlier , also by U @-@ 402 — saw lights but was denied permission to investigate . Only when survivors were found by U.S. Coast Guard cutter Bibb some four hours later was the fate of Henry R. Mallory made clear . Bibb rescued 205 men , 3 of whom later died . Another Coast Guard cutter , Ingham , rescued a further 22 , of whom 2 later died . Among the 272 dead was the ship 's master , 48 crewmen , 15 armed guards , and 208 passengers . 
 = Italian ironclad Francesco Morosini = 
 Francesco Morosini was an ironclad battleship built in the 1880s and 1890s for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . The ship , named for Francesco Morosini , the 17th @-@ century Doge of Venice , was the second of three ships in the Ruggiero di Lauria class , along with Ruggiero di Lauria and Andrea Doria . She was armed with a main battery of four 17 @-@ inch ( 432 mm ) guns , was protected with 17 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 451 mm ) thick belt armor , and was capable of a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 The ship 's construction period was very lengthy , beginning in August 1881 and completing in February 1888 . She was quickly rendered obsolescent by the new pre @-@ dreadnought battleships being laid down , and as a result , her career was limited . She spent her career alternating between the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in training exercises each year with the rest of the fleet . The ship was stricken from the naval register in August 1909 ; the following month , she was expended as a target ship for experiments with torpedoes . 
 = = Design = = 
 Francesco Morosini was 105 @.@ 9 meters ( 347 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 84 m ( 65 @.@ 1 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 37 m ( 27 @.@ 5 ft ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 886 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 730 long tons ) normally and up to 11 @,@ 145 t ( 10 @,@ 969 long tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , oval boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 507 – 509 officers and men . 
 Francesco Morosini was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) 27 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . She carried a secondary battery of two 6 in ( 152 mm ) 32 @-@ cal. guns , one at the bow and the other at the stern , and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) 32 @-@ cal. guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . She was protected by steel armor ; her armored belt was 17 @.@ 75 in ( 451 mm ) thick , and her armored deck was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick . Her conning tower was armored with 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) of steel plate , and the barbette had 14 @.@ 2 in ( 361 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Francesco Morosini was under construction for nearly eight years . She was laid down at the Venetian Arsenal on 4 December 1881 and launched on 30 July 1885 . She was not completed for another four years , her construction finally being finished on 21 August 1889 . Because of the rapid pace of naval technological development in the late 19th century , her lengthy construction period meant that she was an obsolete design by the time she entered service . The year she entered service , the British began building the Royal Sovereign class ; these ships marked a significant advance over previous types of capital ships and set the standard for future vessels , which became known as pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . In addition , technological progress , particularly in armor production techniques — first Harvey armor and then Krupp armor — rapidly rendered older vessels like Francesco Morosini obsolete . 
 Francesco Morosini took part in the annual fleet maneuvers of 1894 in 2nd Division of the Active Squadron , along with the protected cruiser Ettore Fieramosca , the torpedo cruiser Tripoli , and four torpedo boats . She remained in the 2nd Division the following year , which now included the protected cruiser Etruria and the torpedo cruisers Euridice and Calatafimi . The Squadron was based at La Spezia at the time . The following year , she cruised off Crete as the flagship of the 2nd Division , under Rear Admiral E. <unk> . During that year 's summer maneuvers , held in July , Francesco Morosini continued as <unk> 's flagship ; the 2nd Division also included her sister Andrea Doria and the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan . The 1st and 2nd Divisions of the Active Squadron were tasked with defending against a hostile fleet , simulated by older ships in reserve . 
 In 1898 , Francesco Morosini was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with Ruggiero di Lauria and the ironclad Lepanto and five cruisers . The following year , Francesco Morosini and her two sisters returned to the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for eight months of the year , with the remainder spent with reduced crews . The Squadron also included the ironclads Re Umberto , Sicilia , and Lepanto . In 1900 , Francesco Morosini and her sisters were significantly modified and received a large number of small guns for defense against torpedo boats . These included a pair of 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , ten 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , five 37 mm revolver cannon , and two machine guns . 
 In 1905 , Francesco Morosini and her two sisters were joined in the Reserve Squadron by the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads and Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . In 1908 , the Italian Navy decided to discard Francesco Morosini and her sister Ruggiero di Lauria . She was formally stricken from the naval register in August 1909 , and was thereafter used as a target ship for a torpedo experiment . On 15 September , she was sunk at La Spezia ; the experiment was conducted to test the effect of a torpedo hit in order to develop more a more effective hull design . The explosion tore a 50 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 540 sq ft ) hole in the hull , causing her to list severely and sink on her side . Her wreck was later scrapped . 
 = Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit = 
 Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit is a steel roller coaster at Universal Studios Florida in Orlando , Florida . With a height of 167 feet ( 51 m ) , a length of 3 @,@ 800 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) , and a top speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) , it is the largest X @-@ Coaster ever built by German manufacturer Maurer Söhne . It was announced on March 19 , 2008 and officially opened on August 19 , 2009 though originally planned to open in the spring of that year . Some of the special features are that riders are recorded during the entire 1 minute and 37 second ride and can choose one of thirty songs to listen to during the experience . 
 = = History = = 
 During the second week of January 2008 , Universal Parks & Resorts filed a Notice of Commencement with Orange County , Florida indicating that they were to construct a ride system that they had code @-@ named " Project Rumble . " The notice also stated that the contractor was " Maurer Rides GmbH , " located in Munich , Germany . 
 After months of rumours , the new attraction was announced by Universal officials on March 19 , 2008 . Unlike usual announcements , officials did not reveal the specifications of the entire roller coaster . In the original press release , it stated that the roller coaster 's vertical lift hill would be 167 feet ( 51 m ) tall , and that the trains would reach a maximum speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . The press release also mentioned that each train would be equipped with a multi @-@ media package , LED lights , built in video recorders , and the option for riders to choose a song from a list to be played during the course of the ride . The ride would also include six near miss encounters . At the time , the new roller coaster was scheduled to open in Spring 2009 . Also , in the months after the announcement , Universal surveyed guests on what songs they think should be included in the roller coaster . Some of the artists that guests could choose from were : The Black Eyed Peas , Bee Gees , The Beach Boys , and Johnny Cash . 
 Construction began in May 2008 with preliminary land clearing . The first track pieces were installed during the week of December 7 , 2008 . In February 2009 , Universal launched a website for the attraction , which included a construction blog and photographs chronicling progress of the attraction 's construction . The track layout was completed at the end of April 2009 with the crowning of the lift hill . 
 In April 2009 , Universal confirmed that the roller coaster would not open as originally planned and said it would open in the summer . Though Universal has never mentioned what the exact problem with the roller coaster was , it is believed by newspapers that issues with the anti @-@ rollback devices on the lift hill that were not working correctly caused the delay . 
 After the issues with the ride were resolved , Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit began public previews in mid @-@ August 2009 . On August 19 , 2009 , Universal Studios Florida officially opened the attraction . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 Guest first enter into one of two queues ; either the main queue , or the single rider queue . In both queue lines , there are several large screen displays that explain how to pick a song to play during the ride and important safety instructions . In the video , characters called " Video DJ 's " are used as demonstrators to provide a visual explanation . 
 = = = Ride = = = 
 The station for the roller coaster is quite different than traditional stations . As the train enters , it slows down but does not stop . There is a moving sidewalk on both sides of the station moving at the same speed as the train so riders can load and unload . Riders have about 45 seconds to take their seat , lower the lap @-@ bar and make their song choice . After the restraints are checked , the train immediately begins to climb the 167 @-@ foot ( 51 m ) vertical chain lift and the song that the rider picked begins to play while the on @-@ ride video recorder begins recording . When the train reaches the top of the lift , it drops back to the ground reaching a maximum speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . Following the drop , the train goes through a non @-@ inverting loop ( meaning that the train doesn 't go through an inversion ) , which is nicknamed " The Double Take " . Then the train makes an upward right turn into one of the several mid @-@ course brakes . It then drops back down going through a hole in a wall before entering a left upward helix . This section of the coaster is nicknamed " The Treble Clef " . Next the train enters a quick element nicknamed , " The Jump Cut " which is similar to a non @-@ inverting corkscrew . The train then drops back down before climbing back up into the second mid @-@ course brakes . Following a small drop to the left , it travels straight before making a right turn , followed by a left , and then another right leading into the third set of mid @-@ course brakes . Another drop is followed by the brakes leading into an s @-@ bend / turn . The train then travels into an inclined loop , then the train enters the fourth set of brakes after going back up . Finally , the train drops back down , and goes over a small hill before entering the final brake run where the train enters the station and the riders song ends . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit is 3 @,@ 800 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) long in length , and the height of the lift is approximately 167 feet ( 51 m ) . Because the lift hill is vertical , a special evacuation system is used in the event that a train stalls on the lift . Also , the track is filled with sand and gravel to reduce the noise when a train is on the track . Throughout the layout of the roller coaster , there are 5 sets of brakes to control the speed of the trains . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 The roller coaster operates with seven stadium @-@ style seating X @-@ Car trains . Each train has two cars that can hold six riders each for a total of twelve riders per train . On the head rest of each seat there are two speakers that play music during the ride . The speakers have been designed so that only the rider 's selected music track will be audible . On the restraint is a small touch screen where riders can choose which song they want to listen to during the ride . Additionally , the trains are equipped with multi @-@ coloured lights that can be seen during the night . 
 = = Musical selections = = 
 The initial announcement just said that there would be 5 categories of songs . The full track list was not released until July 6 , 2009 , with Universal Studios Florida unveiling thirty songs ( 6 in each category ) that can be played during the ride . 
 After riders board the train and lower their restraint , attached to the restraint is a small screen containing the logo of the ride and five categories of songs the rider can pick from . The song that the rider picked begins as the train climbs the vertical lift hill . Depending on the song , it may not begin at the beginning and end early as the total cycle time of the roller coaster is 1 minute and 39 seconds . 
 = = = Hidden Song Selections = = = 
 In addition to these 30 songs , Universal Studios Florida also provided additional " hidden " songs that are available to riders , but are not included in the queue video . 
 To access these songs , after lowering the restraint , on the screen , riders must push and hold the logo of the ride for approximately ten seconds . When they release their finger , a number pad will then show up . Entering a three digit code will allow the rider to listen to the song that the code corresponds to . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Doreen Valiente = 
 Doreen Edith Dominy Valiente ( 4 January 1922 – 1 September 1999 ) was an English Wiccan who was responsible for writing much of the early religious liturgy within the tradition of Gardnerian Wicca . An author and poet , she also published five books dealing with Wicca and related esoteric subjects . 
 Born to a middle @-@ class family in Surrey , Valiente began practicing magic while a teenager . Working as a translator at Bletchley Park during the Second World War , she also married twice in this period . Developing her interest in occultism after the war , she began practicing ceremonial magic with a friend while living in Bournemouth . Learning of Wicca , in 1953 she was initiated into the Gardnerian tradition by its founder , Gerald Gardner . Soon becoming the High Priestess of Gardner 's Bricket Wood coven , she helped him to produce or adapt many important scriptural texts for Wicca , such as The Witches Rune and the Charge of the Goddess , which were incorporated into the early Gardnerian Book of Shadows . In 1957 , a schism resulted in Valiente and her followers leaving Gardner to form their own short @-@ lived coven . After investigating the Wiccan tradition of Charles Cardell , in 1953 she was initiated into Raymond Howard 's Coven of Atho . In 1964 she then went to work with Robert Cochrane in his coven , the Clan of Tubal Cain , although she later broke from this group . 
 Eager to promote and defend her religion , she played a leading role in both the Witchcraft Research Association and then the Pagan Front during the 1960s and 1970s . That latter decade also saw her briefly involve herself in far right politics as well as becoming a keen ley hunter and proponent of Earth mysteries . As well as regularly writing articles on esoteric topics for various magazines , from the 1960s onward she authored a number of books on the subject of Wicca , as well as contributing to the publication of works by Wiccan friends Stewart Farrar , Janet Farrar , and Evan John Jones . In these works also she became an early advocate of the idea that anyone could practice Wicca without requiring initiation by a pre @-@ existing Wiccan , while also contributing to and encouraging research into the religion 's early history . Living in Brighton during these years , she worked with both her partner and initiate Ron Cook and was a member of the Silver Malkin coven . In her final years she served as patron of the Sussex @-@ based Centre for Pagan Studies prior to her death from pancreatic cancer . 
 Valiente 's magical artefacts and papers were bequeathed to her friend John Belham @-@ Payne , who entrusted them to a charitable trust , the Doreen Valiente Foundation , in 2011 . Having had a significant influence in the history of Wicca , she is widely revered in the Wiccan community as " the Mother of Modern Witchcraft " , and has been the subject of two biographies . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1922 – 52 = = = 
 Valiente was born Doreen Edith Dominy on 4 January 1922 at Colliers Wood in the Southern English town of Mitcham , Surrey . Her father , Harry Dominy , was a civil engineer , and he lived with her mother Edith in Colliers Wood . Harry came from a Methodist background and Edith from a Congregationalist one , however Doreen was never baptised , as was the custom of the time , due to an argument that Edith had had with the local vicar . Doreen later claimed that she had not had a close or affectionate relationship with her parents , whom she characterised as highly conventional and heavily focused on social climbing . During her childhood they moved to Horley in Surrey , and it was there – according to her later account – that she had an early spiritual experience while staring at the moon . From there , her family moved to the West Country and then to the New Forest . In either late 1934 or 1935 , Doreen 's mother left her father and took her to live with maternal relatives in Southampton . Valiente first began practicing magic aged 13 , performing a spell to prevent her mother being harassed by a co @-@ worker ; she came to believe that it had worked . Her early knowledge of magical practices may have derived from books that she found in the local library . Her parents were concerned by this behaviour and sent her to a convent school . She despised the school and left it at the age of 15 , refusing to return . She had wanted to go to art school , but instead gained employment in a factory , before moving on to work as a clerk and typist at the Unemployment Assistance Board . 
 During the Second World War , she became a Foreign Office Civilian Temporary Senior Assistant Officer , in this capacity working as a translator at Bletchley Park . In relation to this work , she was also sent to South Wales , and it was there , in the town of Barry , that she met <unk> <unk> , a Greek seaman in the Merchant Navy . Entering a relationship , they were married in East Glamorgan on 31 January 1941 . However , in June 1941 he was serving aboard the <unk> when it was sunk by a U @-@ boat off of the West African coast ; he was declared missing in action and presumed deceased . Widowed , during 1942 and 1943 Valiente had a number of short @-@ term jobs in Wales , which were possibly a cover for intelligence work . 
 After October 1943 she was transferred to the intelligence service 's offices in Berkeley Street in the Mayfair area of London , where she was involved in message decryption . In London she met and entered into a relationship with Casimiro Valiente , a Spaniard who had fled from the Spanish Civil War , where he had fought on the side of the Spanish Republican Army before later joining the French Foreign Legion , where he was wounded at the Battle of Narvik and evacuated to England . They were married on 29 May 1944 at St Pancras Registry Office . The couple moved to Bournemouth – where Doreen 's mother was then living – and here Casimiro worked as a chef . Valiente would later say that both she and her husband suffered racism after the war because of their foreign associations . 
 Developing an interest in occultism , she began practicing ceremonial magic with a friend , " <unk> " , at his flat . She had obtained the magical regalia and notebooks of a recently deceased doctor , who had been a member of the Alpha et Omega , a splinter group of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , and attempted to learn Hebrew , a language with uses in various forms of ceremonial magic . It was at this point that she selected " <unk> " as her magical name . She was particularly interested by John Symonds ' book The Great Beast , which was a biography of the occultist Aleister Crowley , who had founded the religion of Thelema in 1904 , and following this she avidly read a copy of Crowley 's Magick in Theory and Practice which she found in a local library . Alongside these , she also had some practical experience with the esoteric religions of Spiritualism and Theosophy , having attended the services of a local Christian Spiritualist church in <unk> . 
 = = = Gerald Gardner and the Bricket Wood Coven : 1952 – 57 = = = 
 She had also become familiar with the idea of a pre @-@ Christian witch @-@ cult surviving into the modern period through the works of Charles Godfrey Leland , Margaret Murray , and Robert Graves , although believed that the religion was extinct . It was in autumn 1952 that she read an article by the reporter Allen Andrews in Illustrated magazine titled " Witchcraft in Britain " . Discussing the recent opening of the Folklore Centre of Superstition and Witchcraft in Castletown on the Isle of Man , it mentioned the museum 's director , Cecil Williamson , and its " resident witch " , Gerald Gardner . 
 Intrigued by the article , Valiente wrote a letter to Williamson in 1952 , who in turn put her in contact with Gardner . Valiente and Gardner wrote several letters back @-@ and @-@ forth , with the latter eventually suggesting that she meet him at the home of his friend and fellow Wiccan Edith Woodford @-@ Grimes ( " <unk> " ) , who lived not far from Bournemouth , in the Christchurch area . Before she left the meeting , Gardner gave her a copy of his 1949 novel , High Magic 's Aid , in which he describes a fictionalised account of Wiccan initiates in the Middle Ages ; he allegedly did so in order to gauge her opinion on ritual nudity and scourging , both of which were present in his tradition of Gardnerian Wicca . 
 On Midsummer 1953 Gardner invited Valiente again to Woodford @-@ Grimes 's house , and it was here that he initiated her into Wicca in a ritual during which they stood before an altar and he read from his Book of Shadows . The three of them then set off to the prehistoric monument of Stonehenge in Wiltshire , where they witnessed the Druids performing a ritual there . Gardner had lent a ritual sword which he owned to the Druids , who placed it within the monument 's Heel Stone during their rite . Valiente told her husband and mother about the visit to Stonehenge , but not about her initiation , of which , she feared , they would not have approved . 
 Later in the year , Gardner invited Valiente to visit him at his flat in Shepherd 's Bush , West London , and it was there that she met the eight to ten members of his Bricket Wood coven , which met near St. Albans , north of London . She soon rose to become the coven 's High Priestess . The historian Ronald Hutton later commented that in doing so , she formed " the second great creative partnership of [ Gardner 's ] life " after that with Woodford @-@ Grimes . Valiente recognised how much of the material in Gardner 's Book of Shadows was taken not from ancient sources as Gardner had initially claimed , but from the works of Crowley . She confronted Gardner with this , who claimed that the text he had received from the New Forest coven had been fragmentary and he had had to fill much of it using various sources . She took the Book of Shadows , and with Gardner 's permission , rewrote much of it , cutting out a lot of sections that had come from Crowley , fearing that his infamous reputation would sully Wicca . In 1953 she wrote " Queen of the Moon , Queen of the Stars " , an invocation for use in a Yule ritual which was inspired by a Hebridean song found in the Carmina Gadelica . With Gardner she also wrote " The Witches Rune " , a chant for use while dancing in a circle . She rewrote much of the Charge of the Goddess , with Hutton characterising this act as " her greatest single contribution to Wicca " , for her version of the Charge became " the principle expression of Wiccan spirituality " in coming years . 
 Gardner spent his summers at the Museum of Magic and Witchcraft on the Isle of Man , and thus often relied on Valiente to deal with his affairs in Southern England . He sent her to meet with the occult artist Austin Osman Spare when he wanted some talismans produced by the latter . Spare subsequently described Valiente as " a myopic <unk> nymph ... harmless and a little tiresome " in a letter that he wrote to Kenneth Grant . At Gardner 's prompting , she also met with the occultist Gerald Yorke , who was interested in learning about Wicca ; Gardner insisted that she lie to Yorke by informing him that she was from a longstanding family of hereditary Wiccan practitioners . She also aided him in preparing his second non @-@ fiction book about Wicca , The Meaning of Witchcraft , focusing in particular on those sections refuting the sensationalist accusations of the tabloid press . 
 However Gardner 's increasing desire for publicity , much of it ending up negative , caused conflict with Valiente and other members of his coven like Ned Grove and Derek Boothby . She felt that in repeatedly communicating with the press , he was compromising the coven 's security . She was also not enthusiastic about two young people whom Gardner brought into the coven , Jack L. Bracelin and his girlfriend ' <unk> ' , stating that " a more <unk> pair of spivs it would be hard to find indeed " . Two factions emerged within the coven ; Valiente led a broadly anti @-@ publicity group , while Gardner led a pro @-@ publicity one . In 1957 , Valiente and Grove drew up a list of " Proposed Rules of the Craft " which were partly designed to curtail Gardner 's publicity seeking . From his home in the Isle of Man , he responded that this was not necessary as a series of rules already existed , at which point he produced the Wiccan Laws . These laws limited the control of the High Priestess , which angered Valiente , who later realised that Gardner had simply made them up in response to her own Proposed Laws . In summer 1957 , the coven split . According to Valiente , she and her followers " had had enough of the Gospel according to St. Gerald ; but we still believed that the real traditional witchcraft lived " . According to Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White , " Wicca had experienced its first great schism " . 
 = = = Robert Cochrane and Where Witchcraft Lives : 1957 – 69 = = = 
 After breaking from Gardner 's Bricket Wood coven , Valiente formed her own coven with Grove as High Priest , still following the tradition of Gardnerian Wicca , albeit without the Wiccan laws , which she believed to be entirely an invention of Gardner 's . This coven however failed to last , breaking up amid arguments between its founders . In 1956 , Valiente , along with her husband and her mother , moved into a basement flat in Lewes Crescent , Kemptown , in the southern coastal town of Brighton , although in 1968 they moved into a flat nearer to the town centre . She befriended another Kemptown resident , the journalist Leslie Roberts , who shared her interest in the supernatural . He attracted much attention to himself in the local press through his claims that practitioners of black magic were also operating in the area . Valiente remained a good friend to Roberts until his death from heart disease in 1966 . She also got back in touch with Gardner , and mended their friendship , remaining on good terms until his death in 1964 , when he left her £ 200 in his will . During the early 1960s she also developed a correspondence with two Gardnerian initiates in Sheffield , Patricia Crowther and her husband Arnold Crowther , finally meeting them when the latter couple visited Brighton in 1965 . 
 After her mother 's death in August 1962 , Valiente felt that she could be more open about being a Wiccan herself . Eager to spread information about Wicca throughout Britain , she also began to interact with press , sending a 1962 letter to the Spiritualist newspaper Psychic News , and in 1964 being interviewed for her involvement with Wicca by Brighton 's Evening Argus . During the 1960s , she began producing articles about Wicca and other esoteric subjects on a regular basis , for such esoteric magazines as Light , Fate , and Prediction . In this capacity , she also began to make appearances on television and radio . She also involved herself in the newly formed Witchcraft Research Association ( WRA ) , becoming its second President after the resignation of Sybil Leek . Valiente 's letter of welcome was included in the first issue of the WRA 's newsletter , Pentagram , published in August 1964 , while she also gave a speech at the WRA 's Halloween dinner in October . It was at the speech that Valiente proclaimed the Wiccan Rede ; this was its first public appearance in a recognisable form , with Doyle White arguing that it was Valiente herself who both created and named the Rede . It was through the WRA that Valiente came to communicate with the journalist Justine Glass , who was then conducting research for her book Witchcraft , the Sixth Sense , and Us . 
 Valiente began visiting local libraries and archives in order to investigate the history of witchcraft in Sussex . On the basis of this research , the esoteric press Aquarian published her first book , Where Witchcraft Lives , in 1962 . Just as Gardner had done in his book Witchcraft Today , here Valiente did not identify as a practicing Wiccan , but as an interested scholar of witchcraft . It contained her own research into the history and folklore of witchcraft in her county of Sussex , which she had collected both from archival research and from the published work of the historian L 'Estrange Ewen . It interpreted this evidence in light of the discredited theories of Margaret Murray , which claimed that a pre @-@ Christian religious movement had survived to the present , when it had emerged as Wicca . Hutton later related that it was " one of the first three books to be published on the subject " of Wicca , and that the " remarkable feature of the book is that it remains , until this date [ 2010 ] , the only one produced by a prominent modern witch that embodies actual original research into the records of the trials of people accused of the crime of witchcraft during the early modern period . " In 1966 , Valiente then produced a manuscript for a book titled I am a Witch ! , a collection of poems with a biographical introduction , however it was never published , with publishers not believing that it would be commercially viable . 
 Valiente learned of the non @-@ Gardnerian Wiccan Charles Cardell from a 1958 article , and subsequently struck up a correspondence with him . Cardell suggested that they pool their respective traditions together , but Valiente declined the offer , expressing some scepticism regarding Cardell 's motives and conduct . In 1962 , Valiente began a correspondence course run by Raymond Howard , a former associate of Cardell 's ; this course instructed her in a Wiccan tradition known as the Coven of Atho . At Halloween 1963 she was then initiated into the Coven of Atho in a ritual overseen by Howard , entering the lowest rank of the course , that of ' <unk> ' , and beginning to copy the teachings that she received into notebooks , where she was able to identify many of the sources from which Howard had drawn upon in fashioning his tradition . 
 In 1964 , Valiente was introduced to the Pagan witch Robert Cochrane by a mutual friend , the ceremonial magician William G. Gray , who had met him at a gathering at Glastonbury Tor held by the Brotherhood of the Essenes . Although sceptical of Cochrane 's claims to have come from a hereditary family of witches , she was impressed by his charisma , his desire to avoid publicity , and his emphasis on working outdoors . Valiente was invited to join Cochrane 's coven , the Clan of Tubal Cain , becoming its sixth member . However , she became dissatisfied with Cochrane , who was openly committing adultery and constantly insulting Gardnerians , even at one point calling for " a Night of the Long Knives of the Gardnerians " , at which point Valiente openly criticised him and then left his Clan . In her own words , she " rose up and challenged him in the presence of the rest of the coven . I told him that I was fed up with listening to all this senseless malice , and that , if a ' Night of the Long Knives ' was what his sick little soul craved , he could get on with it , but he could get on with it alone , because I had better things to do " . Shortly after , Cochrane committed ritual suicide on Midsummer 1966 ; she authored the poem " Elegy for a Dead Witch " in his memory . She remained in contact with his widow and other members of the Clan , as well as with Gray , and proceeded to work on occasion with The Regency , a group founded by former members of the Clan . 
 = = = The Pagan Front , National Front , and further publications : 1970 – 84 = = = 
 Living in Brighton , Valiente took up employment in a branch of the Boots pharmacist . In 1971 she appeared on the BBC documentary , Power of the Witch , which was devoted to Wicca and also featured the prominent Wiccan Alex Sanders . That same year , she was involved in the founding of the Pagan Front , a British pressure group that campaigned for the religious rights of Wiccans and other Pagans . In November 1970 she developed a full moon inauguration ritual for local branches of the Front to use and on May Day 1971 she chaired its first national meeting , held at Chiswick , West London . It was she who developed the three principles that came to be central to the Pagan Front 's interpretation of their religion : adherence to the Wiccan Rede , a belief in reincarnation , and a sense of kinship with nature . 
 In April 1972 her husband Casimiro died ; he had never taken an interest in Wicca or esotericism and Valiente later claimed that theirs had been an unhappy relationship . Newly widowed , she soon had to move as the local council decided that her home was unfit for human habitation ; she was relocated into council accommodation in the mid @-@ 1960s tower block of Tyson Place in Grosvenor Square , Brighton . Her flat was described by visitors as cramped , being filled with thousands of books . It was there that she met Ronald Cooke , a member of the apartment block 's residents ' committee ; they entered into a relationship and she initiated him into Wicca , where he became her working partner . Together they regularly explored the Sussex countryside , and went on several holidays to Glastonbury , further considering moving there . She also joined a coven that was operating in the local area , Silver Malkin , after it was established by the Wiccan High Priestess Sally <unk> . 
 During the early 1970s , Valiente became a member of a far right white nationalist political party , the National Front , for about eighteen months , during which she designed a banner for her local branch . Valiente 's biographer Philip Heselton suggested that the party 's nationalistic outlook may have appealed to her strongly patriotic values and that she might have hoped that the Front would serve as a political equivalent to the Pagan movement . At the same time she also became a member of another , more extreme far right group , the Northern League . However , she allowed her membership of the National Front to lapse , sending a letter to her local branch stating that although she respected its leader John Tyndall and had made friends within the group , she was critical of the party 's opposition to women 's liberation , gay rights , and sex education , all of which she lauded as progressive causes . Heselton has also suggested that Valiente may have joined these groups in order to investigate them before reporting back to Britain 's intelligence agencies . 
 It was also in the early 1970s that she read John Michell 's The View Over Atlantis and was heavily influenced by it , embracing Michell 's view that there were ley lines across the British landscape that channelled earth energies . Inspired , she began searching for ley lines in the area around Brighton . She also began subscribing to The Ley Hunter magazine , for which she authored several articles and book reviews . Valiente came to see the public emergence of Wicca as a sign of the Age of Aquarius , arguing that the religion should ally with the feminist and environmentalist movements in order to establish a better future for the planet . 
 In 1973 , the publishing company Robert Hale brought out Valiente 's second book , An ABC of Witchcraft , in which she provided an encyclopaedic overview of various topics related to Wicca and esotericism . In 1975 , Hale published Valiente 's Natural Magic , a discussion of what she believed to be the magical usages and associations of the weather , stones , plants , and other elements of the natural world . In 1978 Hale then published Witchcraft for Tomorrow , in which Valiente proclaimed her belief that Wicca was ideal for the dawning Age of Aquarius and espoused James Lovelock 's Gaia hypothesis . It also explained to the reader how they could initiate themselves into Wicca and establish their own coven . In 1978 she offered a book of poetry to Hale , although they declined to publish it , believing that there would not be sufficient market for such a publication . In 1982 she then submitted a book of short stories , The Witch Ball , to Hale , but again they declined to publish it . 
 In 1978 , Valiente struck up a friendship with the Alexandrian Wiccans Stewart Farrar and Janet Farrar , who were then living in Ireland . With the Farrars , she agreed to publish the original contents of the Gardnerian Book of Shadows , in order to combat the garbled variants that had been released by Cardell and Lady Sheba . The original Gardnerian material appeared in the Farrars ' two books , Eight <unk> for Witches and The Witches ' Way ( 1984 ) , both published with Hale at Valiente 's recommendation . In these works , Valiente and the Farrars identified differences between early recensions of the Book and identified many of the older sources that it drew upon . Hutton believed that later scholars such as himself had to be " profoundly grateful " to the trio for undertaking this task , while Doyle White opined that these publications , alongside Witchcraft for Tomorrow , helped contribute to " the democratisation of Wicca " by enabling any reader to set themselves up as a Wiccan practitioner . As an appendix to The Witches ' Way she also published the result of her investigations into " Old Dorothy " , the woman whom Gardner had claimed had been involved with the New Forest coven . The academic historian Jeffrey Burton Russell had recently suggested that Gardner invented " Old Dorothy " as an attempt to hide the fact that he had invented Wicca himself . Valiente sought to disprove this , discovering that " Old Dorothy " was a real person : Dorothy Clutterbuck . Valiente biographer Jonathan Tapsell described it as " one of Doreen 's greatest known moments " . 
 = = = Autobiography and final years : 1985 – 1999 = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , Valiente began writing an autobiography in which she focused on her own place within Wiccan history . It would be published by Hale in 1989 as The Rebirth of Witchcraft . In this work she did not dismiss the Murrayite witch @-@ cult theory , but she did undermine the belief that Wicca was the survival of it by highlighting the various false claims made by Gardner , Cochrane , and Sanders , instead emphasising what she perceived as the religion 's value for the modern era . She also provided a foreword for Witchcraft : A Tradition Renewed , a book published in 1990 by Hale . It had been written by Evan John Jones , a former member of the Clan of Tubal Cain who also lived in Brighton . Heselton has expressed the view that Valiente likely did more than this , and that she wrote a number of the chapters herself . As Valiente became better known , she came to correspond with a wide range of people within the Pagan and esoteric communities . Through this , she met the American Wiccan Starhawk – whom she greatly admired – on one of the latter 's visits to Britain . She also communicated with the American Wiccan and scholar of Pagan studies Aidan A. Kelly during his investigations into the early Gardnerian liturgies . She disagreed with Kelly that there had been no New Forest coven and that Gardner had therefore invented Wicca , instead insisting that Gardner had stumbled on a coven of the Murrayite witch @-@ cult . 
 In 1997 Valiente discovered the Centre for Pagan Studies ( CPS ) , a Pagan organisation based in the Sussex hamlet of <unk> that had been established in 1995 . Befriending its founders , John Belham @-@ Payne and his wife Julie , she became the Centre 's patron and gave several lectures for the group . In 1997 Cooke died , leaving Valiente grief @-@ stricken . Her final public speech was at the Pagan Federation 's annual conference , held at Croydon 's Fairfield Halls in November 1997 ; here she praised the work of early twentieth @-@ century occultist Dion Fortune and urged the Wiccan community to accept homosexuals . Valiente 's health was deteriorating as she was diagnosed first with diabetes and then terminal pancreatic cancer ; increasingly debilitated , John Belham @-@ Payne and two of her friends became her primary carers . In her last few days she was moved to the Sackville Nursing Home , there requesting that Belham @-@ Payne publish an anthology of her poems after her death . She died on 1 September 1999 , with Belham @-@ Payne at her side . 
 Valiente 's body was kept at the CPS ' barn in <unk> , where an all @-@ night vigil was held ; those invited included Ralph Harvey , Janet Farrar , Gavin Bone , and Hutton . After this Pagan rite was completed , her coffin was cremated at Brighton 's Woodvale crematorium , in an intentionally low @-@ key affair with no media publicity . As per her wishes , Valiente 's ashes were scattered in Sussex woodland . Her magical artifacts and manuscripts , including her Book of Shadows , were bequeathed to the Centre , although there was nevertheless public disagreement over her will . Her book of poems was published posthumously in 2000 , followed by an enlarged second edition in 2014 . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Hutton characterised Valiente as " a handsome woman of striking , dark @-@ haired , aquiline looks , possessed of a strong , enquiring , candid , and independent personality , and a gift for poetry and ritual " . Belham @-@ Payne noted that Valiente was " very tall , rather reserved and preferred to be in the background " , while Valiente 's friend Ashley Mortimer described her as " sensible , practical , decent , honest and , perhaps most importantly , pragmatic " . The writer Leo <unk> described her as " a plain , <unk> bespectacled woman with a slight stoop and a friendly twinkle in her eye " . Throughout her life , Valiente remained a believer in the Murrayite Witch @-@ Cult theory despite the fact that it had been academically discredited by the 1970s . 
 Valiente had a strong dislike of unexpected visitors , and would often refuse to answer the door to those who knocked unannounced . Valiente was an avid fan of football , and closely followed the World Cup , refusing to open the door to any visitors while she was watching the competition on television . She also enjoyed betting on horse races . Her favourite foods included cucumber sandwiches , cauliflower cheese , and baked potatoes . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Within the occult community , Valiente has become internationally known as the " Mother of Modern Witchcraft " , although she herself disliked this moniker . Heselton believed that Valiente 's influence on Wicca was " profound and far @-@ reaching " , while <unk> characterised her as Gardner 's " most gifted acolyte " . In 2016 , Heselton expressed the view that Valiente was best known for her books , which are " still some of the most readable on the subject " of Wicca , further highlighting that they often appeared on Wiccan reading lists . The ritual liturgies that Valiente composed also proved highly influential within the Wiccan religion and constitute a core element of her legacy . 
 Kelly asserted that Valiente " deserves credit for having helped transform the Craft from being the hobby of a handful of eccentric Brits into being an international religious movement " . Describing her as " a major personality in the development " of Wicca , Hutton also expressed the view that " her enduring greatness lay in the very fact that she was so completely and strong @-@ mindedly dedicated to finding and declaring her own truth , in a world in which the signposts to it were themselves in a state of almost complete confusion " . 
 = = = Events and organisations = = = 
 In 2009 , the CPS organised " A Day for Doreen " , an event in central London dedicated to Valiente . Sixteen speakers from within the Wiccan and Pagan community came to talk at the event , which was a sell @-@ out . 
 Following Valiente 's death , Belham @-@ Payne received offers of substantial amounts of money from buyers seeking to purchase parts of her collection . In 2011 he entrusted the collection of artefacts that he had inherited from Valiente to the newly established Doreen Valiente Foundation . A charitable trust , the Foundation was designed to prevent the collection being broken up and sold , moreover allowing for future Wiccans and researchers to start " delving into it , protecting it , making it accessible and available for people to research , learn from and enjoy . " Belham @-@ Payne became the group 's chairman , while Ashley Mortimer , Brian Botham , and Trish Botham were appointed as trustees . 
 On 21 June 2013 the CPS unveiled a blue plaque at the Tyson Place tower block , Valiente 's final home . At the ceremony , a speech was given by Denise Cobb , the Mayor of Brighton . It had been preceded by an open solstice ritual in Brighton 's Steine Gardens , led by Ralph Harvey . 
 = Lung cancer = 
 Lung cancer , also known as lung carcinoma , is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung . If left untreated , this growth can spread beyond the lung by the process of metastasis into nearby tissue or other parts of the body . Most cancers that start in the lung , known as primary lung cancers , are carcinomas . The two main types are small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) and non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) . The most common symptoms are coughing ( including coughing up blood ) , weight loss , shortness of breath , and chest pains . 
 The vast majority ( 85 % ) of cases of lung cancer are due to long @-@ term tobacco smoking . About 10 – 15 % of cases occur in people who have never smoked . These cases are often caused by a combination of genetic factors and exposure to radon gas , asbestos , second @-@ hand smoke , or other forms of air pollution . Lung cancer may be seen on chest radiographs and computed tomography ( CT ) scans . The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy which is usually performed by bronchoscopy or CT @-@ guidance . 
 Prevention is by avoiding risk factors including smoking and air pollution . Treatment and long @-@ term outcomes depend on the type of cancer , the stage ( degree of spread ) , and the person 's overall health . Most cases are not curable . Common treatments include surgery , chemotherapy , and radiotherapy . NSCLC is sometimes treated with surgery , whereas SCLC usually responds better to chemotherapy and radiotherapy . 
 Worldwide in 2012 , lung cancer occurred in 1 @.@ 8 million people and resulted in 1 @.@ 6 million deaths . This makes it the most common cause of cancer @-@ related death in men and second most common in women after breast cancer . The most common age at diagnosis is 70 years . Overall , 17 @.@ 4 % of people in the United States diagnosed with lung cancer survive five years after the diagnosis , while outcomes on average are worse in the developing world . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Signs and symptoms which may suggest lung cancer include : 
 Respiratory symptoms : coughing , coughing up blood , wheezing , or shortness of breath 
 Systemic symptoms : weight loss , weakness , fever , or clubbing of the fingernails 
 Symptoms due to the cancer mass pressing on adjacent structures : chest pain , bone pain , superior vena cava obstruction , or difficulty swallowing 
 If the cancer grows in the airways , it may obstruct airflow , causing breathing difficulties . The obstruction can lead to accumulation of secretions behind the blockage , and predispose to pneumonia . 
 Depending on the type of tumor , paraneoplastic phenomena — symptoms not due to the local presence of cancer — may initially attract attention to the disease . In lung cancer , these phenomena may include hypercalcemia , syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ( <unk> , abnormally concentrated urine and diluted blood ) , ectopic ACTH production , or Lambert – Eaton myasthenic syndrome ( muscle weakness due to autoantibodies ) . Tumors in the top of the lung , known as Pancoast tumors , may invade the local part of the sympathetic nervous system , leading to Horner 's syndrome ( dropping of the eyelid and a small pupil on that side ) , as well as damage to the brachial plexus . 
 Many of the symptoms of lung cancer ( poor appetite , weight loss , fever , fatigue ) are not specific . In many people , the cancer has already spread beyond the original site by the time they have symptoms and seek medical attention . Symptoms that suggest the presence of metastatic disease include weight loss , bone pain and neurological symptoms ( headaches , fainting , convulsions , or limb weakness ) . Common sites of spread include the brain , bone , adrenal glands , opposite lung , liver , pericardium , and kidneys . About 10 % of people with lung cancer do not have symptoms at diagnosis ; these cancers are incidentally found on routine chest radiography . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Cancer develops following genetic damage to DNA and epigenetic changes . These changes affect the normal functions of the cell , including cell proliferation , programmed cell death ( apoptosis ) and DNA repair . As more damage accumulates , the risk of cancer increases . 
 = = = Smoking = = = 
 Smoking , particularly of cigarettes , is by far the main contributor to lung cancer . Cigarette smoke contains at least 73 known carcinogens , including benzo [ a ] pyrene , <unk> , 1 @,@ 3 @-@ butadiene and a radioactive isotope of polonium , polonium @-@ 210 . Across the developed world , 90 % of lung cancer deaths in men during the year 2000 were attributed to smoking ( 70 % for women ) . Smoking accounts for about 85 % of lung cancer cases . 
 Passive smoking — the inhalation of smoke from another 's smoking — is a cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers . A passive smoker can be defined as someone living or working with a smoker . Studies from the US , Europe and the UK have consistently shown a significantly increased risk among those exposed to passive smoke . Those who live with someone who smokes have a 20 – 30 % increase in risk while those who work in an environment with secondhand smoke have a 16 – 19 % increase in risk . Investigations of <unk> smoke suggest it is more dangerous than direct smoke . Passive smoking causes about 3 @,@ 400 deaths from lung cancer each year in the USA . 
 Marijuana smoke contains many of the same carcinogens as those in tobacco smoke . However , the effect of smoking cannabis on lung cancer risk is not clear . A 2013 review did not find an increased risk from light to moderate use . A 2014 review found that smoking cannabis doubled the risk of lung cancer . 
 = = = Radon gas = = = 
 Radon is a colourless and odorless gas generated by the breakdown of radioactive radium , which in turn is the decay product of uranium , found in the Earth 's crust . The radiation decay products ionize genetic material , causing mutations that sometimes turn cancerous . Radon is the second @-@ most common cause of lung cancer in the USA , causing about 21 @,@ 000 deaths each year . The risk increases 8 – 16 % for every 100 Bq / m ³ increase in the radon concentration . Radon gas levels vary by locality and the composition of the underlying soil and rocks . About one in 15 homes in the US has radon levels above the recommended guideline of 4 picocuries per liter ( pCi / l ) ( 148 Bq / m ³ ) . 
 = = = Asbestos = = = 
 Asbestos can cause a variety of lung diseases , including lung cancer . Tobacco smoking and asbestos have a synergistic effect on the formation of lung cancer . In smokers who work with asbestos , the risk of lung cancer is increased 45 @-@ fold compared to the general population . Asbestos can also cause cancer of the pleura , called mesothelioma ( which is different from lung cancer ) . 
 = = = Air pollution = = = 
 Outdoor air pollution has a small effect on increasing the risk of lung cancer . Fine particulates ( PM2.5 ) and sulfate aerosols , which may be released in traffic exhaust fumes , are associated with slightly increased risk . For nitrogen dioxide , an incremental increase of 10 parts per billion increases the risk of lung cancer by 14 % . Outdoor air pollution is estimated to account for 1 – 2 % of lung cancers . 
 Tentative evidence supports an increased risk of lung cancer from indoor air pollution related to the burning of wood , charcoal , dung or crop residue for cooking and heating . Women who are exposed to indoor coal smoke have about twice the risk and a number of the by @-@ products of burning biomass are known or suspected carcinogens . This risk affects about 2 @.@ 4 billion people globally , and is believed to account for 1 @.@ 5 % of lung cancer deaths . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 About 8 % of lung cancer is due to inherited factors . In relatives of people with lung cancer , the risk is doubled . This is likely due to a combination of genes . Polymorphisms on chromosomes 5 , 6 and 15 are known to affect the risk of lung cancer . 
 = = = Other causes = = = 
 Numerous other substances , occupations , and environmental exposures have been linked to lung cancer . The International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) states there is " sufficient evidence " to show the following are carcinogenic in the lungs : 
 Some metals ( aluminum production , cadmium and cadmium compounds , chromium ( VI ) compounds , beryllium and beryllium compounds , iron and steel founding , nickel compounds , arsenic and inorganic arsenic compounds , underground hematite mining ) 
 Some products of combustion ( incomplete combustion , coal ( indoor emissions from household coal burning ) , coal gasification , coal @-@ tar pitch , coke production , soot , diesel engine exhaust ) 
 Ionizing radiation ( X @-@ radiation , gamma radiation , plutonium ) 
 Some toxic gases ( methyl ether ( technical grade ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) ether , sulfur mustard , <unk> ( vincristine @-@ prednisone @-@ nitrogen mustard @-@ <unk> mixture ) , fumes from painting ) 
 Rubber production and crystalline silica dust 
 = = Pathogenesis = = 
 Similar to many other cancers , lung cancer is initiated by activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes . <unk> cause mutations in these genes which induce the development of cancer . 
 Mutations in the K @-@ ras proto @-@ oncogene are responsible for 10 – 30 % of lung adenocarcinomas . About 4 % of non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinomas involve an <unk> @-@ ALK tyrosine kinase fusion gene . 
 Epigenetic changes — such as alteration of DNA methylation , histone tail modification , or microRNA regulation — may lead to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes . 
 The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) regulates cell proliferation , apoptosis , angiogenesis , and tumor invasion . Mutations and amplification of EGFR are common in non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinoma and provide the basis for treatment with EGFR @-@ inhibitors . Her2 / neu is affected less frequently . Other genes that are often mutated or amplified are c @-@ MET , <unk> @-@ 1 , <unk> , PIK3CA , and <unk> . 
 The cell lines of origin are not fully understood . The mechanism may involve abnormal activation of stem cells . In the proximal airways , stem cells that express keratin 5 are more likely to be affected , typically leading to squamous @-@ cell lung carcinoma . In the middle airways , implicated stem cells include club cells and <unk> cells that express club cell secretory protein . Small @-@ cell lung carcinoma may be derived from these cell lines or neuroendocrine cells , and may express <unk> . 
 Metastasis of lung cancer requires transition from epithelial to mesenchymal cell type . This may occur through activation of signaling pathways such as Akt / <unk> , <unk> @-@ ERK , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Performing a chest radiograph is one of the first investigative steps if a person reports symptoms that may suggest lung cancer . This may reveal an obvious mass , widening of the mediastinum ( suggestive of spread to lymph nodes there ) , atelectasis ( collapse ) , consolidation ( pneumonia ) or pleural effusion . CT imaging is typically used to provide more information about the type and extent of disease . Bronchoscopy or CT @-@ guided biopsy is often used to sample the tumor for histopathology . 
 Lung cancer often appears as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph . However , the differential diagnosis is wide . Many other diseases can also give this appearance , including metastatic cancer , <unk> , and infectious granulomas such as tuberculosis , histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis . Lung cancer can also be an incidental finding , as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph or CT scan done for an unrelated reason . The definitive diagnosis of lung cancer is based on histological examination of the suspicious tissue in the context of the clinical and radiological features . 
 Clinical practice guidelines recommend frequencies for pulmonary nodule surveillance . CT imaging should not be used for longer or more frequently than indicated as extended surveillance exposes people to increased radiation . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Lung cancers are classified according to histological type . This classification is important for determining management and predicting outcomes of the disease . Lung cancers are carcinomas — malignancies that arise from epithelial cells . Lung carcinomas are categorized by the size and appearance of the malignant cells seen by a <unk> under a microscope . For therapeutic purposes , two broad classes are distinguished : non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinoma and small @-@ cell lung carcinoma . 
 = = = = Non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinoma = = = = 
 The three main subtypes of NSCLC are adenocarcinoma , squamous @-@ cell carcinoma and large @-@ cell carcinoma . 
 Nearly 40 % of lung cancers are adenocarcinoma , which usually originates in peripheral lung tissue . Although most cases of adenocarcinoma are associated with smoking , adenocarcinoma is also the most common form of lung cancer among people who have smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes in their lifetimes ( " never @-@ smokers " ) and ex @-@ smokers with a modest smoking history . A subtype of adenocarcinoma , the <unk> carcinoma , is more common in female never @-@ smokers , and may have a better long @-@ term survival . 
 <unk> @-@ cell carcinoma accounts for about 30 % of lung cancers . They typically occur close to large airways . A hollow cavity and associated cell death are commonly found at the centre of the tumor . About 9 % of lung cancers are large @-@ cell carcinoma . These are so named because the cancer cells are large , with excess cytoplasm , large nuclei and conspicuous <unk> . 
 = = = = Small @-@ cell lung carcinoma = = = = 
 In small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) , the cells contain dense <unk> granules ( vesicles containing neuroendocrine hormones ) , which give this tumor an endocrine / paraneoplastic syndrome association . Most cases arise in the larger airways ( primary and secondary bronchi ) . Sixty to seventy percent have extensive disease ( which cannot be targeted within a single radiation therapy field ) at presentation . 
 = = = = Others = = = = 
 Four main histological subtypes are recognised , although some cancers may contain a combination of different subtypes , such as adenosquamous carcinoma . Rare subtypes include carcinoid tumors , bronchial gland carcinomas and <unk> carcinomas . 
 = = = Metastasis = = = 
 The lung is a common place for the spread of tumors from other parts of the body . Secondary cancers are classified by the site of origin ; e.g. , breast cancer that has spread to the lung is called metastatic breast cancer . <unk> often have a characteristic round appearance on chest radiograph . 
 Primary lung cancers themselves most commonly metastasize to the brain , bones , liver and adrenal glands . <unk> of a biopsy is often helpful to determine the original source . The presence of <unk> @-@ A , <unk> @-@ 1 , <unk> and <unk> are helpful in confirming the subtype of lung carcinoma . SCLC derived from neuroendocrine cells may express <unk> , neural cell adhesion molecule , <unk> or <unk> . 
 = = = Staging = = = 
 Lung cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source . It is one of the factors affecting the prognosis and potential treatment of lung cancer . 
 The evaluation of non @-@ small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) staging uses the TNM classification . This is based on the size of the primary tumor , lymph node involvement , and distant metastasis . 
 Using the TNM descriptors , a group is assigned , ranging from occult cancer , through stages 0 , IA ( one @-@ A ) , IB , IIA , IIB , IIIA , IIIB and IV ( four ) . This stage group assists with the choice of treatment and estimation of prognosis . 
 Small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) has traditionally been classified as " limited stage " ( confined to one half of the chest and within the scope of a single tolerable radiotherapy field ) or " extensive stage " ( more widespread disease ) . However , the TNM classification and grouping are useful in estimating prognosis . 
 For both NSCLC and SCLC , the two general types of staging evaluations are clinical staging and surgical staging . Clinical staging is performed prior to definitive surgery . It is based on the results of imaging studies ( such as CT scans and PET scans ) and biopsy results . Surgical staging is evaluated either during or after the operation , and is based on the combined results of surgical and clinical findings , including surgical sampling of thoracic lymph nodes . 
 Diagrams of main features of staging 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Smoking prevention and smoking cessation are effective ways of preventing the development of lung cancer . 
 = = = Smoking ban = = = 
 While in most countries industrial and domestic carcinogens have been identified and banned , tobacco smoking is still widespread . Eliminating tobacco smoking is a primary goal in the prevention of lung cancer , and smoking cessation is an important preventive tool in this process . 
 Policy interventions to decrease passive smoking in public areas such as restaurants and workplaces have become more common in many Western countries . Bhutan has had a complete smoking ban since 2005 while India introduced a ban on smoking in public in October 2008 . The World Health Organization has called for governments to institute a total ban on tobacco advertising to prevent young people from taking up smoking . They assess that such bans have reduced tobacco consumption by 16 % where instituted . 
 = = = Screening = = = 
 Cancer screening uses medical tests to detect disease in large groups of people who have no symptoms . For individuals with high risk of developing lung cancer , computed tomography ( CT ) screening can detect cancer and give a person options to respond to it in a way that prolongs life . This form of screening reduces the chance of death from lung cancer by an absolute amount of 0 @.@ 3 % ( relative amount of 20 % ) . High risk people are those age 55 @-@ 74 who have smoked equivalent amount of a pack of cigarettes daily for 30 years including time within the past 15 years . 
 CT screening is associated with a high rate of falsely positive tests which may result in unneeded treatment . For each true positive scan there are about 19 falsely positives scans . Other concerns include radiation exposure and the cost of testing along with follow up . Research has not found two other available tests — sputum cytology or chest radiograph ( <unk> ) screening tests — to have any benefit . 
 The U.S. Preventative Services Task Force ( USPSTF ) recommends yearly screening using low @-@ dose computed tomography in those who have a total smoking history of 30 pack @-@ years and are between 55 and 80 years old until a person has not been smoking for more than 15 years . Screening should not be done in those with other health problems that would make treatment of lung cancer if found not an option . The English National Health Service was in 2014 re @-@ examining the evidence for screening . 
 = = = Other prevention strategies = = = 
 The long @-@ term use of supplemental vitamin A , vitamin C , vitamin D or vitamin E does not reduce the risk of lung cancer . Some studies suggest that people who eat diets with a higher proportion of vegetables and fruit tend to have a lower risk , but this may be due to confounding — with the lower risk actually due to the association of a high fruit / vegetables diet with less smoking . More rigorous studies have not demonstrated a clear association between diet and lung cancer risk . 
 = = Management = = 
 Treatment for lung cancer depends on the cancer 's specific cell type , how far it has spread , and the person 's performance status . Common treatments include palliative care , surgery , chemotherapy , and radiation therapy . Targeted therapy of lung cancer is growing in importance for advanced lung cancer . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 If investigations confirm NSCLC , the stage is assessed to determine whether the disease is localized and amenable to surgery or if it has spread to the point where it cannot be cured surgically . CT scan and positron emission tomography are used for this determination . If mediastinal lymph node involvement is suspected , the nodes may be sampled to assist staging . Techniques used for this include <unk> needle aspiration , <unk> needle aspiration ( with or without endobronchial ultrasound ) , endoscopic ultrasound with needle aspiration , <unk> , and thoracoscopy . Blood tests and pulmonary function testing are used to assess whether a person is well enough for surgery . If pulmonary function tests reveal poor respiratory reserve , surgery may not be possible . 
 In most cases of early @-@ stage NSCLC , removal of a lobe of lung ( lobectomy ) is the surgical treatment of choice . In people who are unfit for a full lobectomy , a smaller <unk> excision ( wedge resection ) may be performed . However , wedge resection has a higher risk of recurrence than lobectomy . Radioactive iodine brachytherapy at the margins of wedge excision may reduce the risk of recurrence . Rarely , removal of a whole lung ( pneumonectomy ) is performed . Video @-@ assisted <unk> surgery ( VATS ) and VATS lobectomy use a minimally invasive approach to lung cancer surgery . VATS lobectomy is equally effective compared to conventional open lobectomy , with less postoperative illness . 
 In SCLC , chemotherapy and / or radiotherapy is typically used . However the role of surgery in SCLC is being reconsidered . Surgery might improve outcomes when added to chemotherapy and radiation in early stage SCLC . 
 = = = Radiotherapy = = = 
 Radiotherapy is often given together with chemotherapy , and may be used with curative intent in people with NSCLC who are not eligible for surgery . This form of high @-@ intensity radiotherapy is called radical radiotherapy . A refinement of this technique is continuous <unk> accelerated radiotherapy ( <unk> ) , in which a high dose of radiotherapy is given in a short time period . <unk> thoracic radiotherapy generally should not be used after curative intent surgery for NSCLC . Some people with mediastinal N2 lymph node involvement might benefit from post @-@ operative radiotherapy . 
 For potentially curable SCLC cases , chest radiotherapy is often recommended in addition to chemotherapy . 
 If cancer growth blocks a short section of bronchus , brachytherapy ( localized radiotherapy ) may be given directly inside the airway to open the passage . Compared to external beam radiotherapy , brachytherapy allows a reduction in treatment time and reduced radiation exposure to healthcare staff . Evidence for brachytherapy , however , is less than that for external beam radiotherapy . 
 <unk> cranial irradiation ( PCI ) is a type of radiotherapy to the brain , used to reduce the risk of metastasis . PCI is most useful in SCLC . In limited @-@ stage disease , PCI increases three @-@ year survival from 15 % to 20 % ; in extensive disease , one @-@ year survival increases from 13 % to 27 % . 
 Recent improvements in targeting and imaging have led to the development of stereotactic radiation in the treatment of early @-@ stage lung cancer . In this form of radiotherapy , high doses are delivered over a number of sessions using stereotactic targeting techniques . Its use is primarily in patients who are not surgical candidates due to medical comorbidities . 
 For both NSCLC and SCLC patients , smaller doses of radiation to the chest may be used for symptom control ( palliative radiotherapy ) . 
 = = = Chemotherapy = = = 
 The chemotherapy regimen depends on the tumor type . Small @-@ cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) , even relatively early stage disease , is treated primarily with chemotherapy and radiation . In SCLC , cisplatin and etoposide are most commonly used . Combinations with carboplatin , gemcitabine , paclitaxel , vinorelbine , topotecan , and irinotecan are also used . In advanced non @-@ small cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) , chemotherapy improves survival and is used as first @-@ line treatment , provided the person is well enough for the treatment . Typically , two drugs are used , of which one is often platinum @-@ based ( either cisplatin or carboplatin ) . Other commonly used drugs are gemcitabine , paclitaxel , docetaxel , <unk> , etoposide or vinorelbine . 
 Adjuvant chemotherapy refers to the use of chemotherapy after apparently curative surgery to improve the outcome . In NSCLC , samples are taken of nearby lymph nodes during surgery to assist staging . If stage II or III disease is confirmed , adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival by 5 % at five years . The combination of vinorelbine and cisplatin is more effective than older regimens . Adjuvant chemotherapy for people with stage IB cancer is controversial , as clinical trials have not clearly demonstrated a survival benefit . Chemotherapy before surgery in NSCLC that can be removed surgically also appears to improve outcomes . 
 Chemotherapy may be combined with palliative care in the treatment of the NSCLC . In advanced cases , appropriate chemotherapy improves average survival over supportive care alone , as well as improving quality of life . With adequate physical fitness maintaining chemotherapy during lung cancer palliation offers 1 @.@ 5 to 3 months of prolongation of survival , symptomatic relief , and an improvement in quality of life , with better results seen with modern agents . The NSCLC Meta @-@ Analyses Collaborative Group recommends if the recipient wants and can tolerate treatment , then chemotherapy should be considered in advanced NSCLC . 
 = = = = Targeted therapy = = = = 
 Several drugs that target molecular pathways in lung cancer are available , especially for the treatment of advanced disease . <unk> , <unk> and <unk> inhibit tyrosine kinase at the epidermal growth factor receptor . <unk> is a monoclonal antibody directed against receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa @-@ B ligand . It may be useful in the treatment of bone metastases . 
 = = = Bronchoscopy = = = 
 Several treatments can be administered via bronchoscopy for the management of airway obstruction or bleeding . If an airway becomes obstructed by cancer growth , options include rigid bronchoscopy , balloon <unk> , stenting , and <unk> . Laser <unk> involves the delivery of laser light inside the airway via a bronchoscope to remove the obstructing tumor . 
 = = = Palliative care = = = 
 Palliative care when added to usual cancer care benefits people even when they are still receiving chemotherapy . These approaches allow additional discussion of treatment options and provide opportunities to arrive at well @-@ considered decisions . Palliative care may avoid unhelpful but expensive care not only at the end of life , but also throughout the course of the illness . For individuals who have more advanced disease , hospice care may also be appropriate . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Of all people with lung cancer in the US , 16 @.@ 8 % survive for at least five years after diagnosis . In England , between 2005 and 2009 , overall five @-@ year survival for lung cancer was less than 10 % . Outcomes are generally worse in the developing world . Stage is often advanced at the time of diagnosis . At presentation , 30 – 40 % of cases of NSCLC are stage IV , and 60 % of SCLC are stage IV . Survival for lung cancer falls as the stage at diagnosis becomes more advanced : the English data suggest that around 70 % of patients survive at least a year when diagnosed at the earliest stage , but this falls to just 14 % for those diagnosed with the most advanced disease . 
 <unk> factors in NSCLC include presence of pulmonary symptoms , large tumor size ( > 3 cm ) , <unk> cell type ( histology ) , degree of spread ( stage ) and metastases to multiple lymph nodes , and vascular invasion . For people with inoperable disease , outcomes are worse in those with poor performance status and weight loss of more than 10 % . <unk> factors in small cell lung cancer include performance status , gender , stage of disease , and involvement of the central nervous system or liver at the time of diagnosis . 
 For NSCLC , the best prognosis is achieved with complete surgical resection of stage IA disease , with up to 70 % five @-@ year survival . People with extensive @-@ stage SCLC have an average five @-@ year survival rate of less than 1 % . The average survival time for limited @-@ stage disease is 20 months , with a five @-@ year survival rate of 20 % . 
 According to data provided by the National Cancer Institute , the median age at diagnosis of lung cancer in the United States is 70 years , and the median age at death is 72 years . In the US , people with medical insurance are more likely to have a better outcome . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Worldwide , lung cancer is the most common cancer among men in terms of both incidence and mortality , and among women has the third highest incidence , and is second after breast cancer in mortality . In 2012 , there were 1 @.@ 82 million new cases globally , and 1 @.@ 56 million deaths due to lung cancer , representing 19 @.@ 4 % of all deaths from cancer . The highest rates are in North America , Europe and East Asia , with over a third of new cases in 2012 in China . Rates in Africa and South Asia are much lower . 
 The population segment most likely to develop lung cancer is people aged over 50 who have a history of smoking . In contrast to the mortality rate in men , which began declining more than 20 years ago , women 's lung cancer mortality rates have been rising over the last decades , and are just recently beginning to stabilize . In the USA , the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer is 8 % in men and 6 % in women . 
 For every 3 – 4 million cigarettes smoked , one lung cancer death occurs . The influence of " Big Tobacco " plays a significant role in the smoking culture . Young nonsmokers who see tobacco advertisements are more likely to take up smoking . The role of passive smoking is increasingly being recognized as a risk factor for lung cancer , leading to policy interventions to decrease undesired exposure of nonsmokers to others ' tobacco smoke . Emissions from automobiles , factories , and power plants also pose potential risks . 
 In the United States , black men and women have a higher incidence . Lung cancer rates are currently lower in developing countries . With increased smoking in developing countries , the rates are expected to increase in the next few years , notably in China and India . 
 In the United States military veterans have a 25 @-@ 50 % higher rate of lung cancer primarily due to higher rates of smoking . During World War Two and the Korean War asbestos also played a part and Agent Orange may have caused some problems during the Vietnam War . 
 Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in the UK ( around 43 @,@ 500 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011 ) , and it is the most common cause of cancer death ( around 35 @,@ 400 people died in 2012 ) . 
 From the 1960s , the rates of lung adenocarcinoma started to rise relative to other types of lung cancer . This is partly due to the introduction of filter cigarettes . The use of filters removes larger particles from tobacco smoke , thus reducing deposition in larger airways . However , the smoker has to inhale more deeply to receive the same amount of nicotine , increasing particle deposition in small airways where adenocarcinoma tends to arise . The incidence of lung adenocarcinoma continues to rise . 
 = = History = = 
 Lung cancer was uncommon before the advent of cigarette smoking ; it was not even recognized as a distinct disease until 1761 . Different aspects of lung cancer were described further in 1810 . Malignant lung tumors made up only 1 % of all cancers seen at autopsy in 1878 , but had risen to 10 – 15 % by the early 1900s . Case reports in the medical literature numbered only 374 worldwide in 1912 , but a review of autopsies showed the incidence of lung cancer had increased from 0 @.@ 3 % in 1852 to 5 @.@ 66 % in 1952 . In Germany in 1929 , physician Fritz <unk> recognized the link between smoking and lung cancer , which led to an aggressive <unk> campaign . The British Doctors ' Study , published in the 1950s , was the first solid epidemiological evidence of the link between lung cancer and smoking . As a result , in 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States recommended smokers should stop smoking . 
 The connection with radon gas was first recognized among miners in the Ore Mountains near <unk> , Saxony . Silver has been mined there since 1470 , and these mines are rich in uranium , with its accompanying radium and radon gas . Miners developed a disproportionate amount of lung disease , eventually recognized as lung cancer in the 1870s . Despite this discovery , mining continued into the 1950s , due to the USSR 's demand for uranium . Radon was confirmed as a cause of lung cancer in the 1960s . 
 The first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was performed in 1933 . Palliative radiotherapy has been used since the 1940s . Radical radiotherapy , initially used in the 1950s , was an attempt to use larger radiation doses in patients with relatively early @-@ stage lung cancer , but who were otherwise unfit for surgery . In 1997 , continuous <unk> accelerated radiotherapy was seen as an improvement over conventional radical radiotherapy . With small @-@ cell lung carcinoma , initial attempts in the 1960s at surgical resection and radical radiotherapy were unsuccessful . In the 1970s , successful chemotherapy regimens were developed . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 Current research directions for lung cancer treatment include immunotherapy , which encourages the body 's immune system to attack the tumor cells , epigenetics , and new combinations of chemotherapy and radiotherapy , both on their own and together . Many of these new treatments work through immune checkpoint blockade , disrupting cancer 's ability to evade the immune system . 
 <unk> blocks signaling through a receptor on T cells known as <unk> @-@ 4 which dampens down the immune system . It has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for treatment of melanoma and is undergoing clinical trials for both non @-@ small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) and small cell lung cancer ( SCLC ) . 
 Other immunotherapy treatments interfere with the binding of programmed cell death 1 ( PD @-@ 1 ) protein with its ligand PD @-@ 1 ligand 1 ( PD @-@ L1 ) . Signaling through PD @-@ 1 inactivates T cells . Some cancer cells appear to exploit this by expressing PD @-@ L1 in order to switch off T cells that might recognise them as a threat . Monoclonal antibodies targeting both PD @-@ 1 and PD @-@ L1 , such as <unk> and <unk> are currently in clinical trials for treatment for lung cancer . 
 Epigenetics is the study of small , usually heritable , molecular modifications — or " tags " — that bind DNA and modify gene expression levels . Targeting these tags with drugs can kill cancer cells . Early @-@ stage research in NSCLC using drugs aimed at epigenetic modifications shows that blocking more than one of these tags can kill cancer cells with fewer side effects . Studies also show that giving patients these drugs before standard treatment can improve its effectiveness . Clinical trials are underway to evaluate how well these drugs kill lung cancer cells in humans . Several drugs that target epigenetic mechanisms are in development . <unk> deacetylase inhibitors in development include valproic acid , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in development include <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The <unk> project is looking at how NSCLC develops and evolves , and how these tumors become resistant to treatment . The project will look at tumor samples from 850 NSCLC patients at various stages including diagnosis , after first treatment , post @-@ treatment , and relapse . By studying samples at different points of tumor development , the researchers hope to identify the changes that drive tumor growth and resistance to treatment . The results of this project will help scientists and doctors gain a better understanding of NSCLC and potentially lead to the development of new treatments against the disease . 
 For lung cancer cases that develop resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and <unk> lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) tyrosine kinase inhibitors , new drugs are in development . New EGFR inhibitors include <unk> and <unk> . An alternative signaling pathway , c @-@ Met , can be inhibited by <unk> and <unk> . New ALK inhibitors include <unk> and <unk> . 
 = Canadians = 
 Canadians ( French : Canadiens ) are the people who are identified with the country of Canada . This connection may be residential , legal , historical , or cultural . For most Canadians , several ( or all ) of these connections exist and are collectively the source of their being Canadian . 
 Canada is a bilingual and multicultural society home to people of many different ethnic , religious and national origins , with the majority of the population made up of Old World immigrants and their descendants . Following the initial period of French and then the much larger British colonization , different waves ( or peaks ) of immigration and settlement of non @-@ aboriginal peoples took place over the course of nearly two centuries and continue today . Elements of Aboriginal , French , British and more recent immigrant customs , languages and religions have combined to form the culture of Canada and thus a Canadian identity . Canada has also been strongly influenced by its linguistic , geographic and economic neighbour , the United States . 
 Canadian independence from Britain grew gradually over the course of many years since the formation of the Canadian Confederation in 1867 . World War I and World War II in particular gave rise to a desire among Canadians to have their country recognized as a fully @-@ fledged sovereign state with a distinct citizenship . Legislative independence was established with the passage of the Statute of Westminster 1931 , the Canadian Citizenship Act of 1946 took effect on January 1 , 1947 , and full sovereignty was achieved with the patriation of the constitution in 1982 . Canada 's nationality law closely mirrored that of the United Kingdom . Legislation since the mid 20th century represents Canadians ' commitment to multilateralism and socioeconomic development . 
 = = Population = = 
 As of 2010 , Canadians make up 0 @.@ 5 % of the world 's total population , having relied upon immigration for population growth and social development . Approximately 41 % of current Canadians are first- or second @-@ generation immigrants , and 20 percent of Canadian residents in the 2000s were not born in the country . Statistics Canada projects that , by 2031 , nearly one @-@ half of Canadians above the age of 15 will be foreign @-@ born or have one foreign @-@ born parent . Aboriginal peoples , according to the 2011 Canadian Census , numbered at 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 685 or 4 @.@ 3 % of the country 's 33 @,@ 476 @,@ 688 population . 
 = = = Immigration = = = 
 The French originally settled New France , in present @-@ day Quebec and Ontario ; and Acadia , in present @-@ day Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , during the early part of the 17th century . Approximately 100 Irish @-@ born families would settle the Saint Lawrence Valley by 1700 , assimilating into the Canadien population and culture . During the 18th and 19th century ; immigration westward ( to the area known as Rupert 's Land ) was carried out by " Voyageurs " ; French settlers working for the North West Company ; and by British settlers ( English and Scottish ) representing the Hudson 's Bay Company , coupled with independent entrepreneurial woodsman called " <unk> des bois " . This arrival of newcomers led to the creation of the Métis , an ethnic group of mixed European and First Nations parentage . 
 The British conquest of New France was preceded by a small number of Germans and Swedes who settled alongside the Scottish in Port Royal , Nova Scotia , while some Irish immigrated to the Colony of Newfoundland . In the wake of the 1775 invasion of Canada by the newly formed Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , approximately 60 @,@ 000 United Empire Loyalist fled to British North America , a large portion of whom migrated to New Brunswick . After the War of 1812 , British ( including British army regulars ) , Scottish and Irish immigration was encouraged throughout Rupert 's Land , Upper Canada and Lower Canada . 
 Between 1815 and 1850 , some 800 @,@ 000 immigrants came to the colonies of British North America , mainly from the British Isles as part of the great migration of Canada . These new arrivals included some Gaelic @-@ speaking Highland Scots displaced by the Highland Clearances to Nova Scotia . The Irish Potato Famine of the 1840s significantly increased the pace of Irish immigration to Prince Edward Island and the Province of Canada , with over 35 @,@ 000 distressed individuals landing in Toronto in 1847 and 1848 . Beginning in the late 1850s , the immigration of Chinese into the Colony of Vancouver Island and Colony of British Columbia peaked with the onset of the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush . The Chinese Immigration Act of 1885 eventually placed a head tax on all Chinese immigrants , in hopes of discouraging Chinese immigration after completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway . 
 The population of Canada has consistently risen , doubling approximately every 40 years , since the establishment of the Canadian Confederation in 1867 . From the mid- to late 19th century , Canada had a policy of assisting immigrants from Europe , including an estimated 100 @,@ 000 unwanted " Home Children " from Britain . Block settlement communities were established throughout western Canada between the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Some were planned and others were spontaneously created by the settlers themselves . Canada was now receiving a large number of European immigrants , predominantly Italians , Germans , Scandinavians , Dutch , Poles , and Ukrainians . Legislative restrictions on immigration ( such as the Continuous journey regulation and Chinese Immigration Act ) that had favoured British and other European immigrants were amended in the 1960s , opening the doors to immigrants from all parts of the world . While the 1950s had still seen high levels of immigration by Europeans , by the 1970s , immigrants were increasingly Chinese , Indian , Vietnamese , Jamaican and Haitian . During the late 1960s and early 1970s , Canada received many American Vietnam War draft dissenters . Throughout the late 1980s and 1990s , Canada 's growing Pacific trade brought with it a large influx of South Asians , who tended to settle in British Columbia . Immigrants of all backgrounds tend to settle in the major urban centres . The Canadian public as @-@ well as the major political parties support immigration . 
 The majority of illegal immigrants come from the southern provinces of the People 's Republic of China , with Asia as a whole , Eastern Europe , Caribbean , Africa and the Middle East all contributing to the illegal population . Estimates of numbers of illegal immigrants range between 35 @,@ 000 and 120 @,@ 000 . A 2008 report by the Auditor General of Canada Sheila Fraser stated that Canada has lost track of approximately 41 @,@ 000 illegal immigrants whose visas have expired . 
 = = = Citizenship and diaspora = = = 
 Canadian citizenship is typically obtained by birth in Canada or by birth or adoption abroad when at least one biological parent or adoptive parent is a Canadian citizen who was born in Canada or naturalized in Canada ( and did not receive citizenship by being born outside of Canada to a Canadian citizen ) . It can also be granted to a permanent resident who lives in Canada for three out of four years and meets specific requirements . Canada established its own nationality law in 1946 with the enactment of the Canadian Citizenship Act which took effect on January 1 , 1947 . The Immigration and Refugee Protection Act , was passed by the Parliament of Canada in 2001 as Bill C @-@ 11 , which replaced the Immigration Act of 1976 as the primary federal legislation regulating immigration . Prior to the conferring of legal status on Canadian citizenship , Canada 's naturalization laws consisted of a multitude of Acts beginning with the Immigration Act of 1910 . 
 According to Citizenship and Immigration Canada , there are three main classifications for immigrants : Family class ( persons closely related to Canadian residents ) , Economic class ( admitted on the basis of a point system that accounts for age , health and labour @-@ market skills required for cost effectively inducting the immigrants into Canada 's labour market ) and Refugee class ( those seeking protection by applying to remain in the country by way of the Canadian immigration and refugee law ) . In 2008 , there were 65 @,@ 567 immigrants in the family class , 21 @,@ 860 refugees , and 149 @,@ 072 economic immigrants amongst the 247 @,@ 243 total immigrants to the country . Canada <unk> over one in 10 of the world ’ s refugees and has one of the highest per @-@ capita immigration rates in the world . 
 As of a 2010 report by the Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada , there were 2 @.@ 8 million Canadian citizens abroad . This represents about 8 % of the total Canadian population . Of those living abroad , the United States , Hong Kong , the United Kingdom , Taiwan , China , Lebanon , United Arab Emirates and Australia have the largest Canadian diaspora . Canadians in the United States constitute the greatest single expatriate community at over 1 million in 2009 , representing 35 @.@ 8 % of all Canadians abroad . Under current Canadian law , Canada does not restrict dual citizenship but Passport Canada encourages its citizens to travel abroad on their Canadian passport , so they can access Canadian consular services . 
 = = = Ethnic ancestry = = = 
 Canada has 34 ethnic groups with at least 100 @,@ 000 members each , of which 11 have over 1 million people and numerous others are represented in smaller amounts . According to the 2006 census , the largest self @-@ reported ethnic origin is " Canadian " ( 32 % ) , followed by English ( 21 % ) , French ( 15 @.@ 8 % ) , Scottish ( 15 @.@ 1 % ) , Irish ( 13 @.@ 9 % ) , German ( 10 @.@ 2 % ) , Italian ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) , Chinese ( 4 @.@ 3 % ) , North American Indian ( 4 @.@ 0 % ) , Ukrainian ( 3 @.@ 9 % ) , and Dutch ( Netherlands ) ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) . In the 2006 census , over five million Canadians identified themselves as a member of a visible minority . Together , they make up 16 @.@ 2 % of the total population : most numerous among these are South Asian ( 4 @.@ 0 % ) , Black ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) , and Filipino ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) . Aboriginal peoples are not considered a visible minority under the Employment Equity Act , and this is the definition that Statistics Canada also uses . 
 For a complete list see : Canadian ethnic groups 
 = = Culture = = 
 Canada 's culture is a product of its ethnicities , languages , religions , political and legal system ( s ) . Canada has been shaped by waves of migration that have combined to form a unique blend of art , cuisine , literature , humour and music . Today , Canada has a diverse makeup of nationalities and constitutional protection for policies that promote multiculturalism rather than cultural assimilation . In Quebec , cultural identity is strong , and many French @-@ speaking commentators speak of a Quebec culture distinct from English Canadian culture . However , as a whole , Canada is a cultural mosaic : a collection of several regional , aboriginal , and ethnic subcultures . 
 Canadian government policies such as official bilingualism ; publicly funded health care ; higher and more progressive taxation ; outlawing capital punishment ; strong efforts to eliminate poverty ; strict gun control ; leniency in regard to drug use , and , most recently , legalizing same @-@ sex marriage are social indicators of Canada 's political and cultural values . American media and entertainment are popular , if not dominant , in English Canada ; conversely , many Canadian cultural products and entertainers are successful in the United States and worldwide . The Government of Canada has also influenced culture with programs , laws and institutions . It has created Crown corporations to promote Canadian culture through media and has also tried to protect Canadian culture by setting legal minimums on Canadian content . 
 Canadian culture has historically been influenced by Aboriginal , French and British cultures and traditions . Most of Canada 's territory was inhabited and developed later than other European colonies in the Americas , with the result that themes and symbols of pioneers , trappers , and traders were important in the early development of the Canadian identity . First Nations played a critical part in the development of European colonies in Canada , particularly for their role in assisting exploration of the continent during the North American fur trade . The British conquest of New France in the mid @-@ 1700s brought a large Francophone population under British Imperial rule , creating a need for compromise and accommodation . The new British rulers left alone much of the religious , political , and social culture of the French @-@ speaking habitants , guaranteeing through the Quebec Act of 1774 the right of the Canadiens to practise the Catholic faith and to use French civil law ( now Quebec law ) . 
 The Constitution Act of 1867 was designed to meet the growing calls of Canadians for autonomy from British rule , while avoiding the overly strong decentralization that contributed to the Civil War in the United States . The compromises made by the Fathers of Confederation set Canadians on a path to bilingualism , and this in turn contributed to an acceptance of diversity . 
 The Canadian Forces and overall civilian participation in the First World War and Second World War helped to foster Canadian nationalism , however in 1917 and 1944 conscription crisis ' highlighted the considerable rift along ethnic lines between Anglophones and Francophones . As a result of the First and Second World Wars , the Government of Canada became more assertive and less deferential to British authority . With the gradual loosening of political ties to the United Kingdom and the modernization of Canadian immigration policies , 20th @-@ century immigrants with African , Caribbean and Asian nationalities have added to the Canadian identity and its culture . The multiple @-@ origins immigration pattern continues today with the arrival of large numbers of immigrants from non @-@ British or non @-@ French backgrounds . 
 Multiculturalism in Canada was adopted as the official policy of the government during the premiership of Pierre Elliot Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s . The Canadian government has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration . Multiculturalism is administered by the Department of Citizenship and Immigration and reflected in the law through the Canadian Multiculturalism Act and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Canada as a nation is religiously diverse , encompassing a wide range of groups , beliefs and customs . The preamble to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms references " God " , and the monarch carries the title of " Defender of the Faith " . However Canada has no official religion , and support for religious pluralism ( Freedom of religion in Canada ) is an important part of Canada 's political culture . With the role of Christianity in decline , having once been central and integral to Canadian culture and daily life ; commentators have suggested that Canada has come to enter a post @-@ Christian period in a secular state , with irreligion in Canada on the rise . The majority of Canadians consider religion to be unimportant in their daily lives , but still believe in God . The practice of religion is now generally considered a private matter throughout society and within the state . 
 The 2011 Canadian census reported that 67 @.@ 3 % of Canadians identify as being Christians ; of this number , Catholics make up the largest group , accounting for 38 @.@ 7 percent of the population . The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada ( accounting for 6 @.@ 1 % of Canadians ) ; followed by Anglicans ( 5 @.@ 0 % ) , and Baptists ( 1 @.@ 9 % ) . About 23 @.@ 9 % of Canadians declare no religious affiliation , including agnostics , atheists , humanists , and other groups . The remaining are affiliated with non @-@ Christian religions , the largest of which is Islam ( 3 @.@ 2 % ) , followed by Hinduism ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) , Sikhism ( 1 @.@ 4 % ) , Buddhism ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) , and Judaism ( 1 @.@ 0 % ) . 
 Before the arrival of European colonists and explorers , First Nations followed a wide array of mostly animistic religions . During the colonial period , the French settled along the shores of the Saint Lawrence River , specifically Latin Rite Roman Catholics , including a number of Jesuits dedicated to converting Aboriginals ; an effort that eventually proved successful . The first large Protestant communities were formed in the Maritimes after the British conquest of New France , followed by American Protestant settlers displaced by the American Revolution . The late nineteenth century saw the beginning of a substantive shift in Canadian immigration patterns . Large numbers of Irish and Southern Europeans immigrants were creating new Roman Catholic communities in English Canada . The settlement of the west brought significant Eastern Orthodox immigrants from Eastern Europe and Mormon and Pentecostal immigrants from the United States . 
 The earliest documentation of Jewish presence in Canada occurs in the 1754 British Army records from the French and Indian War . In 1760 , General Jeffrey Amherst , 1st Baron Amherst attacked and won Montreal for the British . In his regiment there were several Jews , including four among his officer corps , most notably Lieutenant Aaron Hart who is considered the father of Canadian Jewry . The Islamic , Jains , Sikh , Hindu and Buddhist communities , although small , are as old as the nation itself . The 1871 Canadian Census ( first " Canadian " national census ) indicated thirteen Muslims among the populace , with approximately 5000 Sikh by 1908 . The first Canadian mosque was constructed in Edmonton , in 1938 , when there were approximately 700 Muslims in Canada . Buddhism first arrived in Canada when Japanese immigrated during the late 19th century . The first Japanese Buddhist temple in Canada was built in Vancouver in 1905 . The influx of immigrants in the late 20th century , with Sri Lankan , Japanese , Indian and Southeast Asian customs , has contributed to the recent expansion of the Jain , Sikh , Hindu and Buddhist communities . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 A multitude of languages are used by 35 million Canadians , with English and French ( the official languages ) being the mother tongues of approximately 60 % and 20 % of Canadians respectively . In 2011 , nearly 6 @.@ 8 million Canadians listed a non @-@ official language as their mother tongue . Some of the most common non @-@ official first languages include Chinese ( mainly Cantonese ; 1 @,@ 072 @,@ 555 first @-@ language speakers ) , Punjabi ( 430 @,@ 705 ) , Spanish ( 410 @,@ 670 ) , German ( 409 @,@ 200 ) , and Italian ( 407 @,@ 490 ) . Less than one percent of Canadians ( just over 250 @,@ 000 individuals ) can speak an aboriginal language . About half this number ( 129 @,@ 865 ) reported using an aboriginal language on a daily basis . Additionally , Canadians speak several sign languages ; it is unknown the number of speakers of the most spoken languages , ASL and <unk> , nor of Maritime Sign Language or of Plains Sign Talk . There are only 47 speakers of the Inuit language <unk> . 
 English and French are recognized by the Constitution of Canada as official languages . Thus all federal government laws are enacted in both English and French with government services available in both languages . Two of Canada 's territories give official status to indigenous languages . In Nunavut , Inuktitut and Inuinnaqtun are official languages alongside the national languages of English and French , and Inuktitut is a common vehicular language in territorial government . In the Northwest Territories , the Official Languages Act declares that there are eleven different languages : Chipewyan , Cree , English , French , <unk> ’ in , Inuinnaqtun , Inuktitut , <unk> , North Slavey , South Slavey and <unk> . Multicultural media are widely accessible across the county and offer specialty television channels , newspapers and other publications in many minority languages . 
 In Canada , as elsewhere in the world of European colonies , the frontier of European exploration and settlement tended to be a linguistically diverse and fluid place , as cultures using different languages met and interacted . The need for a common means of communication between the indigenous inhabitants and new arrivals for the purposes of trade , and ( in some cases ) intermarriage , led to the development of Mixed languages . Languages like Michif , Chinook Jargon and <unk> creole tended to be highly localized and were often spoken by only a small number of individuals who were frequently capable of speaking another language . Reaching across Canada , the United States and into Mexico existed Plains Sign Talk which functioned originally as a trade language used to communicate internationally and across linguistic borders . 
 = SMS Prinzregent Luitpold = 
 SMS Prinzregent Luitpold was the fifth and final vessel of the Kaiser class of battleships of the Imperial German Navy . Prinzregent Luitpold 's keel was laid in October 1910 at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel . She was launched on 17 February 1912 and was commissioned into the navy on 19 August 1913 . The ship was equipped with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets , and had a top speed of 21 @.@ 7 knots ( 40 @.@ 2 km / h ; 25 @.@ 0 mph ) . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was assigned to the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career ; in December 1916 , she was transferred to the IV Battle Squadron . Along with her four sister ships , Kaiser , Friedrich der Grosse , Kaiserin , and König Albert , Prinzregent Luitpold participated in all of the major fleet operations of World War I , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . The ship was also involved in Operation Albion , an amphibious assault on the Russian @-@ held islands in the Gulf of Riga , in late 1917 . 
 After Germany 's defeat in the war and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , Prinzregent Luitpold and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet were interned by the Royal Navy in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and reduced to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , days before the treaty was signed , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . Prinzregent Luitpold was raised in July 1931 and subsequently broken up for scrap in 1933 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was 172 @.@ 4 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 26 @,@ 570 long tons ) . She had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 1 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 8 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . She had a crew of 41 officers and 1 @,@ 043 enlisted men . Prinzregent Luitpold was powered by two sets of Parsons steam turbines , supplied with steam by 14 coal @-@ fired boilers . Unlike her four sisters , the ship was intended to use a diesel engine on the center shaft , but this was not ready by the time work on the ship was completed . The engine was never installed , and so Prinzregent Luitpold was slightly slower than her sisters , which were equipped with a third turbine on the center shaft . The powerplant produced a top speed of 21 @.@ 7 knots ( 40 @.@ 2 km / h ; 25 @.@ 0 mph ) . She carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 540 long tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 630 km ; 9 @,@ 090 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The ship dispensed with the inefficient hexagonal turret arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , one forward and two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates and four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the hull ; one was in the bow , and the other four were on the broadside . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Odin as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship Odin , Prinzregent Luitpold was laid down at the Howaldtswerke dockyard in Kiel in October 1910 . She was launched on 17 February 1912 and christened by Princess Theresa of Bavaria ; Ludwig III , the last king of Bavaria and the son of the ship 's namesake , Luitpold , Prince Regent of Bavaria , gave a speech . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 19 August 1913 . Prinzregent Luitpold was equipped with facilities for a squadron commander , and became the flagship of the III Battle Squadron upon commissioning . 
 Directly after commissioning , Prinzregent Luitpold took part in the annual autumn maneuvers , which followed the fleet cruise to Norway . The exercises lasted from 31 August to 9 September . Unit drills and individual ship training were conducted in October and November . In early 1914 , Prinzregent Luitpold participated in additional ship and unit training . The annual spring maneuvers were conducted in the North Sea at the end of March . Further fleet exercises followed in April and May in the Baltic and North Seas . The ship went to Kiel Week that year . Despite the rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June , the High Seas Fleet began its summer cruise to Norway on 13 July . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills off Skagen before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany , as a result of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On the 27th , the entire fleet assembled off Cape <unk> before returning to port , where they remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out the following day , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was present during the first sortie by the German fleet into the North Sea , which took place on 2 – 3 November 1914 . No British forces were encountered during the operation . A second operation followed on 15 – 16 December . This sortie was the initiation of a strategy adopted by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet . He intended to use the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group to raid British coastal towns to lure out portions of the British Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . Early on 15 December the fleet left port to raid the towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby . That evening , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Prinzregent Luitpold and her four sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold went into the Baltic for squadron training from 23 to 29 January 1916 . While on the maneuvers , the newer battleship König became the III Squadron flagship . Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander of III Squadron , lowered his flag on 24 January and transferred it to König . The Kaiser removed von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February , following the loss of the armored cruiser SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank the month before . Admiral Hugo von Pohl succeeded him as the commander of the fleet . Pohl continued the policy of sweeps into the North Sea to destroy isolated British formations . On 24 April , Prinzregent Luitpold ran aground in the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , though she was freed without causing significant damage . A series of advances into the North Sea were conducted throughout the rest of 1915 ; Prinzregent Luitpold was present for the sweeps on 17 – 18 May , 29 – 30 May , 10 August , 11 – 12 September , and 23 – 24 October . The III Squadron completed the year with another round of unit training in the Baltic on 5 – 20 December . 
 Pohl 's tenure as fleet commander was brief ; by January 1916 hepatic cancer had weakened him to the point where he was no longer able to carry out his duties . He was replaced by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer in January . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the British Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . The first of Scheer 's operations was conducted the following month , on 5 – 7 March , with an uneventful sweep of the Hoofden . Prinzregent Luitpold was also present during an advance to the Amrun Bank on 2 – 3 April . Another sortie was conducted on 21 – 22 April . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . During the operation , Prinzregent Luitpold was the third ship in the VI Division of III Squadron and the seventh ship in the line , directly astern of Kaiserin and ahead of Friedrich der Grosse . The VI Division was behind only the V Division , consisting of the four König @-@ class battleships . The eight Helgoland- and Nassau @-@ class battleships of the I and II Divisions in I Squadron followed the VI Division . The six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the III and IV Divisions in II Battle Squadron formed the rear of the formation . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of Vice Admiral David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , the crew of the leading German battleship , König , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold engaged the nearest target her gunners could make out , one of the Lion @-@ class battlecruisers , at a range of some 22 @,@ 300 yd ( 20 @,@ 400 m ) , though her shots fell short . Beatty 's ships increased speed and at 17 : 51 veered away to further increase the distance to the III Squadron battleships . At 18 : 08 , Prinzregent Luitpold shifted her fire to the battleship Malaya at a range of 19 @,@ 100 yd ( 17 @,@ 500 m ) , though without any success . By 18 : 38 , Malaya disappeared in the haze and Prinzregent Luitpold was forced to cease fire . The British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled earlier in the engagement , lay directly in the path of the advancing High Seas Fleet . Prinzregent Luitpold and her three sisters destroyed Nomad with their secondary guns while the I Squadron battleships dispatched Nestor . At around 19 : 00 , the German battle line came into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; Prinzregent Luitpold fired two salvos from her main battery at an unidentified four @-@ funneled cruiser at 19 : 03 but made no hits . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible ; Rear Admiral Paul Behncke in König attempted to maneuver the III Squadron to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The eight III Squadron battleships fired on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . The armored cruisers Defence , Warrior , and Black Prince joined in the attack on the crippled Wiesbaden . Between 19 : 14 and 19 : 17 , several German battleships and battlecruisers opened fire on Defence and Warrior . Instead of joining the fire on the much closer cruisers , Prinzregent Luitpold engaged the leading battleships of the British line , firing a total of 21 salvos . The gunners reported ranges of 17 @,@ 500 to 18 @,@ 800 yd ( 16 @,@ 000 to 17 @,@ 200 m ) , though this was an overestimation that caused the ship 's salvos to fall past their intended target . 
 By 20 : 00 , the German line was ordered to complete a 180 @-@ degree turn eastward to disengage from the British fleet . The maneuver , conducted under heavy fire , caused disorganization in the German fleet . Kaiserin had come too close to Prinzregent Luitpold and was forced to haul out of line to starboard to avoid a collision . Prinzregent Luitpold came up alongside Kaiserin at high speed , which forced Kaiserin to remain out of line temporarily . The turn reversed the order of the German line ; Prinzregent Luitpold was now the eighth ship from the rear of the German line , leading the III Squadron . At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night @-@ cruising formation . Kaiserin was the eleventh ship , in the center of the 24 @-@ ship line . 
 After a series of night engagements between the leading battleships and British destroyers , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British light forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later ; the I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead , and Prinzregent Luitpold , Kaiserin , Kaiser , and Kronprinz stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . The remainder of the battleships and battlecruisers entered Wilhelmshaven , where those that were still in fighting condition replenished their stocks of coal and ammunition . In the course of the battle , Prinzregent Luitpold fired one @-@ hundred and sixty @-@ nine 30 @.@ 5 cm shells and one @-@ hundred and six 15 cm rounds . She and her crew emerged from the battle completely unscathed . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 In early August , Prinzregent Luitpold and the rest of the operational III Squadron units conducted divisional training in the Baltic . On 18 August , Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the 31 May operation ; the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — supported by three dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Prinzregent Luitpold , would trail behind and provide cover . During the operation , Prinzregent Luitpold carried the Commander of U @-@ boats . On the approach to the English coast , Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another fleet advance followed on 18 – 20 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . Two weeks later , on 4 November , Prinzregent Luitpold took part in an expedition to the western coast of Denmark to assist two U @-@ boats — U @-@ 20 and U @-@ 30 — that had become stranded there . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König @-@ class battleships remained in III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser @-@ class ships , including Prinzregent Luitpold , were transferred to IV Squadron . Prinzregent Luitpold became the flagship of the new squadron . In the Wilhelmshaven Roads on 20 January 1917 , the ship struck a steel hawser that became entangled in the ship 's starboard propeller . In March , Friedrich der Grosse was replaced as the fleet flagship by the newly commissioned battleship Baden . Friedrich der Grosse in turn replaced Prinzregent Luitpold as the flagship of IV Squadron . Steadily decreasing morale and discontent with rations provoked a series of small mutinies in the fleet . On 6 June and 19 July , stokers protested the low quality of the food they were given , and on 2 August , some 800 men went on a hunger strike . The ship 's officers relented and agreed to form a <unk> , a council that gave the enlisted men a voice in their ration selection and preparation . One of the ringleaders of the protests , however , was arrested and executed on 5 September . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while Prinzregent Luitpold and the rest of IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . Prinzregent Luitpold , along with Kaiser and Kaiserin , were tasked with silencing the Russian guns at Hundsort which had taken Moltke under fire . The ships opened fire at 05 : 44 , and by 07 : 45 , Russian firing had ceased and German troops were moving ashore . Two days later , Vice Admiral Wilhelm Souchon left Tagga Bay with Prinzregent Luitpold , Friedrich der Grosse , and Kaiserin to support German ground forces advancing on the Sworbe Peninsula . By 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On the 24th , Prinzregent Luitpold was detached from the task force and returned to Kiel . 
 After arriving in Kiel , Prinzregent Luitpold went into drydock for periodic maintenance , from which she emerged on 21 December . She then proceeded on to Wilhelmshaven , where she resumed guard duty in the Bight . On 17 March 1918 , the ship steamed to the Baltic for training exercises , and the following day the battlecruiser Derfflinger rammed her outside Kiel . The accident caused no serious damage , however . The ship participated in the fruitless advance to Norway on 23 – 25 April 1918 , after which she resumed guard duties in the German Bight . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Prinzregent Luitpold and her four sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to improve Germany 's bargaining position , despite the expected casualties . But many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt that the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy " . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , was interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any circumstances . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and men per ship . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Prinzregent Luitpold sank at 13 : 30 ; she was subsequently raised on 9 July 1931 and broken up by 1933 in Rosyth . 
 = Michèle Mouton = 
 Michèle Mouton ( born 23 June 1951 ) is a French former rally driver . Competing in the World Rally Championship for the Audi factory team , she took four victories and finished runner @-@ up in the drivers ' world championship in 1982 . She is still the last woman to compete in top @-@ level rallying . 
 Mouton debuted in rallying as a co @-@ driver but quickly moved to the driver 's seat , steering an Alpine @-@ Renault A110 in national rallies . In 1975 , she competed in circuit racing and won the two @-@ litre prototype class in the 24 Hours of Le Mans . After being signed by Fiat France for 1977 , Mouton finished runner @-@ up to Bernard Darniche in the European Rally Championship . She went on to win the 1978 Tour de France Automobile and record consistent results in her home events in the WRC ; the Tour de Corse and the Monte Carlo Rally . For 1981 , Audi Sport signed Mouton to partner Hannu Mikkola . In her first year with the Audi Quattro , she took a surprise victory at the Rallye Sanremo . 
 In the 1982 season , Mouton finished a close second overall to Walter Röhrl , after wins in Portugal , Brazil and Greece , and helped Audi to its first manufacturers ' title . Her campaign the following year resulted in fifth place . With the team having four top drivers for 1984 , Mouton 's participation on world championship level became part @-@ time . In 1985 , she won the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb in the United States , setting a record time in the process . In 1986 , she moved to Peugeot and won the German Rally Championship as the first female driver to win a major championship in rallying . Soon after securing the title , Mouton retired from rallying due to the ban of Group B supercars . In 1988 , she co @-@ founded the international motorsport event Race of Champions in memory of her former rival Henri Toivonen . Mouton became the first president of the FIA 's Women & Motor Sport Commission in 2010 and the FIA 's manager in the World Rally Championship in 2011 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Michèle Mouton was born 23 June 1951 in Grasse , a town on the French Riviera known for its perfume industry , close to the mountain stages famously featured in French rallies . Her parents grew roses and jasmine on their large property . After graduating from high school , Mouton began law studies , but would soon drop out and concentrate on a career in rallying . Although Mouton began driving her father 's Citroën 2CV when she was 14 years old , she did not turn her interest to rallying until 1972 , when her friend Jean <unk> asked her to practise the Tour de Corse with him . Mouton later co @-@ drove for him in the 1973 Monte Carlo Rally , the first @-@ ever World Rally Championship ( WRC ) event . After a few more rallies , Mouton 's father suggested a switch to driving if she wanted to continue in rallying , and promised to buy her a car and give her one @-@ year to prove herself . Driving an Alpine @-@ Renault A110 , she debuted at the Critérium <unk> Paris @-@ Saint @-@ Raphaël and then tackled the Tour de France Automobile . In the Île de <unk> , a complementary event to the Tour de Corse at the end of 1973 , Mouton finished eighth overall . 
 In the World Rally Championship , Mouton made her driver debut in 1974 , finishing 12th in the Tour de Corse in an Alpine A110 . It was rumoured her good performances were the result of a special engine , however her car passed inspection by WRC scrutineers . At the end of the year , Mouton was crowned both French and European ladies ' champion . Re @-@ entering the Tour de Corse the following season , she took seventh place . Mouton successfully defended her ladies ' titles , and also competed in circuit racing : In an all @-@ female team with Christine <unk> and Marianne <unk> , she won the two @-@ litre prototype category of the 1975 24 Hours of Le Mans . Recalling the race in 2008 , Mouton said : " It started to rain I remember , and I started to pass everybody . I was running on slicks . In the pits they were saying ' Michele you must stop ' , but I did not want to because I was passing everyone . " Her results attracted a major sponsor in the form of the French oil company Elf . In 1976 , Mouton drove the A110 to 11th place in Monte Carlo and retired at the Rallye Sanremo . At the Tour de Corse , her debut in the newer A310 also ended in retirement . 
 = = = Fiat = = = 
 For the 1977 season , Fiat France signed Mouton to partner Jean @-@ Claude <unk> . She was not impressed by the handling of the Fiat 131 Abarth , stating it was " like a big truck , not a car " and " terrible to drive " . However , the car would prove successful and Mouton put in very consistent results , finishing eighth in the Tour de Corse in 1977 and fifth three years in a row from 1978 to 1980 . In 1980 , she had been running as high as second before her engine died for a time . In Monte Carlo , she drove the car to seventh place in 1979 and 1980 , equalling the result she had achieved in the event in a Lancia Stratos HF in 1978 . 
 Outside the World Rally Championship , Mouton drove a Porsche Carrera RS to victory in the 1977 <unk> Rallye de España and to second place in the 1977 Tour de France Automobile . She also finished runner @-@ up to Bernard Darniche in the overall European Rally Championship ( ERC ) . Mouton went on to win the Tour de France with the 131 Abarth the following year . At the Rallye d 'Antibes , she finished third behind the Stratos drivers Darniche and Attilio Bettega . She placed fifth in the ERC standings and fourth in the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) Cup for Drivers , the predecessor to the drivers ' world championship . In 1979 , Mouton finished second in the French Rally Championship , behind Porsche 911 SC driver Bernard <unk> . 
 = = = Audi = = = 
 = = = = 1980 = = = = 
 In 1980 , Audi Sport , Audi 's new factory team , called Mouton and signed her for a World Rally Championship programme for the 1981 season . Mouton described Audi 's call as " a complete shock " . Audi 's decision to nominate her instead of established male rivals attracted a great deal of publicity . As the Audi Quattro , the first rally car to have over 300 bhp and both a turbocharger and four @-@ wheel @-@ drive , had not yet gained FIA homologation , Audi could only enter rallies as zero cars and not as competitive entries . Hannu Mikkola debuted the car in the Algarve Rally in October , and would have won by about thirty minutes had his times been officially registered . Mouton joined Freddy <unk> for the final round of the Finnish Rally Championship , the Northern Lights , and also showed encouraging pace on the slippery surfaces . Mouton initially found the car <unk> , but became more comfortable after switching to left @-@ foot braking , as advised by Mikkola who was in charge of developing the car . Audi announced their participation in eight events in 1981 , although Mouton would not be entered in the Swedish Rally due to her lack of experience on driving on ice and snow . 
 = = = = 1981 = = = = 
 Mouton 's first competitive run in the Quattro in Monte Carlo ended before it had even begun . She withdrew from the event before the start due to apparent engine problems . The team later discovered that dirt had got into the fuel system . At the Rally Portugal , she started her long partnership with the Italian co @-@ driver Fabrizia Pons . Mouton won seven stages and took a career @-@ best fourth place , despite suffering from electronic problems . This ended criticism of Audi for signing a female driver . After a retirement due to a broken camshaft in the Tour de Corse , Mouton set several fastest times at the Acropolis Rally in Greece . While Mikkola was leading and Mouton fifth , the stewards excluded the <unk> citing homologation infractions . Although Audi protested , the stewards upheld the decision . In her debut in the high @-@ speed 1000 Lakes Rally in Finland , Mouton found it hard to get used to the rhythm changes . She recorded a few top @-@ ten stage times and finished 13th . She was satisfied with her performance , and the local newspaper Keskisuomalainen described her debut as successful . At the Rallye Sanremo in Italy , a mixed surface event with tarmac and gravel , Mouton took the lead when the local star Michele <unk> crashed and held off Henri Toivonen and Ari Vatanen to take the victory . This marked the first time a female driver had won a world championship event in rallying . Mouton 's male rivals were left speechless . Earlier during the weekend , Vatanen had been confident : " Never can nor will I lose to a woman . " Mouton recalled her debut win in a 2008 interview for <unk> Magazine : 
 I remember not just because it was a win , but also because it was a big fight right into the last night . Fabrizia reminded me the other night that we had a problem with the brake pads , so we lost a lot of time . We finished three days rallying ( with one day to go ) , night and day , 32 seconds in front of Ari Vatanen . We drove the last special stage for the night , came back to the hotel and I could not sleep at all , four hours in front of me and no sleep . Then I arrive at the special stage , it 's about <unk> long , and I look at Fabrizia and I said " OK , we forget everything , and we are at the first stage of the rally again , because one of us will crash . " And so Ari hit a rock , and we won the rally . 
 In the season @-@ ending RAC Rally in Great Britain , Mouton continued her good performances by running third at half distance , despite having been uncomfortable about competing in a rally where pacenotes and practice are not allowed . However , her Quattro later incurred gearbox problems and she retired from fifth place after sliding off the road into a snow @-@ filled ditch . Mouton would later state : " For me , rallying is England . No pacenotes – just you in the car having to do the fastest time . This , to me , is rallying . OK , it was not easy for me because I did not have experience there of the British championship , but it is really rallying . I like it very much . " Mouton finished the season in eighth place in the drivers ' championship , while Audi was fifth in the manufacturers ' standings . 
 = = = = 1982 = = = = 
 Mouton 's 1982 season started with a big accident at the Monte Carlo Rally . On stage twelve in the small town <unk> in Provence , she missed a patch of ice and slid off the road , crashing into the stone wall of a large house at 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Mouton injured her knee while Pons suffered a concussion . She had been in third place , and had set the fastest time for the difficult Col de <unk> mountain pass . The pair 's injuries were not serious and Mouton went on to make her debut in the Swedish Rally . She was running third when she slid into a snow bank , and crashed into the Quattro of teammate Hannu Mikkola who had gone off at the same place . She eventually finished fifth . In Portugal , Mouton recorded 18 stage wins on her way to a clear victory ahead of Toyota 's Per Eklund . She once admitted that to be competitive in the rally , she tried to think of the large crowds right by the side of the route as trees . At the Tour de Corse , she could not match the pace of the leaders and finished seventh . At the Acropolis Rally , Mouton won ahead of the Opel duo Walter Röhrl and Henri Toivonen , and closed to within 20 points of the championship leader Röhrl . The event was overshadowed by two serious accidents , one of which killed a spectator . Mouton had commented : " I 'm afraid that something might break in my car and I can no longer avoid hitting a spectator . " 
 In New Zealand , Mouton continued her good performances and traded the lead with Mikkola , Röhrl and Björn Waldegård . Soon after regaining the lead on stage twelve , she retired with a broken oil pump . After seven rounds , Mouton was second in the championship , 32 points behind Röhrl and 12 ahead of Eklund . The Rally of Brazil was marred by the fatal accident of Brazilian driver Thomas Fuchs , and featured chaotic conditions as parts of the course were not successfully closed for competition . Although only five teams made it to the finish , Mouton improved her title hopes by winning her duel with Röhrl after the German lost a wheel on the last day . At the 1000 Lakes , she clocked in the eighth fastest time for the famous <unk> stage and placed seventh after the first day . On the following leg , Mouton drove too fast into a jump and damaged her Quattro while landing . After the next jump , her front wheels locked up and she rolled the car . Mouton was next locked in a tight battle for the win in Sanremo . Although she recorded nine stage wins and Audi took a one @-@ two , she had to settle for fourth behind Röhrl . 
 Audi had not originally planned to participate in the African marathon events , but now found it necessary to enter the penultimate round , the Rallye Côte d 'Ivoire , due to their title battles with Opel . Just before the start of the event , Mouton received news that her father had succumbed to cancer in his house in Nice . His last wish was that Mouton start the rally . After a first day of over 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 750 miles ) of racing in temperatures over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , she was eight minutes clear of Mikkola and nearly half an hour ahead of title rival Röhrl . Mikkola said that he had never been in such a hot car , and Röhrl estimated that the temperature inside his car reached an " almost unbearable " 70 ° C. With just over half of the 5 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) behind , Mouton led from Röhrl by over an hour despite losing 25 minutes due to transmission problems . On the third day , both Mouton and Röhrl struggled with several reliability issues and her lead over Röhrl shrank to 18 minutes . The Toyota <unk> <unk> of Eklund and Waldegård were still over two hours behind . Should Mouton go on to hold off Röhrl , she would reduce Röhrl 's lead in the championship to just two points . As a driver 's seven best results counted towards the championship at the time , Mouton would only need a third place in the RAC Rally to take the title even if Röhrl would win . On the final day , she continued to suffer from mechanical problems and had the complete fuel injection system changed . For the next time control , Röhrl and Mouton arrived almost simultaneously . With only 600 km to go , Mouton went off the road and rolled her car . She drove the severely damaged Quattro for five more kilometres before giving up . 
 Röhrl inherited the win and became the first two @-@ time world champion in rallying . Having lost her father , Mouton did not dwell on losing the title . Röhrl had earlier conceded that he " would have accepted second place in the championship to Mikkola " , but not to Mouton : " This is not because I doubt her capabilities as a driver , but because she is a woman . " He believed that defeat would have devalued his performances . At the RAC , Mouton edged out Toivonen to take second place behind Mikkola . This result made Audi the first German marque to win the manufacturers ' world title . At the inaugural Autosport Awards gala , Mouton won the International Rally Driver of the Year award . 
 = = = = 1983 = = = = 
 The 1983 season started the Group B era of the WRC and Mouton was now at the wheel of the Audi Quattro A1 . She also had a new teammate ; Audi had signed Stig Blomqvist as their third regular driver . For the third year in a row , Mouton had a bad start to her season in Monte Carlo . She went off the road on a stage not far from her home town , and again hit a stone wall at over 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The car was destroyed , but Mouton and Pons were unharmed . Mouton explained to her team boss Roland Gumpert , later of Gumpert supercar fame , that she had had to dodge a photographer . Mouton went on to record successive points finishes . She finished fourth in Sweden in a quadruple win for Audi , after an early driving error that had sent her Quattro into a snow bank . In Portugal , Mouton finished second to Mikkola , ahead of Lancia 's Röhrl and Markku Alén . After the first section of the Safari Rally , totaling over 1 @,@ 600 km ( 1 @,@ 000 mi ) , Mouton arrived to the finish on three wheels and said she was " totally exhausted " from the effort . She eventually placed third behind Opel 's Ari Vatanen and her teammate Mikkola . After four events , Mikkola and Mouton were first and second in the drivers ' championship . 
 At the Tour de Corse , Audi debuted the Quattro A2 , which was 70 kg ( 155 lb ) lighter and had an engine producing 30 more horsepower . Mouton 's rally ended when her engine caught on fire . On the first stage in Greece , she rolled her car on a hairpin turn 18 km ( 11 mi ) from the start . Rally New Zealand was for Mouton a repetition of the previous year ; she took the lead on the seventh stage and held on to it until her A2 's engine failed , with only six of the 33 stages to go . The three retirements in a row dropped Mouton to fifth place in the championship . She then finished third behind Mikkola and Blomqvist at the Rally Argentina , but this would remain her last podium finish of the season . At the 1000 Lakes in Finland , Mouton finished the first day in seventh place after setting two top @-@ five stage times . Her car later caught on fire , but she was able to continue in the event by following Mikkola 's advice and driving into a lake . With a string of top @-@ ten times , she eventually finished 16th . In the Rallye Sanremo , the tarmac stages were dominated by the Lancia 037 and Mouton finished seventh after suffering from fuel injection problems . In the season @-@ ending RAC Rally , she started well and held second place after the first twelve stages . An Audi mechanic later accidentally refilled Mouton 's fuel tank with pure water which resulted in time @-@ consuming repairs . She eventually retired after crashing out , and placed fifth overall in the drivers ' championship . Although Mikkola beat Lancia 's Röhrl and Alén to the drivers ' title , Audi had lost the manufacturers ' title to Lancia after the latter 's triple win in Sanremo . 
 = = = = 1984 = = = = 
 For the 1984 season , Audi added two @-@ time world champion Walter Röhrl to their star line @-@ up and Mouton now had a part @-@ time role , competing in five WRC events . For the first time in nine years , she did not enter the Monte Carlo Rally . However , Mouton signed up to commentate the event for Radio Monte Carlo . She started her year well by finishing second at the Swedish Rally behind teammate and home favourite Blomqvist . Mouton later stated that " finishing second was fantastic . When you are out rallying on ice or snow in country like that it is like dancing . From one side to the other side . My dancing background helped my rallying . As soon as I started on gravel I liked it because of that . It was so nice to feel and move the car like that . Sweden , in ice and snow , like ballet ! " This would remain her last podium position in the World Rally Championship . 
 In the Safari Rally , a rotor arm in Mouton 's Quattro failed and caused the turbo to break down as well . She retired after falling victim to the team 's ranking order ; as the repairs were expected to take too long , Gumpert ordered championship leader Blomqvist 's Quattro to be fixed by using Mouton 's sister car as spares . Her debut in the new Sport Quattro at the Acropolis Rally ended with engine overheating problems . In the 1000 Lakes , Mouton placed ninth after the short first day . She later crashed and continued without a windscreen , but the damage to her Quattro could not be repaired in service . Mouton retired and left Finland pointless for the fourth year in a row . In late October , she signed a contract extension with Audi . At the RAC Rally , a slight mistake led to a puncture and Mouton dropped from third to fifth . She went on to narrowly lose the final podium spot to Toyota 's Per Eklund . Mouton 's results placed her 12th in the drivers ' world championship , a point behind Röhrl . Outside the WRC , Mouton debuted in the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb in the United States , driving an Audi Sport Quattro together with her usual co @-@ driver Fabrizia Pons . After her main opponent Martin <unk> got hampered by a flat right front tyre she won the open rally category ( now known as unlimited ) in a record time and placed second overall , leaving behind several specialised V8 single @-@ seaters that had normally dominated the race . 
 = = = = 1985 = = = = 
 Audi 's WRC programme was limited for the 1985 season due to the recent defeats to Peugeot Talbot Sport , Peugeot 's factory team headed by Jean Todt . Mouton and Mikkola were assigned to testing and development duties . She drove both the Sport Quattro and its follower , the Quattro S1 ( Sport E2 ) . Mouton considered the S1 the most difficult rally car she had driven : " For rallying on asphalt , I agree the limit had gone too far . We did not have the reflexes to control it properly . It was tough to drive the car , but not the short Quattro before . " 
 Although Mouton competed in only one world championship event during the season , she contested a full six @-@ round British Rally Championship . Her campaign was plagued by reliability problems and she recorded only one finish . In the National Breakdown Rally , Mouton stopped after damaging her Quattro in a jump . After technical problems led to an early retirement at the Circuit of Ireland , she finished second at the Welsh Rally behind Malcolm Wilson in another Quattro . At the Scottish Rally , Mouton had been closing in on the leading Wilson until a transmission problem forced her to retire . At the Ulster Rally , she set the fastest time for the first stage but then dropped out with a mechanical failure . In the season @-@ ending Manx International Rally , Mouton struggled to start her Quattro and then crashed out five stages later . 
 Mouton 's only WRC event of the year was the long @-@ distance Rallye Côte d 'Ivoire . She was co @-@ driven by Arne Hertz as Pons was ill at the time of the start . Mouton started well and tied the lead with Toyota 's Juha Kankkunen after the first day . Her Quattro incurred severe engine problems on the next day , but was seemingly repaired by Audi mechanics off the route in the jungle . At the same time , the Sport Quattro " chase car " , a high @-@ speed service car , retired and Audi faced accusations of swapping the cars . The team withdrew Mouton just before the finish and the controversy remains unresolved ; the stewards did not find proof but the media published evidence afterwards . Although her rallying year was a disappointment , Mouton made a successful return to the Pikes Peak , winning the event overall in her Sport Quattro . Despite slippery conditions caused by a hailstorm , she broke Al Unser , Jr . ' s 1982 record by about thirteen seconds . The Frenchwoman 's win irritated some of her male rivals . Bobby Unser was reputedly quite vocal about his loss , to which Mouton is said to have replied : " If you have the balls you can try to race me back down as well . " 
 = = = Peugeot = = = 
 Mouton broke off her contract with Audi in late 1985 to join Peugeot for the coming season . She contested the German Rally Championship and two WRC events in a Peugeot 205 Turbo 16 , with which the marque had captured last year 's world titles . To replace the newly @-@ wed Pons , Mouton recruited Terry <unk> who had been left jobless after Ari Vatanen 's accident . Mouton , nicknamed " der <unk> Vulkan " ( The Black Volcano ) due to her temperament and long black hair , won six of the eight events in the German championship , including the Rallye Deutschland . Although the Hessen Rallye was stopped after the severe accident of Formula One driver Marc Surer , which claimed the life of his co @-@ driver Michel <unk> , Mouton was declared the winner . She secured the German national title on the seventh and penultimate round , the Sachs Baltic , after taking her fifth win of the season . She became the first female driver to win a major championship in rallying . 
 Mouton 's WRC outings were her home events : Monte Carlo Rally and Tour de Corse . In Monte Carlo , she was running in eighth place after eleven stages , but soon retired with oil pump problems . For the Tour de Corse in May , Mouton was given the second evolution of the car . She quickly showed good pace and held third place behind Lancia 's Henri Toivonen and teammate Bruno Saby . However , she ran into gearbox trouble on the tenth stage and was forced to retire . During the next day , Toivonen and his co @-@ driver Sergio Cresto crashed out from the lead and died in their seats . Mouton was still in Corsica and remarked to her boyfriend that " if they stop the Group B now , it will be the end for me . " Within days , FISA announced new regulations and banned the Group B supercars for the following year . 
 In October , two weeks after securing the German Rally Championship title , Mouton announced her retirement from rallying . She cited the end of the Group B era as the reason behind the decision , and stated that it was " a good time to stop . " Later in the same month , Mouton crowned her career by winning the last event of the German championship , the Drei @-@ Städte @-@ Rallye ( Three Cities Rally ) , ahead of Armin Schwarz 's MG Metro 6R4 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In 1988 , Mouton co @-@ founded the international motorsport event Race of Champions with Fredrik Johnsson , in memory of Toivonen and to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the world championship for rally drivers . The event originally included the world 's top rally drivers , but now features stars also from other disciplines , such as Formula One , NASCAR , Le Mans and MotoGP , competing against each other in identical cars . 
 In 1988 and 1989 , Mouton participated in rally raids as part of Peugeot 's service team for Ari Vatanen and Jacky Ickx . At the 1988 Rally of Tunisia , Mouton drove a 205 T16 Grand Raid chase car and transported spare parts for Vatanen and Henri Pescarolo , but also classified sixth overall . She later took part in the Dakar Rally as a press driver in 2004 and 2009 . In 2000 , Mouton finished second in the London – Sydney Marathon driving a Porsche 911 , behind former teammate Stig Blomqvist . After 22 years , Mouton and Fabrizia Pons reunited to compete in the 2008 Otago Classic Rally in New Zealand . In 2010 , Mouton competed with a 911 in the Rallye du Maroc and finished second to Grégoire De <unk> . 
 In 2010 , Mouton became the first president of the FIA 's Women & Motor Sport Commission . She stated that " for many years people have asked me why there have been no women following in my footsteps . I really hope the Commission can help answer that question and that we can attract and support women in all areas of our sport . " Having already headed a working group on the future of rallying , Mouton was appointed FIA 's manager in the World Rally Championship in 2011 . Mouton also serves in the nomination committee of the Rally Hall of Fame . In March 2012 , she recused herself after becoming a candidate for nomination . Mouton was inducted into the Hall of Fame along with two @-@ time world champion Carlos Sainz . 
 = = Personal life and legacy = = 
 While announcing her retirement from rallying , Mouton stated her intention to start a family with Corsican sports journalist Claude Guarnieri . She had her daughter Jessie ( Jessica ) in 1987 . Mouton credited her father Pierre 's support as the secret for her success : " He loved driving . He loved fast cars . And I think he would have loved to do what I did . He was a prisoner of war for five years and when he came back he never had the opportunity to compete . But he came to all the rallies I did . And my mother came , too . " 
 Mouton states that in her mind she did not try to beat her male rivals , but to be at their level . She noted that in rallying the time is the most important thing . David Evans of Autosport described her as " motorsport 's most successful ever female driver . " Rally journalist and historian Graham Robson credits Mouton , along with Pat Moss , as " the driver by whom all other females measure their skills and achievements . " Mouton and Moss were of different eras and did not compete directly against each other , although they both appeared at the 1973 Monte Carlo Rally where Mouton co @-@ drove . In 1985 , they swapped cars in a private test session with Moss driving the Quattro and Mouton an Austin @-@ Healey 3000 . Stirling Moss regarded Mouton as " one of the best " , and Niki Lauda described her as a " <unk> " . 
 In 2011 , Mouton was made knight of the Legion of Honour ( Légion d 'honneur ) by French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 = = Complete WRC results = = 
 = Dan Borislow = 
 Daniel Marc Borislow ( September 21 , 1961 – July 21 , 2014 ) was an American entrepreneur , sports team owner , inventor , and thoroughbred horse breeder . Originating in the Philadelphia , Pennsylvania area , Borislow attended Widener University and worked in cable construction and landscaping before going into the telephone business . He founded Tel @-@ Save , Inc. to resell access to AT & T long @-@ distance lines in 1989 . Borislow took the company public in 1995 , and two years later brokered a $ 100 million deal with AOL that made it the exclusive telephone service of its users . At its peak in early 1998 , Tel @-@ Save had sales of $ 300 million and was valued by Wall Street investors at $ 2 billion . However , due to the financial strain of paying off the AOL deal , Tel @-@ Save lost $ 221 million in 1999 , and Borislow sold his stock for a reported $ 200 to $ 300 million and retired . 
 In his brief retirement , he focused on his horse racing career , sending Talk is Money to the 2001 Kentucky Derby although the thoroughbred did not complete the race . Borislow 's most successful horse yet has been Toccet , who won four graded stakes , among which are the Champagne and Hollywood Futurity in 2002 . After selling most of his horses in 2004 , Borislow set forth plans for a new voice @-@ over @-@ IP business which became the magicJack . Invented in 2007 , the magicJack is a small product which can be plugged into a computer 's USB port and allows for unlimited calling from regular telephones . In 2010 , YMAX , the company behind the magicJack , merged with an Israeli company and became a publicly traded corporation . 
 In 2011 , Borislow purchased a controlling share of the Washington Freedom women 's professional soccer team . He had a brief turbulent relationship with other owners and the players which ended in a battle of law suits and the termination of the soccer team and league . Borislow and his family lived in Palm Beach County , Florida , where , through D & K Charitable Foundation , Borislow issued grants to charitable causes . 
 Borislow died from an apparent heart attack or myocardial infarction on July 21 , 2014 . 
 = = Business career = = 
 = = = Tel @-@ Save = = = 
 In 1989 , Borislow founded Tel @-@ Save when he was in his 20s to resell access to AT & T long @-@ distance lines . The company was based in New Hope , Pennsylvania , and its primary market was toward small and medium @-@ sized businesses . Borislow took the company public in 1995 and had an initial public offering of three million shares . He then invested in his own long distance network by deploying five Lucent <unk> @-@ 2000 switches throughout the United States . By 1997 , Tel @-@ Save was making $ 20 million a year . 
 In 1997 , Borislow negotiated a three @-@ year deal with America Online that granted Tel @-@ Save exclusive marketing rights to sell long @-@ distance service to AOL users . AOL users , meanwhile , would now be billed online for their local , long distance , cellular , and internet services . His original asking price was $ 50 million , but after negotiations , the figure increased to $ 100 million , in addition to half of future profits and 15 percent of the company 's stock . Having rescued a reeling AOL from Chapter 11 , Borislow was compared to Ted Turner for his vision and marketing abilities by Bob Pittman , president of AOL . This deal with Borislow skyrocketed AOL 's stock prices 231 % over the next year and catapulted them to be the dominant online provider with no runner up in sight . In December of that year , Borislow was behind the merger of Tel @-@ Save and STF , a similar company that provided telecommunications services to office buildings . 
 At its peak in early 1998 , Tel @-@ Save had sales of $ 300 million and was valued by Wall Street investors at $ 2 billion . His personal stock in the company was $ 500 million . Borislow 's America Online deal was the catalyst for other " portal deals " with AOL . The company 's fortunes turned due to the financial strain of the AOL deal , and following an annual loss of $ 221 million in 1998 , he resigned as CEO of the company on January 1 , 1999 . Gabriel Battista was named CEO in his absence . Tel @-@ Save is now known as Talk America . 
 = = = magicJack = = = 
 In 2005 , after retiring from business to focus on his horse racing career , Borislow set forth plans for a new voice @-@ over @-@ IP business , with an initial name of <unk> . He created YMAX Communications Corporation in April 2006 as a communications and equipment service . YMAX 's profits come from the production of the magicJack , a small device which can be plugged into a computer 's USB port and allows for unlimited calling from regular telephones . 
 CEO Borislow invented the product in 2007 and had applied for patents from the U.S. government while he and Donald Burns shared the payment of $ 25 million to start up the company . 
 Before Borislow launched a widespread television campaign in January 2008 , the company sold less than 1 @,@ 000 <unk> per day . By June , he was selling 8 @,@ 000 @-@ 9 @,@ 000 per day and had roughly 500 @,@ 000 subscribers in total . Borislow attributes its success to its pricing , at $ 40 in the first year of service and $ 20 each year thereafter . Although its voice quality has been criticized , Ted <unk> of The Globe and Mail said the " <unk> was still better than most cell phones I 've tried . " 
 In 2009 , Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum investigated a claim that Borislow falsely marketed the magicJack as having a free 30 @-@ day trial of the product . In reality , the customer must specifically cancel the trial prior to the 30 @-@ day mark , otherwise the credit card would be automatically billed . While Borislow maintained that his company 's actions were not illegal , he reached a settlement on April 15 , agreeing to pay the state of Florida $ 125 @,@ 000 for the cost of the investigation . He said the company resolved over 500 complaints and added a disclaimer on the website clarifying the misconception . 
 <unk> , an Israeli telephone company , acquired YMAX in July 2010 . Since Borislow and other YMAX businessmen contributed most of the equity , they essentially run the merged business , which kept the " YMAX " moniker . <unk> was a publicly traded company , so YMAX went on Nasdaq following the merger . In 2010 , YMAX had a market capitalization of $ 300 million and is expected to make $ 110 million to $ 125 million in sales . 
 = = Horse racing career = = 
 After watching horse races at Philadelphia Park for some time , Borislow decided to go into the business in 1991 . He frequently wagered on trainer John Scanlan 's horses , so he requested Scanlan to be the conditioner for his horses . Among Borislow 's first acquisitions was broodmare Beautiful Bid , who gave birth to Breeders ' Cup Distaff winner and Eclipse champion Beautiful Pleasure . In 2000 , he sold Beautiful Bid for $ 2 @.@ 6 million . 
 Borislow bought a $ 1 @.@ 8 million yearling in September 1999 that he named Talk Is Money . The thoroughbred was named after Tel @-@ Save , with Borislow saying , " Every time someone was talking on the phone , I made money . " Talk Is Money 's best finish came at the Tesio Stakes in April 2001 , where the horse placed second . This qualified him for the 2001 Kentucky Derby , and Borislow hired jockey Jerry Bailey , who won the 2000 Breeders Cup Juvenile with Macho Uno . At 47 @-@ 1 odds , Talk Is Money came in last in the Derby and did not finish the race . 
 Borislow 's most successful horse was Toccet , who won four graded stakes , including the Champagne and Hollywood Futurity in 2002 . Toccet 's name is a misspelled tribute to former National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Rick Tocchet . The horse was named runner @-@ up to Vindication for the American Champion Two @-@ Year @-@ Old Colt in 2002 , a part of the Eclipse Award . Once a favorite to enter the 2003 Kentucky Derby , Toccet was derailed by ankle injuries early in the year . He won one listed stakes after his juvenile season out of 15 starts and now stands at Castleton Lyons . 
 After a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service , Borislow sold a majority of his horses at the Fasig Tipton November sale in 2004 . In February 2005 , he was in a partnership with baseball manager Joe Torre and hockey player Keith Jones to buy Wild Desert . In June of that year , Wild Desert won the Queen 's Plate off a layoff of over 10 weeks . 
 On 5 / 25 / 2014 , Borislow hit the Gulfstream Park Rainbow Six paying $ 6 @.@ 6 million . His winning Rainbow 6 ticket of all / all / all / 1 @,@ 4 / all / all cost $ 7 @,@ 603 @.@ 20 . He played two other similar tickets with a total cost of $ 22 @,@ 809 @.@ 60 . 
 = = Women 's Professional Soccer = = 
 In 2011 , Borislow bought Women 's Professional Soccer franchise Washington Freedom , moved it to South Florida , and renamed it magicJack . Borislow attracted stars of the United States national women 's soccer team such as Abby Wambach and Hope Solo with salaries well above the league average of $ 25 @,@ 000 per year . Borislow was criticized for discriminatory treatment of lesser @-@ known players . Cat Whitehill , a former player and sports broadcaster said , " There are so few superstars that the majority of players can be easily intimidated " She added that the stars " never deliberately meant for the other players on the roster to be treated badly . But it does appear that they didn 't consider what standing up to Borislow would mean for the rest of the team . " 
 On 8 July 2011 , the non @-@ National Team members of magicJack voted to file a grievance through their Player 's Union against Borislow . The grievance alleged that Borislow had violated the Standard Player Contract Provision , the FIFA Code of Ethics , WPS Media Policy and U.S. Soccer Federation Coaching Requirements . The suit alleged Borislow 's " practice of bullying and threatening players , and his creation of a hostile , oppressive , and intimidating work environment which adversely affects players ’ ability ( to ) perform " . 
 The only individual player to speak out publicly about Borislow was Ella Masar . Masar told of a team meeting in which Borislow demanded that the grievance be dropped or he would terminate the players and the magicJack season . 
 Borislow also had problems with WPS staff and owners of other teams . In response to ongoing conflicts with Borislow , in June 2011 WPS moved to terminate his franchise at the end of the season for breach of contractual obligations . Borislow subsequently filed an injunction that would force the league into arbitration rather than settling the matter with the league ’ s Board of Governors . On October 25 , 2011 , the WPS voted to terminate the franchise , accusing Borislow of violations ranging from " unprofessional and disparaging treatment of his players to failure to pay his bills . " WPS also stated , " Mr. Borislow 's actions have been calculated to tarnish the reputation of the league and damage the league 's business relationships . " The team was disbanded on October 28 , 2011 . The ongoing legal battle with the WPS led to the cancelling of the 2012 season for " pending legal issues " on January 1 , 2012 and the magicJack soccer franchise ceased to exist . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 D & K Charitable Foundation was established by Borislow in 1997 with a $ 21 million stock donation . In the first two years , he tried to use the charity to buy and preserve a tract of land in New Hope , Pennsylvania . This venture failed in 1998 when the property owner declined Borislow 's offer . Following this , D & K made donations to the Clearwater Endoscopy Center and the Center for Digestive Healthcare in Clearwater , Florida until 2001 . Since then , it has issued varied grants to causes Borislow supported , such as $ 2 @.@ 75 million to two yeshivas and $ 173 @,@ 450 to a West Palm Beach , Florida private school . Tax records indicate that Borislow and George Farley , the chief financial officer of the non @-@ profit , split approximately $ 2 @.@ 1 million in profits from 2001 @-@ 2005 , while $ 1 @.@ 6 million went to charitable causes . Borislow drew criticism in 2007 when he paid himself $ 1 @.@ 7 million through the charity . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Borislow lived with his wife , Michele , and two children , Danny and Kylie , in Palm Beach County , Florida . The <unk> own three dogs , Magic , Jack , and Teddy . He also maintained a home in Brigantine , New Jersey . 
 In his free time , he enjoyed playing soccer , watching sports , and deep sea fishing . Borislow 's yacht , dubbed The Triple Crown , has three bedrooms , nine flat screen televisions , and golden fixtures . 
 On May 25 , 2014 , he won $ 6 @,@ 678 @,@ 939 @.@ 12 with the only ticket to have the winners of the final six races on Gulfstream 's card . The winner of the biggest payoff in American racing history invested $ 7 @,@ 603 @.@ 20 on the bet , which has a 20 @-@ cent base wager . He covered the full fields in all but the sixth race , in which he had only the Nos. 1 and 4 . Borislow made 2 other similar bets on the race , total investment was $ 22 @,@ 809 @.@ 60 . 
 Borislow died from a heart attack ( myocardial infarction ) in Jupiter , Florida on July 21 , 2014 , reportedly after playing in an adult league soccer match . On July 25 , 2014 , more than 500 mourners attended a memorial service at the Kravis Center in West Palm Beach . 
 = Sarus crane = 
 The sarus crane ( Grus antigone ) is a large non @-@ migratory crane found in parts of the Indian Subcontinent , Southeast Asia and Australia . The tallest of the flying birds , standing at a height of up to 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 ft 11 in ) , they are conspicuous and iconic species of open wetlands . The sarus crane is easily distinguished from other cranes in the region by the overall grey colour and the contrasting red head and upper neck . They forage on marshes and shallow wetlands for roots , tubers , insects , crustaceans and small vertebrate prey . Like other cranes , they form long @-@ lasting pair @-@ bonds and maintain territories within which they perform territorial and courtship displays that include loud trumpeting , leaps and dance @-@ like movements . In India they are considered symbols of marital fidelity , believed to mate for life and pine the loss of their mates even to the point of starving to death . The main breeding season is during the rainy season , when the pair builds an enormous nest " island " , a circular platform of reeds and grasses nearly two metres in diameter and high enough to stay above the shallow water surrounding it . Sarus crane numbers have declined greatly in the last century and it has been estimated that the current population is a tenth or less ( perhaps 2 @.@ 5 % ) of the numbers that existed in the 1850s . The stronghold of the species is in India , where it is traditionally revered and lives in agricultural lands in close proximity to humans . Elsewhere , the species has been extirpated in many parts of its former range . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult sarus crane is very large with grey wings and body ; a bare red head and part of the upper neck ; a greyish crown ; and a long greenish @-@ grey pointed bill . In flight , the long neck is held straight , unlike that of an heron , which folds it back , and the black wing tips can be seen ; the crane 's long pink legs trail behind them . This bird has a grey ear covert patch , an orange @-@ red iris and a greenish @-@ grey bill . Juveniles have a yellowish base to the bill and the brown @-@ grey head is fully feathered . 
 The bare red skin of the adult 's head and neck is brighter during the breeding season . This skin is rough and covered by papillae , and a narrow area around and behind the head is covered by black bristly feathers . The sexes do not differ in plumage although males are on average larger than females ; male sarus of the Indian population can attain a maximum height of about 180 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) making them the world 's tallest extant flying bird . The weight of nominate race individuals is 6 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 8 kg ( 15 – 17 lb ) , while five adult sharpii averaged 8 @.@ 4 kg ( 19 lb ) . Across the distribution range , the weight can vary from 5 to 12 kg ( 11 to 26 lb ) , height typically from 115 to 167 cm ( 45 @.@ 5 to 65 @.@ 5 in ) and the wingspan from 220 to 250 cm ( 86 @.@ 5 to 98 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 While the northern populations are amongst the heaviest cranes , alongside the red @-@ crowned and wattled cranes , and the largest in their range , birds from Australia tend to be smaller . In Australia , the sarus can easily be mistaken for the more widespread brolga . The brolga has the red colouring confined to the head and not extending into the neck . Body mass in Australian sarus cranes was found to average 6 @.@ 68 kg ( 14 @.@ 7 lb ) in males and 5 @.@ 25 kg ( 11 @.@ 6 lb ) in females , with a range for both sexes of 5 to 6 @.@ 9 kg ( 11 to 15 lb ) . Thus , Australian sarus average about 25 % lighter than the northern counterparts and are marginally lighter on average than brolgas . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The species has historically been widely distributed on the lowlands of India along the Gangetic plains , extending south to the Godavari River , west to coastal Gujarat , the <unk> District of Pakistan , and east to West Bengal and Assam . The species no longer breeds in Punjab , though it winters regularly . Sarus cranes are rare and occur in very low numbers in West Bengal and Assam , and are no longer found in the state of Bihar . In Nepal , its distribution is restricted to the western lowland plains , with most of the population occurring in <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> districts . 
 There are two distinct populations of sarus cranes in South @-@ east Asia : the northern population in China and Burma , and the southern population in Cambodia and Vietnam . The sarus used to extend to Thailand and further east into the Philippines , but may now be extinct in both these countries . In 2011 , 24 captive bred cranes raised from five original founders were reintroduced into Thailand . In Australia they are found only in the northern parts , and are partly migratory in some areas . The global range has shrunk and the largest occupied area is now in India . With marshlands largely destroyed , these cranes are increasingly dependent on wet paddy fields in India . Although now found mainly at a low elevation on the plains , there are some historical records from highland marshes further north in <unk> Sar and <unk> in Kashmir . The sarus crane breeds in some high elevation regions such as near the Pong Dam in Himachal Pradesh , where populations may be growing in response to increasing rice cultivation along the reservoir . In rice @-@ dominated districts of Uttar Pradesh , sarus crane abundance ( estimated as occupancy ) was highest in the western districts , intermediate in the central districts , and minimal in the eastern districts . Sarus crane abundance was positively associated with percentage of wetlands on the landscape , and negatively with the percentage of area under rice cultivation . 
 Two isolated populations exists in Australia , one from the western Kimberley region east to Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory and another population from <unk> eastwards and as far south as Townsville . Sarus cranes are not found on the Cape York Peninsula north of Weipa . They are commonly seen in Kakadu National Park , where the species is often hard to find among the more numerous brolga , and on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland . 
 Sarus cranes preferentially use wetlands or uncultivated patches amid flooded rice paddies ( locally called <unk> @-@ <unk> ) for nesting in India . Breeding pairs are territorial and prefer to forage in natural wetlands , though wet crops like rice and wheat are also frequented . In south @-@ western Uttar Pradesh , sarus crane numbers increased with wetland size , though they were found in wetlands of all sizes despite extensive use of wetlands by humans . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 This species was described by Linnaeus in 1758 and placed in the genus Ardea that included the larger herons . Edward Blyth published a monograph on the cranes in 1881 in which he considered the " sarus crane " of India to be made up of two species , Grus collaris and Grus antigone . Most modern authors recognise one species with three disjunct populations that have been treated as subspecies , although the status of one extinct population from the Philippines is uncertain . The nominate subspecies from India is the largest , and in the east from Myanmar is replaced by race sharpii that extends into the Southeast Asian islands . The nominate form from the Indian subcontinent is well marked and differentiated by having a white collar below the bare head and upper neck , and white tertiary remiges . Some authors consider antigone and sharpii as representatives of a formerly continuous population that varied clinally . The race in Australia , initially placed in sharpii ( sometimes spelt <unk> but amended to conform to the rules of Latin grammar ) has been separated and named as the race <unk> ( sometimes spelt <unk> or even gilli ) . The Australian race was designated only in 1988 , with the species itself first noticed in Australia in 1969 and regarded as a recent immigrant . Native Australians , however , differentiated the sarus and the brolga and called the sarus " the crane that dips its head in blood " . The Australian race has a distinctively darker plumage and a larger grey patch of ear coverts . This population shows the most recent divergence from the ancestral form with an estimated 3000 generations of breeding within Australia . An additional subspecies <unk> has been suggested for the population once found , but now extinct , in the Philippines . No distinctive character is known and it may be synonymous with either <unk> or sharpii . 
 Analysis of mitochondrial DNA , from a limited number of specimens , suggested that there was gene flow within the continental Asian populations until the 20th century reductions in range , and that Australia was colonized only in the Late Pleistocene , some <unk> years ago . This has been corroborated by nDNA microsatellite analyses with four times the sample size . This study further suggests that the Australian population is quite inbred . As there exists the possibility of ( limited ) hybridization with the genetically distinct brolga , the Australian sarus crane can be expected to be an incipient species . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The common name of sarus is from the Hindi name ( " <unk> " ) for the species . The Hindi word is derived from the Sanskrit word <unk> for the " lake bird " , ( sometimes corrupted to <unk> ) . While Indians held the species in veneration , British soldiers in colonial India hunted the bird , calling it the serious or even <unk> . The specific name of antigone — after the daughter of Oedipus , who hanged herself — may relate to the bare skin of the head and neck . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Unlike many other cranes that make long migrations , sarus cranes are largely non @-@ migratory ; they may however make short @-@ distance movements in response to rain or dry @-@ weather conditions . The only migratory population is in South @-@ east Asia . Breeding pairs maintain territories that are defended from other cranes using a large repertoire of calls and displays . In Uttar Pradesh , less than a tenth of the breeding pairs maintain territories at wetlands and most pairs are scattered well away from the major wetlands . Non @-@ breeding birds occur as flocks of various sizes that vary from 1 – 430 birds . In semi @-@ arid areas , breeding pairs and successfully fledged juveniles depart from territories in the dry season and join non @-@ breeding flocks . In areas with perennial water supply , like in the western plains of Uttar Pradesh , breeding pairs maintain perennial territories . The largest known flocks are from the 29 km2 Keoladeo National Park – as many as 430 birds , and from wetlands in Etawah and <unk> districts in Uttar Pradesh , ranging from 245 – 412 birds . Flocks of over 100 birds are also regularly reported from Gujarat and Australia . During the breeding season , breeding pairs displace non @-@ breeding birds from some wetland sites , and local populations can appear to decline . Sarus crane populations in Keoladeo National Park have been noted to reduce from over 400 birds in summer to just 20 birds during the monsoon . In areas with perennial wetlands in the landscape such as western Uttar Pradesh , numbers of nonbreeding sarus cranes in flocks can be relatively stable throughout the year . In Etawah @-@ <unk> districts , nonbreeding sarus cranes form up to 65 % of the regional population . 
 They roost in shallow water , where they may be safe from some ground predators . Adult birds do not moult their feathers annually and instead feathers are replaced once every two or three years . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Sarus cranes forage in shallow water ( usually with less than 30 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) depth of water ) or in fields , frequently probing in mud with their long bills . They are omnivorous , eating insects ( especially grasshoppers ) , aquatic plants , fish ( perhaps only in captivity ) , frogs , crustaceans and seeds . Occasionally tackling larger vertebrate prey such as water snakes ( <unk> <unk> ) , sarus cranes may in rare cases feed on the eggs of birds and turtles . Plant matter eaten includes tubers , corms of aquatic plants , grass shoots as well as seeds and grains from cultivated crops such as groundnuts and cereal crops such as rice . 
 = = = Courtship and breeding = = = 
 Sarus cranes have loud trumpeting calls . These calls are , as in other cranes , produced by the elongated trachea that form coils within the sternal region . Pairs may indulge in spectacular displays of calling in unison and posturing . These include " dancing " movements that are performed both during and outside the breeding season and involve a short series of jumping and bowing movements made as one of the pair circles around the other . Dancing may also be a displacement activity when the nest or young are threatened . The cranes breed mainly during the monsoons in India ( from July to October although there may be a second brood ) , and there are records of breeding in all the months . They build large nests , platforms made of reeds and vegetation in wet marshes or paddy fields . The nest is constructed within shallow water by piling up rushes , straw , grasses with their roots and mud so that the platform rises above the level of the water to form a little island . The nest is <unk> and conspicuous , being visible from afar . 
 The nests can be more than two metres ( six feet ) in diameter and nearly a metre ( three feet ) high . Pairs shows high fidelity to the nest site , often refurbishing and reusing nests for as many as five breeding seasons . The clutch is one or two eggs ( rarely three or four ) which are incubated by both sexes for about 31 days ( range 26 – 35 days ) . Eggs are chalky white and weigh about 240 grams . When disturbed from the nest , parents may sometimes attempt to conceal the eggs by attempting to cover them with material from the edge of the nest . The eggshells are removed by the parents after the chicks hatch either by carrying away the fragments or by swallowing them . Approximately 30 % of all breeding pairs succeed in raising chicks in any year , and most of the successful pairs raise one or two chicks each , with brood sizes of three being rare . The chicks are fed by the parents for the first few days , but are able to feed independently after that and follow their parents for food . When alarmed , the parent cranes use a low korr @-@ rr call that signals chicks to freeze and lie still . Young birds stay with their parents until the subsequent breeding season . In captivity , birds breed only after their fifth year . The sarus is widely believed to pair for life , however cases of " divorce " and mate replacement have been recorded . 
 = = = Mortality factors = = = 
 Eggs are often destroyed at the nest by jungle ( Corvus <unk> ) and house crows ( C. splendens ) . In Australia , predators of young birds include the dingo ( Canis dingo ) and fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) while brahminy kites ( <unk> <unk> ) have been known to take eggs . Removal of eggs by farmers ( to reduce crop damage ) or children ( in play ) , or by migrant labourers for food or opportunistic egg collection during trips to collect forest resources are prominent causes of egg mortality . Between 31 and 100 % of nests with eggs can fail to hatch eggs for these reasons . Chicks are also prone to predation ( estimated at about 8 % ) and collection at the nest , but more than 30 % die of unknown reasons . Breeding success ( percentage of eggs hatching and surviving to fledging stage ) has been estimated at about 20 % in Gujarat and 51 – 58 % in south @-@ western Uttar Pradesh . In areas where farmers are tolerant , nests in flooded rice fields and those in wetlands have similar rates of survival . Pairs that nest later in the season have a lower chance of raising chicks successfully , but this improves when territories have more wetlands . Nest success for 96 sarus nests that were protected by locals during 2009 – 2011 via a payment @-@ for @-@ conservation program was 87 % . More pairs are able to raise chicks in years with higher total rainfall , and when territory quality was undisturbed due to increased farming or development . Permanent removal of pairs from the population due to developmental activities caused reduced population viability , and was a far more important factor relative to breeding success due to changes in total annual rainfall . 
 Little is known about the diseases and parasites of the sarus crane , and their effects on wild bird populations . A study conducted at the Rome zoo noted that these birds were resistant to anthrax . Endoparasites that have been described include a trematode , <unk> <unk> from the liver of a captive crane at the London zoo and a <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) from an Australian bird . Like most birds , they have bird lice and the species recorded include <unk> <unk> and <unk> indicum . 
 In captivity , sarus cranes have been known to live for as long as 42 years . Premature adult mortality is often the result of human actions . Accidental poisoning by <unk> , chlorpyrifos and dieldrin @-@ treated seeds used in agricultural areas has been noted . Adults have been known to fly into power lines and die of electrocution , this is responsible for killing about 1 % of the local population each year . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 There were about an estimated 15 – 20 @,@ 000 mature sarus cranes left in the wild in 2009 . The Indian population is less than 10 @,@ 000 , but of the three subspecies , is the healthiest in terms of numbers . They are considered sacred and the birds are traditionally left unharmed , and in many areas they are unafraid of humans . They used to be found on occasion in Pakistan , but have not been seen there since the late 1980s . The population in India has however declined . Estimates of the global population suggest that the population in 2000 was at best about 10 % and at the worst just 2 @.@ 5 % of the numbers that existed in 1850 . Many farmers in India believe that these cranes damage standing crops , particularly rice , although studies show that direct feeding on rice grains resulted in losses amounting to less than one percent and trampling could account for grain loss of about 0 @.@ 4 – 15 kilograms ( 0 @.@ 88 – 33 @.@ 07 lb ) . The attitude of farmers tends to be positive in spite of these damages , and this has helped in conserving the species within agricultural areas . The role of rice paddies may be particularly important for the birds ' conservation , since natural wetlands are increasingly threatened by human activity . The conversion of wetlands to farmland , and farmland to more urban uses are major causes for habitat loss and long @-@ term population decline . Compensating farmers for crop losses has been suggested as a measure that may help . The Australian population is greater than 5 @,@ 000 birds and may be increasing , however , the Southeast Asian subspecies has been decimated by war and habitat change ( such as intensive agriculture and draining of wetlands ) and by the mid @-@ 20th century had disappeared from large parts of its range which once stretched up to southern China ; some 1500 – 2000 birds are left in several fragmented subpopulations . Payment to locals to guard nests and help increase breeding success has been attempted in northern Cambodia . Nest success of protected nests was significantly higher than that of unprotected nests , and positive population @-@ level impacts were apparent . However , the program also caused local jealousies leading to deliberate disturbance of nests , and did nothing to alleviate larger @-@ scale and more permanent threats due to habitat losses reading to the conclusion that such payment @-@ for @-@ conservation programs are at best a complement and not a substitute to more permanent interventions that include habitat preservation and local management of resources . The little @-@ known Philippine population became extinct in the late 1960s . 
 The sarus crane is classified as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List . Threats include habitat destruction and / or degradation , hunting and collecting , as well as environmental pollution and possibly diseases or competing species . The effects of inbreeding in the Australian population may need to be studied . 
 The species has been extirpated in Malaysia , the Philippines and Thailand . Reintroduction programs planned in Thailand have made use of birds from Cambodia . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The species is venerated in India and legend has it that the poet Valmiki cursed a hunter for killing a sarus crane and was then inspired to write the epic Ramayana . The species was a close contender to the Indian peafowl as the national bird of India . Among the Gondi people , the tribes classified as " five @-@ god worshippers " consider the sarus crane as sacred . The meat of the sarus was considered taboo in ancient Hindu scriptures . It is widely believed that the sarus pairs for life and that death of one partner leads to the other pining to death . They are a symbol of marital virtue and in parts of Gujarat , it is a custom to take a newly wed couple to see a pair of sarus cranes . Being ubiquitous in the flood plains of the Ganges , observations on their biology had been made by the Mughal emperor , Jahangir around AD 1607 . He noted , for instance , that the species always laid two eggs with an interval of 48 hours between them and that the incubation period was 34 days . 
 Although venerated and protected by Indians , these birds were hunted during the colonial period . It was noted that killing a bird would lead to its surviving partner trumpeting for many days and it was traditionally believed that the other would starve to death . Even sport hunting guides discouraged shooting these birds . According to 19th @-@ century British zoologist Thomas C. Jerdon , young birds were good to eat , while older ones were " worthless for the table " . Eggs of the sarus crane are however used in folk remedies in some parts of India . 
 Young birds were often captured and kept in menageries both in India and in Europe in former times . They were also successfully bred in captivity early in the 17th century by Emperor Jehangir and in Europe and the United States in the early 1930s . 
 ... The young birds are easily reared by hand , and become very tame and attached to the person who feeds them , following him like a dog . They are very amusing birds , going through the most grotesque dances and antics , and are well worth keeping in captivity . One which I kept , when bread and milk was given to him , would take the bread out of the milk , and wash it in his pan of water before eating it . This bird , which was taken out of the King 's palace at Lucknow , was very fierce towards strangers and dogs , especially if they were afraid of him . He was very noisy — the only bad habit he possessed 
 The Indian state of Uttar Pradesh uses the sarus crane as its official bird symbol . An Indian 14 @-@ seater propeller aircraft , the <unk> , is named after this crane . 
 = = Other sources = = 
 Matthiessen , Peter & Bateman , Robert ( 2001 ) . The Birds of Heaven : Travels with Cranes . North Point Press , New York . ISBN 0 @-@ 374 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Weitzman , Martin L. ( 1993 ) . " What to preserve ? An application of diversity theory to crane conservation " . The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 ( 1 ) : 157 – 183 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . ISSN 0033 @-@ <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Haigh , J. C. & Holt , P. E. ( 1976 ) . " The use of the anaesthetic " <unk> " in a Sarus crane " . Can Vet J. 17 ( 11 ) : 291 – 292 . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 Duan , W. & Fuerst , P. A. ( 2001 ) . " Isolation of a sex @-@ Linked DNA sequence in cranes " . J. <unk> . 92 ( 5 ) : 392 – 397 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / <unk> / 92 @.@ 5 @.@ 392 . PMID <unk> . 
 Menon , G. K. , R. V. Shah , and M. B. Jani . ( 1980 ) . " Observations on integumentary modifications and feathering on head and neck of the Sarus Crane , Grus antigone antigone " . Pavo 18 : 10 – 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Sundar , K. S. G. ( 2006 ) . " Flock size , density and habitat selection of four large waterbirds species in an agricultural landscape in Uttar Pradesh , India : implications for management " . Waterbirds 29 ( 3 ) : 365 – 374 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1675 / 1524 @-@ <unk> ( 2006 ) 29 [ 365 : <unk> ] <unk> ; 2 . 
 = United Nations Parliamentary Assembly = 
 A United Nations Parliamentary Assembly ( UNPA ) is a proposed addition to the United Nations System that would allow for participation of member nations ' legislators and , eventually , direct election of United Nations ( UN ) parliament members by citizens worldwide . The idea was raised at the founding of the League of Nations in the 1920s and again following the end of World War II in 1945 , but remained dormant throughout the Cold War . In the 1990s and 2000s , the rise of global trade and the power of world organizations that govern it led to calls for a parliamentary assembly to scrutinize their activity . The Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly was formed in 2007 to coordinate pro @-@ UNPA efforts , which as of July 2013 has received the support of over 800 Members of Parliament from over 100 countries worldwide and is supported by over 5 @,@ 000 people . The Commission on Global Security , Justice and Governance , chaired by former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and former Nigerian Foreign Minister Ibrahim <unk> , has called for the creation of a United Nations Parliamentary Network " to raise greater awareness and participation by strengthening the voices of legislators in global institutions . " The Commission proposes that this Network " would be similar in initial composition to the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and the Parliamentary Conference on the World Trade Organization " . 
 Supporters have set forth possible UNPA implementations , including promulgation of a new treaty ; creation of a UNPA as a subsidiary body of the UN General Assembly ; and evolution of a UNPA from the Inter @-@ Parliamentary Union or another non @-@ governmental organization . Several proposals for apportionment of votes have been raised to address disparities in UN members ' population and economic power . CEUNPA advocates initially giving the UNPA advisory powers and gradually increasing its authority over the UN system . Opponents cite issues such as funding , voter turnout , and undemocratic UN member nations as reasons for abandoning the project altogether . 
 = = History = = 
 Proposals for a parliamentary assembly in the global organization of nations date back to at least the 1920s , when League of Nations founders considered ( and rejected ) plans to include a people 's assembly as part of the League 's structure . League and UN founding documents include few mechanisms for direct participation by citizens or legislators , aside from Article 71 provision allowing ECOSOC to grant consultative status to certain organizations , and the Chapter XVIII and XIX requirements that ratification and amendments be approved by member states " in accordance with their respective constitutional processes " which typically involve legislative and / or public input . In 1945 , a people 's world assembly was proposed by British politician Ernest Bevin , who said in the House of Commons that " There should be a study of a house directly elected by the people of the world to whom the nations are accountable . " 
 On 16 October 1945 , before the UN Charter had even entered into force , retired U.S. Supreme Court Justice Owen J. Roberts and former New Hampshire Governor Robert P. Bass held a conference in Dublin , New Hampshire , which passed the Dublin Declaration . It stated that the UN Charter was inadequate to preserve peace and proposed the transformation of the U.N. General Assembly into a world legislature , opining , " Such a government should be based upon a constitution under which all peoples and nations will participate upon a basis of balanced representation which will take account of natural and industrial resources and other factors as well as population . It cannot be based on treaties ... in which the states ... act and vote as states " . It called for " limited but definite and adequate power for the prevention of war . " Grenville Clark and other participants in the Dublin conference went on to become active in the United World Federalists ( UWF ) and the global World Federalist Movement . UWF enjoyed some success in the postwar period , as 23 state legislatures passed bills supporting the organization ’ s goals , but McCarthyism prompted many prominent members to resign lest Senator Joseph McCarthy ruin their careers . In the United States , internationalism came to be associated with communism . 
 In the post @-@ Cold War era , several factors contributed to a more favorable environment for UNPA proposals . A Trilateral Commission report notes that the shift from a world led by the two rival <unk> and U.S.-led blocs meant a general diffusion of power . Growth of economic interdependence , proliferation of transnational actors , nationalism in weak states , spread of technology , and increasing numbers of issues ( such as global environmental problems and weapons of mass destruction containment ) that are both domestic and international generated stronger incentive to develop international cooperation than ever before . Democracy in general had spread ; in 2003 , Freedom House counted 121 electoral democracies , compared to 66 in 1987 and 30 in 1975 ( although by the mid @-@ 2000s , the trend appeared to have stagnated ) . The rapidly integrating European Union , a unique supranational body whose European Parliament was gradually growing in power , provided an example to the world of how a multi @-@ nation parliament can evolve and function . The World Trade Organization and similar organizations generated great concern as they seemed to be gaining more influence and control over trade disputes , yet were not accountable to the people ; U.S. President Bill Clinton argued , " We must insist that international trade organizations be open to public scrutiny instead of mysterious , secret things subject to wild criticism . " A " new diplomacy " seemed to be taking shape in which NGOs and governments cooperated to create new global institutions such as the International Criminal Court . U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy Chairman Harold C. <unk> of <unk> , Flaherty , Beliveau & <unk> noted : 
 In early 1993 , the Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on External Affairs and International Trade presented a report stating , " By way of building the public and political constituency for the United Nations , the Committee recommends that Canada support the development of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly . " The Campaign for a Democratic United Nations ( <unk> ) , the International Network for a United Nations Second Assembly ( <unk> ) , and the Global People 's Assembly Movement ( <unk> ) , began circulating UNPA proposals around 1995 , and other organizations , such as One World Trust , began publishing analyses of how to proceed in the current political situation . On 8 February 2005 , on the initiative of the Committee for a Democratic UN , 108 Swiss Parliamentarians signed an open letter to the Secretary @-@ General calling for the establishment of just such a body . On 14 May 2005 , the Congress of the Liberal International issued a resolution stating that " the Liberal International calls on the member states of the United Nations to enter into deliberations on the establishment of a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations . " On 9 June 2005 , the European Parliament issued a resolution that contained an item stating that Europarl " calls for the establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly ( UNPA ) within the UN System , which would increase the democratic profile and internal democratic process of the organisation and allow world civil society to be directly associated in the decision @-@ making process ; states that the Parliamentary Assembly should be vested with genuine rights of information , participation and control , and should be able to adopt recommendations directed at the UN General Assembly ; [ ... ] " In 2006 , Citizens for a United Nations People 's Assembly circulated a petition to UN Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan to " convene a High Level Panel to determine the steps required for the establishment of a Peoples ' Parliamentary Assembly within the United Nations Organization " 
 In April 2007 , international NGOs launched the International Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly , the principal current movement for the establishment of a UNPA . Its Secretariat is led by the Committee for a Democratic U.N. Over 150 civil society groups and more than 550 parliamentarians from all over the world are taking part in the Campaign . As of November 2008 , CEUNPA 's appeal was endorsed by around 2400 signatories from over 120 countries , among them hundreds of parliamentarians , civil society leaders , leading academics and distinguished individuals such as former UN Secretary @-@ General Boutros Boutros @-@ Ghali , the President of the Pan @-@ African Parliament , Gertrude <unk> , Academy Award winner Emma Thompson , SF @-@ author Sir Arthur C. Clarke and Edgar Mitchell , former NASA astronaut and sixth human being to walk on the moon . On 25 September 2007 , the statement by H.E. Mr. José <unk> , Prime Minister of Portugal , on behalf of the European Union , at the United Nations 62nd Session of the General Assembly , General Debate , stated , " We remain committed to the reform of its main bodies in order to enhance the Organization 's <unk> , transparency and effectiveness . " On 24 October 2007 , the Pan African Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution calling for the establishment of a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations , noting , " in contrast to regional international bodies such as the African Union , the European Union , the Council of Europe , or Mercosur , the United Nations and its specialized organizations is one of the last international fora lacking an integrated and institutionalized Parliamentary Assembly . " So far , four international conferences of CEUNPA have taken place . 
 One of the most influential and well @-@ known pro @-@ UN organizations , UNA @-@ USA has been on both sides of the issue . In 2003 , UNA @-@ USA 's executive director of policy studies , Jeffrey Laurenti , wrote an article , An Idea Whose Time Has Not Come , arguing that there were important unresolved issues of inclusivity , authority , and efficiency with the UNPA . UNA 's position seemed to reverse in November 2006 , when the 38th plenary session of the World Federation of United Nations Associations issued a resolution stating that it " Supports the establishment of a United Nations parliamentary Assembly as a consultative body within the United Nations system as a voice of the citizens ; Calls upon the governments of the United Nations member states , parliamentarians and civil society representatives to jointly examine possible steps and options to create a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly . " 
 According to Stefan <unk> , the post @-@ World War II years , particularly the 1980s and 1990s , saw tremendous growth in parliamentary assemblies , with more than 40 established since 1949 . About 42 % of the world 's parliamentary assemblies are formally affiliated with an intergovernmental organization ; 32 % are informally affiliated ; and 26 % are unaffiliated . The spread in parliamentary assemblies was spurred by acceptance of <unk> as a means of legitimizing decisions ; initiatives for intergovernmental cooperation reaching a point at which stronger parliamentary backing was needed ; and regional integration . However , many global organizations , such as the UN and WTO , still lack a parliamentary assembly and " have been heavily criticized for what is supposed to be an institutional deficit . " 
 On 9 February 2010 , a resolution of an international conference of sitting and former judges of the supreme courts of over 30 countries that took place in Lucknow , India , called for a revision of the United Nations Charter and for the establishment of a world parliament . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 There are five main options for creating a U.N. Parliamentary Assembly , according to various assessments . 
 Amending the UN Charter , possibly through a Charter Review Conference under Article 109 of the UN Charter , is a commonly cited possibility . This is difficult because it requires ratification by two @-@ thirds of UN members , including all five permanent members of the Security Council . There have been only five amendments to the UN Charter since 1945 , and none of them were done through the Article 109 process . Louis Sohn and Grenville Clark , in their 1958 book World Peace Through World Law , proposed establishing a UN Parliamentary Assembly through this method . 
 Another possibility is establishing the UNPA as a subsidiary body of the UN General Assembly . The General Assembly has authority to do this under Article 22 of the UN Charter . Erskine Childers and Sir Brian Urquhart endorsed this approach in their 1994 book , Renewing the United Nations System . The Committee for a Democratic UN also recommended the establishment of UNPA by Article 22 or by transformation of the Inter @-@ Parliamentary Union in its report , Developing International Democracy . In 2006 , the Council of Europe passed a resolution noting , " A decisive step towards the development of a UN parliamentary dimension could be the establishment of an experimental parliamentary committee with consultative functions for General Assembly committees . " 
 Yet another option is to create the UNPA as a nongovernmental organization of democratically elected legislators . This would have the advantage of not requiring the cooperation of ( sometimes dictatorial ) national governments or world parliamentary organizations with dictatorial members , so only democratic legislators , parliaments and countries would be represented . The World Constitution and Parliament Association and other NGOs have attempted to set up workable parliaments . Dieter Heinrich critiqued this approach by saying , " If it did succeed on any scale , it would divert resources from pressuring governments on thousands of specific issues , which citizens are good at , into the operation of a pan @-@ global institutional structure , which citizens ' groups are ill equipped to do ... And the resulting assembly would always be of doubtful legitimacy ( who does it really represent ? ) and of unlikely value as an evolutionary starting point for a real world parliament . " 
 A UNPA could be created through a stand @-@ alone treaty . This would have the advantage that as few as 20 or 30 economically and geographically diverse countries could establish a UNPA , and it could expand as more countries ratified the treaty . Strauss notes that this is the method by which most international bodies , such the World Health Organization , International Labour Organization , and International Criminal Court , were founded . The way to get started presumably would be to hold a conference of <unk> to draft the treaty ; then the ratification process would begin . 
 It might also be possible to use and / or transform the Inter @-@ Parliamentary Union ( IPU ) , which was granted observer status in 2002 . The IPU 's Second World Conference of Speakers of Parliament adopted a resolution stating , " We would greatly welcome more substantive interaction and coordination with the United Nations , and call upon the world body to resort more frequently to the political and technical expertise which the IPU together with its Member Parliaments can provide . " Moreover , a 2005 article by IPU Secretary @-@ General Anders B. Johnsson stated that , " It makes little practical or political sense to set up a separate parliamentary assembly alongside the existing governmental General Assembly . " Indeed , the Inter @-@ Parliamentary Union seems to favor a reformed IPU as a substitute for a UNPA , saying , " The Union had the necessary experience , and further bureaucracy should be avoided . " Many national parliaments , however , are currently not members of the IPU . 
 = = Powers = = 
 The CEUNPA proposes that the UNPA 's begin as a consultative body whose powers could be augmented as it evolved into a directly elected assembly : " Step by step , it should be provided with genuine rights of information , participation and control vis @-@ à @-@ vis the UN and the organizations of the UN system . " An article in the Asian @-@ Pacific Law & Policy Journal notes that precedents for this idea include the British Parliament , French Estates @-@ General , U.S. Congress , and Europarl , which are all systems in which , over time , power shifted to directly elected officials : " In the past , fledgling democracy has always had to compromise with the realities of power and evolve step @-@ by @-@ step , where possible . This is often accomplished in the form of a ' non @-@ democratic ' additional house in the parliamentary structure . Thus , in Britain , the necessity of compromise of the ' common people ' with the powers and interests of the armed and titled nobility necessitated a bicameral system incorporating the House of Lords , as well as the House of Commons . The French Estates @-@ General included similar power blocs as ' estates ' or functional separate houses , and the United States Senate reflected a necessary compromise of the interests of less populous states hesitant to subject themselves to ' democratic inundation ' by the more populous states . " 
 World federalists often point out that a democratic union of peoples , rather than governments , is suggested by the opening words of the Preamble to the United Nations Charter , " We the peoples ... " This sentiment was expressed by Theo van Boven , who said , " A more democratic United Nations as envisaged by the campaign for a UN Parliament will strengthen the legitimacy of We the peoples of the United Nations in whose name the UN Charter was proclaimed . " According to the Committee for a Democratic UN , " The UNPA concept is the a first step towards a democratic world parliament " . World federalists typically view an empowered democratic assembly as a means of preventing war by providing everyone a peaceful means of pursuing their political objectives . Walter Cronkite , for instance , said , " Within the next few years , we must change the basic structure of our global community from the present anarchic system of war and ever more destructive weaponry to a new system governed by a democratic U.N. federation . " 
 But there is some opposition to the idea of an empowered global parliament . A 2007 BBC poll of approximately 12 @,@ 000 respondents asked , " How likely would you be to support a Global Parliament , where votes are based on country population sizes , and the global parliament is able to make binding policies ? " Of those polled , 19 @.@ 1 % responded " Very unlikely – it is a bad idea " ; 14 @.@ 9 % responded " Quite unlikely – but it might work " ; 23 @.@ 1 % said " Quite likely – but with reservations " ; and 14 @.@ 4 % said " Very likely – it is a good idea " . The poll was broken out by country , and the U.S. and Australia showed the strongest opposition . Potential challenge to the UNPA are political organizations such as the U.S. Constitution Party , and politicians such as 2008 U.S. presidential candidate Ron Paul , which favor withdrawal from the United Nations and other multilateral organizations altogether due to sovereignty concerns . Canadian Action Party leader Connie <unk> also opposes the UNPA , saying , " It is very revealing to see the NDP and the Greens as part of and promoting this ... Further , the European assembly has proven to be a rubber stamping mechanism of bureaucratic decisions . This is not democracy . " In addition , a <unk> article warns , " With an unexpected backlash against civil society in the offing ( despite the good efforts of the UN General Assembly President , Jan Eliasson , to reverse the trend ) , citizen participation at the UN is diminishing quickly . It would be safe to assume that Member States as a whole are not in the mood to consider a Parliamentary Assembly at this time . " 
 Herbert W. Briggs points out that while a UNPA could be established as a UNGA subsidiary body without any changes to international law , granting it the power to pass binding legislation would require UN Charter amendment or a new treaty . The UNGA plays a role in admitting , suspending and expelling UN members , approving the budget , and electing members to other UN bodies , but its powers as set forth in Chapter IV of the UN Charter are mostly advisory in nature . These include the power to " discuss , " " make recommendations , " " consider , " " call the attention of the Security Council to situations , " " initiate studies , " " receive ... reports , " etc . , as well as " establish such subsidiary organs as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions . " The Charter contains no provision allowing the UNGA to delegate any powers it does not itself possess . And while Article 25 states , " The Members of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council , " there is no requirement that members abide by the recommendations of the UNGA . On the other hand , Article 13 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Charter tasks the UNGA with " encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification . " 
 According to Oscar <unk> , there is some question as to whether the traditional international lawmaking process of state @-@ by @-@ state treaty ratification is adequate today : " The traditional case @-@ by @-@ case process of customary law cannot meet the necessity for common action to deal with the numerous problems raised by technological developments , demographic and environmental impacts , changing attitudes as to social justice , or the many requirements of international business . While all of these matters can be dealt with by multilateral treaties , the treaty processes are often complicated and slow , whereas UN resolutions can be more readily attained . " The Law of the Sea is an example of an agreement that has taken decades to pass in the U.S. ( although the Cato Institute views the delay as a good thing . ) George Monbiot argues , " The absence of an international legislature undermines the authority of an international judiciary ( such as the proposed criminal court ) . Judges presiding over the war @-@ crimes tribunals at the Hague and in Arusha have been forced , in effect , to make up the law as they go along . " 
 Proposals to give the UNGA legislative power – including the " binding triad " idea which would have made UNGA resolutions binding if passed by countries constituting a supermajority of the world 's states , population , and economic production – have made little headway . According to Heinrich , once the UNPA is established , it will be easier to gather support for empowering it . The assembly 's own members can be expected to play a major role in pushing for its evolution by seeking a UN Charter amendment to make it a " principal organ " in parallel with the General Assembly . With their political know @-@ how , their access to the highest levels of their national governments , and their credibility with the world public and the media , the politicians in the UN Parliamentary Assembly can be expected to become a strong and persistent political force for organizing the assembly 's eventual transformation . 
 = = Legitimacy and accountability = = 
 One of the main purposes for the creation of a UNPA is enhancing UN accountability and legitimacy . The United Nations System spent more than $ 1 @.@ 8 billion of public money in 2005 and its own auditors have pointed out that it lacks adequate internal controls to protect against waste , fraud and mismanagement . By holding hearings , issuing reports , and passing resolutions , the UNPA could exercise oversight over other UN bodies . In a September 2007 press release , MEP Graham Watson expressed his hope that " in an era where the UN 's mandate has grown exponentially the UNPA would act as a watch @-@ dog on its activities , monitoring its decision @-@ making deadlines , its accountability and transparency " . London Mayor Ken Livingstone promised that , " a more democratic United Nations as envisaged by this campaign will strengthen the accountability and legitimacy of the UN . " The Pan African Parliament 's resolution mirrored this sentiment : " If democratization is a major means to legitimize and improve national governance , it is also the most reliable way to legitimize and improve international organization , making it more open and responsive by increasing participation . " 
 Canadian Senator Douglas Roche , O.C. , argues in The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly that even an indirectly elected UNPA consisting of delegates appointed by national parliaments could create additional checks and balances by providing for oversight by a parliamentary body that would be independent of member nations ' executive branches . It would open up the global policymaking process to a larger group of elected officials by shifting some power from the relatively small executive branches of countries to the larger legislative branches . According to Roche , globalization has tended to increase the power of the executive branch while marginalizing the legislative branch ; for instance , U.S. Presidents since George H. W. Bush have been given fast track authority to negotiate trade agreements , subject to a " yea or nay " scrutiny by the U.S. Congress on the negotiated deal . A Property and Environment Research Center report argues that changes in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development are another example of how international regulation removes checks and balances between the branches of government : " The OECD was created by a 1961 treaty , ratified by the U.S. Senate , to help achieve economic growth . In April 1998 , a ministerial meeting reinterpreted the treaty , adding social and environmental considerations to the economic ones . The United States executive branch agreed to the changes , but the Senate had no opportunity to debate this treaty , even though it was significantly different from the 1961 treaty . The executive branch had essentially negotiated a new deal without Senate approval . " World Federalist Canada Briefing Paper No. 30 , however , suggests that UNPA proposals may spark opposition from the executive branches that stand to lose power : " Experience has shown that civil servants and diplomats working in national foreign ministries are less likely to support or see the need for a UNPA . They view the UN as a forum for discussion among sovereign states ; whatever action the UN takes is a result of bargaining and compromise among member states " . 
 A significant practical obstacle to a completely democratically elected and representative UNPA is that , in contrast to the situation in which the European Parliament functions , a significant number of UN members , including populous countries such as China are not electoral democracies . In the past , bodies such as the United Nations Commission on Human Rights were criticized for being dominated by abusive regimes . If UNPA representatives were to be drawn from member nations ' parliaments , it could create legitimacy concerns since some national legislatures are regarded as a rubber stamp for the rulers ' decrees . Some global parliament proponents , such as Prof. Lucio Levi , propose starting a federation limited to democracies : " Though the democratization of states all over the world hasn ’ t been completed , this does not preclude starting the democratization of the UN . Six Western European countries founded the European Community , starting its democratization without waiting for the democratization of the institutions of all the European states . " UNA @-@ USA 's Jeff Laurenti notes the problems associated with excluding undemocratic countries from membership : " It is one thing to deny membership to a few small " rogue " dictatorships . It is quite another to exclude China , the vast majority of Arab countries , and two @-@ thirds of Africa , and imagine that the resulting body can have a formal consultative or oversight role with United Nations agencies , be part of UN @-@ sponsored negotiations on multilateral conventions ( the real work of international legislating ) , or pass on the resolutions of UN political bodies . " 
 UNPA proponents frequently counter by pointing out that most of the world 's countries are democratic . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Heinrich argues , " It is essential that the salary and travel costs of UN parliamentarians should be paid by the institution of the UN Parliamentary Assembly from its own budget ( which would be part of the UN budget ) , and not by the national governments individually . This is both to assure the independence of the UNPA politicians in their service to the UN and to assure equality of participation . " Article 17 of the UN Charter stipulates , " The expenses of the Organization shall be borne by the Members as apportioned by the General Assembly . " Thus , unless funded by private donors ( as the land for UN headquarters was in 1946 ) , presumably the UNPA would be funded like the rest of the UN system , with larger economies such as the U.S. paying larger shares of the contributions . This disparity might be offset by weighting members ' votes according to their gross national product or their contributions to the UN system . A Vancouver Sun article notes , " Another point of opposition would involve the notion of adding bureaucracy and complexity to the UN . Estimated cost of the new outfit runs $ 140 million to $ 280 million a year . " 
 A 1993 Parliamentarians for Global Action survey showed that a strong majority of parliamentary respondents thought that the public would support the idea of a UN Parliamentary Assembly , but they were less sure the public would be prepared to finance it . The analysis pointed out , " The possibility of a greater financial burden to support an enlarged UN is unlikely to evoke support unless it can be demonstrated that the return on investment is significant . Citizens are often known to express lofty globalist sentiments when questioned on general principles , and to surrender them when costs or trade offs are concerned . " A 1995 United Nations University report claimed , " it is difficult to see how the Parliamentary Assembly would be able to pay for the salaries and travel of what could be over 1 @,@ 000 representatives ; this proposal could increase the duplication and waste that already exist within multilateral bodies . " 
 CEUNPA 's response to this objection is that " it is true that a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations would be another player in the diplomatic scenery which governments and their executives in international organizations would have to take into account to a certain degree . On the other hand , being composed of elected parliamentarians , the assembly would be closer to the citizens and as such it would lend more credibility and legitimacy to international decisions in which it is involved . In this way , the parliamentary assembly actually would contribute to an increased efficiency of international action . " 
 = = Direct election vs. appointment by national parliaments = = 
 A UNPA might begin as an inter @-@ parliamentary institution – an assembly of parliamentarians from their respective countries ' legislatures – and then change to a directly elected body . This would be similar to the evolution of the European Parliament . Beginning with the European Common Assembly 's founding in 1952 , MEPs were appointed by each of the Member States ' national parliaments ; in 1979 , direct election was instituted . Sen. Douglas Roche , O.C. , in The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly , analyzes the tradeoffs between the two choices . A UNPA based on existing parliamentarians may be easier to establish , because it avoids several hurdles , such as decisions on electoral cycles , a universally acceptable electoral body , legitimacy of elections , and so on : " A body comprising national parliamentarians has the ' stamp of approval ' built @-@ in . National parliamentarians can claim electoral legitimacy in their own right . Admittedly , the credibility of domestic franchised can be called into question , but the trend toward democracy has been strengthening rapidly . " 
 National parliamentarians also generally have staff and money , which could ease the funding issues associated with forming a new world parliamentary assembly . Delegates to a directly elected UNPA , on the other hand , would have more time to devote to the global assembly , since its members would not be occupied with duties relating to their membership in their national legislature . Heinrich points out strategic advantages of an indirectly elected UNPA : " Another advantage to basing representation in a UN Parliamentary Assembly on national parliaments is that it may engage parliamentarians as allies in the cause of getting the assembly established , and , later , helping to build the political will for its evolution . The experience of being a UN parliamentarian will galvanize many of these politicians into going home as advocates for the UN , including the need for strengthening and democratizing the UN Parliamentary Assembly itself . " 
 Heinrich also notes the possibility that national parliaments could appoint citizen representatives to the UNPA , similarly to how the U.S. Electoral College officially selects the President . This would be a stopgap solution until direct election became possible . Yet it would still ensure that citizens would be electing citizens ( albeit indirectly ) , rather than the executive appointing officials , to the UNPA . 
 = = Apportionment of votes = = 
 A global parliamentary assembly could be structured to give populous states greater influence . The one state , one vote rule of the UN General Assembly gives small states a disproportionate amount of influence over the UN system . In Entitlement quotients as a vehicle for United Nations reform , University of Minnesota professor emeritus Joseph E. Schwartzberg notes , " The sixty @-@ four least populous members – enough to block a two @-@ thirds majority vote – comprise less than one percent of the world 's total population , and in theory , the 127 least populous members , accounting for barely eight percent of humanity , are enough to provide the two @-@ thirds majority needed to pass a substantive resolution . " He continues this point in his essay , Overcoming Practical Difficulties in Creating a World Parliamentary Assembly : 
 There are several alternate proposals for apportionment of votes among member nations : 
 Schwartzberg 's weighted voting formula takes into account population ( the democratic / demographic principle ) , contribution to the UN budget ( the economic principle ) , and share of the total membership . The idea of weighting countries ' votes according to their financial contribution to the organization is not unprecedented , as the World Bank , International Monetary Fund and other Bretton Woods institutions use this method . 
 The Provisional People 's Assembly 's methodology gives each nation Population Seats based on a calculation that combines the Penrose method , which takes the square root of the millions of inhabitants of each country , Economic Seats equal to its portion of the world 's total gross domestic product , and classification as Free , Partially Free , or <unk> by Freedom House . 
 Under one person , one vote , each country 's number of votes is directly proportional to its population . This would be similar to how U.S. states are represented in the United States House of Representatives . In The Future of Sovereignty - Rethinking a Key Concept of International Relations , <unk> et al. sum up the advantages and disadvantages of this system : " In a strict meaning of democracy based on individuals as subjects , every person 's vote would have to have exactly the same weight . None of the known proposals , however , supports such a strict interpretation , because the inequality among the states ' voting powers would be extreme with only four countries - China , India , the United States and the former USSR - disposing of an absolute majority . " A way to resolve the disparity in population between countries would be to apportion representation to regions instead of nations . This would , for example , place Suriname and Brazil , the least and most populated South American countries , in a single South American voting bloc of approximately 400 million people , preserving the one person , one vote system while eliminating extreme disparities in population . This approach , however , is dependent upon elected officials being entrusted to represent said regions and not just their home countries , and could potentially leave some less populated countries with no representatives from their country if they are either outvoted by people in more populated countries in their assigned region or if the people in less populated countries vote in large numbers for candidates or political parties from other countries . 
 = = Election standards = = 
 A directly elected UNPA might have common election standards if it follows the example of European Parliament ( EP ) . The European Parliament has adopted certain minimum requirements , such as proportional representation , that each member country must abide by to be represented . Schwartzberg proposes a professional election commission " to ensure that assembly elections are carried out , to the maximum extent , on a level playing field " . Under Schwartzberg 's proposal , the commission would have several powers , including the authority to establish rules of fairness , determine in advance whether fairness criteria were being met , and foreclose polling where those criteria were not met . He proposes criteria that an election must meet to be considered valid , such as minimum participation rates that initially could be set as low as 20 % , and gradually increased . 
 = Dave Stamper = 
 Dave Stamper ( November 10 , 1883 – September 18 , 1963 ) was an American songwriter of the Tin Pan Alley and vaudeville eras , a contributor to twenty @-@ one editions of the Ziegfeld Follies , writer for the Fox Film Corporation , and composer of more than one thousand songs , in spite of never learning to read or write traditional music notation . He may have written " Shine On Harvest Moon " , a claim supported by vaudeville performer and writer Eddie Cantor . He was also a charter member of the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers or ASCAP . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Stamper was born in New York City on November 10 , 1883 , and took up piano at age ten . At seventeen , he left school and became a pianist at a Coney Island dance hall for two years before becoming a " song @-@ plugger " for publisher F. A. Mills . Stamper was twenty when he met singer Nora Bayes and her husband Jack Norworth becoming her accompanist and touring widely for the next four years . After Stamper left Bayes ' employment , he resumed working as a song @-@ plugger and vaudeville pianist . In 1910 he met Gene Buck , an artist who painted cover images for sheet music . The two started collaborating , with Buck providing lyrics for Stamper 's melodies . Their first published songs were In the Cool of the Evening , Daddy Has a Sweetheart ( and Mother Is Her Name ) and Some Boy . 
 Stamper 's first marriage to Gertrude Springer ended in divorce after the birth of two children , Maurice and Regina Stamper . On 16 July 1926 he married " vaudeville and revue comedienne " Edna <unk> who had performed in the Follies of 1923 , 1924 and 1925 . The marriage ended within two years . On 16 August . 1928 he married Agnes White , a Follies performer who was in Stamper and Buck 's musical Take The Air ( 1927 ) . The couple were married for 40 years and produced one daughter , Susan Stamper , a dancer . One of their grandchildren is singer / songwriter Happy Rhodes . 
 Stamper did not learn to read or write traditional musical notation , creating his own numerical notation . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = The Ziegfeld years = = = 
 In 1912 Stamper began writing songs for the Ziegfeld Follies of 1913 , contributing Just You and I and The Moon , Without You and Everybody Sometime Must Love Somebody . He is credited as " additional music " for the Follies of 1914 and 1915 , but he wrote the majority of the music for the Follies of 1916 @.@ and was on an equal billing with Louis A. Hirsch , Jerome Kern , and Irving Berlin . The music of the Follies of 1917 was written by Stamper and Raymond Hubbell and he was described as " an old hand " for his work with Louis A. Hirsch by the Follies of 1918 . In addition to his 1918 Follies work , he wrote all the music for Ziegfeld Midnight Frolic with Gene Buck , a series that also had editions in 1919 , 1920 and 1921 . 
 The Follies of 1919 found Stamper branching out into writing lyrics as well as writing comic sketches . 1919 was a very busy year , with Stamper writing songs for the Follies as well as the Midnight Frolic and the Ziegfeld Nine O 'Clock Review both of which appeared in a theater on the roof of the New Amsterdam theater . 
 Stamper continued as principal songwriter for the Follies of 1920 through 1925 , with an additional summer edition in 1923 . He returned for the Follies of 1931 , the last edition produced by Florenz Ziegfeld himself . 
 = = = Other musicals = = = 
 While his work with Ziegfeld encompassed the majority of his working life , Stamper and Gene Buck worked for other producers as well . He had songs in two plays - When Claudia Smiles ( 1914 ) and Broadway and Buttermilk ( 1916 ) prior to traveling to London with Buck to write songs for Zig Zag ! which ran for 648 performances at the London Hippodrome . Stamper returned to London in 1918 to write songs for another review Box O ' Tricks with Frederick Chapelle , which ran for 625 performances . During his first trip to London , Buck befriended a man who turned out to be a German spy . Two results of this event were fellow passenger Eddie Rickenbacker deciding to enlist to fly , and Dave Stamper having to prove to British police and a Judge that his pages covered with numbers were sheet music rather than a code . 
 Stamper was fully occupied with work for Ziegfeld until 1927 , when Gene Buck hired Stamper to write the music for Take The Air ( 1927 ) . He also worked for the Schubert organization on Lovely Lady ( 1927 ) before returning to Ziegfeld for the 1931 Follies . 
 He finished out his work on Broadway with Provincetown Follies ( 1935 ) which only ran for 63 performances and Orchids Preferred ( 1937 ) which closed in a week . 
 = = = Hollywood = = = 
 In 1928 , Stamper was signed by Fox Film Corporation as a staff composer , remaining there until 1930 . He contributed Dance Away the Night and Peasant Love Song to the film Married in Hollywood ( 1929 ) often called the first filmed operetta . The film Words and Music ( 1929 ) featured The Hunting Song , Take a Little Tip and Too Wonderful for Words all written with lyricist Harlan Thompson . In 1930 , he contributed Only One and The Gay Heart written with Clare Kummer and Once In A While written with Clare Kummer and Cecil Arnold to the " singing cowboy " movie One Mad <unk> and the Bela Lugosi film Such Men Are Dangerous . 
 = = = Shine On , Harvest Moon = = = 
 Stamper claimed to have written " Shine On , Harvest Moon " , while the writers of record were his former employers Nora Bayes and Jack Norworth . Stamper 's claim was supported by vaudeville comic Eddie Cantor in his 1934 book Ziegfeld , The Great <unk> and David Ewen 's All the Years of American Popular Music . 
 Stamper was working as a pianist rather than as a songwriter at the time the song appeared but never learned how to read or write using traditional music notation thus he would have not been able submit the song for copyright , or produce sheet music to prove his claim . Bayes and Norworth compelled Stamper at one point to wear stage make @-@ up to appear Japanese , apparently to keep him from being interviewed by reporters . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Stamper 's caricature was on the wall at Sardi 's restaurant . 
 Stamper and Buck 's song The Shakespearian Rag appears in T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land : 
 But 
 O O O O that <unk> Rag — It 's so elegant 
 So intelligent 
 Ring Lardner and George S. Kaufman mentioned Stamper in their play June Moon : 
 Paul : Did I tell you what Dave Stamper said about it ? 
 Lucille : Yes ! Paul : He said it was another " Paprika " . Wait till you hear it played . Dave Stamper says it 's sure fire . 
 John Hyams played Stamper in the 1936 film The Great Ziegfeld starring William Powell , which won the Academy Award for Best Motion Picture . His songwriting partner Gene Buck was played by William Demarest , best known as " Uncle Charley " on the TV show My Three Sons . 
 = Advanced Gemini = 
 Advanced Gemini is a number of proposals that would have extended the Gemini program by the addition of various missions , including manned low Earth orbit , circumlunar and lunar landing missions . Gemini was the second manned spaceflight program operated by NASA , and consisted of a two @-@ seat spacecraft capable of maneuvering in orbit , docking with unmanned spacecraft such as Agena Target Vehicles , and allowing the crew to perform tethered extra @-@ vehicular activities . 
 A range of applications were considered for Advanced Gemini missions , including military flights , space station crew and logistics delivery , and lunar flights . The Lunar proposals ranged from reusing the docking systems developed for the Agena target vehicle on more powerful upper stages such as the Centaur , which could propel the spacecraft to the Moon , to complete modifications of the Gemini to enable it to land on the Lunar surface . Its applications would have ranged from manned lunar flybys before Apollo was ready , to providing emergency shelters or rescue for stranded Apollo crews , or even replacing the Apollo program . 
 Some of the Advanced Gemini proposals used " off @-@ the @-@ shelf " Gemini spacecraft , unmodified from the original program , whilst others featured modifications to allow the spacecraft to carry more crew , dock with space stations , visit the Moon , and perform other mission objectives . Other modifications considered included the addition of wings or a parasail to the spacecraft , in order to enable it to make a horizontal landing . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gemini was the second American manned orbital spaceflight program , after Mercury . It was intended to demonstrate technologies and techniques required for the Apollo program , such as extra @-@ vehicular activities , rendezvous and docking , maneuvering in orbit and long duration flight . 
 The Gemini spacecraft , which was built by McDonnell Aircraft , was derived from the earlier Mercury spacecraft , but modified to accommodate two astronauts . It was also equipped with a larger equipment module , allowing it to support longer missions , and maneuver in orbit . It was launched by the Titan II rocket flying from Launch Complex 19 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station . In total , twelve missions were launched , ten of which were manned . Following two unmanned test flights , the first manned flight , Gemini 3 , was launched on 23 March 1965 . The program concluded on 15 November 1966 , with the successful recovery of Gemini 12 . 
 Many other applications were envisaged for the Gemini spacecraft at various stages before , during , and after the two years in which it was used by NASA for manned spaceflight . Although none of these proposals ever made it into operation , many were considered seriously , and in some cases flight hardware was constructed prior to cancellation . In the case of the Manned Orbital Laboratory , a Gemini spacecraft was launched on a suborbital demonstration flight in support of the program . In some cases technology developed in the Advanced Gemini program has been reintegrated into other programs , such as components from the Titan IIIM , which was to have launched MOL , being used to upgrade other Titan rockets . 
 = = Military applications = = 
 The United States Air Force intended to use the Gemini spacecraft to transport astronauts to its proposed space stations , the Manned Orbital Development System and later the Manned Orbital Laboratory ( MOL ) . These stations would have been launched by Titan IIIM rockets , with a Gemini spacecraft atop , eliminating the need for rendezvous and docking maneuvers . For this purpose , several modifications were made to the Gemini capsule , including the installation of a hatch in the heat shield to allow access to the space station . 
 In order to give its astronauts experience before these programs started , the Blue Gemini program was proposed , which would have seen USAF astronauts fly on NASA missions in order to practice various techniques required for their own missions . This would have first seen cooperative missions between NASA and the US Air Force , with two missions flying with crews composed of one astronaut from NASA , and one from the USAF , followed by two missions with all @-@ USAF crews , but performing missions for NASA . After these flights , the US Air Force would have flown a number of missions of its own . Firstly , it would have flown a two @-@ man Agena rendezvous and docking mission , followed by two one @-@ man scientific or technology research missions . Other proposed missions included tests of the Astronaut Mobility Unit which was designed to assist with EVAs , inertial navigation systems , and flying a radar imaging system . 
 MOL Launches would have been conducted from Launch Complex 40 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station , and Space Launch Complex 6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base . In 1966 , a test flight was launched from LC @-@ 40 , using a Titan IIIC . It consisted of the Gemini B spacecraft , built from the spacecraft used for the Gemini 2 test flight , atop OPS 0855 , a boilerplate MOL space station . Gemini B was released on a suborbital trajectory , and descended to Earth to test modifications made to the heat shield , and ensure that the access hatch would not affect its performance . OPS 0855 continued on to orbit . Early MOL stations would have only been manned by a single crew , launched with the station . Later stations would have been designed to be resupplied , and support multiple crews , delivered by additional Gemini spacecraft , or derivatives . 
 The MOL program was cancelled on 10 June 1969 , in favour of unmanned reconnaissance satellites . Some systems developed for the program were later used on unmanned missions , while the space suits which were under development were transferred to NASA . The Titan IIIM rocket which was to launch MOL never flew , however some of the upgrades that were built into it were later used to upgrade other Titan rockets — the stretched first and second stages became the Titan 34 , which was used as the core of some later Titan IIIB flights , and on the Titan <unk> . The seven @-@ segment solid rocket boosters were later introduced on the Titan IVA . 
 = = Gemini Ferry = = 
 Several Gemini Ferry spacecraft were proposed to provide transportation of crews and cargo to NASA and USAF space stations in low Earth orbit . NASA contracted McDonnell to conduct a study into what modifications would be needed to allow the Gemini spacecraft to support this . Three spacecraft were envisioned ; a manned spacecraft to transport crew to the stations , a manned spacecraft with a cargo module for both crew and cargo delivery , and a dedicated unmanned spacecraft to resupply the station every three or four months . 
 The studies looked at minimizing required modifications to the Gemini spacecraft . Three docking methods were considered . The first was use of the existing docking system used on Gemini @-@ Agena missions . This would have allowed the mission to be accomplished with little modification to the Gemini spacecraft needed , however crew transfer could only have been accomplished by means of an Extra @-@ vehicular activity ( EVA ) . Changes that would have been required included strengthening the nose , installing two solid rockets to be used for a separation burn , adding the necessary equipment to perform the transfer EVA , and providing provisions for flight to and from the station . The number of retro @-@ rockets would have been increased from four to six . A second method would have seen the spacecraft dock in the same way , but after docking , the spacecraft would be swung round and attached to the side of the space station . A tunnel would then have been placed over the Gemini 's hatches , allowing the crew to transfer to the station without performing an EVA . Some modifications to the hatches would have been required . The final proposed docking method was to use a port mounted on the rear of the equipment module , which would have allowed the crew to transfer directly between the spacecraft and space station , through the docking port . 
 A modified version of the spacecraft was proposed , which would have included a cargo module attached to the back of a modified equipment module . The spacecraft would have approached the station , and docked backwards using a port on the rear of the cargo module . If one of the forward docking configurations had been used for the Gemini itself , the docking would have been controlled remotely from the station , with the Gemini then separating from the cargo module and flying around the station to dock normally on a different port . The rear @-@ docking Gemini would have simply remained attached to the cargo module , with the crew boarding the station through it . Its docking would have been controlled by its own crew , from a station at the back of the cargo module . 
 Two Gemini @-@ derived spacecraft were considered for unmanned resupply flights . The first of these would have involved a Gemini spacecraft , with all systems for manned flight , re @-@ entry and landing removed . The spacecraft would have docked using a port at the front of the spacecraft . Cargo would have been transferred through the nose of the spacecraft , where the re @-@ entry attitude control system was located on the manned spacecraft . The spacecraft was equipped with a liquid propellant engine to perform rendezvous , and to <unk> the space station . The other proposal was for a new spacecraft to be built for unmanned missions , but re @-@ using as many Gemini systems as possible . It would have had a higher cargo capacity than the stripped @-@ down version of the Gemini spacecraft . 
 Crew @-@ only or cargo @-@ only supply missions would have been launched aboard a Titan II , and the Saturn I or Saturn IB would have been used for the combined crew and cargo spacecraft . Because of the increased power of the Saturn I , the Gemini spacecraft 's ejection seats would not have been able to propel the crew far enough in the event of an explosion , so a launch escape tower was proposed , based on the one used on the Mercury spacecraft . The Titan IIIM was also considered to launch the heavier spacecraft . 
 = = Big Gemini = = 
 Big Gemini , or Big G , grew out of a 1963 proposal called Gemini Transport , to develop an enlarged Gemini spacecraft with docking capability , which would take advantage of the increased capacity offered by the Saturn IB and Titan IIIM rockets . It was designed to transport between nine and twelve astronauts into space , and to be able to dock with space stations , in support of Apollo Applications and MOL missions . It would have been launched by a Heavy lift launch vehicle ; either a Titan IIIG or Saturn INT @-@ 20 , the former being intended for use on US Air Force missions and the latter being intended for NASA missions . The Titan IIIM was also considered , which would have launched a smaller version of the spacecraft due to its lower capacity , to resupply MOL space stations later in the program . NASA also proposed several Saturn IB derivatives with solid first stages as alternatives to the INT @-@ 20 , offering similar payload capacity . 
 The shape and mass of the spacecraft would have varied depending on the rocket that was to launch it . The Saturn @-@ launched version had a short , conical cargo module , and a total mass of 47 @,@ 300 kilograms ( 104 @,@ 300 lb ) whereas the Titan IIIG @-@ launched version featured a longer , cylindrical module , with a total mass of 59 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 130 @,@ 000 lb ) . The Titan IIIM version would have been much shorter and lighter , with a mass of 15 @,@ 600 kilograms ( 34 @,@ 400 lb ) , as that rocket had less payload capacity than the Titan IIIG or Saturn . The IIIG variant would have carried twelve crew , whilst the others had a maximum capacity of nine . Use of the NASA variant with the Apollo Service Module was also considered . 
 Once in orbit , Big G would have docked with space stations using an Apollo docking probe mounted on the rear of the cargo module , which was in turn mounted on the rear of the re @-@ entry module . The re @-@ entry module itself would have been enlarged to accommodate the larger crew , and the modifications made to the spacecraft for the MOL program would have been incorporated , including the hatch in the heat shield , which would have been used to provide access to the cargo module . In the event of a launch failure , the launch escape system developed for the Apollo spacecraft would have been used to propel the re @-@ entry module clear of the rocket . 
 Big G would have made landings on land , using a parasail or paraglider to guide it onto a runway or dry lake , such as the one at Edwards Air Force Base . It would have landed using skids derived from the North American X @-@ 15 . 
 = = Lunar exploration = = 
 = = = <unk> missions = = = 
 A number of studies investigated sending a Gemini spacecraft onto a circumlunar trajectory . Many of the proposals made for this involved a two launch architecture , with the Gemini spacecraft rendezvousing with an upper stage in orbit . Upper stages that were considered included the Transtage , the second stage of a Titan II , four different types of Centaur , including the S @-@ V variant developed for the Saturn I , the Agena @-@ D , an enlarged Agena , and two <unk> burning in parallel . Either a Titan or Saturn IB would have been used to launch the upper stage , whilst the Gemini would launch on the Titan II , as it had in the Gemini program . 
 Other proposals involved launching the Gemini spacecraft on a Titan IIIC , and refueling in low Earth orbit before proceeding to the Moon , and a single launch architecture using a three @-@ stage variant of the Saturn IB . 
 The Gemini @-@ Centaur proposal was predicted to have been able to achieve a 72 @-@ hour circumlunar flight . The Centaur would have performed trans @-@ lunar injection , before separating from the Gemini spacecraft . 
 Some concerns were raised that the Gemini spacecraft 's heat shield would not have been able to protect it during the higher speed ballistic reentry associated with the trajectory that would have been required . NASA proposed using a thicker heat shield and more insulation to protect the spacecraft . This and several other modifications made the spacecraft too heavy to be launched by the Titan II rocket which was used for the original twelve Gemini missions , so several solid rocket motors would have been added to allow this additional mass to be flown . 
 = = = Lunar orbit missions = = = 
 The Gemini spacecraft would have rendezvoused with stacked Centaur and Agena upper stages in low Earth orbit . The Centaur would have placed the Gemini and Agena onto a circumlunar trajectory , along which they would coast until they reached the Moon . The Agena would then have been used to perform Lunar orbit insertion . Following the completion of activities in Lunar orbit , the Agena would have been fired again for trans @-@ Earth injection . 
 This architecture would have used a Titan II to launch the Gemini spacecraft , with a Saturn IB launching the upper stages . 
 = = = Lunar landing = = = 
 Using the Gemini spacecraft for a manned Lunar landing was considered as early as the original Mercury Mark II proposal which led to the Gemini program . The initial proposal was for a Lunar orbit rendezvous mission , using a Gemini spacecraft and a lightweight , open cockpit lander , launched by a Saturn C @-@ 3 rocket . It was the first time that Lunar orbit rendezvous was proposed as part of a lunar landing concept . The spacecraft would have been tested in Low Earth orbit before the Lunar missions , using two Titan II launches . The lander , which was designed by NASA 's Langley Research Center , would have had a mass of no more than 4 @,@ 372 kilograms ( 9 @,@ 639 lb ) . Some of the proposals had a mass as low as 1 @,@ 460 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 220 lb ) , with cryogenic propellants being used in place of heavier hypergolic propellant . The proposal was intended to provide a faster and lower @-@ cost alternative to the Apollo program , which was at that time proposing a direct ascent landing . 
 Another proposal would have used a Saturn V to achieve a direct ascent mission profile . The spacecraft consisted of four modules . The Retrograde Module would have been powered by an <unk> engine , and used to propel the spacecraft during the trans @-@ lunar coast . During landing , it would be used for the initial phases of powered descent . At an altitude of 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) above the Lunar surface , the RM would have been jettisoned , and a second module , the Terminal Landing Module , would have performed the final descent . After landing , the spacecraft would have stayed on the Moon for a day , before it was propelled back to Earth . Launch from the Lunar Surface and trans @-@ Earth injection would have been performed by the Service Module , which would also have contained components of the life support system , and other systems which were located in the Equipment Module of the Earth orbit Gemini spacecraft . The Reentry Module was based on the Gemini capsule , but would have been modified to allow it to reenter the atmosphere at the higher velocity that would have been required by a Lunar flight . It was seen as the last effort by NASA managers and engineers who still advocated the direct ascent mission profile , and was intended to be cheaper , faster and safer than the Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous technique . 
 = = = Apollo rescue = = = 
 Due to the risks associated with the Lunar landing , a number of rescue spacecraft were proposed , to be used to allow the crew of an Apollo mission to return to Earth safely in the event of a problem . Many of these designs were based around the Gemini spacecraft . 
 One of these proposals was the Gemini Lunar Orbit Rescue Vehicle , which was designed to retrieve the crew of an Apollo spacecraft stranded in orbit around the Moon . It was to have used a stretched reentry module to accommodate the three astronauts who would have been aboard the Apollo . This would have been attached to a modified Equipment Module . The Equipment Module contained engines which would be used for Lunar orbit insertion and trans @-@ Earth injection , as well as life support equipment to keep the crew alive until they returned to Earth . Launch and trans @-@ Lunar injection would have been performed by a Saturn V. Once the spacecraft was in Lunar orbit , the Apollo crew would have boarded it by means of an EVA . 
 Another proposed spacecraft , the Gemini Lunar Surface Survival Shelter , was designed to be sent to the Moon ahead of an Apollo mission . It would have landed close to the planned Apollo landing site , and if the Apollo Lunar Module 's ascent stage failed to ignite , the crew would have performed an EVA to transfer to the <unk> . The shelter was not designed to take off again after landing , so an <unk> or another Apollo mission would then be sent to collect the crew , whilst the Command Module Pilot of the original Apollo mission would have returned to Earth alone aboard his spacecraft . It consisted of a Gemini Reentry Module , which would have housed the astronauts whilst they awaited rescue , and a descent stage containing life support systems , consumables , and the engine and propellant used to land the spacecraft . 
 The Gemini Lunar Surface Rescue Spacecraft was intended to fly a direct ascent mission , launched by a Saturn V. Descent stages , built from either the descent stage of the Apollo Lunar Module , or from the Apollo Service Module , would have reduced the spacecraft 's velocity as it approached the Moon . One configuration used two Service Modules and one LEM descent stage , with the LEM descent stage performing the final landing , and then being reused for ascent from the Lunar surface and trans @-@ Earth injection . The other configuration used three LEM descent stages , with the second being used for landing and the third for ascent and TEI . The <unk> would have landed close to the Apollo Lunar Module on the Moon , and the Apollo crew would have transferred to it by EVA . 
 Following the Apollo 1 fire in January 1967 , NASA conducted a safety review of the Apollo program . In response to this review , McDonnell proposed the Universal Lunar Rescue Vehicle , a repackaged version of the Lunar Surface Rescue Spacecraft with an enlarged capsule to make room for the three astronauts who were being rescued . It was intended to rescue an Apollo crew at almost any point whilst they were at the Moon , should an anomaly occur . Some <unk> designs included five seats , with two astronauts piloting it to the Moon . The proposal was considered , but rejected due to lack of funds . 
 = = Other proposals = = 
 A number of other applications were considered for the Gemini spacecraft . 
 = = = Manned Orbital Telescope = = = 
 The Manned Orbital Telescope was a proposal for a manned spacecraft for astronomical or solar observation . It would have used the larger reentry module which was also proposed for the Big Gemini spacecraft , and would have been launched on a Saturn IB . The enlarged reentry module was also considered for a spacecraft proposed at the same time , which would have been used to rescue the crews of manned spacecraft that were stranded in low Earth orbit . It would have launched atop a Titan IIIC , once in orbit it would have maneuvered by means of a Transtage integrated into the equipment module . The larger capsule would have been used to accommodate the crew of the spacecraft which required rescuing . 
 = = = Rendezvous with a Pegasus satellite = = = 
 Another proposed mission would have seen a Gemini spacecraft rendezvous with a Pegasus satellite in low Earth orbit . The spacecraft would have either been launched directly into an orbit to rendezvous with the Pegasus , or into a lower orbit , subsequently docking with an Agena , and using that to raise its orbit . The Gemini would have flown around the Pegasus , and then one of the crew would have performed an EVA to recover a piece of one of the spacecraft 's micrometeoroid detection panels . This mission would have been used to prove that rendezvous could be accomplished with any spacecraft , to collect data on the satellite 's exposure to micrometeoroids — supporting data that the satellite had returned itself , and to demonstrate technology for military flights to inspect hostile satellites . 
 = = = Gemini <unk> = = = 
 Several missions were proposed to demonstrate methods of landing the Gemini spacecraft on land . The spacecraft had originally been designed to land using a paraglider and a set of skis or wheels , however this was abandoned in favor of <unk> under parachutes due to delays in development and failures during testing . As the proposed Big Gemini spacecraft would have landed this way , McDonnell Aircraft asked NASA to consider flying standard Gemini spacecraft with the paraglider in order to test the system before it would be required operationally . 
 = = = Winged Gemini = = = 
 Another alternative landing concept was the US Air Force 's proposal to attach wings to the spacecraft . This proposal arose soon after the cancellation of the X @-@ 20 Dyna @-@ Soar , and would have seen a Gemini spacecraft attached to a set of wings developed during the <unk> program . This would have been launched by a Titan II rocket , and would have been unable to maneuver in orbit . Another proposal saw the spacecraft being launched by a Titan IIIA or IIIC , using the Transtage for maneuvering . Once the mission was complete , the spacecraft would have been deorbited by means of five solid rocket motors . 
 = = = Long @-@ duration missions = = = 
 There were also proposals to use the Gemini spacecraft to conduct long @-@ duration missions to small , purpose @-@ built space stations in low @-@ Earth orbit . One proposal saw a space station based on the Agena , which would have been used to provide propulsion and attitude control for the station . A pressurized module between the Agena and the docking adapter would have been used by the crew for accommodation and to conduct experiments . The crew would have boarded the Agena by means of an inflatable tunnel between the hatches and its airlock . The Pecan spacecraft was a similar proposal . 
 = MacPaint = 
 MacPaint is a bitmap @-@ based graphics painting software program developed by Apple Computer and released with the original Macintosh personal computer on January 24 , 1984 . It was sold separately for US $ 195 with its word processor counterpart , MacWrite . MacPaint was notable because it could generate graphics that could be used by other applications . Using the mouse , and the clipboard and QuickDraw picture language , pictures could be cut from MacPaint and pasted into MacWrite documents . Pictures could also be cut from MacPaint and pasted into the resource fork of any application via <unk> , allowing application internationalization . 
 The original MacPaint was developed by Bill Atkinson , a member of Apple 's original Macintosh development team . Early development versions of MacPaint were called <unk> , still retaining part of the name of its roots , <unk> . It was later developed by Claris , the software subsidiary of Apple which was formed in 1987 . The last version of MacPaint was version 2 @.@ 0 , released in 1988 . It was discontinued by Claris in 1998 because of diminishing sales . 
 = = Development = = 
 MacPaint was written by Bill Atkinson , a member of Apple 's original Macintosh development team . The original MacPaint consisted of 5 @,@ 804 lines of Pascal computer code , augmented by another 2 @,@ 738 lines of 68000 assembly language . MacPaint 's user interface was designed by Susan Kare , also a member of the Macintosh team . Kare also beta @-@ tested MacPaint before release . 
 MacPaint uses two offscreen memory buffers to avoid flicker when dragging shapes or images across the screen . One of these buffers contained the existing pixels of a document , and the other contained the pixels of its previous state . The second buffer was used as the basis of the software 's undo feature . In April 1983 , the software 's name was changed from <unk> to MacPaint . The original MacPaint was programmed as a single @-@ document interface . The palette positions and sizes were unalterable , as was the document window . This was different from other Macintosh software at the time , which allowed the users to move windows and <unk> them . 
 The original MacPaint did not incorporate a zoom function . Instead of a zoom function , a special magnification mode called FatBits was used . FatBits showed each pixel as a clickable rectangle with a white border . The FatBits editing mode set the standard for many future editors . MacPaint included a " Goodies " menu which included the FatBits tool . This menu was named the " Aids " menu in prerelease versions , but was renamed " Goodies " as public awareness of the AIDS epidemic grew in the summer of 1983 . 
 = = Release and version history = = 
 MacPaint was first advertised in an 18 @-@ page brochure in December 1983 , following the earlier announcement of the Macintosh 128K . The Macintosh was released on January 24 , 1984 with two applications , MacPaint and MacWrite . For a special post @-@ election edition of Newsweek in November 1984 , Apple spent more than US $ 2 @.@ 5 million to buy all 39 of the advertising pages in the issue . The Newsweek advertisement included many pages dedicated to explaining how MacWrite and MacPaint worked together . After launch , a New York Times reviewer noted how MacPaint unfolded numerous graphic possibilities for the personal computer ; he went further to say " it is better than anything else of its kind offered on personal computers by a factor of 10 . " 
 MacPaint 2 @.@ 0 was released on January 11 , 1988 by Claris . It added many improvements to the software , including the capability to open and use up to nine documents simultaneously . The original MacPaint operated as a single @-@ document application with a non @-@ movable window . MacPaint 2 @.@ 0 eliminated this limitation , introducing a fully functioning document window , which could be sized up to 8 x 10 " . Several other features were introduced , such as a Zoom tool , <unk> tool for undo actions and stationary documents . MacPaint 2 @.@ 0 was developed by David Ramsey , a developer at Claris . MacPaint 2 @.@ 0 was sold for US $ 125 , with a US $ 25 upgrade available for existing users of MacPaint . Claris discontinued technical support for the original MacPaint in 1989 . Claris stopped selling MacPaint in early 1998 because of diminishing sales . There has been an unofficial update called MacPaint X which is 3 @.@ 0 beta , mainly for people who wished to be able to use the program . 
 Since 2010 MacPaint 1 @.@ 3 's source code ( written in a combination of Assembly and Pascal ) is available through the Computer History Museum , along with the QuickDraw source code , a library to draw bitmapped graphics , due to the support of Steve Jobs . 
 MacPaint inspired other companies to release similar products for other platforms ; within a year a half @-@ dozen clones existed for the Apple II and IBM PC . Some of these included Broderbund 's Dazzle Draw for the Apple II , Mouse Systems ' PC Paint for the PC , and IBM 's Color Paint for the IBM <unk> . 
 = = Version history = = 
 = Night Out ( The Office ) = 
 " Night Out " is the fifteenth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's sixty @-@ eighth episode overall . The episode was written by Mindy Kaling and directed by Ken Whittingham . It first aired in the United States on April 24 , 2008 on NBC . " Night Out " was viewed by a measured audience of over 7 @.@ 5 million people , bringing in the lowest number of estimated viewers that The Office received among 12 episodes . " Night Out " received mixed reviews from critics . 
 In the episode , Michael and Dwight travel to New York City to party with Ryan . Ryan starts acting erratically , and it is revealed that he is under the influence of drugs . Meanwhile , the remaining employees are going to be forced to work on a Saturday . Jim proposes that they work late on Friday , so they do not have to come in the next day . Once Jim and his co @-@ workers finish working , they find that they are locked in , and everyone quickly places the blame on Jim . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) arrives at the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company and is noticeably friendlier than on his previous visits . The employees , by now fed up with Ryan 's new website , angrily ask him questions about the website and their clients . Ryan shows the staff at the branch the new Dunder Mifflin website , " Dunder Mifflin Infinity 2 @.@ 0 " , the previous version of which was shut down because sexual predators had invaded the social networking component of the site . As Ryan leaves , he tells Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) of the women he meets in clubs in New York City . Michael and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) subsequently decide to go to New York , locate Ryan , attend parties with him , and try to meet women while doing so . 
 In New York , Michael and Dwight locate Ryan after discovering which club Ryan frequents ; Ryan is thrilled to see them but appears to be under the influence of drugs though Michael and Dwight do not notice . Later , Michael , Dwight , Ryan and Ryan 's colleague , Troy <unk> ( Noel Petok ) ( who Dwight is certain is a Hobbit due to his short stature ) wait outside another club , but fail to get in because they do not have dates . Dwight comes to the rescue when he manages to pair each of them with members of a women 's basketball team , who are also waiting in line . Inside the club , Ryan 's dancing becomes erratic and aggressive , and he accidentally hits a girl , prompting her friends to attack Ryan . Dwight and Michael escort him out of the club , and after Troy advises them not to take Ryan to a hospital , he runs off . Michael and Dwight bring Ryan back to his apartment , where he tells them that he thinks his " friend Troy " has a drug problem , and asks what he should do about it . Michael , oblivious to the fact that Ryan is obviously referring to his own drug addiction , gives him hypothetical advice involving a wiretap and snitching on a drug dealer . He then tells the camera that he has been watching The Wire but does not understand what is going on in the show . 
