 The Nailers had three players selected for the 2009 ECHL All @-@ Star Game , all reserve forwards . Nick Johnson , the only Penguins prospect , was drafted by the team 67th overall in 2004 and signed an entry @-@ level contract with the organization in March 2008 . Johnson did not play in the All @-@ Star Game because he finished the season with Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton . 
 = = Media affiliates = = 
 <unk> @-@ FM 105 @.@ 9 of Pittsburgh was the radio flagship station for the Penguins for the third season . In April , the team and the station agreed to a six @-@ year contract extension . Mike Lange , former Penguin Phil Bourque and Bob Grove were the station 's broadcasters . 
 FSN Pittsburgh was the primary television network . Paul <unk> , Dan Potash , Rob King , and former Penguins Bob <unk> and Jay Caufield were the station 's broadcast team . During the semi @-@ final playoff round against the Washington Capitals , game five set a record as the highest watched game on any FSN regional network in history . It was then surpassed by games six and seven ; the final game of the series drew a 24 @.@ 97 average rating — twice the viewers than the second most watched show of the evening . 
 = Mila Kunis = 
 Milena <unk> " Mila " Kunis ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born August 14 , 1983 ) is an American actress . In 1991 , at the age of seven , she moved from the Ukrainian SSR to Los Angeles with her family . After being enrolled in acting classes as an after @-@ school activity , she was soon discovered by an agent . She appeared in several television series and commercials , before acquiring her first significant role prior to her 15th birthday , playing Jackie Burkhart on the television series That ' 70s Show . Since 1999 , she has voiced Meg Griffin on the animated series Family Guy . 
 Her breakout film role came in 2008 , playing Rachel in the romantic comedy @-@ drama Forgetting Sarah Marshall . Her other films include the neo @-@ noir action film Max Payne ( 2008 ) , the post @-@ apocalyptic action film The Book of Eli ( 2010 ) , the romantic comedy Friends with Benefits ( 2011 ) , the comedy Ted ( 2012 ) , the fantasy Oz the Great and Powerful ( 2013 ) as the Wicked Witch of the West , and the drama Black Swan ( 2010 ) , in which her performance gained her worldwide accolades , including the Premio Marcello Mastroianni for Best Young Actor or Actress , and nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Kunis was born in <unk> , in the Ukrainian SSR ( now Ukraine ) . Her mother , Elvira , is a physics teacher who runs a pharmacy , and her father , Mark Kunis , is a mechanical engineer who works as a cab driver . Kunis has an elder brother named Michael ( born c . 1976 ) . She stated in 2011 that her parents had " amazing jobs " , and that the family was " very lucky " and " not poor " ; they had decided to leave the USSR because they saw " no future " there for Kunis and her brother . In 1991 , when she was seven years old , her family moved to Los Angeles , California , with $ 250 . " That was all we were allowed to take with us . My parents had given up good jobs and degrees , which were not transferable . We arrived in New York on a Wednesday and by Friday morning my brother and I were at school in LA . " 
 Kunis comes from a Jewish family and has cited antisemitism in the former Soviet Union as one of several reasons for her family 's move to the United States . She has stated that her parents " raised [ her ] Jewish as much as they could , " although religion was suppressed in the Soviet Union . On her second day in Los Angeles , Kunis was enrolled at Rosewood Elementary School , not knowing a word of English . She later recalled : " I blocked out second grade completely . I have no recollection of it . I always talk to my mom and my grandma about it . It was because I cried every day . I didn 't understand the culture . I didn 't understand the people . I didn 't understand the language . My first sentence of my essay to get into college was like , ' Imagine being blind and deaf at age seven . ' And that 's kind of what it felt like moving to the States . " 
 In Los Angeles , she attended Hubert Howe Bancroft Middle School . She used an on @-@ set tutor for most of her high school years while filming That ' 70s Show . She briefly attended Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies ( <unk> ) , but when that school proved to be insufficiently flexible about her acting commitments , she transferred to Fairfax High School , from which she graduated in 2001 . She briefly attended UCLA and Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1994 – 2000 : Career beginnings and television work = = = 
 At age nine , Kunis was enrolled by her father in acting classes after school at the Beverly Hills Studios , where she met Susan Curtis , who would become her manager . On her first audition she landed the role for a Barbie commercial . Shortly after , she did a commercial for the Lisa Frank product line . Her first television roles took place in 1994 , first appearing on Days of Our Lives , and a few months later doing her first of two appearances on Baywatch . She had a minor role on 7th Heaven and supporting roles in Santa with Muscles , Honey , We Shrunk Ourselves , and the Angelina Jolie film Gia , as the young Gia Carangi . 
 At the age of 10 , Kunis auditioned for but failed to get the role of a Russian Jewish girl who moves to America in the film Make a Wish , Molly . Instead , she was cast in the secondary role of a Mexican girl . In 1998 , Kunis was cast as Jackie Burkhart in the Fox sitcom That ' 70s Show . All who auditioned were required to be at least 18 years old ; Kunis , who was 14 at the time , told the casting directors she would be 18 but did not say when . Though they eventually figured it out , the producers still thought Kunis was the best fit for the role . That ' 70s Show ran for eight seasons . She won two consecutive Young Star Awards as Best Young Actress in a Comedy TV Series in 1999 and 2000 for her performances . 
 In 1999 , Kunis replaced Lacey Chabert in the role of Meg Griffin on the animated sitcom Family Guy , created by Seth MacFarlane for Fox . Kunis won the role after auditions and a slight rewrite of the character , in part due to her performance on That ' 70s Show . MacFarlane called Kunis back after her first audition , instructing her to speak slower , and then told her to come back another time and enunciate more . Upon claiming that she had mastered these speech particulars , MacFarlane hired her . MacFarlane added : " What Mila Kunis brought to it was in a lot of ways , I thought , almost more right for the character . I say that Lacey did a phenomenal job , but there was something about Mila – something very natural about Mila . She was 15 when she started , so you were listening to a 15 @-@ year @-@ old . Oftentimes with animation they 'll have adult actors doing the voices of teenagers and they always sound like Saturday morning voices . They sound oftentimes very forced . She had a very natural quality to Meg that really made what we did with that character kind of really work . " Kunis was nominated for an Annie Award in the category of Voice Acting in an Animated Television Production in 2007 . She also voiced Meg in the Family Guy Video Game ! . Kunis described her character as " the scapegoat . " 
 = = = 2001 – 08 : Transition to film = = = 
 In 2001 , she appeared in Get Over It opposite Kirsten Dunst . She followed that up in 2002 , by starring in the straight @-@ to @-@ DVD horror film American Psycho 2 alongside William Shatner , a sequel to the 2000 film American Psycho . American Psycho 2 was panned by critics , and later , Kunis herself expressed embarrassment over the film . In 2004 , Kunis starred in the film adaptation Tony n ' Tina 's Wedding . Although the film was shot in 2004 , it did not have a theatrical release until 2007 . Most critics did not like the film , which mustered a 25 % approval from Rotten Tomatoes . DVD talk concluded that " fans would be much better off pretending the movie never happened in the first place " . 
 In 2005 , Kunis co @-@ starred with Jon Heder in Moving McAllister , which was not released theatrically until 2007 . The film received generally poor reviews and had a limited two @-@ week run in theaters . She followed up with After Sex starring alongside Zoe Saldana , who had also appeared in Get Over It . In October 2006 , she began filming Boot Camp ( originally titled Straight Edge ) . The film was not released in theatres in the United States , but was released on DVD on August 25 , 2009 . 
 Kunis starred as Rachel Jansen in the 2008 comedy film , Forgetting Sarah Marshall , co @-@ produced by Judd Apatow . The role , which she won after unsuccessfully auditioning for Knocked Up , entailed improvisation on her part . The film garnered positive reviews , and was a commercial success , grossing $ 105 million worldwide . Kunis 's performance was well @-@ received ; Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal praised her " fresh beauty and focused energy " , while James Berardinelli wrote that she is " adept with her performance and understands the concept of comic timing " . She was nominated for a Teen Choice Award . In an interview , Kunis credited Apatow with helping her to expand her career from That ' 70s Show . 
 Also in 2008 , Kunis portrayed Mona Sax , an assassin , alongside Mark Wahlberg in the action film Max Payne , based on the video game of the same name . Kunis underwent training in guns , boxing , and martial arts for her role . Max Payne was relatively successful at the box office , grossing $ 85 million worldwide but was panned by critics , with several reviewers calling Kunis miscast . Travis <unk> of Boise Weekly wrote that she was " horribly miscast as some sort of undersized , warble @-@ voiced crime boss " . Director John Moore defended his choice of Kunis saying , " Mila just bowled us over ..... She wasn 't an obvious choice , but she just wears Mona so well . We needed someone who would not be just a fop or foil to Max ; we needed somebody who had to be that character and convey her own agenda . I think Mila just knocked it out of the park . " She was nominated for another Teen Choice Award for her role in the film . 
 = = = 2009 – 12 : Film breakthrough and acclaim = = = 
 In 2009 , she appeared in the comedy film Extract with Ben Affleck and Jason Bateman . The film received mostly positive reviews , and grossed $ 10 @.@ 8 million at the box office . Roger Ebert , while critical of the film itself , wrote that Kunis " brings her role to within shouting distance of credibility . " Director Mike Judge commented that part of what was surprising to learn about Kunis was her ability to make references to the cult animation film Rejected . Judge said : " As beautiful as Mila is , you could believe that maybe she would cross paths with you in the real world . " After seeing Kunis perform in Forgetting Sarah Marshall , Judge wanted to cast her in the role of Cindy in Extract : " I just thought , ' Wow , this girl 's perfect . ' And she really wanted to do it , which was fantastic . " Kunis herself stated that " I 'm a huge fan of Mike Judge 's from Office Space , so I was , like , ' Okay , this is a very easy decision . ' I told them I would do anything needed to be in this production – like craft service , or , say , acting . " 
 In 2010 , she starred alongside Denzel Washington in the action film The Book of Eli . Although the film received mixed reviews , it performed well at the box office , grossing over $ 157 million worldwide . Film critic Richard Roeper praised Kunis 's performance , calling it a " particularly strong piece of work " . Several other reviews were equally positive , including that of Pete Hammond of Boxoffice magazine , who wrote that she 's " ideally cast in the key female role " Even reviewers who didn 't necessarily like the film complimented her performance , such as James Berardinelli , who wrote that " the demands of the role prove to be within her range , which is perhaps surprising considering she has been thus far pigeonholed into more lightweight parts " , and Colin Covert of the Star Tribune , who wrote that she " generated a spark and brought a degree of determination to her character , developing an independent female character who 's not always in need of rescuing . " Other critics , such as Claudia Puig of USA Today felt she was miscast , noting that " she looked as if she dropped in from a Ray @-@ Ban commercial " . Kunis received another Teen Choice Award nomination for her performance . Kunis was also cast in a minor role in the 2010 comedy film Date Night , starring Tina Fey and Steve Carell . She garnered several positive reviews for her performance . Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune concluded her performance with James Franco helped save the film and gave it " a shot in the arm . " 
 Kunis was nominated for multiple awards , including her first Golden Globe , for the 2010 film Black Swan . She played a rival ballet dancer to the main character , played by Natalie Portman . Director Darren Aronofsky cast Kunis in the film based on her performance in Forgetting Sarah Marshall , and on the recommendation of co @-@ star and close friend Natalie Portman . She underwent a training regimen that included cardiovascular exercise , a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ calorie a day diet ( she lost 20 pounds that she regained after filming ended ) , and ballet classes for four hours a day , seven days a week . During the demanding production , she suffered injuries including a torn ligament and a dislocated shoulder . Black Swan received widespread acclaim from critics and was nominated for five Academy Awards , including Best Picture . The film grossed over $ 106 @.@ 9 million in the United States and Canada while grossing over $ 329 million worldwide . Reviews of Kunis 's performance were positive , with Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter stating , " Kunis makes a perfect alternate to Portman , equally as lithe and dark but a smirk of self @-@ assurance in place of Portman 's wide @-@ eyed fearfulness . " Guy Lodge of In Contention also praised Kunis , saying , " it 's the cool , throaty @-@ voiced Kunis who is the surprise package here , intelligently watching and reflecting her co @-@ star in such a manner that we 're as uncertain as Nina of her ingenuousness . " Kunis 's performance won her the Marcello Mastroianni Award for Best Young Actor or Actress at the 67th Venice International Film Festival , and earned her Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress . At the 37th annual Saturn Awards , she was also honored with the Best Supporting Actress award for her performance . 
 Kunis was cast alongside Justin Timberlake in the 2011 romantic comedy Friends with Benefits . Director Will Gluck stated that he wrote the story with Kunis and Timberlake in mind . Friends with Benefits achieved success at the box office , grossing over $ 149 million worldwide , and received mostly positive reviews with critics praising the chemistry between Kunis and Timberlake . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote that " Ms. Kunis is fast proving that she 's a gift that keeps giving to mainstream romantic comedy " and " her energy is so invigorating and expansive and her presence so vibrant that she fills the screen " . 
 In 2012 , Kunis co @-@ starred with Mark Wahlberg in Ted , her most commercially successful film to date . The film was directed and co @-@ written by Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane . Kunis played the girlfriend of Wahlberg 's character . When MacFarlane first conceived the project , he considered Kunis too young for the role . However , the film remained in development for several years and when it was finally ready to begin production , he ended up casting her . Ted has received generally positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success , grossing $ 549 million worldwide . Drew McWeeny of HitFix wrote that Kunis " brings some lovely subtle grace notes to a role that easily could have just been ' the pushy girlfriend ' " . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Future projects = = = 
 In 2013 , Kunis played Theodora , the youngest of three witches , opposite James Franco , in the Walt Disney Pictures ' prequel , Oz the Great and Powerful . She dedicated her performance in the film to Margaret Hamilton , the original Wicked Witch of the West in the 1939 film . The film , and Kunis 's performance , received mixed reviews from critics . Kim Newman of Empire Magazine wrote that Kunis " walks away with the honours as the wavering witch Theodora , whose heartbreak brings another , less @-@ expected depth to this 3D spectacle " . In contrast , Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter found Kunis 's performance to be uncertain as her character seemed to be in a state of limbo . Oz the Great and Powerful was a commercial success , grossing over $ 493 million worldwide . 
 Also in 2013 Kunis co @-@ starred in the crime thriller Blood Ties with Clive Owen , Billy Crudup , and Marion Cotillard . The film premiered at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival and had a limited release in the United States in 2014 . Blood Ties received mixed reviews . Kunis was also cast in the comedy The Angriest Man in Brooklyn , alongside Robin Williams and Peter Dinklage . The film had a limited theatrical and VOD release and received poor reviews . The Paul Haggis @-@ directed film Third Person co @-@ starring with Liam Neeson , Olivia Wilde and James Franco premiered at the 2013 Toronto Film Festival and had a limited release in 2014 , but also received mostly negative reviews . Kunis ' performance was praised by some critics ; Deborah Young of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that her role gives her " enormous room to express her talent " and she " gives her story a shot of raw intensity " . 
 Kunis is set to be an executive producer for a feminist @-@ themed TV series for the CW network . Meridian Hills , is a drama about the women 's liberation movement in the 1970s . She will not appear on @-@ screen . In October 2014 it was announced Kunis , along with her partners , had launched a new production company called Orchard Farm Productions . The company has a first @-@ look deal with ABC Studios , where the company is based . Under the agreement , the team will develop and produce TV projects for broadcast and cable . 
 In 2015 , Kunis co @-@ starred with Channing Tatum in the science fiction film Jupiter Ascending , directed by the Wachowskis . The film received mostly negative reviews . 
 Kunis will be co @-@ starring with Kristen Bell and Christina Applegate in the comedy Bad Moms . The film is scheduled to be released July 29 , 2016 . 
 = = In the media = = 
 In 2007 , Kunis participated in a video for the website Funny or Die appearing alongside James Franco . The video was a parody of the MTV show The Hills and was a huge success for the website , with well over one million views . Shawn Levy , director of Date Night , stated that part of what made him decide to cast Kunis with James Franco in the film was the chemistry he felt they had in the Funny or Die video . In December 2008 , Kunis was featured in Gap 's " Shine Your Own Star " Christmas campaign . 
 In 2010 , she was featured in the " Women We Love " segment in Esquire with an accompanied video . Kunis was among several female stars photographed by Canadian singer / songwriter Bryan Adams in conjunction with the Calvin Klein Collections for a feature titled American Women 2010 , with the proceeds from the photographs donated to the NYC AIDS foundation . During the summer of 2010 Kunis served with Randy Jackson as the Master of Ceremonies for the 9th Annual Chrysalis Foundation Benefit . The Chrysalis Foundation is a Los Angeles @-@ based non @-@ profit organization formed to help economically disadvantaged and homeless individuals to become self @-@ sufficient through employment opportunities . 
 GQ magazine named Kunis the Knockout of the Year for 2011 , with Men 's Health naming her one of the " 100 Hottest Women of All @-@ Time " . FHM magazine ranked her number 9 on its 2012 Hot 100 list , but she reached number 1 on their 2013 " 100 Sexiest Women in the World " list , which brought to an end a four @-@ year run by British women . 
 Prior to this in 2008 Kunis stated , " You 've got to base your career on something other than being FHM 's top 100 number one girl . Your looks are going to die out , and then what 's going to be left ? " Maxim has consistently ranked Kunis on its Hot 100 list , reaching a ranking of number 5 in both 2009 and 2011 and number 3 in 2012 . Esquire magazine named her 2012 's Sexiest Woman Alive . She ranked # 2 on AskMen 's list of Top 99 Women for 2013 , behind only Jennifer Lawrence . In 2013 , she responded to those lists : " All I can say is , I feel honored to be considered sexy . " 
 Christian Dior signed Kunis in 2012 to be the face of its Spring fashion campaign . In February 2013 , she was named Gemfields global brand ambassador and the face of their advertising campaign . Gemfields is a luxury company that produces emeralds , rubies , and <unk> . She visited Gemfields ' mine in Zambia . Kunis appeared wearing Gemfields 's Rubies for the world premiere of Jupiter Ascending . 
 In 2013 , she appeared in Forbes list of 100 powerful celebrities , ranking # 89 on the basis of five criteria ( Money , TV / Radio , Press , Social , and <unk> ) , with her highest ranking as # 14 in marketability . She earned $ 11 million for the year ending in June 2013 . 
 In 2014 , Kunis appeared in a range of global advertising for Beam , Inc . ( makers of Jim Beam bourbon ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On September 14 , 2011 , the FBI announced it was investigating the alleged hacking of Kunis 's cellphone and email accounts , along with those of other celebrities . Christopher Chaney from Jacksonville , Florida , later pleaded guilty in federal court to nine counts of computer hacking . 
 In November 2011 , Kunis was escorted by Sgt. Scott Moore to a United States Marine Corps Ball in Greenville , North Carolina . Kunis had accepted Moore 's invitation in July after he posted it as a YouTube video while serving with the 3rd Battalion , 2nd Marine Regiment , in Afghanistan 's Helmand province . The event celebrated the Marine Corps ' 236th anniversary . 
 Kunis supports the Democratic Party and Barack Obama . In a 2012 interview , she criticized the Republican Party , saying : " The way that Republicans attack women is so offensive to me . And the way they talk about religion is offensive . I may not be a practicing Jew , but why we gotta talk about Jesus all the time ? " 
 = = = Health = = = 
 In January 2011 , she revealed her struggle with chronic <unk> that had caused temporary blindness in one eye . Some months earlier she had surgery that had corrected the problem . Kunis also has heterochromia iridum , a condition in which the irises are different colors . One eye ( left ) is brown , and the other ( right ) is green . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Kunis began dating actor Macaulay Culkin in 2002 . During their relationship , there were rumors of the couple getting married , but Kunis denied them . In an interview with BlackBook magazine , Kunis stated that marriage is " not something that 's important to me " . Kunis said she tried her best to protect her and Culkin 's privacy , noting that " We don 't talk about it to the press . It 's already more high profile than I want it to be . " When asked if it was difficult to stay out of the tabloids and press , Kunis responded : " I keep my personal life as personal as I physically , mentally , possibly can . " Asked if that is difficult she said , " I don 't care . I will go to my grave trying . It is hard , but I 'll end up going to a bar that 's a hole in the wall . I won 't go to the ' it 's @-@ happening ' place . " On January 3 , 2011 , Kunis ' publicist confirmed reports that Kunis and Culkin had ended their relationship , saying " The split was amicable , and they remain close friends . " 
 Kunis began dating her former That ' 70s Show co @-@ star Ashton Kutcher in April 2012 , and they became engaged in February 2014 . She gave birth to their daughter Wyatt Isabelle in October 2014 . Kunis married Kutcher during the first weekend of July 2015 , in Oak Glen , California . In June 2016 , their representative confirmed they are expecting their second child . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Carly Colón = 
 Carlos Edwin " Carly " Colón Jr . ( born February 21 , 1979 ) is a Puerto Rican professional wrestler better known internationally by his ring name Carlito . He belongs to a wrestling family , being the son of Carlos Colón Sr. , who introduced him to wrestling . His mother was born in Canada , which grants him Canadian citizenship . Colón debuted in his father 's promotion , the World Wrestling Council ( WWC ) , eventually winning the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship 16 times , and the WWC Puerto Rico Heavyweight Championship once . During the early years of his career , he made appearances for the X Wrestling Federation and Funking Conservatory , winning his first international championship for the second . In his native Puerto Rico , he is known as both Carly Colón and Carlito . 
 In 2003 , Colón signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , working for the promotion until 2010 . He worked in Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) for sixteen months , mostly wrestling in tag team matches while making appearances in WWC . On October 7 , 2004 , Colón made his debut performing on the main event of SmackDown ! as Carlito Caribbean Cool . Colón is a former United States Champion and Intercontinental Champion and has been part of both the Raw and SmackDown brands . He is the only wrestler to win a championship on two separate debuts in WWE and the second Puerto Rican to become Intercontinental Champion after Pedro Morales . At WrestleMania XXV , Colón and his brother , Eddie Colón , became the only tag team to unify the WWE Tag Team Championship and World Tag Team Championship . 
 World Wrestling Entertainment contacted Colón and he will be appearing on television late 2016 at WWE <unk> 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Colón was born in the Santurce district of the capital of Puerto Rico , San Juan . He is son of retired wrestler and promoter Carlos Colón , Sr. and his wife , Nancy . Colón was the first of four siblings , a group that also includes fellow wrestlers Eddie Colón and Stacy Colón , both of whom have performed in the World Wrestling Council . A second sister , Melissa did not enter the wrestling business . Other members of Colón 's family have also been involved in the World Wrestling Council ; his uncle José Colón and cousin Orlando Colón have been involved in several angles within the company . On April 18 , 2009 , Colón was retroactively granted the Canadian citizenship following a series of amends to the Canadian nationality law . This revision automatically granted the distinction to all the first generation individuals born abroad . The revision only required a single Canadian parent , a demand that Colón met through his maternal bloodline . 
 Between 1991 and 1997 , Colón attended the Jesuit Colegio San Ignacio de Loyola , from which he graduated . Unsatisfied with his physical conditioning , he began attending a gym as an 11 @-@ year @-@ old . Despite this , Colón has stated that he did not intend to become a wrestler at first and only did so as sport . It was not until completing his college education that he decided to train , after noticing that his condition was on par with the wrestlers despite his age . However , despite this Colón initially expected to retire within ten years and run a private business . He admits that during this initial stage , he received peer pressure to match the accomplishments of his father . Colón 's decision to sign with World Wrestling Entertainment was a controversial one among the Puerto Rican wrestling community . He was criticized by the locals , labeled as someone who had " sold out " his Puerto Rican wrestling traditions over for the " flash and flair " of the American company . Colón spoke of this in an interview with The Sun in which he stated " I did not care about what they thought . I 've always dreamed of working for the WWE when I was young , and I took that chance when it came " . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Council ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In November 1999 , Colón began working in the World Wrestling Council as a cameraman , then known by his actual nickname " Carly " , being subtly introduced to the television programming . Soon after his first appearance , the promotion 's main heel ( or villainous ) wrestler , Ray González , took an interest in him after learning his identity . After weeks of being pestered , Colón responded by punching González , which resulted in a beat @-@ down by the dominant heel stable , La Familia del Milenio . At Aniversario 1999 , Colón interrupted a match between González and Colón , Sr. , aiding his father by interrupting while wielding a shovel , which became his trademark weapon early in his career . The feud between Colón Sr. and González continued , with him <unk> on his father 's behalf . The final match of this feud concluded in the same manner that the first Aniversario encounter . Soon after , vignettes depicting him training with Isaac Rosario began airing in WWC 's show , <unk> de la Lucha Libre . Colón made his in @-@ ring debut in January 2000 by defeating Félix Tapia , a jobber and member of La Familia . He was immediately booked in a major push , defeating almost the entirety of the heel locker room during the following two weeks . Despite being active for less than three months , he earned the support of the WWC fanbase . 
 On January 29 , 2000 , Colón defeated González to become the youngest wrestler to win the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship . Following his victory , he was engulfed by fans and carried to the locker room by the <unk> de la Justicia , the main fan @-@ favorite stable in the promotion . González countered by creating a coalition of wrestlers that had feuded with Colón Sr. in the past , led by Hercules Ayala and Ramón Álvarez . On February 19 , 2000 , Colón dropped the Universal Heavyweight Championship to González , following intervention from Álvarez . This led to a double feud against Álvarez and Ayala , from which he emerged victorious . During this timeframe , he also wrestled One Man Gang , who was involved a storyline where a $ 10 @,@ 000 bounty was placed by La Familia to " end his career " . On July 16 , 2000 , Colón defeated González to recover the championship in the main event of Aniversario , the promotion 's anniversary event . This was followed with a feud with Curt Hennig , brought in by La Familia , who won the title by pinning him on September 30 , 2000 . Both met in a rematch the following event , with the championship being held @-@ up following a time limit draw . On November 25 , 2000 , Colón <unk> the belt by defeating Hennig in a no @-@ disqualification contest without time limit . On December 3 , 2000 , Colón wrestled " The Botswana Beast " Benjamin Peacock to a double count out . In his next match , he defeated Horace Hogan . 
 González turned on Hennig and brought in Jerry Flynn to recapture the title . Colón won their first encounters , but Flynn won the Universal Heavyweight Championship on February 17 , 2001 . He resumed his feud with González , before migrating to another angle against La Familia 's main tag team , Thunder and Lightning , composed of Reynaldo " Thunder " Rodríguez and Alex " Lightning " Cruz . Teaming with his father and bother , Eddie Colón , he earned a victory over them . Thunder and Lightning went on to turn on González , who then pursued a partnership with Colón , looking for him in several locations . At Aniversario 2001 : Septiembre Negro , he teamed with González to defeat Thunder and Lightning . However , the partnership was short lived , with González turning on Colón and regaining control of La Familia . On November 13 , 2001 , Colón participated in the television tapings of the X Wrestling Federation . In his only appearance for the promotion , he defeated David Sierra . On December 1 , 2001 , Colón defeated González to win the Universal Heavyweight Championship , restarting the formula of bringing foreign wrestlers to challenge him . 
 His next feud was against Vampiro , winning the first encounters between them , but losing the title in a no @-@ disqualification contest . A rematch ended in a double disqualification , with the belt being held @-@ up after both assaulted the designated referee . To close this rivalry , Colón defeated Vampiro to regain the Universal Heavyweight Championship . On March 16 , 2002 , he teamed with his bother to defeat Thunder and Lightning and win the WWC World Tag Team Championship . Their reign only lasted a day , losing a rematch the following date . He subsequently formed an alliance with Konnan , winning the belts again on March 26 , 2002 , and holding them for nearly three months . After losing the titles back to Thunder and Lightning , Konnan turned on Colón by attacking his sister , Stacy Colón , with a guitar . He dropped the title in the ensuing feud , recovering it back on November 23 , 2002 . To open 2003 , Colón lost the belt to José " Chicky Starr " Laureano , winning it back the following month . On March 15 , 2003 , he lost the championship to Sabu , before recovering it two weeks later . In May 2003 , Colón wrestled in two tryout matches for World Wrestling Entertainment . His opponents were Tommy Dreamer and Jamie Noble , with both contests ending in a loss . Three different reports scouted his performance in a positive manner , with an official offer being made days after the initial appearances . 
 On June 2 , 2003 , Colón signed a developmental contract with WWE , being assigned to Ohio Valley Wrestling . He made a final appearance in WWC , winning a match over Mike Awesome at Aniversario 2003 . Following this performance , Colón addressed the crowd and vacated the Universal Heavyweight Championship , with the next titleholder being decided in a tournament following his departure . The staff of WWC 's main rival , the International Wrestling Association ( IWA ) , was surprised by the event due to the promotion 's previous association with WWE . They expected the tryout to conclude with the same outcome that the ones that WWE held with their talents ( Germán Figueroa , Ricky Banderas and Andy Anderson ) without any offer being made , deciding to counter the signing 's impact with a storyline that benefited from it . The following month in the tour to promote the Summer Attitude 2003 event , the IWA began announcing the arrival of the " son of a former world champion " and " legend that is universally recognized " to the promotion , which was heavily implied to be Colón , but actually served as a plot device to introduce David Flair . Before the identity was revealed , his music was played over the sound system , only for the crowd to be told by Savio Vega ( Juan Rivera ) that they should avoid " acting like morons " . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 Upon joining OVW , Colón performed under his nickname of " Carly " . On July 5 , 2003 , he debuted by teaming with Luther Reigns and John Hennigan in a loss to Tank Toland , Johnny Jeter , and Matt Cappotelli . In his first singles appearances , Colón defeated Rob <unk> and Mike Mondo . He teamed with <unk> in a loss to Damien Sandow and Simon Dean , after which the team was dissolved . Hennigan then teamed with Cappotelli winning against Colón and his new partner , Joey Mercury . This team scored a win over Carl <unk> & Mondo , before being dissolved itself . Shortly afterwards , his ring name was changed as to the more formal " Carlos Colón , Jr . " , his actual name . His performance in OVW was intercalated by appearances in dark matches that took place before WWE 's main shows . On October 14 , 2003 , he teamed with Dean in a dark match loss to Sean O 'Haire and Matt Morgan that preceded WWE Velocity . In February 2004 , Colón performed as a heel for the first time in his career by joining Bolin Services , a faction led by Kenny Bolin and completed by Shad Gaspard , Jerome <unk> , Demond Thompson , Mike Mondo and fellow Puerto Rican Lourdes <unk> . He was paired with several members of the faction , with his team with Mondo trading wins against the team of Mac Johnson & Seth Skyfire and defeating Adrenaline ( a team composed by Chris Cage and Toland ) twice . His teams with Shad Gaspard and Chris Masters did not meet the same success , losing three consecutive matches , two against Adrenaline and one to The British Knights respectively . Individually , Colón defeated Micah Taylor , but lost to Cappotelli . 
 A trio formed by him , Mondo and Gaspard won a couple of matches over the trios of Skyfire , Mac Johnson , & Demond Thompson and Mike Taylor , Rob Begley & Steve Lewington . However , it also lost to Rod Steele , Mike Taylor & Rob Begley and Mac Johnson , Seth Skyfire , & Big Bad John . The trio wrestled the team of Adrenaline and Wavell Starr to a no contest . While working in OVW , Colón continued to appear in various World Wrestling Council events . Towards the year 's end , he made sporadic appearances and feuded with the " Dominican Boy " Julio César López over the Universal Heavyweight Championship . Colón won a November encounter by disqualification , which prevented the title from changing hands . He won a rematch on December 20 , 2003 , and held on to the Universal Heavyweight Championship for two weeks , losing it to Abdullah the Butcher at WWC 's Three Kings Weekend . During this timeframe , Colón also participated in several dark matches prior to Velocity and Sunday Night Heat , in the first teaming with Brent Dail in a loss to Jim Steele & Mike Barton and on the second losing to Johnny Jeter in singles . WWC scheduled him to wrestle Abyss on April 10 , 2004 , but WWE did not grant the permission to perform at the event , considering that it could be promoted as an interpromotional match against its rival , Total Nonstop Action Wrestling . Throughout March and May , Colón wrestled in dark matches for both the RAW and SmackDown ! brands . The outcome of these unofficial presentations were wins over Paul London , Ruffy Silverstein , Wavell Starr and Ricky Reyes , also including losses to Hardcore Holly , Shoichi Funaki , Shannon Moore and Billy Kidman . 
 His work in OVW was a key plot device in WWC 's main storyline of the year . On May 15 , 2004 , the promotion began a backstage angle where Enrique Cruz told Eddie Colón that Carly Colón was wrestling as a heel in OVW , only for José Rivera , Jr. to dismiss it as " internet gossip " . A subsequent phone conversation between brothers concluded without a direct response on the matter . On June 13 , 2004 , Carly Colón 's role as a heel was made official in a segment where he told his sister that he was no longer interested in his father or the people of Puerto Rico . Consequently , Eddie Colón traveled to the United States to meet with his brother . Upon arriving to the hotel where Carly Colón was staying , he asked to contact him , but the clerk refused to attend him after receiving the response that " Mr. Colón says that he has no brother " and receiving no response upon knocking on the room door . 
 Eddie Colón was expelled from the hotel and tried to attend his brother 's training , but he received the same response and was denied access , buying a ticket for an OVW show held that night . After the event 's start , Carly Colón was shown arriving late and being scolded by Jim Cornette . This skit reflected real conflicts between both . Cornette has stated that during Colón 's stay in OVW he considered him a very talented performer , capable of doing " great stuff " but only did it when he " was on " due to being used to be treated as " wrestling royalty " in his role of " the boss ' son " . Cornette went on to explain the limited role , saying that : " I didn 't feature Carlito , because he thought that he was more advanced than the rest of the guys and was cruising ... But that wasn 't what I wanted to see " . Colón rebuffed this by saying that " they could have done more " with him in OVW and that the reason no to do it was because " Jim Cornette [ doesn 't ] like " him . 
 After noticing the hostile fan reaction and witnessing Carly 's heel tactics from the public , Eddie Colón sneaked and waited by the locker rooms and confronted him , which resulted in a faceoff that concluded with the heel locker jumping him . Upon learning this , Colón Sr. travelled to Kentucky and interrupted an OVW scrimmage , which resulted in Carly Colón asking for his expulsion from the building . This served as setup for a feud between brothers , which saw Carly Colón return to Puerto Rico and mock the fans by stating that they would be " buying PPVs to see [ him ] " and using the recent Puerto Rico national basketball team 's 19 @-@ point victory over the United States national basketball team to claim that they were " conformists " for celebrating a single win . The first match between brothers headlined Aniversario on August 21 , 2004 . Carly Colón won the match by faking a knee injury and then shoving his sister into Eddie Colón when she entered the ring to help , using the distraction to score the pinfall . Two rematches were held the following month at <unk> 3 , the first of which ended in a time limit draw . He lost the rubber match , which concluded with the heel factions assaulting both brothers and Colón , Sr. futilely asking them to join forces . 
 In response to this angle , the IWA began hinting that Colón would be joining a heel stable known as " Capitol Sports " ( borrowing the name that WWC used during the 1970s @-@ 90s ) , which in storyline was being covertly operated by González in cooperation with his " business partners " ( a reference to Colón , Sr. and Jovica ) with the intention of taking over the promotion . In a segment of their television show , the company ran a script where a surprise arrival was announced , which was promoted as " a young wrestler [ ... ] with a tremendous future in the United States [ ... ] who has Capitol flowing trough his veins " and with whom González had differences in the past that were overcome when he opened his eyes ( in reference to WWC 's heel turn ) so that he could " complete " an unspecified task in the invasion . The IWA further mocked Colón in a skit where Savio Vega dismissed this revelation , citing that he had video evidence of a match where Flash Flanagan ( who was active in the promotion performing as " Slash Venom " ) pinned him at OVW . This angle was concluded in a segment where González berated an unknown individual during a call for being unable to appear in a card , claiming that " he [ was ] as mediocre as [ his ] father and brother " . 
 = = = = United States Champion ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 In preparation for his debut , the WWE 's creative team began testing different characters for him to use . The first attempt involved the promotion filing copyrights for the use of " Carlitos Colón " , which is the nickname commonly associated with his father in Puerto Rico . On June 7 , 2004 , Colón wrestled under this name in a dark match , this time losing to Sean Morley . However , later than month the name was modified to " Carlito Colón " and he was given the gimmick of a metrosexual man , originally intending to team him with Rico Constantino upon being promoted . However , this idea was dropped when Constantino was legitimately injured in a match . An afro was introduced to his gimmick during the last week of June , when he lost to Shane Helms in another dark match . As his promotion drew nearer , his team with Mondo lost to <unk> and alternate partners Nick Dinsmore and Flash Flanagan . However , it also won a match over <unk> and Steve Lewington . In singles , he was defeated by Elijah Burke . On September 19 , 2004 , he wrestled under the name of " Carlito Caribbean Cool " in a SmackDown ! house show and defeated Scotty 2 Hotty . The creative team settled on this character and he wrestled under it in two more dark matches prior to Velocity , where he was booked in wins over Moore and Chris Cage . 
 On October 7 , 2004 , Colón made his debut as a heel on SmackDown ! as " Carlito Caribbean Cool " ( though later shortened to simply " Carlito " ) , whose gimmick was an apple toting big mouth who would spit apple " in the face of people who don 't want to be cool " . Carlito defeated John Cena for the United States Championship in his first match on the main roster by using a steel chain to knock out Cena . He immediately entered an undefeated streak of 14 contests , during which he successfully defended the title against Rob Van Dam , Rey Mysterio , Eddie Guerrero and Hardcore Holly , also defeating Shannon Moore in a non @-@ title match . Carlito was then involved in a storyline where his bodyguard Jesús stabbed Cena in a nightclub . Carlito held the United States Championship for forty @-@ two days , losing it back to Cena after suffering a legitimate injury . Carlito made his pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at the 2004 Survivor Series , where he represented Team Angle in an eight @-@ man tag team match against Team Guerrero , but did not actually participate in the event after being chased out of the building by Cena . 
 While Carlito was recovering from an injury , he was involved in a comical angle with SmackDown ! ' s general manager , Theodore Long . The storyline consisted of Carlito being forced to do demeaning chores around the arena , such as selling hot dogs , removing snow from parking lots with a shovel and mopping floors . As a result of these actions , Carlito created a petition in support of Long ’ s destitution , but was unsuccessful . On March 26 , 2005 , Colón performed for the first time in six months as Carlito , in a match against his younger brother Eddie Colón during an event in Caguas , Puerto Rico arriving to the stadium in a helicopter and under a massive standing ovation of the thousands of fans gather that night . Carlito made his WrestleMania debut in a non @-@ wrestling role at WrestleMania 21 , in which he interrupted an edition of Rowdy Roddy Piper 's Piper 's Pit , with Stone Cold Steve Austin as the special guest . This event led to an angle in the World Wrestling Council , where Piper and Carlito were booked to wrestle a match on Friday Madness , a special event presented by the company , which Piper won . Following WrestleMania , Carlito created an interview segment entitled Carlito ’ s Cabana . Carlito then entered a feud with The Big Show after a spot where Show refused an offer to work in an enforcer role for Carlito . This feud involved Carlito tricking Show into eating a poisoned apple , and Matt Morgan becoming Carlito 's enforcer . This feud ended with Carlito defeating Show at Judgment Day . 
 = = = = Intercontinental Champion ( 2005 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Carlito was drafted to the Raw brand in the 2005 WWE Draft Lottery , where he defeated Shelton Benjamin for the Intercontinental Championship in his debut match for the brand . He then lost the Intercontinental title to Ric Flair at Unforgiven . Towards the end of 2005 , Carlito was involved in a brand rivalry which led to him discontinuing Carlito 's Cabana . The angle concluded with Carlito wrestling for Team Raw against Team SmackDown ! in a ten @-@ man tag team match at the Survivor Series . 
 In late 2005 , Carlito was added to angles involving the WWE Championship . After defeating Shelton Benjamin in a qualifying match , Carlito was added to the main event at New Year 's Revolution in early 2006 , the Elimination Chamber match . He was one of the final two wrestlers remaining , after eliminating Kane , Chris Masters and Shawn Michaels . He then lost the match to John Cena . 
 Carlito appeared in another World Wrestling Council show that took place on March 15 , 2006 in Carolina , Puerto Rico . He defeated Tyson Tomko , and he hosted an edition of Carlito 's Cabana with Victor Jovica and Carlos Colón . 
 Following New Year 's Revolution , Carlito and Chris Masters joined forces as a tag team . Together they competed against Big Show and Kane for the World Tag Team Championship at WrestleMania 22 . Carlito and Masters lost when Masters accidentally attacked Carlito . Following the match , Carlito confronted Masters , igniting a feud between them . Carlito began showing signs of a face turn when he attacked Chris Masters after his " Masterlock Challenge " the next night on Raw . This storyline came to a conclusion at Backlash , where Carlito defeated Masters via an illegal assist from the ropes . 
 At Vengeance , Carlito fought in a Triple Threat match against Shelton Benjamin and Johnny Nitro for Benjamin 's Intercontinental title . Nitro won the match after pulling Carlito outside of the ring and pinning him . Following Vengeance , Carlito began an on @-@ screen relationship with Trish Stratus , turning face as a result . He also engaged in a short feud with Johnny Nitro and Melina , which ended after Carlito and Stratus defeated Nitro and Melina in a mixed tag team match at Saturday Night 's Main Event . Carlito next feuded with Randy Orton , following a spot where Orton attempted to attack Stratus during a backstage segment . The two wrestlers were booked for a match at Unforgiven and a rematch on Raw ; Orton won both matches . The feud concluded in a match at WWE ’ s annual Tribute to the Troops event , where Carlito won by pinfall . The angle involving Carlito 's relationship with Trish Stratus lasted until Stratus ' retirement from wrestling following Unforgiven . 
 In the final months of 2006 , Carlito competed in several matches involving the Intercontinental Championship . His involvement in this angle ended at Cyber Sunday 2006 , after being elected by the fans to face Jeff Hardy for the championship . Carlito , however , lost the match . During this time period Carlito 's gimmick underwent a slight change and was sold as a " ladies man " , eventually getting involved in another fictional relationship with Torrie Wilson . During this time , Colón was present at Lockout , a special event presented by the World Wrestling Council that took place on December 16 , 2006 . At this event , he defeated Jon Heidenreich to become Universal Heavyweight Champion , but was stripped of the championship minutes later . Carlito participated in the 2007 Royal Rumble , where he was eliminated by The Great Khali . Following the Royal Rumble , Carlito started a feud with Ric Flair , in which Flair insulted Carlito for leaving a show early by claiming that he had no heart , no passion and was undeserving of his spot on the roster . After Carlito challenged and lost to Flair in a match , they were booked as a tag team , with Flair serving as a mentor to Carlito . The team was involved in a Money in the Bank qualifying match which was declared a " no contest " after The Great Khali interfered . This led to a triple threat match the following week which included and was won by Randy Orton . 
 Prior to the WrestleMania 23 , Colón expressed dissatisfaction with WWE management in an interview for not having plans to book him to appear at the pay @-@ per @-@ view and criticized their methods for selecting performers to push , making reference to backstage politics . Carlito , however , did participate in a dark match at WrestleMania , winning in a tag team match with Flair as his partner against the team of Chavo Guerrero and Gregory Helms . The team also lost a number one contender 's match for the World Tag Team Championship against Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch . Carlito turned on Flair after the loss , which turned him heel again . Their feud ended with a match at Judgment Day , where Carlito lost to Flair by submission . Colón appeared in the World Wrestling Council 's Aniversario 2007 event where he faced Scott Hall , who retook his WWE gimmick , Razor Ramon , for the first time since leaving the promotion in 1996 . As a way to promote the match , Hall claimed that the " Carlito Caribbean Cool " character was an imitation of him , giving it the nickname " Mini Razor " . Colón defeated Ramon with his Back Stabber finisher , in a match that included interference by the then @-@ Universal Heavyweight Champion Apolo . All three were involved in a three @-@ way match for the title the following day , which concluded with Ramon pinning Apolo . 
 Following his feud with Flair he was involved in angles with The Sandman and Triple H. He then lost to Triple H at Unforgiven 2007 in a no disqualification match where the no disqualification rule only applied to Carlito . In late 2007 , Colón requested his release from the WWE as he was unhappy with the direction of his character . Following a meeting with Vince McMahon , however , he was convinced to stay . On December 10 , 2007 , he was featured in a ladder match at the Raw 15th Anniversary against Jeff Hardy for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , which Hardy won . Carlito defeated Cody Rhodes to qualify for the money in the bank ladder match at Wrestlemania 24 . He failed to win at the event . Carlito then formed a tag team with Santino Marella . The team was placed in several matches involving the World Tag Team Championship , twice being named the number one contenders ; however , they lost the relevant championship matches . 
 = = = = The Colóns ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 As part of the 2008 WWE Supplemental Draft , Carlito was drafted back to the SmackDown brand . After the draft , he asked for a vacation , using this time to attend his father 's official retirement ceremonies at Aniversario 2008 , where he also wrestled against Ray Gonzalez . 
 On September 12 , he re @-@ debuted on the brand turning face , forming a tag team with his brother , Primo . They defeated WWE Tag Team Champions Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder in the match to gain their first victory as a team . Two weeks later , both teams competed in a title match , with The Colóns winning to become tag team champions . Subsequently , Carlito and Primo entered a feud with World Tag Team Champions John Morrison and The Miz . At WrestleMania XXV , The Colóns defeated Miz and Morrison in a tag team unification match , becoming the first team to simultaneously hold both sets of the company 's Tag Team Championships since their creation . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , both Carlito and Primo were drafted back to the Raw brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . At The Bash , the duo dropped the Unified Tag Team Titles to Edge and Chris Jericho in a Triple Threat Tag Team Match also involving Ted DiBiase and Cody Rhodes . Carlito and Primo invoked their rematch clause the next night on Raw , but were unsuccessful . 
 On the July 6 episode of Raw , following their loss to Edge and Jericho , Carlito turned heel by attacking Primo . At Night of Champions , Carlito challenged for the United States Championship in a Six @-@ Pack Challenge , which also involved Primo , but neither of them were able to win the title . On the August 3 episode of Raw , Carlito defeated Primo to end their feud . On the August 13 episode of WWE Superstars , Carlito teamed with Rosa Mendes to defeat Kofi Kingston and Mickie James . Mendes would then become Carlito 's manager until she was traded to the ECW brand in September . 
 After a two @-@ month hiatus , on the November 30 episode of Raw , Carlito returned to confront John Cena , after Cena challenged Sheamus to come out to the ring , telling him everyone on the roster were tired of him and that Sheamus was their representative of what the roster believed and then tried to spit apple in Cena 's face , which led to him getting hit with Cena 's finisher , the Attitude Adjustment . The following week , Carlito was defeated by Cena . 
 In February 2010 , Carlito was announced as one of the eight WWE Pros for the first season of WWE NXT . On the February 22 episode of Raw , Carlito was defeated by Christian in a Money in the Bank Qualifying match . The next night on WWE NXT , Carlito teamed with his NXT Rookie Michael Tarver in a losing effort against Christian and his NXT Rookie Heath Slater . On the May 2 episode of WWE Superstars , during his match with Primo , Carlito would stop the match and told Primo they shouldn 't fight when the crowd cheers for two brothers to fight each other . Primo would agree and reunite with his brother , turning heel in the process . On the May 10 episode of Raw , Carlito and Primo attacked R @-@ Truth for Ted DiBiase , who paid them afterwards . On May 21 , Colón was released due to a violation of the WWE Wellness Program and refusal to attend a rehabilitation facility for a reported addiction to pain killers . 
 = = = International and independent circuit ( 2010 ) = = = 
 Following his release , Colón began accepting dates to work for independent promotions . The first promotion to include him in its roster was World Wrestling Today . Colón challenged for the heavyweight titles of Big Time Wrestling , Coastal Championship Wrestling , Canadian Wrestling 's Elite , International Wrestling Cartel and Crossfire Wrestling , but either lost these matches or won by count out . He made short tours for promotions such as Pro Wrestling Syndicate , NWA Southwest , World Wrestling Association , Border City Wrestling , National Wrestling Superstars , Vendetta Pro Wrestling and the Canadian National Wrestling Alliance , scoring wins over the likes of Shane Douglas and Gangrel . On August 7 , 2010 , he made his debut in Lucha Libre USA 's live shows , wrestling as " Carlitos " . On December 2010 , Carlito participated in Inoki Genome Federation in Japan , where he was pinned by Japanese superstar Kendo Kashin . In February 2011 , NWA Southwest in Texas booked Carlito in a match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Adam Pearce . On March 4 , 2011 , Colón , billed as Carlito Caribbean Cool , made his debut for the Mexican promotion Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) , defeating <unk> , Jack Evans and <unk> in a four – way match to advance to the Rey de Reyes tournament finals at the Rey de Reyes pay @-@ per @-@ view . In the finals of the tournament , Carlito was defeated by Extreme Tiger . On October 31 , 2011 , he was booked for the Halloween Lucha Tour event held in Matamoros , Tamaulipas , in which he tagged with Chavo Guerrero and Rikishi <unk> to face Mil <unk> , Dos Caras and <unk> . They repeated the match the following two days in different locations , but replaced <unk> with El Hijo de Canek . On February 4 , 2012 , Colón continued his international tour by <unk> on the World Wrestling Fan Xperience ( WWFX ) Champions Showcase Tour in Manila , Philippines , where he wrestled under his LLUSA name in a win over Snitsky . 
 Colón won Family Wrestling Entertainment 's Heavyweight Championship on October 6 , 2012 , in main event of House of Hardcore 's first show , defeating previous champions Tommy Dreamer and Mike Knox in a three @-@ way match . On October 26 , 2012 , he made a one @-@ night appearance for Wrestling New Classic ( <unk> ) in Japan , losing to Tajiri in the first round of the <unk> Championship tournament . In March 2013 , Colón won the Millennium Wrestling Federation 's Undisputed Championship . He had previously performed for the promotion , mostly in matches involving Benny <unk> ( David <unk> ) between 2011 and 2012 . On June 21 , 2013 , he dropped the FWE Heavyweight Championship to John Hennigan . The following day , Colón defeated Mike Bennett in the House of Hardcore . In July 2013 , he made a one @-@ night appearance for All American Wrestling by headlining the promotion 's Scars and Stripes event , in which Keith Walker was booked as the winner 
 On October 12 , 2013 , Colón lost to Dreamer in the first round of the FWE Open Weight Grand Prix . On September 6 , 2013 , he made his debut for the World Wrestling League marking the first time that he performed for another Puerto Rico @-@ based promotion . In his first appearance , Colón defeated established Mexican performers Blue Demon , Jr. and La Parka II . Two days later , he lost a rematch by submission . Colón was one of the first wrestlers to perform in Qatar Pro Wrestling , the first promotion in this Arabian state . On November 9 , 2013 , he and Rosita defeated Tara and Stevie Richards at House of Hardcore 3 . At Wrestling Alliance Revolution 's Super Leyendas del Ring , Colón won a three @-@ way match for the WAR World Heavyweight Championship . On November 30 , 2013 , at WrestleCade , Carlito was defeated by Matt Hardy for the WrestleCade championship . On December 7 , 2013 , he wrestled at First Wrestling Society 's Amo Del <unk> winning the <unk> World Heavyweight Championship . Moments later , his first contender was confirmed to be Ken Shamrock , who was abandoning a four @-@ year retirement . On March 7 , 2014 , Colón returned to WWL , joining Chavo Guerrero and Fuerza Guerrera in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 match against Juventud Guerrera , Octagon and Ricky Marvin , where his team lost by disqualification . Two days later , he participated in a three @-@ way match for José " Monster Pain " Torres 's WWL World Heavyweight Championship , but was not involved in the outcome after the champion pinned Guerrero . Colón was a member of the International Wrestling Federation 's inaugural roster , where he debuted with a win over Willie Mack . He lost the WAR World Heavyweight Championship to Pablo Marquez on April 19 , 2014 , as part of CCW 's Spring Breakout . 
 = = = Return to WWC ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 On July 11 , 2010 , Colón was booked in a match called " The Three Faces of Fear " at WWC 's Aniversario 2010 which also involved Booker T. The concept of this contest was that he would face three unknown adversaries successively . Colón also performed on a second date of this event , working under a " tweener " concept , representing a morally ambiguous team without clear allegiance . He returned to WWC on September 25 , 2010 at the " Septiembre Negro " event , where he defeated " El Triple Mega <unk> " Ricky Banderas . On November 27 , 2010 , Colón defeated Shelton Benjamin to win the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship at the Crossfire event . He made his first title defense against Banderas at WWC 's last show of the year — Lockout . On January 8 , 2011 , Colón lost the Universal Heavyweight Championship to Banderas , following interference from Shane Sewell . On June 4 , 2011 , Carlito returned to WWC and defeated Steve Corino to win the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship for the thirteenth time . On July 17 , 2011 at Aniversario 2011 Carlito made his first defense of the title against Abyss . In this event , Savio Vega cut a promo pursuing a feud as part of the first interpromotional angle between WWC and the International Wrestling Association . However , this cooperation was stalled due to differences between the administration of both promotions , remaining fruitless for the rest of the year . 
 On October 28 , 2011 , Colón returned to WWC first to join his brother and wrestled Gilbert Cruz and his cousin Orlando Colón , before successfully defending the Universal Heavyweight Championship against Masters the following night . On November 11 , 2011 , he won a rematch . At WWC 's Euphoria 2012 , he wrestled in a rematch against Banderas , which was left inconclusive when a video depicting Vega was shown in the <unk> , draining the time limit . Colón dropped the Universal Heavyweight Championship to Gilbert at Noche de Campeones 2012 , failing to win it back in a rematch held at Camino a la Gloria . In this event , he also aided Ray González , which resulted in both receiving an invitation to join La Nueva Familia , a recreation of La Familia del Milenio , proposed by Félix " <unk> " López . González refused this approach , claiming that it was returning to the past . On May 12 , 2012 , Colón also declined the invitation by spitting an apple in López 's face , who countered by ordering Thunder and Lightning to ambush both him and González during a number one contendership match . At Aniversario 2012 , Colón and González defeated Thunder and Lightning , unmasking them for the first time in their career . They teamed once again , but lost a rematch by disqualification . At Septiembre Negro , a third and final encounter was set in a liberation match . Colón was the one to be handcuffed to the ring apron , turning on González upon being released and assaulting Carlos Colón , Sr. when he tried to interfere . 
 During the following weeks , vignettes aired where he berated members of his own family , eventually being confronted by José Huertas González . On October 7 , 2012 , Savio Vega reappeared in <unk> de la Lucha Libre , issuing yet another challenge . However , this time Colón backfired with a challenge of his own , inviting Vega to a special edition of Carlito 's Cabana . The edition of Carlito 's Cabana that featured Vega took place on October 14 , 2012 . In the segment , both traded insults and it finished with the security removing Vega when he tried to assault Colón after the former spat an apple in his face . At Halloween Wrestling <unk> he was disqualified , assaulting his opponent after his father , who served as special referee , did not allow Huertas González to use his finisher . At Honor vs. <unk> , Colón unsuccessfully challenged Ray González for the Universal Heavyweight Championship . A Hair vs. Hair rematch was immediately scheduled for Lockout , which will feature a guest referee elected by popular vote between Vega and Huertas González . The following night marked the first time that Colón participated in a match where his father was among his opponents , but he avoided facing him directly , instead requesting a tag and only entering later to pin González . 
 During this time frame , an angle began in which Colón began pursuing the ownership of WWC . This led to the creation of the Carlito Caribbean Company ( CCC ) , which acquired power when Rivera defeated Victor Jovica following a Huertas González heel turn to force him to sell WWC 's stocks . Despite Rivera 's involvement as a favored heel , Colón was booked in a spot where the new CCC management turned on him . The ownership of WWC was to be decided in a match between Huertas González and Colón , Sr. held on June 29 , 2013 , at Summer Madness in which CCC lost its bid . In the same event , Colón faced Rivera for the first time , dominating throughout the match but losing after being sprayed in the face with " green mist " . On July 13 , 2013 , he won a rematch by countering this same tactic . On August 18 , 2013 , Colón issued an open challenge for Aniversario 40 , calling himself a " Puerto Rican icon " . The following week the challenge was accepted by Sting , a former WCW and TNA world heavyweight champion commonly known as " The Icon " . When Colón was preparing to finish the match with the Back Stabber , a masked wrestler known as Rey Fénix intervened and costed him the match . Since that mask was usually worn by Ray González , he began pursuing a match against him . On November 16 , 2013 , Colón defeated Fénix in a Hair vs. Mask match that served as the main event of Crossfire . However , when Rey Fénix unmasked , he was Ricky Santana instead of González . 
 At Lockout 2013 , Colón defeated Germán Figueroa but lost to Rivera , who was now wrestling under a character known as " TNT " . After losing two consecutive matches to Ray González , he was able to win a tag team match where he joined Huertas González . However , after the event was over his partner turned on him , forcing a face switch and beginning a new feud . He joined Ray González to win the first match of this storyline . Afterwards , Huertas González challenged Colón to place his hair on the line , but was ignored on several occasions . The wager became official following the outcome of a match that made it mandatory . On March 30 , 2014 , Colón defeated Huertas González in a one @-@ sided bet match , remaining undefeated in matches where his hair was at risk . After Carlos Colón , Sr. was announced as a member of the 2014 WWE Hall of Fame Class , he participated in two homages held by WWC . On April 6 , 2014 , Colón joined the other members of the family during the official induction ceremony . On July 19 , 2014 , Carlito defeated TNT to win his first WWC Puerto Rico Heavyweight Championship . On October 10 , 2014 , Colón lost the title against Gilbert . On January 24 , 2015 , at Hora de la Verdad , Carly Colón defeated Mighty Ursus and Ray González to win the WWC Universal Championship . 
 On March 5 , 2016 , Carlito defeated Mr. 450 to win the WWC Universal Championship . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Back Cracker / Back Stabber ( Double knee backbreaker ) 
 Figure four leglock – OVW ; used as a regular move in WWE 
 Inverted facelock spun out into a DDT – 2005 – 2006 
 Overdrive – 2004 
 Signature moves 
 Backflip off the top rope over a standing opponent , sometimes while springboarding 
 Dropkick , sometimes from the top rope or while springboarding 
 Fireman 's carry flapjack 
 Flowing DDT 
 Hurricanrana 
 Japanese arm drag 
 Lifting reverse STO 
 Monkey flip 
 Running knee lift followed by a running clothesline 
 Snap swinging neckbreaker 
 Springboard back elbow 
 Springboard moonsault , sometimes while performing a double jump 
 Springboard senton bomb , sometimes while performing a double springboard 
 Sitout spinebuster 
 Spitting apple pieces into an opponent 's face 
 Managers 
 Trish Stratus 
 Torrie Wilson 
 The Bella Twins 
 Brie Bella 
 Rosa Mendes 
 Nicknames 
 " The Caribbean Bad Apple " 
 Entrance themes 
 " El que lo <unk> no lo <unk> " by Los Hijos de los <unk> & Apollo Sound ( 1999 @-@ 2003 ; WWC ) 
 " Tony 's Theme " by Giorgio Moroder ( 2004 ; WWC ) 
 " Cool " by Jim Johnston ( 2004 – present ; WWE / WWC ) 
 " Burn It To The Ground " by Nickelback ( 2010 ; LLUSA ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Family Wrestling Entertainment 
 FWE Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 First Wrestling Society 
 <unk> World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Funking Conservatory 
 FC Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Magnum Pro Wrestling 
 Magnum Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Millennium Wrestling Federation 
 MWF Undisputed Championship ( 1 time , Current ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 27 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 2006 
 Puerto Rico Wrestling 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2008 ) - with Primo 
 Wrestling Alliance Revolution 
 WAR World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Puerto Rico Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship ( 16 times , current ) 
 WWC World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Eddie Colón ( 1 ) and Konnan ( 1 ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Primo 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Primo 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Early life of David Lynch = 
 David Keith Lynch ( born January 20 , 1946 ) is an American filmmaker , television director , visual artist , musician and occasional actor . Known for his surrealist films , he has developed his own unique cinematic style , known as " Lynchian " , and is characterized by its dream imagery and meticulous sound design . The surreal and , in many cases , violent elements to his films have earned them the reputation that they " disturb , offend or <unk> " their audiences . 
 Although born in Missoula , Montana , Lynch spend his youth traveling across the United States due to his father Donald 's job for the Department of Agriculture ; as a result , Lynch attended school across several states . Raised in a contented , happy family , the young Lynch was a member of the Boy Scouts of America , reaching the highest rank of Eagle Scout . However , Lynch took to building fireworks and playing the bongos in a Beat Generation nightclub as acts of rebellion , before discovering that he could translate his childhood fascination with drawing and painting into a career in fine art . Lynch and his close friend Jack Fisk travelled to Austria hoping to study under Oskar Kokoschka , but the artist was not present at the time . 
 Returning the United States , Lynch enrolled in the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia . Although initially focusing on oil painting and sculpture , Lynch found himself beginning to experiment with short films . After completing several short animated and partly animated works , Lynch was prompted by his mentor Bushnell Keeler to apply for one of four annual grants from the American Film Institute to fund another film project . The resulting film , The Grandmother , paved the way for Lynch 's scholarship at the AFI Conservatory ; while studying there , Lynch wrote and directed a film which would take several years to gestate — his feature @-@ length début and the beginning of his commercial film career , Eraserhead . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lynch was born on January 20 , 1946 in Missoula , Montana to Donald and Edwina " Sunny " ( née <unk> ) Lynch , who met as students at Duke University . David was the eldest of three siblings . For the most part a housewife , Sunny also tutored English lessons , having earned her degree at Duke . Donald Lynch worked for the United States Department of Agriculture , which necessitated moving the family around the country — they relocated to Sandpoint , Idaho , when David was two months old , before his fourteenth birthday the family had lived in Spokane , Washington , Durham , North Carolina , Boise , Idaho , and Alexandria , Virginia . The young Lynch easily coped with this transitory lifestyle , and was popular throughout his school years , having found it easy for an " outsider " such as himself to make friends after moving to a new school . Lynch 's elementary and junior high school educations were taken in Boise ; he attended high school in Alexandria . 
 Lynch recalls having a happy childhood , although he suffered from bouts of agoraphobia in his youth , especially after having been scared by a screening of Henry King 's 1952 film Wait Till the Sun Shines , Nellie , when he was six years old . He would develop a brief habit of wearing three neckties at a time , which he understands to have been a manifestation of his personal insecurity . He also points to a particular image from his childhood that shaped his understanding of the world — " [ my youth ] was a dream world , those droning airplanes , blue skies , picket fences , green grass , cherry trees . Middle America as it was supposed to be . But then on the cherry tree would be this pitch oozing out , some of it black , some of it yellow , and there were millions and millions of red ants racing all over the sticky pitch , all over the tree . So you see , there 's this beautiful world and you just look a little bit closer and it 's all red ants " . 
 Finding the calm and contented nature of his home life frustrating , the young Lynch sought ways to secretly rebel against his parents . He and a friend took to building bottle rockets ; after a particularly powerful rocket severely damaged his friend 's foot they switched their focus to making and detonating pipe bombs for fun instead . A large pipe bomb which they detonated in a school swimming pool was heard by several neighbors , and resulted in Lynch and his friend being arrested . Lynch was also a member of the high school fraternity Alpha Omega Upsilon , and learned to play the bongos while frequenting a nightclub popular with the Beat Generation , earning the nickname " Bongo Dave " . 
 Lynch was a member of the Boy Scouts of America , attaining the rank of Eagle Scout . His childhood friend Toby Keeler posited that this experience and the " be prepared " Scout motto formed the basis of Lynch 's " do it yourself " approach to filmmaking and art , and shaped his ability to " make things out of nothing " . Lynch had initially joined the Scouts in order to " put it behind " him , but continued at the urging of his father ; he eventually summed up his biography as " Eagle Scout . Missoula , Montana " in a 1990 press release for Wild at Heart . As a Boy Scout , Lynch was present at John F. Kennedy 's presidential inauguration , which took place on Lynch 's 15th birthday . When Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 , Lynch was the first in his school to hear of it , as he was working on a display case rather than attending class . 
 = = Art student = = 
 Lynch 's interest in art began at an early age ; he recalled his father bringing home large amounts of paper from his government job , and because his mother would not let him use coloring books , he would draw and paint on this spare paper . Lynch 's early artwork mostly depicted war @-@ related imagery — weaponry and fighter planes — based on his collection of toy military equipment . He frequently depicted the M1917 Browning machine gun , calling it a favorite of his . Later in life , however , Lynch was summoned for conscription for the Vietnam War , and declared 4 @-@ F , " unfit for military service " , for undisclosed health reasons . 
 At the age of 14 , Lynch 's family visited Hungry Horse , Montana , staying with his aunt and uncle near Hungry Horse Dam . Their next @-@ door neighbor was an artist named Ace Powell , whose style was similar to that of Charlie Russell and Frederic Remington . Powell and his wife were both painters , and would let Lynch work with their materials while he was staying in town ; however , Lynch found it difficult to believe that art was something in which he could forge a career , believing it to be a hobby peculiar to the Western United States . Returning home to Virginia , Lynch met Keeler 's father Bushnell , who was also an artist . Lynch rented space in the elder Keeler 's studio and , alongside his friend Jack Fisk , worked on his art until he had finished school . From there , he enrolled in the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , but soon dropped out . 
 Bushnell Keeler has commented that Lynch 's dropping out of the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston " worked to his detriment then , but may now be one of his greatest assets " . Keeler recounts that Lynch left the school after allowing one of his tutors to use his dormitory room ; the tutor , who was in the process of divorcing his wife , spent several nights in Lynch 's room with his mistress , while Lynch obligingly slept on the floor . Rather than confronting the tutor about this situation , Lynch felt it would be easier to leave school instead . Keeler and film critic Greg Olson posit that this desire to avoid confrontation has shaped the characters he has written , who often seek an " escape route " in the face of adversity rather than face it directly . Olson has further added that several of Lynch 's later works — Dune and Twin Peaks — would have " been less compromised " had Lynch been of a more adversarial personality ; as they were , both projects featured interference from film and television studios respectively . 
 After this , Lynch and Fisk planned a three @-@ year strip to Austria , planning to study under the expressionist painter Oskar Kokoschka , who was one of Lynch 's " least favorite painters " . However , when Lynch arrived in Salzburg , he found that the artist had left , prompting him to return to America . Before leaving Europe , the pair travelled to Athens by train , to visit Lynch 's girlfriend at the time , who was holidaying there . However , when they arrived in Greece they discovered that she had already left for home ; Lynch and Fisk departed for America shortly thereafter . Upon his return , Lynch enrolled in the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia , devoting himself to painting and sculpture . Lynch 's paintings , which were influenced by the works of Francis Bacon , were executed in oils , and following an incident in which a moth landed in a still @-@ drying piece , he began embedding insects in his work . 
 Life in Philadelphia was disturbing for Lynch , who had by this point married his pregnant girlfriend Peggy <unk> . The two had met in 1964 , and wed in 1967 , shortly before the birth of their daughter Jennifer . 
 Lynch and his family spent five years living in an atmosphere of " violence , hate and filth " . The area was rife with crime , which would later inform the tone of his work . Describing this period of his life , Lynch said " I saw so many things in Philadelphia I couldn 't believe ... I saw a grown woman grab her breasts and speak like a baby , complaining her nipples hurt . This kind of thing will set you back " . In Olson 's David Lynch : Beautiful Dark , the author posits that this time contrasted starkly with the director 's childhood in the Pacific Northwest , giving the director a " bipolar , Heaven @-@ and @-@ Hell vision of America " which has subsequently shaped his films . 
 = = Short films = = 
 Lynch 's experiments with moving sculptures led to his piquing interest in the medium of motion picture film . In 1966 , with the help of Fisk , Lynch animated a one @-@ minute short feature called Six Figures Getting Sick ; the project cost $ 200 and was filmed with a sixteen millimeter camera . The sculpture @-@ motion picture was a simple animated loop of several figures growing increasingly nauseous before vomiting down the screen . This loop was repeated several times and accompanied by the sound of an air @-@ raid siren ; however , it was projected onto a cast of Lynch 's head in order to distort the footage further . 
 After Six Figures Getting Sick was completed , one of Lynch 's classmates , H. Barton Wasserman , offered to pay $ 1000 for a similar motion picture to be made for an art installation in his home . Lynch purchased a clockwork Bolex movie camera , and began to teach himself cinematography . Lynch worked on the commissioned motion picture over the next two months , crafting a mix of live action and animation in a split @-@ screen format . However , when the film was developed , an error along the way had rendered it indistinguishable and unusable . Wasserman allowed Lynch to keep the remainder of the budget , which he used to fund the production of a new motion picture project , The Alphabet . 
 Similarly to Wasserman 's unfinished commission , 1968 's The Alphabet was composed of both live action and animation . The abstract 16mm movie was inspired by an experience related by Lynch 's wife Peggy , who had once seen her niece reciting the alphabet in her sleep while suffering from a nightmare . Peggy was the sole live action actor in the film , which depicted in animation the nightmares of a young girl . The film displays several elements that would continue throughout Lynch 's oeuvre , including the use of meticulous sound design to convey unease . The sound of his infant daughter crying was recorded on a faulty cassette recorder and included in the film 's soundtrack ; the malfunctioning of the recorder not only lent the sound a <unk> distorted quality but allowed Lynch to return it to where he had purchased it from upon finishing the film . 
 Although Lynch was enthusiastic about the medium of film , he realized that the wages from his job as a printer would not stretch to cover future budgetary needs . Bushnell Keeler recommended that Lynch apply for a grant from the newly formed American Film Institute ( AFI ) . Together with a copy of The Alphabet , Lynch 's application included an eight @-@ page treatment for a project titled The Grandmother . The submission was successful , and Lynch was awarded one of four annual grants from the AFI , totalling $ 5 @,@ 000 . The Grandmother was filmed in Lynch 's home in Philadelphia and starred his friends and colleagues . Lynch 's initial grant of $ 5 @,@ 000 was later supplemented by a further $ 2 @,@ 200 also supplied by the AFI . Completed in 1970 , it relates the story of a family grown from the ground like plants ; the neglected and abused son seeks to create stability in his life by growing a grandmother from a seed . Once again , the film mixes animation with live action footage , and features the use of both pallid stage make @-@ up reminiscent of the silent film era , and a similarly washed @-@ out use of colour to The Alphabet . Running for thirty minutes , the film has been described by critics Colin Odell and Michelle Le Blanc as " fall [ ing ] into that twilight category of film that is too short to be a feature and too long to be a short film " . 
 = = AFI Conservatory = = 
 Having completed The Grandmother , Lynch realized that filmmaking was the career he wanted to pursue . He accepted a scholarship at the AFI Conservatory , Lynch moved to Los Angeles , California , with his family , and recalls having felt " the evaporation of fear " after leaving the crime and poverty of Philadelphia . Lynch was dissatisfied with the Conservatory and considered dropping out , but he changed his mind after being offered the chance to produce a script of his own devising . He was given permission to use the school 's full campus for film sets ; he converted the school 's disused stables into a series of sets and lived there . He began work on a script titled Gardenback , based on his painting of a hunched figure with vegetation growing from its back . Gardenback was a surrealist script about adultery , featuring a continually growing insect that represented one man 's lust for his neighbor . The script would have resulted in a roughly 45 @-@ minute @-@ long film , which the AFI felt was too long for such a figurative , nonlinear script . 
 In its place , Lynch presented Eraserhead , which he had developed based on a daydream of a man 's head being taken to a pencil factory by a small boy . Several board members at the AFI were still opposed to producing such a surrealist work , but they were persuaded when dean Frank Daniel threatened to resign if it was vetoed . Eraserhead 's script is thought to have been inspired by Lynch 's fear of fatherhood ; Jennifer had been born with " severely clubbed feet " , requiring extensive corrective surgery as a child . Jennifer has claimed that her own unexpected conception and birth defects were the basis for the film 's themes . 
 Pre @-@ production work for Eraserhead began in 1971 . However , the staff at the AFI had underestimated the project 's scale — they had initially green @-@ lit Eraserhead after viewing a twenty @-@ one page screenplay , assuming that the film industry 's usual ratio of one minute of film per scripted page would reduce the film to approximately twenty minutes . This misunderstanding , coupled with Lynch 's own meticulous direction , caused the film to remain in production for a number of years . In an extreme example of this labored schedule , one scene in the film begins with Jack Nance 's character opening a door — a full year would pass before he was filmed entering the room . Buoyed with regular donations from Fisk and his wife Sissy Spacek , production continued for several years . Additional funds were provided by Nance and his wife , actress Catherine Coulson , who worked as a waitress and donated her income , and by Lynch himself , who delivered newspapers throughout the film 's principal photography . 
 During one of the many lulls in filming , Lynch was able to produce the short film The Amputee , taking advantage of the AFI 's wish to test new film stock before committing to bulk purchases . The short piece starred Coulson , who continued working with Lynch as a technician on Eraserhead . Eraserhead 's production crew was very small , composed of Lynch ; sound designer Alan Splet ; cinematographer Herb Cardwell , who left during production and was replaced with Frederick Elmes ; production manager and prop technician Doreen Small ; and Coulson , who worked in a variety of roles . Lynch began his interest in Transcendental Meditation during the film 's production , adopting a vegetarian diet and giving up smoking and alcohol consumption . 
 = = After Eraserhead = = 
 Eraserhead premièred at the Filmex film festival in Los Angeles , on March 19 , 1977 . On its opening night , the film was attended by 25 people . The second evening had 24 viewers . Ben Barenholtz , head of distributor Libra Films International , persuaded local theater Cinema Village to run the film as a midnight feature , where it continued for a year . After this , it ran for ninety @-@ nine weeks at New York 's Waverly Cinema , had a year @-@ long midnight run at San Francisco 's Roxie Theater from 1978 to 1979 , and achieved a three @-@ year tenure at Los Angeles ' <unk> Theatre between 1978 and 1981 . The film has grossed $ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the United States as of 2012 . Following the release of Eraserhead , Lynch tried to find funding for his next project , Ronnie Rocket , a film " about electricity and a three @-@ foot guy with red hair " . 
 Lynch met film producer Stuart Cornfeld during this time . Cornfeld had enjoyed Eraserhead and was interested in producing Ronnie Rocket ; he worked for Mel Brooks and Brooksfilms at the time , and when the two realized that Ronnie Rocket was unlikely to find sufficient financing , Lynch asked to see some already @-@ written scripts to work from for his next film . Cornfeld found four scripts he felt might interest Lynch , but on hearing the name of the first , Lynch decided his next project would be The Elephant Man . 
 = Fra Mauro formation = 
 The Fra Mauro formation ( or Fra Mauro Highlands ) is a <unk> formation on the near side of Earth 's Moon that served as the landing site for the American Apollo 14 mission in 1971 . It is named after the 80 @-@ kilometer @-@ diameter crater Fra Mauro , located within it . The formation , as well as Fra Mauro crater , take their names from a 15th @-@ century Italian monk and mapmaker of the same name . Apollo 13 was originally scheduled to land in the Fra Mauro highlands , but was unable due to an in @-@ flight technical failure . 
 Fra Mauro is thought to have been formed from ejecta , or debris , from the impact which formed Mare Imbrium . During Apollo 14 , the crew members sampled ejecta from Cone crater , a feature close in proximity to the immediate landing site of the mission , which provided insight into the composition of material deep inside the formation . Data from the mission has helped to determine the approximate age of Mare Imbrium , suggesting that it is no more than about 4 @.@ 25 billion years old . 
 = = Formation and geography = = 
 Fra Mauro is a widespread hilly geological area covering large portions of the lunar surface around Mare Imbrium , and is thought to be composed of ejecta from the impact which formed Imbrium . The area is primarily composed of relatively low ridges and hills , between which exist undulating valleys . Much of the ejecta blanket from the Imbrium impact is covered with debris from younger impacts and material churned up by possible moonquakes . Debris found in the formation may have originated from deep beneath the original crust , and samples collected there could give insight into the geologic history of the Moon . The petrology of the formation , based on data obtained on Apollo 14 , indicates a history of impact and ejection possibly spanning over approximately 500 million years . 
 A relatively recent impact created Cone crater , 1 @,@ 000 feet across and 250 feet deep , near the landing site of Apollo 14 . One of the main objectives of that mission was to sample the original Imbrium material located on its rim . 
 Samples obtained of the Fra Mauro formation during Apollo 14 suggest that the impact that formed the Imbrium basin is no older than 4 @.@ 25 billion years . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Analysis of Apollo 14 samples suggests that there are five major geologic constituents present in the immediate landing area : regolith breccias , fragmental breccias , igneous lithologies , <unk> lithologies , and impact @-@ melt lithologies . Samples of each of these compositions were recovered in one or both of two major surface units of the Apollo 14 landing site within Fra Mauro : the immediate impact blanket of Cone crater , about 25 million years old , and surrounding older terrain . 
 During Apollo 14 , astronauts Alan Shepard and Edgar Mitchell recovered ejecta material from the Cone crater impact , which is believed to have excavated Imbrium impact material from a possible depth of about 80 m ( 260 ft ) . Most of the samples returned from the Moon from Fra Mauro are classified as breccias from the vicinity of Cone crater . 
 Studies conducted upon samples from Apollo 14 have shown that the samples do not support the possibility that the landing site is floored by volcanic rocks , or basalts . Basalts are sparse in samples of Cone crater ejecta , but somewhat abundant in samples recovered farther west , on the opposite side of the immediate landing site . Two explanations have been presented for this : ( 1 ) the majority of basalt in the landing site lies below the depth of excavation of Cone crater or ( 2 ) the presence of a basalt flow beneath the landing area excavated by a nearby crater with a diameter of 100 m ( 330 ft ) . It is believed that the former seems more likely , as the basalts are similar to the basalts recovered at Cone crater . It is inconclusive whether or not the recovered basalts have a direct affiliation with the landing site , as it is located in a valley between ridges , and there exists the possibility that the basalts were merely deposited there as a result of other impact events . 
 The Apollo 14 crew members sampled boulders in the ejecta of Cone crater . These boulders appeared to be layered and fractured breccias , contrasting from the appearance of the surrounding area because of their older age . As these boulders increase in size and number closer to Cone crater , it is believed that they originate from the greatest depth of excavation of Cone crater . These boulders show what is believed to be general characteristics of the Fra Mauro formation : clastic texture , stratification , and jointing or fracturing . 
 = = Landing site selection = = 
 As Apollo 14 was an early Apollo mission , landing sites were restricted to equatorial regions for technical reasons . After Apollo 12 demonstrated the ability to land at a pre @-@ specified landing zone , mission planners considered landings in rough , but geologically interesting areas of the Moon . 
 The aborted Apollo 13 mission was originally scheduled to land at Fra Mauro , with Apollo 14 scheduled to land in the Littrow region of Mare <unk> . After Apollo 13 failed to land , it was decided to re @-@ target Apollo 14 to Fra Mauro , as it was regarded as more interesting scientifically than the Littrow site . There , Apollo 14 had the objective of sampling ejecta from the Imbrium impact to gain insight into the Moon 's geologic history . A landing site near the freshly formed Cone crater was chosen , as this crater served as a ' natural drill hole ' to allow the astronauts to obtain Imbrium ejecta , the primary objective of the mission . 
 = The Boat Race 1979 = 
 The 125th Boat Race took place on 17 March 1979 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The 150th anniversary race was won by Oxford by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ lengths . For the first time in 50 years , neither crew featured foreign rowers , while Cambridge 's stroke was replaced just hours before the race . Goldie won the reserve race in the slowest time in the history of the race while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1978 race after Cambridge sank . Cambridge , however , led overall with 68 victories to Oxford 's 55 . The race was sponsored for the third consecutive year by Ladbrokes . Former Oxford Blue Ronnie Howard was the umpire for the race . To allow for television viewing , the start time of the race ( 2 p.m. ) was an hour earlier than the traditional flood tide . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Oxford were being coached for the sixth consecutive time by Daniel Topolski who had himself rowed in the 1967 and 1968 races . As coach , Topolski had suffered just one defeat . Cambridge 's head coach was Czechoslovakian former international rower Bohumil Janoušek ; although a double Olympic medallist , he was still cautious of the event : " It 's a peculiar race . The distance , the bends , the fact that only two crews race , the fact that during the course you encounter all sorts of water and wind conditions . " Janoušek had been employed in order to prevent Cambridge losing for the fourth consecutive time , an occurrence which last took place following the 1912 race . Preparations for the race were hampered by appalling weather conditions : horizontal sleet and snow made practice rows challenging . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Both crews weighed an average of 13 st 4 lb ( 84 @.@ 2 kg ) ; Henderson , the Cambridge cox weighed 13 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) more than his Dark Blue counterpart . In the week leading up to the race however , Cambridge 's Andy Grey was struck down by gastroenteritis . While he recovered , his roommate John Woodhouse became ill and withdrew from the race three hours prior to the event . Woodhouse was replaced by Graham Phillips ( who weighed 8 pounds ( 4 kg ) less than Woodhouse ) and the Light Blue boat was reorganised , with Phillips rowing at three and Nick Davies moving to stroke . Oxford 's crew contained four returning Blues , with Boris Rankov making the second of what would become six appearances in the race . Cambridge welcomed back four Blue rowers and the cox Henderson , all of whom had rowed the previous year . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss ( for the fifth consecutive year ) and elected to start from the Surrey station . Conditions were calm – Desmond Hill writing in The Daily Telegraph described the river as " glassy " – and the tide , as a result of the earlier start time , was very weak . The two boats were at 45 degrees to one another as the umpire dropped the flag to signal the start and within a minute , Oxford were clear of Cambridge . Oxford held a lead of two lengths by Craven Cottage and passed the Mile Post five seconds ahead , and extended their lead to eight seconds by the time the crews shot Hammersmith Bridge . Davies brought two two pushes out of the Light Blues at Chiswick Eyot but Oxford maintained their lead and passed the finishing post in 20 minutes 33 seconds , three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead of Cambridge . It was Oxford 's fourth consecutive victory and their fifth in six years . 
 Taking place 30 minutes before the main race , the reserve race saw Cambridge 's Goldie defeat Oxford 's Isis by twelve lengths and thirty seconds . As of 2014 , the winning time of 22 minutes 50 seconds is the slowest time in the history of the event . It was Goldie 's third consecutive victory , and their eleventh in thirteen years . Cambridge won the 34th Women 's Boat Race , making it their third in a row , and their sixteenth victory in seventeen years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford cox , Peter Berners @-@ Lee suggested : " I got some help from the tide at the beginning , but very little later . I was expecting a neck @-@ and @-@ neck race and I couldn 't believe we were a length up at Fulham . " 
 = Kepler @-@ 8b = 
 Kepler @-@ 8b is the fifth of the first five exoplanets discovered by NASA 's Kepler spacecraft , which aims to discover planets in a region of the sky between the constellations Lyra and Cygnus that transit ( cross in front of ) their host stars . The planet is the hottest of the five . Kepler @-@ 8b was the only planet discovered in Kepler @-@ 8 's orbit , and is larger ( though more diffuse ) than Jupiter . It orbits its host star every 3 @.@ 5 days . The planet also demonstrates the Rossiter – McLaughlin effect , where the planet 's orbit affects the redshifting of the spectrum of the host star . Kepler @-@ 8b was announced to the public on January 4 , 2010 at a conference in Washington , D.C. after radial velocity measurements conducted at the W.M. Keck Observatory confirmed its detection by Kepler . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 The Kepler @-@ 8b planet is named because it was the first planet discovered in the orbit of Kepler @-@ 8 . The star itself ( and by extension , its planet ) was named after the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA @-@ run satellite that searches for terrestrial planets between constellations Cygnus and Lyra that transit , or cross in front of , their host stars with respect to Earth . This crossing slightly dims the star at a regular interval , which is used to determine if the cause of the fluctuation in brightness is indeed due to a planetary transit . The planet was first noted as a potential transit event by the Kepler telescope , and was originally designated as KOI 10 @.@ 01 . Follow @-@ up observations by the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer at Hawaii 's W.M. Keck Observatory yielded additional information about the planet , including its mass and radius . Kepler @-@ 8b was the fifth planet discovered by the Kepler telescope . The first three planets in Kepler 's field of view had already been confirmed , and were used to test Kepler 's accuracy . 
 Kepler @-@ 8b was the last of the first five planets that Kepler discovered . Its discovery , along with the planets Kepler @-@ 4b , Kepler @-@ 5b , Kepler @-@ 6b , and Kepler @-@ 7b , were announced to the public at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington , D.C. This conference took place on January 4 , 2010 . The discovery of these first five planets helped confirm Kepler 's functionality . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 8 is an F @-@ type star in the Lyra constellation that lies approximately 1330 ( ± 180 ) parsecs away from Earth . With a mass and radius of , respectively , 1 @.@ 213 Msun and 1 @.@ 486 Rsun , the star is both more massive and wider than the Sun . With an effective temperature of <unk> K , Kepler @-@ 8 is also hotter than the Sun , although it is approximately three quarters of a billion years younger and is slightly less metal @-@ rich . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 8b has a mass of .603 MJ , but a radius of 1 @.@ 419 RJ . This means that although Kepler is approximately 60 % the mass of planet Jupiter , it is more diffuse , as it is 41 @.@ 9 % wider . Based on its size and the distance from its star , Kepler @-@ 8b is a Hot Jupiter planet , orbiting Kepler @-@ 8 from a distance of <unk> AU every 3 @.@ <unk> days . To compare , planet Mercury orbits the Sun at an average distance of .3871 AU every 87 @.@ 97 days . With an equilibrium temperature of 1764 K , Kepler @-@ 8b was the hottest of the five planets announced during the conference stating its discovery . Kepler @-@ 8b has an eccentricity of 0 , which means that its orbit is very circular . The planet also has a density of .261 grams / cc , approximately 74 % less dense than purified water at 4 ° C. 
 As Kepler @-@ 8b orbits its star , it demonstrates the Rossiter – McLaughlin effect , in which the host star 's spectrum becomes red- and , later , blueshifted , as a body transits it . The identification of this effect established Kepler @-@ 8b as orbiting in a prograde motion ( as opposed to retrograde motion , in which a planet orbits in a direction opposite of its star 's rotation ) . 
 = Jake the Brick = 
 " Jake the Brick " is the twentieth episode of the sixth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written , storyboarded , and directed by head writer Kent Osborne , from an outline by Adam Muto , Osborne , and series creator Pendleton Ward . " Jake the Brick " debuted on November 26 , 2014 on Cartoon Network as the third episode to be aired as part of the " Corn @-@ Ooo @-@ copia " — a week of all @-@ new Adventure Time premieres . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Jake tries to fulfill a bizarre lifelong ambition of being a brick inside a shack as it collapses . Finn , being supportive , leaves a walkie talkie with Jake , who absentmindedly begins to narrate the events around him . Finn and BMO are drawn into Jake 's storytelling , and Finn uses <unk> 's radio station to broadcast Jake 's narration of the trials and tribulations of a rabbit . All of Ooo is soon engrossed in the radio broadcast , unbeknownst to Jake . 
 " Jake the Brick " was based on a doodle made by Tom Herpich during a game of exquisite corpse , making it one of the few episodes of Adventure Time to have been developed out of the game . Osborne at the production crew were so amused by Herpich 's drawing that they decided to build an episode in order to showcase it . The episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 00 million viewers . The episode also was met with mostly positive critical reception , with many commenters appreciating its simplistic and calm nature . In 2015 , it won a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Finn wanders all over Ooo until he manages to locate Jake , who is fulfilling a bizarre lifelong ambition of being a brick inside a shack as it collapses . Finn expresses his support , but decides to head back to the Tree Fort . He leaves a walkie talkie with Jake . After a period of time passes , Jake begins absentmindedly narrating the events around him . Finn and BMO are drawn into Jake 's storytelling , and Finn uses <unk> 's radio station to broadcast Jake 's narration . 
 Jake focuses his attention on the trials and tribulations of a rabbit . First , the rabbit is tormented by a rogue deer . Then , a storm threatens to destroy his home . But luckily , the rabbit enlists the aid of a friendly sea lard and several beavers , and together , the animals are able to rebuild the rabbit 's home . While Jake narrates , the entirety of Ooo tunes into the broadcast and becomes engrossed in the tale of the rabbit , unbeknownst to Jake . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Jake the Brick " was written and storyboarded by Adventure Time head writer Kent Osborne , from a story by Adam Muto , Osborne , Jack Pendarvis , and series creator Pendleton Ward . Osborne also served as the episode 's supervising director , while the art direction was helmed by Nick Jennings . The genesis for the episode can be traced back to a drawing made during a game of exquisite corpse by Tom Herpich . The quick doodle , which featured Finn offering a brick @-@ shaped Jake a sandwich , was accompanied by a short plot synopsis involving Jake 's son Kim Kil Whan . The plot was never used , but Osborne and the crew found the drawing so amusing that they decided to work it into an episode . In reality , " Jake the Brick " was one of the few episodes to have been generated from a game of exquisite corpse . According to Ward , most of the ideas that come from the game are " terrible " . A large portion of the dialogue used in the final episode was written by Pendarvis . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Jake the Brick " aired on November 26 , 2014 on Cartoon Network and was the third episode to air during the " Corn @-@ Ooo @-@ copia " — a week of all @-@ new Adventure Time premieres . It was seen by 2 @.@ 00 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 0 @.@ 4 percent of all households aged 18 to 49 years old were watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . 
 The episode also was met with mostly positive critical reception , with many commenters appreciating its simplistic and calm nature . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " , calling it a " satisfying episode . " He applauded the way that Osborne took the episode 's fairly simple plot structure and framed it around an emergency news broadcast , noting that the episode emphasizes the value of radio as a communicative medium ; he positively compared the episode to the popular podcast Serial , writing that both this episode and the aforementioned podcast emphasize the importance of the audio experience . Furthermore , Sava opined that the episode was one of the show 's more experimental outings , and it was proof that the writers of Adventure Time had full creative control over their series . 
 Dara Driscoll of TV Overmind named " Jake the Brick " one of the six best episodes of Adventure Time 's sixth season . She praised the episode for its calm and peaceful tone , arguing that " it ’ s a … relaxing episode [ and ] as you listen to Jake tell the story of the bunny … you become attached to its well @-@ being just like all of the listeners of the radio show . " 
 In September 2015 , the episode won an Emmy for Short @-@ format Animation , making it the series ' first win in this category . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Michael Gomez = 
 Michael Gomez ( born Michael Armstrong on 21 June 1977 ) , also known as " The Irish Mexican " or " The Predator " , is a former professional boxer . He was born to an Irish Traveller family in Longford , County Longford , Ireland , spending his early years in Dublin before moving to London and later Manchester , England , with his family at the age of nine . 
 Gomez finished his career fighting in the lightweight division ; however , he is more notable for his fights in the featherweight and super featherweight divisions . During his career he has amassed a number of championship title belts : the IBF Inter @-@ Continental featherweight title ; and the British , WBO Inter @-@ Continental , WBA Inter @-@ Continental and WBU super featherweight titles . 
 Gomez , who has been compared to Johnny Tapia , has lived a turbulent life and has often been involved in controversial fights . In Gomez 's initial matches he suffered a number of losses to journeyman opposition but then went on a run of victories which stretched for almost four years . Of his 17 fights between February 2001 and March 2008 , 16 ended in knockouts . Concerns arose about his drinking and failure to adhere to his diet and training regimes after a 2001 loss to Laszlo Bognar . Gomez appeared to be " back on track " in 2003 , with his high @-@ profile fight against Edinburgh @-@ based fighter , " Amazing " Alex Arthur for the British and WBA Inter @-@ Continental super featherweight titles , which Gomez won by delivering a knockout blow to Arthur in the fifth round . 
 In 2006 , Gomez suffered a controversial loss to Peter McDonagh when , in the middle of a round , he dropped his guard and walked out of the ring , later saying he had retired from boxing . He returned to the ring after a 15 @-@ month interval . On 21 June 2008 , Gomez lost what was seen as possibly his last bout — a last chance saloon opportunity to resurrect his career against rising star and Olympic silver medallist Amir Khan . The fight ended with Gomez 's suffering a TKO when the referee stopped the fight in the fifth round . 
 Gomez took the surname Gomez after his childhood hero Wilfredo Gomez . 
 = = Background = = 
 Michael Armstrong was born into an Irish traveller family in Longford , Ireland . His mother went into labour with him while driving , so his partially sighted father took over the wheel but crashed the car into a lamp post on the way to the hospital ; Michael was delivered in the back seat . The Armstrong family moved to Ballymun , Dublin , and , when Michael was age nine , to Manchester , England . 
 Following the family 's move to England , Armstrong 's father 's eyesight failed further due to retinitis pigmentosa . By that time , there were ten children in the Armstrong family . After his younger sister , Louise , died from sudden infant death syndrome , his mother left the family to live with another woman . Armstrong subsequently spent much of his youth in various children 's homes , and was a serial truant from school . His mother had taught him to shoplift as a child , and he was involved in petty crime throughout his youth in Manchester . At nine years old , he began training at Brian Hughes ' Collyhurst and Moston Boys ' Club . He also played football for a local North Manchester team until the club received so many fines for Armstrong 's fighting on the pitch that they were unable to pay them . At this point , he stopped playing football to concentrate on his training in the ring . During his time in the children 's home Armstrong met Alison , who has remained his companion ( and later his wife ) throughout his professional career ; they were parents by the time Armstrong was 17 . 
 = = Early professional career = = 
 Armstrong boxed as an amateur before turning professional in June 1995 . He chose the professional surname " Gomez " when the British Boxing Board of Control ( <unk> ) required him to select another name at the time of his registration as a professional ; there was another boxer in the same weight division using the name " Michael Armstrong " . He chose his ring name in honour of Puerto Rican boxer Wilfredo Gómez , whose videotaped fights Armstrong had studied intently as a youth . The name , combined with Gomez 's " brawling style " , earned him the nickname of " the Irish Mexican " . He developed a ring persona based on this nickname , which has remained popular with fans throughout his career . His ring entrance music is that of a Mexican Mariachi band , a reference to his Hispanic @-@ sounding chosen name , and many of his supporters wear <unk> to his fights and wave Irish flags . Gomez also wears long Mexican @-@ style boxing shorts in the colours of the flag of Ireland and often has the shape of a shamrock shaved into the hair on the back of his head . 
 In his debut fight at the G @-@ Mex Leisure Centre , Manchester , England , Gomez beat previously undefeated Danny <unk> on the undercard of a bill that included Robin Reid and Michael Brodie . Despite this initial win , Gomez 's early career was littered with losses to journeyman fighters such as Greg Upton and Chris Williams . 
 In 1996 , Gomez was charged with murder after a gang fight outside a nightclub in Manchester . Gomez had hit one of his attackers , Sam Parle , who died after his head hit the pavement as a result of the blow . The charge was later reduced to manslaughter and Gomez was cleared after it was ruled that he had acted in self @-@ defence . 
 After this shaky beginning in the professional ranks , Gomez had a run of victories from September 1997 to February 1999 . During this period Gomez won seven straight fights before challenging for his first title belt , the vacant British Central Area featherweight title against Chris <unk> on 27 February 1999 in Oldham . Gomez won the title with a fifth round knockout . He followed his first title win by adding another championship , the IBF Inter @-@ Continental featherweight title , with a second round knockout over Nigel Leake . 
 = = = Move to super featherweight = = = 
 Later that year , Gomez relinquished his championship belts in a bid to move up to the super featherweight division . His first fight in the division , in September 1999 , was for the vacant British super featherweight title , against the experienced and much heralded Liverpudlian fighter Gary Thornhill . Gomez defeated Thornhill with a second round knockout . In November 1999 , Gomez faced off against Mexican Jose <unk> for the WBO Inter @-@ Continental super featherweight title , walking away with the title based on the judges ' scores after the full twelve rounds . In 1999 , Gomez won four title belts , was undefeated during the year and was also named " Young Boxer of the Year " by the British Boxing Writers ' Club . He continued his winning form into 2000 with another run of six wins , and successfully defended his British super featherweight title against Dean <unk> , Carl Greaves and Ian McLeod . 
 = = Bognar and Lear fights = = 
 Gomez 's first fight in 2001 was on 10 February against Hungarian boxer Laszlo Bognar for the WBO Inter @-@ Continental super featherweight title , in Widnes , Cheshire . Gomez had Bognar on the canvas in the fifth round , but Bognar recovered from this knockdown and used his southpaw jab to keep Gomez from closing in . In the ninth round referee Dave Paris stopped the fight following a double left from Bognar , which had Gomez stricken against the ropes . Gomez felt the fight had been stopped prematurely and that he should have been allowed to continue . Gomez later stated that he was suffering from flu and should not have taken the fight . The Daily Telegraph reported after the match that the pre @-@ fight weigh @-@ in and medical examination were not carried out in accordance with <unk> regulations : the volunteer inspector left before Bognar and Gomez had weighed in , and the medical examiner had not detected that Gomez was ill . 
 Gomez sought a rematch against Bognar , and five months later in July 2001 the pair met again , this time in Manchester , resulting in a victory for Gomez . The fight started badly for Gomez when he suffered a flash knockdown in the first round and was down again in the second . Gomez came back to knock Bognar down near the end of the second round . Gomez came out firing at the start of the third round and finished the fight with a fourth and final knockdown to avenge his earlier defeat . He followed up his victory over Bognar with a second round knockout of Scottish fighter Craig Docherty for another British super featherweight title win . 
 His next opponent was unbeaten West Ham @-@ based fighter Kevin Lear on 1 June 2002 , again in Manchester , on the undercard of the Ricky Hatton vs. Eamonn Magee fight . Lear , a former Amateur Boxing Association of England ( ABA ) champion , kept a one @-@ dimensional Gomez at bay with his sharp jab from the outset of the fight . Gomez took several punches to the face , and his nose began to bleed heavily starting in the sixth round . By the eighth round Gomez was slowing , suffering the effects of Lear 's continuing barrage of combinations . At the end of the eighth round Gomez 's trainer Brian Hughes retired his fighter , giving Lear a surprise victory . 
 The defeat to Lear , and the manner in which the fight ended , prompted Hughes , Gomez 's longtime mentor and trainer , to ask Gomez to retire from boxing . This event signalled the end of the relationship between Gomez and Hughes ; soon after , Gomez crossed Manchester to join Ricky Hatton and former Collyhurst gym stablemate Anthony Farnell at the rival Phoenix Gym run by Billy Graham . Gomez followed the defeat to Lear with a string of three wins , all by knockout . 
 During the period between the first Bognar fight and the loss to Lear , Gomez 's life spun out of control . He was " boozing , brawling and womanising " , and was convicted of four drink @-@ drive offenses . During a street fight , Gomez was stabbed and badly injured — his heart stopped beating for 148 seconds while on the operating table . 
 = = Alex Arthur fight = = 
 Following his change in trainer , Gomez was contracted for the highest profile fight of his career against Edinburgh @-@ based fighter " Amazing " Alex Arthur for the British and WBA Inter @-@ Continental super featherweight titles . The fight took place in a sold @-@ out Meadowbank Stadium in October 2003 , in what was the first professional boxing card in Edinburgh in almost 20 years . 
 Prior to the fight , Arthur had opined during interviews that " looking deep into Gomez 's eyes at the press conference , I 'm not sure even he believes he can win . He 'll be so fired up I expect it 'll take me eight or nine rounds but , if his resistance has gone as people are saying , it could be a lot sooner . " With respect to his approach to the fight , Arthur added " I see about 20 ways to beat him . I 'm just looking forward to shutting him up . " 
 Arthur , who was looking to retain the BBBofC Lonsdale Belt , was seen as a rising star in British boxing . He was a strong favourite to win the bout against Gomez , who was perceived to have been through too many battles and abused his body too much , and the fight was seen as a stepping stone on Arthur 's way to a future world championship . However , Freddie Roach , Arthur 's trainer , was criticised when he remained in the United States to coach another boxer instead of continuing to work with Arthur to prepare for his championship match . 
 Gomez proved his critics wrong when he arrived at the fight in prime condition and with aggression , determination and desire . The first two rounds started at a furious pace , with Arthur keeping Gomez at bay with stiff jabs and Gomez working inside with hooks and body punches . The match was turning into a clash of opposing styles , Arthur displaying control and boxing technique and Gomez storming forward with wild ferocity . From the third round the fight began to turn Gomez 's way . Gomez cut Arthur in the third and silenced the home crowd , who were not used to seeing the home @-@ town hero being battered in this manner . Gomez dominated the fourth round and was in full control of the fight — he exposed Arthur 's weak defence and at one stage landed 28 punches without reply . 
 Gomez knocked down his opponent twice before delivering a jarring left hook to Arthur , knocking Arthur to the canvas for the third time . Referee John Coyle stopped the fight , and Gomez won with the resulting TKO in the fifth round . The match was hailed as one of the best fights in Britain for a decade . Boxing promoter Frank Warren called the fight " the greatest contest seen on these shores since Nigel Benn beat Gerald McClellan in 1995 " . Retired Scottish boxer Ken Buchanan said it was one of the best fights he had ever seen . 
 Gomez attended Arthur 's next fight against Ugandan Michael Kizza in Meadowbank , Scotland , but Arthur did not appear when Gomez fought Ben Odamattey for the WBU super featherweight title in Manchester a few weeks later . Gomez pointed this out when being interviewed shortly afterward , adding " Sky Television want a return . Frank Warren , Arthur 's manager , wants a re @-@ match . And most of all so do I. " Arthur responded by saying " the fight ( with Gomez ) is definitely going to happen . Hopefully I 'll get another warm @-@ up fight in June and then take on Gomez in September . " Despite the rhetoric , the two fighters did not meet each other in the ring again . 
 = = WBU world title = = 
 In March 2004 , Gomez fought Ghanaian Ben Odamattey for the WBU super featherweight title at the MEN Arena in Manchester , winning the championship by stopping Odamattey in the third round . He retained his WBU title in his next two fights against Justin <unk> and Leva <unk> with knockout wins . Gomez then faced Argentinian boxer " El <unk> " Javier Osvaldo Alvarez in February 2005 , once again fighting at the MEN Arena in Manchester . WBO super middleweight title holder Joe Calzaghe had been scheduled to top the bill but pulled out of his arranged fight , and Gomez and Alvarez were slotted as the main attraction . 
 The pair clashed at the weigh in , and this antagonism carried into the ring ; from the outset of the fight Gomez tried to draw Alvarez into a brawl . Gomez appeared to win the first two rounds behind stinging jabs , but Alvarez seemed unruffled . In the third round , Alvarez started to take control of the fight and landed several blows to Gomez 's face . Gomez began quickly in the fourth round , attacking Alvarez from behind his jab and working his way through his opponent 's defense . Alvarez appeared content to catch Gomez as he moved forward . Despite Gomez 's strong start , Alvarez dazed Gomez with a stiff right hand shot in the fourth round , after which the Argentinian launched into a furious onslaught . Gomez steadied in the fifth but was visibly tired . Two minutes into the sixth round , Alvarez floored Gomez with a right hook . Gomez beat the count and Alvarez then moved in to continue his attack . Referee Mickey Vann stopped the fight after 2 minutes 25 seconds of the round with Gomez pinned to the ropes and taking significant punishment . 
 = = Peter McDonagh controversy = = 
 Gomez was out of the ring for almost a year following the Alvarez fight and was next due to fight Willie <unk> for the WBU lightweight title , but turned down the opportunity for a chance to fight for an Irish title . Gomez then signed up to fight fellow English @-@ based Irishman , Peter McDonagh , for the Irish lightweight title on the undercard of a Bernard Dunne fight on 28 January 2006 at the National Stadium , Dublin . After the fight was signed Gomez stated " I just can 't wait to get my hands on that Irish title because I 've been desperate to fight in Ireland for years . " 
 Leading up to the fight McDonagh was making visits to see <unk> Uri Geller as " mind coach " to help him prepare mentally for the fight , and Geller also travelled with him to Dublin for the fight . Gomez commented that " I 'm not sure Uri Geller will be of much use to him though because there won 't be any spoons in that ring for him to bend . The only thing I plan on bending is some of McDonagh 's ribs with my body punches . " 
 The first four rounds were relatively close , with Gomez leading according to pundits , but the fight ended in the fifth round under bizarre circumstances when for no apparent reason Gomez stopped fighting and failed to defend himself . He then received a number of unanswered punches from McDonagh before being floored . Gomez rose from the canvas immediately but appeared to ignore the referee and walk towards his corner while the referee continued with his count . Gomez then left the ring as the referee was waving the fight off . RTÉ commentator Steve Collins said " I smell a rat , something 's not right here . " 
 The Boxing Union of Ireland ( BUI ) initially suspended both fighters ' purses , and investigated reports of unusual betting patterns , with large sums of money being placed on McDonagh to win inside the distance and more specifically in the fifth round . Odds on McDonagh to win the fight in the fifth round had been cut from 125 – 1 to 18 – 1 by the afternoon of the bout . Following their investigation , the BUI released the purses to each of the fighters , stating " Michael Gomez and Peter McDonagh confirmed that neither they , their families , nor any person in their camp , as far as they were aware , <unk> on the fight . " The BUI did express disappointment that the bookmaker , Boylesports , who had suspended wagering on the bout due to the unusual betting patterns , had chosen not to reply to the investigators ' queries . Gomez later explained the loss by saying that " it was all very simple , I just came to a decision in there that I need to retire from boxing full stop " . Gomez further indicated that he planned to pursue a career in bodybuilding . McDonagh , meanwhile , claimed that he had won because of Gellar 's assistance leading up to the bout . 
 Gomez sought a second opportunity to fight McDonagh ; in April 2007 , he offered to fight for only his training costs . Finally , their rematch for the Irish lightweight title , to be billed as " Redemption " , was set for 23 May 2008 , but McDonagh pulled out of the scheduled bout . 
 = = Return to the ring = = 
 Gomez found himself once again drawn to boxing after watching a fight between Alex Arthur and Carl Johanneson , and resumed training . In May 2007 , fifteen months after his fight with McDonagh , he returned to the ring to face Daniel Thorpe at the Altrincham Leisure Centre , Manchester . 
 Gomez had left the Phoenix Gym and was now training at Bobby <unk> ' Boxing Academy in Stalybridge , Manchester , and had returned to fight in the super featherweight division . The fight was billed as " The Last Stand " , and the venue was sold out with fellow fighters Ricky Hatton and his brother Matthew Hatton cheering him on from ringside . Gomez won the fight with a stoppage in the third round . The following month Gomez also beat Youssef Al Hamidi , again with a third round stoppage . Following two comeback fights against journeyman opposition Gomez was rumoured to be in line for fights against many of Britain and Ireland 's top level super featherweights and lightweights including Kevin Mitchell , Amir Khan , and Carl Johanneson ; Gomez himself was seeking a rematch against Peter McDonagh . 
 He then signed up to face Leeds 's Johanneson on 19 October 2007 at the Doncaster Dome , Doncaster , England for the British super featherweight title . Johanneson had just come off his second defeat to Armenian Leva <unk> , whom Gomez had knocked out in October 2004 . Before the fight , Gomez was confident , stating " You can 't <unk> me . I 'll jab your head off . If he comes to have a fight with me it is going to be early Christmas for everyone because I don 't know who 's going to go but someone 's going to go and it 's not going to be me . " At the pre @-@ fight press conference in Doncaster both fighters squared up to each other and promised to knock each other out ; during the highly charged face off both fighters had to be kept apart by their promoter and trainers . 
 As many expected , the highly anticipated domestic clash was a savage brawl from round one . Gomez won the opening rounds and threatened to overpower Johanneson from the opening seconds . The Leeds fighter then gained the upper hand as the fight went on , flooring Gomez in the sixth round only for the " Irish Mexican " to rise from the canvas . Soon after , with Gomez appearing unsteady on his feet , referee Mickey Vann stopped the fight . Gomez said that Vann had stopped the fight early , adding , " When the stoppage came , I wasn 't wobbling or staggering , and I only dropped my hands in the fight to show Johanneson that he couldn 't hurt me . But the referee simply got the wrong message . It was bad refereeing . I told him straight away I was fine , but he insisted on showing me to my corner . " The former champion was clear that he wanted another opportunity to fight for the British title . 
 = = Amir Khan fight = = 
 Gomez fought Amir Khan for the Commonwealth lightweight title at the National Indoor Arena , Birmingham , on 21 June 2008 , Gomez 's thirty @-@ first birthday . Khan said that " there is no way he will be as fit as me , so I expect a spectacular stoppage " . Gomez did not attend the scheduled pre @-@ fight press conference , prompting Khan to deride him , and promoter Frank Warren accused Gomez of failing to show respect to Khan and the media . 
 During the fight Khan knocked Gomez to the canvas in the first round with a barrage of hooks and uppercuts . In the second round , Gomez caught Khan with a left hook , knocking down the younger fighter and exposing his defensive weakness ; however , Khan steadied himself after the mandatory eight @-@ count , and cut Gomez above the left eye before the round ended . Gomez caught Khan in the ribs with a left hook in the fourth round which left Khan unstable for a moment , but Khan responded with a flurry of hooks and jabs . Khan landed a " cracking left hook " in the fifth , but Gomez beat the count . At 2 : 32 of the fifth round , referee John Keane stopped the fight when Gomez was knocked into the ropes by a Khan left uppercut . After the fight , Khan said he felt he had moved up a level by " fighting world class fighters like Gomez . " 
 Before the fight , sports writers considered Gomez a tough opponent for Khan , with his " knockout punch " and his success against Alex Arthur in similar circumstances , despite having lost three of his last six fights . Gomez saw the fight as an opportunity to reignite his career ; in an interview shortly before the fight he spoke of how " [ t ] his fight really is my last chance to set myself up for life and become known in every household in Britain " . At the same time , he reflected on the positive effects of his career in the ring , saying " Boxing kept my feet on the ground and gave me a focus . It 's got me through the bad times and calmed me down . If it wasn 't for boxing , I wouldn 't have my beautiful wife and family " . Gomez lives with his wife Alison and their three children in Manchester . 
 = 1988 – 94 British broadcasting voice restrictions = 
 From October 1988 to September 1994 the voices of representatives from Sinn Féin and several Irish republican and loyalist groups were banned by the British government from being broadcast on television and radio in the United Kingdom . The restrictions , announced by the Home Secretary , Douglas Hurd , on 19 October 1988 , covered eleven organisations based in Northern Ireland and followed a heightened period of violence in the history of the Troubles , as well as the government 's belief in a need to prevent Sinn Féin from using the media for political advantage . 
 Broadcasters quickly found ways around the ban , chiefly by dubbing the voice of anyone who was prevented from speaking with the voice of an actor . The legislation did not apply during election campaigns , and under certain other circumstances . The restrictions caused difficulties for British journalists who objected to censorship in various other countries , such as Iraq and India . The Republic of Ireland had its own similar legislation that banned anyone with links to paramilitary groups from the airwaves , but repealed this in January 1994 . This added pressure on the British government to do likewise . The broadcast ban was finally lifted on 16 September 1994 , a fortnight after the first Provisional Irish Republican Army ceasefire . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout the Troubles , UK broadcasters were regularly required to stop or postpone the broadcast of documentaries and other programmes relating to Ireland . One of the most prominent instances of this was the 1985 Real Lives documentary for the BBC , At the Edge of the Union . The programme featured extensive footage of Sinn Féin 's Martin McGuinness and the Democratic Unionist Party 's Gregory Campbell discussing the Troubles , and following direct intervention by the government it was temporarily blocked from being aired . The incident led to a one @-@ day strike by members of the National Union of Journalists , who walked out in protest that the BBC 's independence was being undermined . 
 The months leading up to the introduction of the ban had also seen a particularly intense period of Troubles @-@ related violence . One of the bloodiest episodes of that time was the Ballygawley bus bombing which resulted in the deaths of several British soldiers . Another incident , the killing of two off @-@ duty British soldiers who drove into an IRA funeral procession , brought the media into conflict with the government after journalists present at the funeral declined a Royal Ulster Constabulary request to hand over footage of the incident amid concerns doing so would put them at risk . In response the Prime Minister , Margaret Thatcher , told the House of Commons journalists had a " bounden duty " to assist with the investigation . " Either one is on the side of justice in these matters or one is on the side of terrorism " . Film was subsequently seized from the BBC and ITN under the Prevention of Terrorism and Emergency Provisions Acts . 
 The Conservative government believed there was a need for it to act to prevent Sinn Féin from using the media to defend the actions of the IRA , and the measures were part of a wider government response to the increase in violence , which also included changes to the right to silence and the tightening of rules allowing paramilitary prisoners early release . Further controversy also erupted in September 1988 over an intended edition of the Channel 4 discussion programme After Dark which was to have featured the Sinn Féin president , Gerry Adams , as a guest . The show was dropped after the conservative academic Paul Wilkinson – a Professor at Aberdeen University who specialised in the study of terrorism and political violence – voiced strong objections to its transmission . 
 = = The ban = = 
 On 19 October 1988 , the Home Secretary , Douglas Hurd , issued a notice under clause 13 ( 4 ) of the BBC Licence and Agreement to the BBC and under section 29 ( 3 ) of the Broadcasting Act 1981 to the Independent Broadcasting Authority prohibiting the broadcast of direct statements by representatives or supporters of eleven Irish political and military organisations . The ban prevented the UK news media from broadcasting the voices , though not the words , of ten Irish republican and Ulster loyalist paramilitary groups , as well as Sinn Féin . Among the other groups affected were the Provisional IRA , Irish National Liberation Army , Ulster Defence Association and the Ulster Volunteer Force , although the ban was targeted primarily at Sinn Féin . Addressing the House of Commons on the ban , Hurd said , " the terrorists themselves draw support and sustenance from access to radio and television ... the time has come to deny this easy platform to those who use it to propagate terrorism " , while the Conservative Prime Minister , Margaret Thatcher , said it would " deny terrorists the oxygen of publicity " . 
 The 1981 Act allowed the Home Secretary to introduce measures in the event of a public interest issue . A parliamentary debate was not required , though Hurd acquiesced to one , and the issue was discussed in the House of Commons on 2 November 1988 . The opposition Labour Party introduced an amendment condemning the government 's decision as " incompatible with a free society " , but it was rejected , despite some Conservative MPs voting with Labour . The legislation was condemned by the National Council for Civil Liberties . The National Union of Journalists planned a one @-@ day strike in protest at the ban for 10 November , but the action was called off after its members failed to reach consensus . A group of broadcast journalists subsequently launched a legal challenge to overturn the ban , but in May 1989 the High Court decided the Home Secretary had acted lawfully . A later hearing at the Appeal Court upheld that decision in December 1989 . 
 Hurd 's belief was that the ban would place the print and broadcast media on a level footing , but opponents of the restrictions argued they were affecting the quality of news reporting from Northern Ireland , and consequently people 's understanding of the issues . The broadcaster Scarlett McGwire , one of those to challenge the regulations , said in 1989 , " The case is not just about journalists and being able to report Northern Ireland properly . It is about people not being able to understand what is happening there because it is not reported properly " . Marmaduke Hussey , Chairman of the BBC , called the ban a " very dangerous precedent " . A petition organised by the Campaign for Press and Broadcasting Freedom , and including the signatures of 50 MPs , was presented at 10 Downing Street on the first anniversary of its commencement . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 Media outlets were usually left to interpret the restrictions in their own way , and the ban 's remit was at first applied retrospectively to archive material , though this was later relaxed following government advice . In 2005 John Birt , a former Director @-@ General of the BBC , said Hurd 's announcement came " right out of the blue " , while Danny Morrison , who in 1988 was director of publicity for Sinn Féin , spoke of the total confusion that resulted . " I asked television and radio journalists , ' what can be done ? ' " <unk> was initially used , but one of the main ways the new law was circumvented was by substituting the voices of actors for those who could not speak directly . The BBC and its commercial counterparts compiled a list of actors who could be called upon to record voiceovers for news items and documentaries about the Troubles , often at short notice . The actors frequently spoke the words in real time along with the person whose voice was being dubbed . One such interview with Gerry Adams once appeared on the US CNN network without anyone realising they were hearing an actor speak . 
 The restrictions were also applied to television drama , documentary and discussion programmes . In December 1988 the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , Tom King , ordered Channel 4 to cancel an episode of the US drama series Lou Grant that featured the story of a fictional IRA gunrunner , even though it had aired previously . Mother Ireland , a documentary about women and Irish nationalism that included an interview with Mairéad Farrell , shot dead during an SAS operation in Gibraltar , was also banned . On a later occasion the appearance of the political activist Bernadette Devlin McAliskey on an edition of the BBC 's Nation discussing reasons for political violence was also censored when much of what she said was subtitled . 
 County Sound , a radio station in Surrey , dropped an interview with Errol Smalley , a campaigner for the Guildford Four , although he made a later appearance after successfully overturning the decision . In November 1988 " Streets of Sorrow / Birmingham Six " – a song by The Pogues expressing support for the Birmingham Six and Guildford Four – was subject to the regulations because it included " general disagreement with the way in which the British government responds to , and the courts deal with , the terrorist threat in the UK " . 
 However , the ban was not always enforced . Restrictions were briefly lifted during the 1992 general election , allowing a political debate between the Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams and the Social Democratic and Labour Party leader John Hume to be heard during the election campaign , but the ban resumed once the polls were closed , even preventing Adams ' reaction to the loss of his parliamentary seat from being directly aired . An individual 's real voice could also be broadcast if the news item in question did not directly relate to their political beliefs or paramilitary activities . Similarly , anyone subject to the restrictions who was an eyewitness to an event or incident could be heard . In February 1992 , the voice of Gerard McGuigan , a Sinn Féin councillor , was broadcast when he spoke about an attack on his house by the Ulster Defence Association . Adams was also allowed to speak about a similar attack against his property . On another occasion , the journalist Peter Taylor was given access to inmates at the Maze Prison for a documentary about the jail , but while the prisoners were allowed to speak freely about their personal lives , a complaint by the IRA prisoners ' food spokesman concerning the size of the prison 's sausage rolls had to be <unk> . In 2005 , Francis Welch , a television producer , described the incident as one that highlighted " the surreal nature of the restrictions " . 
 = = Lifting of regulations = = 
 Thatcher 's successor as Prime Minister , John Major , announced a review of the regulations in November 1993 , telling the House of Commons that the general belief within the Conservative Party was that interviews with those subject to the restrictions were being stretched " to the limit and perhaps beyond " . His decision followed a television interview with Gerry Adams , which a Conservative MP , Jill Knight , described as having caused " offence to a great number of people " . Conservative backbenchers and unionist MPs wanted more rigid restrictions , and The Irish Times reported a " widespread feeling " that Major favoured a complete ban , but that journalists were opposed to this . It quoted the BBC 's John Simpson , who said that reporting events from Northern Ireland would become " virtually impossible " . At that time coverage of Northern Ireland @-@ related topics was becoming more frequent with the increasing pace of the peace process . The review was conducted by the Secretary of State for Heritage , Peter Brooke . In February 1994 , Major 's government decided to maintain the status quo . 
 Pressure to reverse the restrictions grew after the statutory instruments of Section 31 of the Irish government 's Broadcasting Authority Act 1960 lapsed in January 1994 . These had prohibited radio and television interviews with representatives of paramilitary groups and Sinn Féin . From that point , anyone in Northern Ireland with access to the Republic of Ireland 's state broadcaster , RTÉ , could hear the voices of anyone still banned from the airwaves by the UK regulations . Responding to the Dublin government 's decision , Gerry Adams said , " Over 20 years of political censorship has served to stunt any hopes of a resolution of the conflict . It has denied the right of information . Good riddance . " The regulations particularly came under the spotlight during a visit Adams made to the United States in 1994 , where he gave a speech that was widely broadcast around the world , but had to be dubbed in the UK because of the ban . In May 1994 the National Union of Journalists launched a legal challenge with the European Commission of Human Rights , seeking to take the British government to court for breach of freedom of expression under the European Convention of Human Rights , but the case was rejected . A similar challenge brought against the Irish government in 1991 over its broadcast ban had also been thrown out . 
 The UK ban was lifted on 16 September 1994 , a fortnight after the first IRA ceasefire was declared . On the same day Major announced that ten roads linking Northern Ireland with the Republic ( which had been closed by British security forces ) would reopen , and promised any negotiated deal on the future of Northern Ireland 's governance would be subject to a referendum . The deputy leader of Sinn Féin , Martin McGuinness , gave his first direct interview to Ulster Television shortly after the restrictions ceased . 
 The decision to end the ban was welcomed by broadcasters . Michael Grade , who was then chief executive of Channel 4 , said it had ended " one of the most embarrassing attempts to censor coverage of the most important domestic political story of post @-@ war years " , while John Birt commented , " We can once again apply normal and testing scrutiny to all sides in the debate " . Sinn Féin also signalled their approval , but the ban 's lifting was viewed with more caution by unionist politicians . Peter Robinson of the Democratic Unionist Party felt the decision was premature while the IRA remained an armed organisation . " It gives de facto recognition to a body of men who still have their guns and bombs under the table , who still reserve the right to murder if they don 't get their way " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Francis Welch , the producer of Speak No Evil , a 2005 BBC documentary that discusses the restrictions , argued that the legislation " added pressure to the process of reporting events in Northern Ireland " , while Sinn Féin 's Danny Morrison believed the ban " was a weapon of war used by the government " in an attempt to silence the Republican movement . However , Norman Tebbit , a former Conservative MP , said that the media was giving Sinn Féin and the IRA " publicity that they shouldn 't have had " . Peter Robinson of the Democratic Unionist Party argued the use of legislation was " a legitimate weapon for the state to use " . 
 In 1994 Tony Hall , the head of the BBC 's News and Current Affairs , argued that the restrictions did not allow viewers to make a proper judgment about those subject to the rules , as the subtle changes to their voices could not be heard . In particular he cited the example of the appearance of Gerry Adams on the BBC 's On the Record in September 1993 , in which he spoke about the prospect of peace in Northern Ireland . Hall said Adams was nervous and defensive throughout the interview as the presenter , Sheena McDonald , argued that peace could not be achieved while the IRA continued its violent stance , but that viewers were unaware of these aspects of the discussion . He also said that some countries , such as India and Egypt , had quoted the restrictions to BBC journalists who complained about the over use of censorship by authorities in those countries . Additionally Hall argued that Sinn Féin and the IRA had manipulated the ban by using it as an excuse to decline interviews . 
 The BBC Foreign Affairs Editor John Simpson encountered similar difficulties on the issue of censorship while reporting from Iraq during the Gulf War in 1990 – 91 . " When I worked in Baghdad , officials there always used to mention our Sinn Fein ban if you criticised their censorship . I don 't like to see this country appearing on the same side of the dividing line as Saddam Hussein on anything at all . " At a conference on the reporting of Northern Ireland @-@ related issues at the University of London in November 1993 , chaired by the Irish journalist Mary Holland , several participants claimed it was undermining the practice of investigative reporting . 
 Research by the Glasgow Media Group indicates that coverage of Sinn Féin by the BBC before the ban was minimal . In 1988 Sinn Féin was only heard or seen on television 93 times , had only 17 of the 633 formal BBC interviews as compared to 121 interviews with the Conservative Party and 172 with the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the civil service , and were never interviewed in the studio like many other participants . However , after the ban there was a steep decline in coverage of Sinn Féin and Republican views , with television appearances being reduced to 34 times in the following year , and the delays and uncertainties caused by ambiguities , voice @-@ overs and subtitles often lead to coverage and films being dropped entirely . 
 = Mulan ( 1998 film ) = 
 Mulan is a 1998 American animated musical action @-@ comedy @-@ drama film produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation based on the Chinese legend of Hua Mulan . Disney 's 36th animated feature , it was directed by Tony Bancroft and Barry Cook , with story by Robert D. San Souci and screenplay by Rita Hsiao , Philip LaZebnik , Chris Sanders , Eugenia Bostwick @-@ Singer , and Raymond Singer . Ming @-@ Na , Eddie Murphy , Miguel Ferrer and BD Wong star in the English version , while Jackie Chan provided his voice for the Chinese dubs of the film . The film 's plot takes place during the Han Dynasty , where Fa Mulan , daughter of aged warrior Fa Zhou , impersonates a man to take her father 's place during a general conscription to counter a Hun invasion . 
 Released during the Disney Renaissance , Mulan was the first of three features produced primarily at the Disney animation studio at Disney @-@ MGM Studios in Orlando , Florida . Development for the film began in 1994 , when a number of artistic supervisors were sent to China to receive artistic and cultural inspiration . Mulan was well received by critics and the public , grossing $ 304 million , earning Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations , and winning several Annie Awards including Best Animated Feature . A 2005 direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel , Mulan II , followed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the Huns , led by the ruthless Shan Yu , invade Han China , the Chinese emperor begins to command a general mobilization . Each family is given a conscription notice , requiring one man from each family to join the Chinese army . When Fa Mulan hears that her elderly father Fa Zhou , the only man in their family , is once more to go to war , she becomes anxious and apprehensive . She decides to deal with this herself by disguising herself as a man so that she can go to war instead of her father . When her family learns of Mulan 's departure , they all become anxious . Grandmother Fa , Mulan 's grandmother , prays to the family ancestors for Mulan 's safety . The ancestors then order their " Great Stone Dragon " to protect Mulan . The ancestors are unaware that the statue of Great Stone Dragon failed to come to life , and that Mushu , a small dragon , is the one sent to protect Mulan . 
 Mulan is misguided by Mushu in how to behave like a man , which starts a ruckus at the training camp . However , under command of Li Shang , she and her new co @-@ workers at the camp , Yao , Ling and Chien @-@ Po , become skilled warriors . Mushu , desiring to see Mulan succeed , creates a fake order from Shang 's father , General Li , ordering Shang to follow them into the mountains . The troops set out to meet General Li , but arrive at a burnt @-@ out encampment and discover that General Li and his troops have all been killed by the Huns . As they solemnly leave the mountains , they are ambushed by the Huns , but Mulan cleverly uses a cannon to create an avalanche which buries most of the Huns . An enraged Shan Yu slashes her in the chest , and her deception is revealed when the wound is bandaged . Instead of executing Mulan as the law requires , Shang relents and decides to spare her life for saving him , but expels her from the army , stranding her on the mountain as the rest of the army departs for the Imperial City to report the news of the Huns ' demise . However it is revealed that several Hun warriors including Shan Yu survive the avalanche , and Mulan catches sight of them as they make their way to the City , intent on capturing the Emperor . 
 At the Imperial City , Mulan attempts to warn Shang about Shan Yu , but he refuses to listen . The Huns appear to capture the Emperor , then they lock up the palace . With Mulan 's help , Yao , Ling , and Chien @-@ Po pose as concubines and are able to enter the palace and , with the help of Shang , they defeat Shan Yu 's men . As Shang prevents Shan Yu from assassinating the Emperor , Mulan lures the boss Hun onto the roof where she engages him in solo combat . Meanwhile , acting on Mulan 's instructions , Mushu fires a bundle of fireworks rockets at Shan Yu on her signal . The fireworks strike Shan Yu and explode , killing him . Mulan is praised by the Emperor and the people of China , who all bow to her as an unprecedented honor . While she accepts the Emperor 's crest and Shan Yu 's sword as gifts , she politely declines his offer to be his advisor and asks to return to her family . She returns home and presents these gifts to her father , but he is more overjoyed to have Mulan back safely . Shang , who has become enamored with Mulan , soon arrives under the guise of returning her helmet , but accepts the family 's invitation for dinner . Mushu is granted a position as a Fa family guardian by the ancestors amid a returning celebration . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ming @-@ Na Wen as Fa Mulan ( singing voice provided by Lea Salonga ) 
 Eddie Murphy as Mushu 
 BD Wong as Captain Li Shang ( singing voice provided by Donny Osmond ) 
 Miguel Ferrer as Shan Yu 
 June Foray as Grandmother Fa ( singing voice provided by Marni Nixon ) 
 Harvey Fierstein as Yao 
 Gedde Watanabe as Ling 
 Jerry Tondo as Chien @-@ Po 
 James Hong as Chi @-@ Fu 
 Soon @-@ Tek Oh as Fa Zhou 
 Pat Morita as The Emperor of China 
 George Takei as First Ancestor 
 Miriam Margolyes as The Matchmaker 
 Freda <unk> Shen as Fa Li 
 James <unk> as General Li 
 Frank Welker as Cri @-@ Kee and Khan ( Mulan 's horse ) 
 Chris Sanders as Little Brother ( Mulan 's dog ) 
 Mary Kay Bergman as various ancestors 
 Kelly Chen , Coco Lee and Xu Qing voiced Mulan in the Cantonese , Taiwanese Mandarin and Mainland standard versions of the film respectively , while Jackie Chan provided the voice of Li Shang in all three Chinese versions and appeared in the version of promotional music videos of " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1989 , Walt Disney Feature Animation Florida had opened with 40 to 50 employees , with its original purpose to produce cartoon shorts and featurettes . However , by late 1993 , following several animation duties on Beauty and the Beast , Aladdin , and The Lion King , Disney executives were convinced to allow the Feature Animation Florida studios to produce their first independent film . Around that same time , Disney Feature Animation developed an interest into Asian @-@ themed legends beginning with the optioning several books by children 's book author Robert D. San Souci who had a consulting relationship with Disney executive Jay Dyer . Around that same time , a short straight @-@ to @-@ video film titled " China Doll " about an oppressed and miserable Chinese girl who is whisked away by a British Prince Charming to happiness in the West was in development . Thomas Schumacher asked Souci if he had any additional stories , in which Souci turned in a manuscript of a book based on the Chinese poem " The Song of Fa Mu Lan " . Ultimately , Disney decided to combine the two separate projects . 
 Following the opening of the Feature Animation Florida studios , Barry Cook , who had served as a special @-@ effects animator department since 1982 , had directed the Roger Rabbit cartoon Trail Mix @-@ Up produced at the satellite studio . Upon a lunch invitation with Thomas Schumacher , Cook was offered two projects in development : a Scottish folk tale with a dragon or Mulan . Knowledgeable about the existence of dragons in Chinese mythology , Cook suggested adding a dragon to Mulan , in which a week later , Schumacher urged Cook to drop the Scottish project and accept Mulan as his next project . Following this , Cook was immediately assigned as the initial director of the project , and cited influences from Charlie Chaplin and David Lean during production . While working as a supervising animator on the gargoyles on The Hunchback of Notre Dame , Tony Bancroft was offered to co @-@ direct the film following a recommendation from Rob Minkoff , co @-@ director of The Lion King , to Schumacher , in which he accepted , and joined the creative team by early 1995 . 
 Development for Mulan began in 1994 , after the production team sent a select group of artistic supervisors to China for three weeks to take photographs and drawings of local landmarks for inspiration ; and to soak up local culture . Key members of the creative team at the time – Pam Coats , Barry Cook , Ric <unk> , Robert Walker , and Mark Henn – were invited to travel to China as a research trip to study the landscape , people , and history of the original legend . From June 17 to July 2 , 1994 , the research trip flew to Beijing , China , which is where Pam Coats became inspired by the placement of flags on the Great Wall , Datong , Luoyang , Xi 'an , <unk> , Dunhuang , and Guilin . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In its earliest stages , the story was originally conceived as a Tootsie @-@ like romantic comedy film where Mulan , who was a misfit tomboy that loves her father , is betrothed to Shang whom she has not met . On her betrothal day , her father Fa Zhou carves her destiny on a stone tablet in the family temple , which she shatters in anger , and runs away to forge her own destiny . In November 1993 , Chris Sanders , who had just finished storyboard work on The Lion King , was hopeful to work on The Hunchback of Notre Dame until Schumacher appointed him to work on Mulan instead . Acting as Head of Story , Sanders grew frustrated with the romantic comedy aspect of the story , and urged producer Pam Coats to be more faithful to the original legend by having Mulan leave home because of the love for her father . This convinced the filmmakers to decide to change Mulan 's character in order to make her more appealing and selfless . Sequence Six – in which Mulan takes her father 's conscription order , cuts her long hair , and dons her father 's armor – served as a pivotal moment in the evolution of Mulan 's character . Director Barry Cook explained that the sequence initially started as a song storyboarded by Barry Johnson and redrawn by character designer Chen @-@ Yi Chang . Following the story changes to have Mulan leave to save her father , the song was dropped . Storyboard artist and co @-@ head of story Dean DeBlois was tasked to revise the sequence , and decided to board the sequence with " minimal dialogue " . Assisted with an existing musical selection from another film score courtesy of Sanders , the sequence reel was screened for Peter Schneider and Thomas Schumacher , both of whom were impressed . DeBlois stated , " Sequence Six was the first sequence that got put into production , and it helped to establish our ' silent ' approach . " Additionally , General Li was not originally going to be related to Shang at all , but by changing the story , the filmmakers were able to mirror the stories of Shang and Mulan 's love for their fathers . 
 Because there was no dragon in the original legend , Mulan did not have animal companions ; it was Roy E. Disney who suggested the character of Mushu . Veteran story artist Joe Grant created the cricket character , Cri @-@ Kee for , though animator Barry Temple admitted " the directors didn 't want him in the movie , the story department didn 't want him in the movie . The only people who truly wanted him in the movie were Michael Eisner and Joe Grant – and myself , because I was assigned the character . I would sit in meetings and they ’ d say , ' Well , where 's the cricket during all this ? ' Somebody else would say , ' Oh , to hell the cricket . ' They felt Cri @-@ Kee was a character who wasn 't necessary to tell the story , which is true . " Throughout development on the film , Grant would slip sketches of Cri @-@ Kee under the directors ' door . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Before production began , the production team sought out Chinese , Japanese , Filipino , or Korean vocal talents . Tia Carrere was an early candidate to voice the title character , and Lea Salonga , who had been the singing voice of Princess Jasmine in Aladdin , was also cast as Mulan 's speaking voice , but the directors did not find her attempt at a deeper speaking voice when Mulan impersonated Ping convincing , so Ming @-@ Na Wen was brought in to speak the role . Salonga was later relegated to providing the singing voice . Wen herself landed the role after the filmmakers listened to her narration at the beginning of The Joy Luck Club . Coats reflected on her decision , stating " When we heard Ming @-@ Na doing that voice @-@ over , we knew we had our Mulan . She has a very likable and lovely voice , and those are the qualities we were looking for . " For the role of Mushu , Disney was aiming for top Hollywood talent in the vein of Robin Williams 's performance as the Genie , and approached Eddie Murphy , who at first balked during recording in the Disney studios , and asked to record the voice in his basement at his Bubble Hill mansion in Englewood , New Jersey . For the speaking voice of Captain Li Shang , BD Wong was hired , although his singing voice , for the song " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " , was performed by Donny Osmond , who had originally auditioned as the speaking voice of the title character in Hercules . Osmond 's casting originated from a suggestion from the casting director , and throughout recording , Osmond studied Wong 's dialogue tapes , and aimed to match his inflections and personality . Osmond commented that his sons decided that he had finally " made it " in show business when he was in a Disney film . Likewise for the role of Grandmother Fa , June Foray provided for the speaking voice , and Marni Nixon supplied the singing voice . 
 = = = Animation and design = = = 
 To achieve a harmonious visual look , producer designer Hans Bacher and art director Ric <unk> , along with Robert Walker and Head of Backgrounds Robert Stanton collaborated to establish a proper chronological location for the film in Chinese history . Since there was no general consensus on the time of Mulan 's existence , they based on the visual design on the Ming and Qing dynasties . An important element of Bacher 's design was to turn the art style closer to Chinese painting , with watercolor and simpler design - as opposed to the details of The Lion King and The Hunchback of Notre Dame . Bacher further studied more than thirty @-@ five film directors ranging from the silent era German Expressionism , British and American epics of the 1950s and 60s , and the spaghetti westerns for inspiration for composition , lighting , and staging that would establish settings that enhanced the characters , and additional inspiration was found in the earlier Disney animated films such as Bambi , Pinocchio , and Dumbo to establish a sense of staging . 
 In October 1997 , the Walt Disney Company announced a major expansion of its Florida animation operations constructing a 200 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot , four @-@ story animation building and the addition of 400 animators to the workforce . 
 To create 2 @,@ 000 Hun soldiers during the Huns ' attack sequence , the production team developed crowd simulation software called Attila . This software allows thousands of unique characters to move autonomously . A variant of the program called Dynasty was used in the final battle sequence to create a crowd of 3 @,@ 000 in the Forbidden City . Pixar 's photorealistic open API RenderMan was used to render the crowd . Another software developed for this movie was Faux Plane which was used to add depth to flat two @-@ dimensional painting . Although developed late in production progress , Faux Plane was used in five shots , including the dramatic sequence which features the Great Wall of China , and the final battle sequence when Mulan runs to the Forbidden City . During the scene in which the Chinese are bowing to Mulan , the crowd is a panoramic film of real people bowing . It was edited into the animated foreground of the scene . 
 = = Music = = 
 In March 1994 , Stephen Schwartz was attached to compose the lyrics and music for the songs for the film . Following the research trip to China in June 1994 , Schwartz was contacted by former Disney studio chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg to compose songs for The Prince of Egypt , which he agreed . Peter Schneider , the then @-@ president of Walt Disney Feature Animation , threatened to have Schwartz 's name removed from any publicity materials for Pocahontas and The Hunchback of Notre Dame . Michael Eisner phoned Schwartz , and urged him to back out of his commitment to DreamWorks which he refused and left the project . After Schwartz 's departure , his three songs , " Written in Stone " , " Destiny " , and " China Doll " , were dropped amid story and character changes by 1995 . Shortly after , Disney music executive Chris Montan heard Matthew Wilder 's demo for a stage musical adaption of Anne Rice 's Cry to Heaven , and selected Wilder to replace Schwartz . David Zippel then joined to write the lyrics . The film featured five songs composed by Wilder and Zippel , with a sixth originally planned for Mushu , but dropped following Eddie Murphy 's involvement with the character . 
 After Danny Elfman and Thomas Newman were considered to score the film , English composer Rachel Portman was selected as the film composer . However , Portman became pregnant during production , and decided to back out . Following Portman 's departure , Randy Edelman — whose Dragonheart theme was used in the trailer — and Kitarō were considered , until Jerry Goldsmith became available and signed on after dropping out of a project . The film 's soundtrack is credited for starting the career of pop singer Christina Aguilera , whose first song to be released in the U.S. was her rendition of " Reflection , " the first single from the Mulan soundtrack . The song , and Aguilera 's vocals , were so well received that it landed her a recording contract with RCA records . In 1999 , she would go on to release her self @-@ titled debut album , on which Reflection was also included . The pop version of Reflection has a Polish version ( " <unk> " performed by Edyta <unk> ) and 2 Spanish versions , for Spain ( performed by <unk> ) and Latin America ( performed by Lucero ) . Other international versions include a Brazilian Portuguese version by Sandy & Junior ( " Imagem " ) , a Korean version performed by Lena Park , and a Mandarin version by Coco Lee . 
 The music featured during the haircut scene , often referred as the Mulan Decision score , is different in the soundtrack album . The soundtrack album uses an orchestrated score while the movie uses heavy synthesizer music . The synthesizer version is available on the limited edition CD . Salonga , who often sings movie music in her concerts , has done a Disney medley which climaxes with an expanded version of " Reflection " ( not the same as those in Aguilera 's version ) . Salonga also provided the singing voice for Mulan in the movie 's sequel , Mulan II . 
 = = Release = = 
 Because of the disappointing box office performances of The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Hercules , Disney restricted its marketing campaign for Mulan spending $ 30 million on promotional advertisements compared to more than $ 60 million for Hercules the year before . Instead of the lavish media event premieres of Pocahontas in Central Park and the electric light parade on Fifth Avenue for Hercules , Disney opted to premiere the film at the Hollywood Bowl complete with Chinese lanterns and fortune cookies . Two days before the general release , McDonald 's launched its promotional campaign by including one of eight toys free with the purchase of a Happy Meal . In collaboration with Disney , Hyperion Books published The Art of Mulan authored by Jeff <unk> , which chronicled the production of the film . In addition with its publication , Hyperion Books also issued a collector 's " folding , accordion book " of the ancient poem that inspired the film . On August 18 , 1998 , around 3 @,@ 700 backpacks and 1 @,@ 800 pieces of luggage were recalled back to their manufacture , Pyramid Accessories Inc . , when it is discovered they contained lead @-@ based paint . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The film was first released in VHS on February 2 , 1999 as part of the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection line . That year , the film was released on DVD as part of the Limited Issues line . In 2000 , it was released on DVD as part of the Walt Disney Gold Classic Collection line . The second DVD release entered moratorium on January 31 , 2002 . On October 26 , 2004 , Walt Disney Home Entertainment released Mulan on as a Special Edition . 
 In March 2013 , Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Mulan and Mulan II on Blu @-@ ray and DVD to coincide with the film 's 15th anniversary . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Reception of Mulan was mostly positive . Rotten Tomatoes gives it a rating of 86 % , based on 73 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Exploring themes of family duty and honor , Mulan breaks new ground as a Disney film , while still bringing vibrant animation and sprightly characters to the screen . " In a 2009 countdown , Rotten Tomatoes ranked it twenty @-@ fourth out of the fifty canonical animated Disney features . On Metacritic , the film has a score of 71 out of 100 , based on 24 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare " A + " grade . 
 Kyle Suggs described the visuals as " breathtaking , " and Dan Jardine described them as " magnificently animated . " Film critic Roger Ebert gave Mulan three and a half stars out of four in his written review . He said that " Mulan is an impressive achievement , with a story and treatment ranking with Beauty and the Beast and The Lion King " . Negative reviews described it as a " disappointment . " The songs were accused of not being memorable , and slowing down the pace of the movie . Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine criticized the film as " soulless " in its portrayal of Asian society . 
 This movie was also the subject of comment from feminist critics . Mimi Nguyen says the film " pokes fun at the ultimately repressive gender roles that seek to make Mulan a domesticated creature . " Nadya Labi agreed , saying " there is a lyric in the film that gives the lie to the bravado of the entire girl @-@ power movement . " She pointed out that Mulan needed to become a boy in order to accomplish what she did . Kathleen <unk> , an assistant professor of English at the University of Oregon , also criticized the film 's portrayal of gender roles : " In order to even imagine female heroism , we 're placing it in the realm of fantasy " . Pam Coats , the producer of Mulan , said that the film aims to present a character who exhibits both masculine and feminine influences , being both physically and mentally strong . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Mulan 's opening weekend box office gross revenues were $ 22 @.@ 8 million , making it the second @-@ highest grossing movie that week , behind only The X @-@ Files . It went on to gross $ 120 million in the U.S. and Canada combined , and $ 304 million worldwide , making it the second @-@ highest grossing family film of the year , behind A Bug 's Life , and the seventh @-@ highest grossing film of the year overall . While Mulan outgrossed the two Disney films which had preceded it , The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Hercules , its box office returns failed to match those of the Disney films of the early 1990s such as Beauty and the Beast , Aladdin , and The Lion King . Internationally , its highest grossing releases included those in the United Kingdom ( $ 14 @.@ 6 million ) and France ( $ 10 @.@ 2 million ) . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Mulan won several Annie Awards , including Best Animated Feature and Individual achievement awards to Pam Coats for producing ; Barry Cook and Tony Bancroft for directing ; Rita Hsiao , Christopher Sanders , Phillip <unk> , Raymond Singer and Eugenia Bostwick @-@ Singer for writing , Chris Sanders for storyboarding , Hans Bacher for production design , David <unk> for effects animation , Ming @-@ Na for voice acting for the character of Mulan , Ruben A. Aquino for character animation , and Matthew Wilder , David Zippel and Jerry Goldsmith for music . ( Tom Bancroft and Mark Henn were also nominated for an Annie Award for Character Animation . ) The musical score also received significant praise . Jerry Goldsmith won the 1999 BMI Film Music Award . Goldsmith was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Music Score , but lost to Stephen Warbeck 's score for Shakespeare in Love . Goldsmith was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score . Matthew Wilder and David Zippel were nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song for " Reflection " . They were beaten by The Truman Show and " The Prayer " from Quest for Camelot , respectively . 
 = = = Reception in China = = = 
 Disney was keen to promote Mulan to the Chinese , hoping to replicate their success with the 1994 film The Lion King , which was one of the country 's highest @-@ grossing Western films at that time . Disney also hoped it might smooth over relations with the Chinese government which had soured after the release of <unk> , a Disney @-@ funded biography of the Dalai Lama that the Chinese government considered politically provocative . China had threatened to curtail business negotiations with Disney over that film and , as the government only accepts ten Western films per year to be shown in their country , Mulan 's chances of being accepted were low . Finally , after a year 's delay , the Chinese government did allow the film a limited Chinese release , but only after the Chinese New Year , so as to ensure that local films dominated the more lucrative holiday market . Box office income was low , due to both the unfavorable release date and rampant piracy . Chinese people also complained about Mulan 's depiction as too foreign @-@ looking and the story as too different from the myths . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 A PlayStation action @-@ adventure game based on the film , titled Disney 's Story Studio : Mulan , published by Ubisoft and developed by Revolution Software ( under the name " Kids Revolution " ) , was released on December 15 , 1999 . The game was met with generally positive reception and holds a 70 @.@ 67 % average rating at the review aggregator website GameRankings . 
 = = = Live action adaptation = = = 
 Disney expressed interest in a live action and 3D adaptation of Mulan starring international star Zhang Ziyi . Chuck Russell was chosen as the director . The film was originally planned to start filming on October 2010 , but was canceled . On March 30 , 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter reported that Disney was developing a live @-@ action remake with Chris Bender and J.C. Spink producing while Elizabeth Martin and Lauren Hynek will write the screenplay . 
 = Lost in the World = 
 " Lost in the World " is a song by American hip hop recording artist Kanye West from his fifth studio album , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . The song features vocals by Justin Vernon of indie folk band Bon Iver , as well as sampling his 2009 song " Woods " . It also contains portions of " Soul Makossa " written by Manu Dibango , and samples of " Comment No. 1 " , performed by Gil Scott @-@ Heron . It was produced by West and Jeff Bhasker , who wrote the track with Vernon and Malik Jones . " Lost in the World " was initially leaked on September 29 , 2010 and was 6 minutes and 4 seconds long . The version on the album was split up into two parts , with the outro becoming a new track entitled " Who Will Survive in America " . 
 The song received acclaim from music critics , who praised the atmospheric production , the appearance of Vernon , and West 's verse . The verse by West was described as one of the most poetic of his career , with the song being cited as one of the strongest on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . " Lost in the World " was featured during the closing credits of Runaway , a 35 @-@ minute short film directed by West set with music from the album . The song peaked at number 104 on the South Korean Gaon Chart . A music video was directed by Ruth Hogben , featuring black and white cinematography , frantic dancing by models and a brief cameo by West . The music video received positive reviews from critics . 
 " Lost in the World " was sampled in a freestyle by West 's GOOD Music labelmate Pusha T , and a remix produced by DJ Tiësto . West first performed the song live at Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , and subsequently performed it at several music festivals , including the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and the The Big Chill . " Lost in the World " was proposed by West as the album 's fifth single , but plans to release it never surfaced . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kanye West previewed " Lost in the World " in July 2010 at the offices of Facebook . West performed production @-@ free versions of several songs at the event , standing on top of a table . Rolling Stone writer Daniel Kreps , who reported the event , wrote " in an unorthodox move , Kanye West debuted verses from three new songs , a cappella for employees at Facebook 's headquarters in Palo Alto , California . " Before launching into a performance of " Lost in the World " , West mused that " this is actually a bit more like a poem " and described it as more of a " serious rap " . A version of the song leaked online on September 29 , 2010 ; the version was unfinished , with a length of approximately 6 minutes . At this time , it was unknown whether or not the song would appear on West 's upcoming fifth studio album . Later , in October 2010 , it was confirmed that " Lost in the World " would indeed appear on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , but that the leaked version had subsequently been split into two different songs . The first part of the track remained titled " Lost in the World " , while the end became another song , titled " Who Will Survive in America " . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Following some media controversies , West chose to record My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy in a reclusive manner in Oahu , Hawaii . Like the majority of the album , " Lost in the World " was composed there . West attempted to shy away from working with artists he didn 't consider himself familiar with , however made the exception for Justin Vernon , singer of the band Bon Iver . Vernon 's involvement in the project stemmed from a phone call by West . West had gotten into contact with Vernon and described his intention of sampling the song " Woods " from Bon Iver 's Blood Bank EP . After the phone message , West invited Vernon down to his record studio in Hawaii to appear on the album . 
 West also cited the Bon Iver album For Emma , Forever Ago as something he was a fan of , and admitted an admiration of the unique aesthetic of Vernon 's music . The two quickly became friends through discussions of music and games of basketball . While at Hawaii , Vernon collaborated extensively , reportedly producing a total of 10 tracks together , including the album cuts " Dark Fantasy " and " Monster " . Vernon told Pitchfork Media about the composition of the song , stating : 
 " So I head out there and he plays me the track and it sounds exactly like how you want it to sound : forward moving , interesting , light @-@ hearted , heavy @-@ hearted , fucking incredible sounding jam . It was kind of bare so I added some choir @-@ sounding stuff and then <unk> out the samples with my voice . That whole first week I was there we worked on the ' Woods ' song , which is called ' Lost in the World ' . We were just eating breakfast and listening to the song on the speakers and he 's like , ' Fuck , this is going to be the festival closer . ' I was like , ' Yeah , cool . ' It kind of freaked me out . " 
 Vernon recorded his lines in a separate recording studio than most of the album . Vernon described the studio as a " tiny black room " . He would record a line in the room , and then shortly later West would come in and play back what was recorded , and then discuss what needed to be changed . They repeated that process a few times until the song was finished . Vernon expressed a positive opinion of working with West , and though he called West demanding in some ways , he appreciated West 's enthusiasm for music and the creativity produced by the recording sessions . The song was recorded around the death of Michael Jackson and the event had an effect of the recording crew of the song , and certain aspects of the song are influences by personal events that affected West throughout the years . In an interview with MTV , West said that the song was going to be last featured on the album , and commented that " emotionally it just fit the crescendo of everything that I was saying and what I wanted to say to this girl . And it 's also my favorite eight bars that I 've ever written in my life . I think it 's one of the greatest pieces of writing . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Lost in the World " is 4 minutes and 16 seconds long and has been described as a " moody meditation " . It features tribal drums and samples Bon Iver 's " Woods " , a song originally written about alienation , applied by West " as the centerpiece of a catchy , communal reverie " on the album . The song manipulates the original Bon Iver sample and incorporates influences from both house music and dance music , adding tribal chants and percussion . During the duration of the song , there are several distinct production changes . The song begins with faint vocals delivered by Vernon , which are reinforced by drums , gospel @-@ styled chorus , an increased tempo , and a final measured tempo . The song continues to build at a slow pace , until a choir explodes into a bombastic roar , boasting the line " run from the lights . " 
 West delivers a short , 40 second verse , which appears over two and a half minutes into the song . West 's verse contains an interpolation of the " Mama @-@ say mama @-@ sah ma @-@ ma @-@ coo @-@ sah " hook from Michael Jackson 's song " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . The song features West 's comment on his fans and his fame , with additional references to Jackson . Embling of Tiny Mix Tapes viewed that the track points out a paralleled with West and Jackson , commenting : 
 " Life in the spotlight is perilous , and West knows that what happened to the King of Pop could just as easily happen to him . [ ... ] A disembodied chorus urges West to ' run from the lights / run for your life ' on ' Lost in the World , ' the record ’ s frenzied penultimate track ; but even as we listen , we know there ’ s little chance that he ’ ll leave the spotlight behind . West is telling us , over the course of 11 songs , that he ’ s willing to die for our amusement , our respect . " 
 The song ends with a very long sample of Gil Scott @-@ Heron 's " Comment No. 1 " , a speech which served as a comment on the 1960s Revolutionary Youth Movement for failing to recognize the more basic needs of the African @-@ American community . " Lost in the World " transitions into the closing track " Who Will Survive in America " . It is edited to a smaller version on the track that , according to Chicago Tribune writer Greg Kot , " retains its essence , that of an African @-@ American male who feels cut off from his country and culture " . Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times described " Woods " as a " Wisconsin death trip that becomes a testimonial to rebirth through isolation " and noted a significant difference from " Lost in the World " , commenting that the song was more about West 's " exhausted cry of one who 's always new in town , chasing whatever goal or girl is in the room , fueled by consumer culture 's relentless buzz , but finally left unsatisfied . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received universal acclaim from critics . Alex Denney NME called the song the " heart @-@ rending highlight " of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and cited the vocal performance by Vernon as a " quite brilliant effect . " Denney commented " it frames Kanye ’ s inner demons in a universal way , recasting Vernon ’ s semi @-@ mythical woodland retreat as his own cipher for spiritual replenishment " . Los Angeles Times writer Ann Powers called the song an important piece of the album , saying that the sampling of Bon Iver was both surprising and inspired , and noted the differences from " Woods " and " Lost in the World " . David Amidon of PopMatters viewed that the track contained " glass @-@ shattering bass " , and viewed that the track " storms out of all this dreariness with a thunderous , plodding house bass and Kanye taking Bon Iver in every which direction as the song exudes nothing but triumph . " Chris Martins of Spin stated that West managed to transform Iver 's " melancholic ' Woods ' into a perversely bright experimental dance track . " Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker commented that the song was difficult to classify as purely a rap song , noting that " West ’ s music is born of hip @-@ hop , but it now includes so many varieties that it feels most accurate to call it simply Kanye . " Jones noted than in less than the six minutes of the song 's running time , West " moves from a loner in the woods to his own isolation and on to the entire African @-@ American experience . " 
 Andy Gill of The Independent stated that he was impressed that the song was West 's only use of autotune on the album , describing the song as both " lovely " and " poignant " in nature . David Browne of Time stated that the song , much like " Runaway " , feature " shimmering soundscapes that pinpoint a common ground between the hardness of hip @-@ hop and the sweetness of indie rock . " AbsolutePunk 's Drew Beringer cited the song as an example of West 's growth as a producer , noting that he was sampling unexpected songs to unique results , including the " haunting " song " Woods " . Beringer felt that the most interest take of this on the album was " Lost in the World " , describing it as a " as an auto @-@ tuned medley of Vernon and West that soars over pounding drums and a frantic backing choir " . HipHopDX writer Jake Paine felt that the track utilized " pounding drums " , and commented that it was " an intense tapestry of ever @-@ changing sound that includes several genres and decades of inspiration . " 
 Channing Freeman of Sputnikmusic viewed that track , along with " All of the Lights " and " Power " have " a certain zest of life " to them , adding that all three tracks were " beautiful " . He also commented that " it is great to see that Kanye is still able to have plenty of fun without losing any of his creativity . " Dan Vidal of URB commented " sonically , the joy comes from the triumphant , painstaking arrangement that undoubtedly went into the production " . The Washington Post 's Chris Richards mused that " the drums come avalanching on Lost in the World " , calling it " the grand finale this album deserves . " He continued that " West serves up high drama at a breakneck tempo , with pining melodies crying out for a redemptive moment . But there 's no final act of contrition . West is too ' lost in this plastic life . ' " Cole Mathew of Slant Magazine described the track as " Kanye 's much @-@ anticipated reworking of Bon Iver 's " Woods " from his classic EP " , and wrote that " it 's astounding how he takes the strangest sample on the album and crafts it into a defiantly giddy dance number , complete with tribal drumming in the verses and group choruses that sound massive . It 's a mad stroke of brilliance to take Justin Vernon 's solitary ode to alienation and use it as the centerpiece of a catchy , communal reverie . It 's experimental , to be sure , but it 's also the closest the album comes to pure pop indulgence . " The song peaked on the South Korea Gaon Chart at position 104 . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 To promote My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , West performed the song at Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade . During the performance , West wore black <unk> , fur vest , shiny gold shirt , gold chains , and a headband . According to a reviewer from Rap @-@ Up , he was lip syncing the song during the performance . Due to the controversy stemming from the MTV Video Music Awards , it was reported that West was booed during the performance . The booing garnered press coverage and was reported by several publications . During his set at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , West performed " Lost in the World " towards the end of his performance . Justin Vernon joined Kanye during the performance , and it was described as " one of the most memorable performances in Coachella history . " The track was featured during West 's set at the The Big Chill music festival . At the festival , West announced plans for the song to be the fifth single from the album , however plans to do never surfaced . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 The song appears in West 's short film Runaway , an extended 35 minute long music video which features a majority of the tracks featured on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . The song during the video 's climax , and features West frantically running through the forest . Rapper Pusha T released a promotional remix of the track with verses provided by him . A dance remix by Grammy nominated DJ Tiësto was produced in 2011 , that was " apparently been sitting around Tiësto ’ s hard drive for the past year " , and was finally put up to download as part of a podcast in April 2012 . The remix took over a year to be released , but was finally allowed to be released for undisclosed reasons . Consequence of Sound writer Chris Coplan reported that the remix had a duration of around eight minutes , commenting that " the formerly artsy number is chopped and screwed into a bass @-@ heavy club anthem , with the emotionally @-@ frozen vibe melting to the sheer heat produced by random samples and various chunky synth lines . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video was made by fashion film director Ruth Hogben in collaboration with West , who appears in a cameo in the video . The video was shot during the summer of 2011 during a two @-@ day shoot . Hogben and West had brainstorming sessions deciding what the video was going to be conceptually , finally deciding something that would aesthetically fit the song the best . About collaborating with West , Hogben commented that the process was very organic and creative in nature , musing that the two went back and forth with ideas for visuals . The dancers in the video were not instructed to dance in any particular way by Yemi A.D. who was in charge of the dance choreography ; and according to Ruth Hogben , they " wanted an interpretation of how they felt about the song to be portrayed instead . " The video was eventually released May 4 , 2012 . The video was described as " belated " because it was premiered nearly a year and a half after the initial release of the album " Lost in the World " accompanies . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white clip opens with a warning that " strobe effects are used in this video " and features a group of models dressed in sheer fabric dancing while West poses during his verse . West 's face is actually not shown anywhere in the video , which mostly showcases " tortured and slick mirrors and skylines , with a well @-@ placed dancer depicting the heaven and hell in which the rapper wallows . " According to Belinda White of The Daily Telegraph , it features designers Gareth Pugh and Rick Owens , stylists Katie Grand and Katie <unk> and " brands such as Louis Vuitton , Barneys , Mac Cosmetics and Selfridges . " Director Hogben mused that ultimately people " are supposed to come up with their individual interpretations of the clip . " Kia Makarechi of The Huffington Post offered her interpretation of the video , writing : 
 " In the black and white video -- which West made with filmmaker Ruth Hogben -- post @-@ rocker Bon Iver 's haunting intro plays over images of a model in sheer fabric . When the rapper appears , he 's standing on a mirrored platform -- seeing only himself when he looks down . He 's ' lost in the world , ' grounded by a reality that 's isolated and clouded ( via wind and fog machines ) . " 
 HitFix 's Katie Hasty viewed that video played out more like a fashion clip than an actual music video , but mused that it was a probable result considering the past of the director . Hasty commented that it was a " gorgeous way to sell the song . " Robbie Daw of website Idolator compared the Nick Knight cinematography to the style featured in the music video for Lady Gaga 's single " Born This Way " ( which was directed by Nick Knight ) and wrote that " the black @-@ and @-@ white extravaganza is a rap video unlike any others released in recent memory — well , unless you count Kanye 's last off @-@ the @-@ wall clip . " Luis Tovar of Pretty Much Amazing compared the video to the trailer of The Dark Knight Rises , and called it " totally Kanye " . Popdust writer Katherine St Asaph described the video as an artistic " black @-@ and @-@ white cut that disorients you with lots of falling and flailing and flailing @-@ called @-@ interpretive @-@ dance , with billowing smoke and sudden shifts in art direction " , commenting that the video was a welcome change of pace . 
 = = Chart position = = 
 = Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti = 
 " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " ( English : " But I Remember You " ) is a song written and produced by Rudy Pérez . It was first recorded by Puerto Rican singer Lourdes Robles on her album Definitivamente ( 1991 ) . In the ballad , the singer remembers her lover even when she tries to forget . Nine years later , American recording artist Christina Aguilera performed a cover version on her second studio album Mi Reflejo which Pérez also produced . It was released as the second single from the album in December 2000 . The music video for Aguilera 's version was directed by Kevin Bray . 
 Aguilera performed the song live at the 2001 Grammy Awards . Her version peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States and number three in Spain . It received a Latin Grammy nomination for Record of the Year . It has been covered by Mexican singer Edith Márquez and Jencarlos Canela . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1991 , Puerto Rican recording artist Lourdes Robles released her third studio album Definitivamente which was arranged and produced by Cuban @-@ American musician Rudy Pérez . Pérez wrote three songs for the album including " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " . The song tells the story of a woman who cannot forget her lover . It was later included on Robles 's greatest hits album <unk> y Sus Exitos ( 2007 ) . In 2000 , American recording artist Christina Aguilera covered " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " on her second studio album Mi Reflejo which was also produced by Pérez . 
 = = Christina Aguilera version = = 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " was serviced to Latin radio stations on the second week of December 2000 in the United States . It reached number eight on Hot Latin Songs and five on Hot Latin Pop Songs in the US . In Spain , it reached number three on the country 's singles chart . Kurt B. <unk> from Wall of Sound was positive toward the song , saying that Aguilera is " persuasive and engaging " on the song . Orlando Sentinel editor Perry Gettelman was not impressed , writing that " She seems equally fond of acrobatic trills and low , sex @-@ kittenish moans " . At the 2nd Latin Grammy Awards , " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " received a Latin Grammy nomination for Record of the Year which went to Alejandro Sanz for " El Alma al Aire " . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The video for " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " was directed by Kevin G. Bray , which features Aguilera performing the song in a recording studio . Aguilera also gave a performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards in February , performing " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " and " Falsas Esperanzas " Leila Cobo of Billboard magazine called Aguilera 's Grammy performance " remarkably mainstream " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = = Weekly charts = = = = 
 = = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = = 
 = = Other cover versions = = 
 Mexican singer and actress Edith Márquez performed a cover of the song on her studio album <unk> de Cabaret ( 2008 ) . In the same year , America band Dark Latin Groove performed a salsa cover of the song on their album <unk> ( 2008 ) which was produced by Sergio George . It was also performed live by American actor and singer Jencarlos Canela ( whom Pérez has also worked with ) in the House of Blues , Orlando . 
 = Yarralumla , Australian Capital Territory = 
 Yarralumla is a large inner south suburb of Canberra , the capital city of Australia . Located approximately 3 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) south @-@ west of the city , Yarralumla extends along the south @-@ west bank of Lake Burley Griffin . ( The lake was created after the Second World War through the blocking , with a dam , of the Molonglo River . ) 
 In 1828 , Henry Donnison , a Sydney merchant , was granted a lease on the western side of Stirling Ridge . Donnison 's land was named Yarralumla in a survey of the area conducted in 1834 , apparently after the indigenous people 's term for the area . It was also spelt <unk> in other documents . In 1881 , the estate was bought by Frederick Campbell , grandson of Robert Campbell who built nearby " Duntroon " . He completed the construction of a large , gabled , brick house on his property in 1891 that now serves as the site of Government House , the official residence of the Governor @-@ General of Australia . Campbell 's house replaced an elegant , Georgian @-@ style homestead , the main portions of which were erected from local stone in the 1830s . Among the old Yarralumla homestead 's most notable occupants were Sir Terence Aubrey Murray , who owned Yarralumla sheep station from 1837 to 1859 , Augustus Onslow Manby Gibbes , who owned the property from 1859 to 1881 , and Augustus ' father Colonel John George Nathaniel Gibbes ( 1787 – 1873 ) . ( Augustus " Gussie " Gibbes was Murray 's brother @-@ in @-@ law ; he also advanced money to Frederick Campbell to assist with the construction , in 1890 – 1891 , of Campbell 's grand new family house at Yarralumla . ) 
 The modern suburb of Yarralumla was gazetted by the government in 1928 and as of 2011 was home to approximately 3 @,@ 000 people and many diplomatic missions . In recent years , it has become one of Canberra 's most desirable and expensive residential suburbs because of its wide leafy streets , attractive lakeside setting and central location . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Yarralumla is located in the central Canberra district of South Canberra . It is bordered by Lake Burley Griffin to the north , Commonwealth Avenue and Capital Hill to the east , Adelaide Avenue and the Cotter Road to the south , and Scrivener Dam , Lady Denman Drive and part of the Molonglo River to the west . 
 Although Yarralumla is one of the largest suburbs in Canberra by area , its population remains quite small because more than half of its area consists of open space or non @-@ residential development , including Weston and Stirling Parks , the Royal Canberra Golf Club , and the grounds of Government House . A relatively high proportion of houses are occupied by diplomatic missions . 
 The embassy area of Yarralumla is located towards the eastern end of the suburb next to Stirling Park . It is the hilliest area of Yarralumla ; Parliament House and the Parliamentary Triangle are located nearby . 
 The streets in Yarralumla are named after Australian governors and botanists . Most of the older streets in the suburb are laid out on an approximately rectangular grid with some curved sections , while the more hilly eastern end of the suburb , including the embassy district , is set out with contour @-@ guided roads . Major roads in Yarralumla include Banks Street , Novar Street and Hopetoun Circuit in a north @-@ south direction and <unk> Street , Loftus Street and Weston Street running east @-@ west . Being a dormitory suburb , there are no major through roads . Access to the rest of the city can be made from Adelaide Avenue , Commonwealth Avenue , Lady Denman Drive and Cotter Road , all of which run along the borders of the suburb . From these roads , entry to the suburb can be gained by turning into roads such as Coronation Drive , Hopetoun Circuit and Novar Street . 
 Yarralumla is located on the Yarralumla Formation which is a mudstone / siltstone formation that was formed around 425 million years ago during the Silurian Period . The formation extends from Red Hill and Woden in the South to Lake Burley Griffin in to the north , passing under the suburb of Yarralumla . The formation is evidence of the last major marine sedimentary period when eastern Australia was still covered by shallow seas . It shows fossil evidence of trilobites , coral and primitive crinoids . The Yarralumla brickworks quarry and the Deakin anticline are places where the formation is exposed and easily studied . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 The area now called Yarralumla is part of two original land grants , which were granted to free settlers for the establishment of farms . In 1828 Henry Donnison , a Sydney merchant who had arrived with his wife and family on the brig Ellen on 29 – 30 July 1828 , was granted an allotment on the western side of Stirling Ridge . A second grant was made to William <unk> ( a German who had served in the British Navy and arrived free in the Colony in 1818 ) , who had bought the land from John Stephen , on 7 March 1839 . Donnison 's land was named Yarralumla in a survey of the area conducted in 1834 . Yarralumla was a name for the area used by the local people , apparently meaning " echo " . An area to the west of what is now the suburb was the <unk> parish . 
 The prominent New South Wales parliamentarian Sir Terence Aubrey Murray ( 1810 – 1873 ) purchased Yarralumla in 1837 . He lived there with his wife Mary Murray ( née Gibbes , 1817 – 1858 ) , the second daughter of the Collector of Customs for NSW , Colonel John George Nathaniel Gibbes ( 1787 – 1873 ) , MLC . In 1859 , Murray sold Yarralumla to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Augustus Onslow Manby Gibbes ( 1828 – 1897 ) . Later that same year , Augustus ' parents came to live with him at Yarralumla homestead . 
 Augustus Gibbes improved the estate and acquired additional land by purchase and lease . However , In 1881 , he sold Yarralumla for 40 @,@ 000 pounds to Frederick Campbell , a descendant of Robert Campbell , in order to travel overseas . Frederick Campbell erected a new , three @-@ storey , brick house on the site of the former Yarralumla homestead at the beginning of the 1890s . Campbell 's house would later form the basis of what is now the Governor @-@ General of Australia 's official Canberra residence , known colloquially as " Yarralumla " or " Government House " . Campbell also built a large wooden woolshed nearby in 1904 . It remains standing to this day . 
 In 1908 , the Limestone Plains area , including Yarralumla , was selected as the site for the capital city of the newly established Commonwealth of Australia . Soon afterwards in 1913 , the Commonwealth Government purchased the property . Tenant farmers were allowed to stay on the land on annual leases , some remaining until 1963 when the Molonglo River was dammed to form Lake Burley Griffin . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 With the construction of Australia 's capital city underway , the Yarralumla brickworks were established in 1913 to supply building material . The bricks were used for many of Canberra 's buildings , including the provisional Parliament House . In 1917 , Walter Burley Griffin named the area surrounding the brickworks " Westridge " . A narrow gauge goods railway was constructed for the transportation of bricks to some of the major building sites in central Canberra . This linked the brickworks to places such as Parliament House , and the Kingston Power House . 
 Construction on the Commonwealth nursery and Westbourne Woods arboretum was started in 1914 , and a temporary camp was built near the brickworks to accommodate the workers . Thomas Charles Weston was Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge ( Afforestation Branch ) in the years 1913 to 1926 , and later became Director of City Planting and the Superintendent of Parks and Gardens . Weston was responsible for testing and selecting plant species at the arboretum for their suitability to Canberra 's environment ; from 1913 through to 1924 Weston oversaw the propagation of more than two million trees which were then planted in the Canberra area . Most of the original Westbourne Woods arboretum is now leased to the Royal Canberra Golf Club , with the remainder forming part of Weston Park . The Yarralumla nursery is still active , albeit on a smaller scale and functioning as a retail nursery selling both wholesale and direct to the public . 
 In 1922 , a workers ' tent camp was erected on the eastern side of Stirling Ridge to house the men working on the main intercepting sewer . The following year saw the start of the construction of 62 small , four @-@ room , unlined timber cottages , to be used as housing for the married tradesmen involved in the construction of the provisional Parliament House . Other camps were established at the eastern end of Stirling Park on the hills opposite modern Lotus Bay . The first of these was contractor John Howie 's settlement ( 1922 – 30 ) , consisting of 25 timber cottages for his married men and timber barracks ( Hostel Camp ) for his single men . Two other single men 's tent camps were established nearby — Old Tradesmen 's Camp ( 1923 – 27 ) and No 1 Labourers Camp ( 1924 – 27 ) . The men from Howie 's worked on the Hotel Canberra and the others on the construction of the provisional Parliament House and nearby administrative buildings . 
 The Stirling Park camps were known as Westlake to their new inhabitants , and previously " Gura Bung <unk> " ( stony ground ) to the local Aboriginal people . In 1925 , the population of this temporary suburb was 700 . This represented roughly one @-@ fifth of the total population of the Federal Capital Territory at the time ; in the region , only Molonglo Settlement had a larger population , at 750 . The site was chosen so that it was near to Parliament House but hidden from direct line of sight from anywhere " important " . The small cottages at Westlake were removed starting in the mid @-@ 1950s , with the last one removed in 1965 . Many of the Westlake workers ' cottages were moved to Queanbeyan and are still used as housing today . The Stirling Park near the embassy area of Yarralumla now covers the historic Westlake settlement area . 
 The Commonwealth Forestry School was established in Westridge near the brickworks and Westbourne Woods in 1926 . It opened with its first intake of students in the following year . Today the heritage @-@ listed Forestry School and the associated principal 's residence Westridge House are located on Banks Street , Yarralumla . The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation ( CSIRO ) Forestry and Forestry Products subsumed the school in 1975 . Westridge House , an impressive Tudor @-@ style structure , underwent a A $ 500 @,@ 000 refurbishment and is used as a residence for the chief officer of the CSIRO . 
 By 1928 , there were over 130 people on the electoral roll for Westridge . The majority of the population consisted of men working at the brickworks and nursery . Westridge was gazetted as a Canberra suburb in 1928 . 
 = = = After World War II = = = 
 Westridge was renamed Yarralumla in the 1950s . In 1963 , Lake Burley Griffin was filled and Yarralumla was expanded to include Westlake , which had up until then been part of Acton . 
 After the Second World War , the suburb began to expand rapidly with the construction of many private homes . Yarralumla 's image as a lower @-@ class suburb would persist into the 1960s and 1970s . This general perception began to alter once Lake Burley Griffin had been created and its surrounds landscaped into parklands ; the area soon gained a reputation for its attractive lakeside location . During the 1980s , house prices began to rise coincident with a rejuvenation of the suburb . Many of the original government @-@ built <unk> , brick , and weatherboard houses have been demolished and replaced by larger dwellings of a variety of more modern styles and materials . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population of the Westridge area on the 1928 electoral roll numbered over 130 . On Census night 2011 , Yarralumla had a population of 2 @,@ 907 people . Of these 48 @.@ 2 % were male . The suburb had only 1 @.@ 3 % indigenous Australians , substantially below the national average of 2 @.@ 5 % . The percentage of married people in the suburb was six points higher than the national average , and the proportion of residents who had never married was 4 points lower . Despite the higher level of marriage , this did not translate into a higher level of children ; 46 @.@ 5 % of families consisted of a couple without children in the household , compared to the national average of 37 @.@ 8 % . The 2006 Census showed that Yarralumla residents had a median age of 47 , compared to a Canberra average of 34 . The suburb had an older population for a city of young people ; the median national age is 37 and 38 @.@ 2 % of Yarralumla residents were 55 or over , compared to the national figure of 25 @.@ 6 % . 
 Yarralumla is a comparatively wealthy suburb with a 2011 median weekly income of $ 1 @,@ 139 ; this compares to an ACT @-@ wide figure of $ 917 and an Australia @-@ wide figure of $ 577 . The public service or defence force employed around 20 % of the workforce , somewhat less than the ACT average of 25 @.@ 8 . This compared to 2 @.@ 0 % for Australia as a whole . The higher incomes were derived from the suburb 's white @-@ collar base ; 61 @.@ 6 % of Yarralumla 's workforce was employed as professionals or in managerial posts , compared to 34 % nationally . In contrast , only 3 @.@ 4 % were engaged in blue @-@ collar occupations , compared with 16 @.@ 0 % for the nation as a whole . The proportion of the population working as tradesmen and technicians was almost three times lower than average across Australia . 
 The median monthly housing loan repayments in Yarralumla in 2011 were $ 2 @,@ 442 , compared to the ACT @-@ wide figure of $ 2 @,@ 167 and a federal average of $ 1 @,@ 800 . At $ 425 , the weekly rent was more than 50 % higher than the national average . Yarralumla 's median house price was $ 1m in 2011 versus $ 530 @,@ 000 for the whole of the ACT in 2013 . The rate of home ownership in the suburb was 46 @.@ 3 % — much higher than the national average of 32 @.@ 1 % . 26 @.@ 9 % of the households rented . Accommodation was mostly separate houses ( 74 @.@ 7 % ) , although the number of residences in the suburb has been increasing through conversion of blocks to dual occupancy and other medium @-@ density @-@ type developments . Despite this , only 2 @.@ 6 % lived in an apartment or unit , little more than one quarter of the national average . 
 The population of Yarralumla in 2011 was predominantly Australian @-@ born , with some 72 @.@ 3 % of its residents being born in Australia . The second most prevalent birthplace was England at 6 @.@ 6 % , followed by New Zealand and India with 1 @.@ 7 and 1 @.@ 5 % respectively . The suburb was more oriented towards the Anglo @-@ Celtic majority than the rest of Australia ; English was spoken at home by 84 @.@ 4 % of the population , compared to the national average of 76 @.@ 8 % . Every other language was spoken by less than 2 % of the population . Italian , French , German , Croatian and Hindi were all spoken by at least 0 @.@ 7 % of the population . The most popular religious affiliations in descending order were no religion , Roman Catholic , Anglican , Uniting and Presbyterian and Reformed . The proportion of the population professing to having no religion was 31 @.@ 8 % , higher than the national average of 22 @.@ 3 % . 
 = = Suburb amenities = = 
 The Yarralumla local shopping centre is located on the corner of Bentham and Novar Streets . The centre contains a supermarket , bakery , dry @-@ cleaners , video store / post office , chemist , gift shop and newsagent as well as several restaurants and speciality shops . 
 Weston Park is situated on a peninsula near the western end of Lake Burley Griffin . The park includes swimming areas , children 's play equipment and wading pools , and a miniature railway , and is a popular barbecue spot on weekends . Weston Park forms part of a string of parks that line the southern shore of Lake Burley Griffin ; other parks include Yarralumla Bay , Lennox Gardens ( incorporating a Japanese garden named Canberra Nara Park ) and Stirling Park . 
 Like most of Canberra , Yarralumla 's only scheduled public transport is provided by ACTION buses . On weekdays , route 2 provides a service from Yarralumla to Woden and City Interchanges along Novar Street , <unk> Street and Hopetoun Circuit . Route 2 operates every 30 minutes until 6pm and hourly from 6pm to 11 pm . On weekends and public holidays , route 932 provides an hourly service along the same streets as route 2 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Yarralumla 's first school , the Catholic St Peter Chanel 's Primary School , opened in 1956 ; it closed in the 1990s . Yarralumla Primary School , a public school , opened a year after St Peter Chanel 's in 1957 . Half of the original primary school is now used as a behavioural centre catering to problem students . <unk> in Yarralumla include the Montessori preschool on Loftus Street . There is also a day care facility called Little Lodge on Macgillivray Street . 
 The Canberra Japanese Supplementary School Inc . , a Japanese weekend educational programme , has its school office in the Japanese Embassy Consular Section in Yarralumla , while it holds its classes at Deakin High School in Deakin . It was established on 1 August 1988 . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Yarralumla is located within the federal electorate of Canberra , which as of 2014 is represented by Gai <unk> in the House of Representatives . Historically both federal electorates in the ACT are safe Labor seats . Polling place statistics are shown to the right for the Yarralumla polling place in the 2013 federal and 2012 ACT elections . 
 In the ACT Legislative Assembly , Yarralumla is part of the electorate of Molonglo , which elects seven members on the basis of proportional representation , although the number of electorates and members were under review as of February 2014 . The 2012 ACT election saw a swing in Yarralumla of 2 @.@ 1 % away from the Labor Party and 10 @.@ 0 % to the Liberal Party . 
 The Yarralumla Residents Association ( <unk> ) is a registered organisation formed to represent the views of Yarralumla residents and business . The group stands against government plans for urban consolidation , supporting open space and the conservation of low @-@ density housing . The organisation has been very vocal in opposing government plans for further development of Yarralumla and is also vocal about any plans for the Yarralumla brickworks site . 
 = = Notable places = = 
 Yarralumla is notable among Canberra suburbs for its large number of landmarks and places of historical interest . The Governor @-@ General 's residence Government House , which shares the name Yarralumla , is located at the western end of the suburb in 53 hectares ( 130 acres ) of parkland . It sits alongside Lake Burley Griffin , next to the Royal Canberra Golf Club and Scrivener Dam . The house was built in 1891 as the headquarters for the Yarralumla property . Also located alongside Scrivener Dam is the National Zoo & Aquarium . The nearby Yarralumla woolshed is available for event hire , often playing host to parties and bush dances . The land surrounding the woolshed has been developed as an equestrian park , including areas for showjumping , eventing and endurance riding . 
 The Yarralumla brickworks are notable as the first industrial manufacturing facility in the ACT . The brickworks were closed temporarily several times due to the Great Depression and both World Wars . Proposals to modernise the brickworks were rejected by the National Capital Development Commission in the early 1970s and they closed permanently in 1976 . Presently the site is closed to the public and is in a state of disrepair . The unfenced parkland around the brickworks is a popular recreation area for Yarralumla residents . Residential development is proposed for the 42 @-@ hectare site , initially including 1 @,@ 600 new dwellings , although this is now likely to be significantly reduced . The eastern end of Yarralumla is home to many of the diplomatic missions in Canberra , many of which are built in a traditional style reflecting that of their respective home countries . Examples of regionally styled <unk> include the embassies of Saudi Arabia and Thailand , and the High Commissions of India and Papua New Guinea . The United States embassy was the first embassy built in Canberra , with the foundation stone laid on the Fourth of July , 1942 . The embassy is an impressive compound of buildings built in a Georgian style , inspired by several buildings designed by Christopher Wren for Virginia at the beginning of the 18th century . The French embassy includes the French @-@ Australian War Memorial opened in 1961 , which has a sculpture by André <unk> @-@ <unk> called Winged Victory . Canberra tourist drive six takes tourists on a car @-@ based tour past many of Canberra 's embassies including those located in Yarralumla . It zig @-@ zags through the eastern side of Yarralumla past many of the missions . 
 Also located in the eastern end of the suburb are Lennox Gardens , the Yarralumla Yacht Club , the Albert Hall and the Hotel Canberra . The Hotel Canberra opened in 1924 to accommodate politicians when Parliament was in session . The hotel was closed in 1974 and the buildings served as an annexe for Parliament House between 1976 and 1984 . The Hyatt Hotel Group re @-@ opened the hotel in 1987 . 
 = It 's Not the End of the World ? = 
 " It 's Not the End of the World ? " is a song by Welsh band Super Furry Animals . It was the last single to be released from the Rings Around the World album and reached number 30 on the UK Singles Chart on its release in January 2002 . Singer Gruff Rhys has variously described the track as being about the extinction of mankind and as " a romantic song about growing old " . 
 Critical reaction to the track was generally mixed with some reviewers claiming the track compares unfavourably with the band 's previous work while others were enthusiastic in their praise . A computer generated promotional music video was produced to accompany " It 's Not the End of the World ? " ' s release as a single . Directed by Numero 6 the video won the special jury prize at the 2002 Imagina Festival . An alternative video , directed by Dylan Jones , was included on the DVD release of Rings Around the World featuring archive footage of nuclear explosions . 
 = = Themes and recording = = 
 " It 's Not the End of the World ? " is " a romantic song about growing old " according to singer Gruff Rhys . In an interview with British newspaper The Daily Telegraph Rhys discussed the song in the context of parent record Rings Around the World . The band abandoned the idea of making a " save the world " concept album as they reasoned that " when people talk about saving the world they 're really talking about saving humans . The reality is that humans are the problem " . " It 's Not the End of the World ? " expands on this idea with Rhys stating that the song is about the extinction of the human race : " maybe we 'll all die but the world 'll still be here , even if it 's a dark , singed piece of rock flying around the sun " . The track was recorded in 2000 at Bearsville Studios , Woodstock and was produced by the Super Furry Animals and Chris Shaw . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " It 's Not the End of the World ? " is 3 minutes 25 seconds long and is in the key of C major . The track begins with just a guitar , featuring an echo effect , playing the descending notes C , B , A , G , F , E , D and G before the band join on 13 seconds with the bridge during which Gruff Rhys sings the word " why " several times in a falsetto voice , accompanied by strings arranged by Sonia Slay and the group . The first verse follows on 38 seconds with Rhys accompanied by a basic 4 / 4 beat provided by drummer Dafydd Ieuan , sparse bass guitar and a melody line played by Huw Bunford on guitar . The first chorus enters at 1 minute 4 seconds with Rhys singing the words " as our hair turns white , all the stars still shine so bright above , at least it 's not the end of the world " while Bunford plays a guitar counter @-@ melody . Another bridge and verse follow before the second chorus appears at 2 minutes 2 seconds with Rhys this time singing " as our hair turns grey everything is far from A @-@ A @-@ A @-@ ok " . The outro begins at 2 minute 23 seconds , with the chorus repeating before the bridge plays through several times , ending on a C chord . 
 = = = Alternative version = = = 
 A Force Unknown remix of " It 's Not the End of the World ? " is included on the DVD version of Rings Around The World . The track is 3 minutes 52 seconds in length and begins with just cymbals then drums before the bridge . The remix follows the arrangement of the original with Gruff Rhys 's vocals and all instruments heavily effected by echo . Instrumentation is sparse with only occasional guitar . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critical reaction to " It 's Not the End of the World ? " was generally mixed . Website Drowned in Sound described the song as " sweet and charming " but stated that , although it is a good album track it isn 't strong enough to stand up on its own as a single and is rather " bland " compared to some of the band 's other songs such as " Demons " and " Fire in My Heart " . The NME called the song " a bit rubbish " by the Super Furries ' " usual high standards " and went as far as to claim that " John Lennon was shot for less " . The Dallas Observer claimed the track is " guaranteed to induce the same type of melancholic , goose @-@ bumpy splendor that tunes like The Kinks ' ' Waterloo Sunset ' , Dennis Wilson 's ' Forever ' and Jack Bruce 's ' Theme for an Imaginary Western ' still do " , Entertainment Weekly described it as one of the best songs on parent album Rings Around the World , comparing it to the work of The Beatles while The Daily Telegraph called it a " honey @-@ dripping pop classic " . PopMatters claimed the track " sounds like any of Blur 's best ballads " . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 = = = Dylan Jones video = = = 
 A Dylan Jones directed video was included on the DVD version of Rings Around the World on its release in July 2001 . The video consists entirely of archive footage of nuclear explosions and nuclear technicians . Keyboard player Cian Ciaran has stated that the band deliberately tried to avoid making videos that looked like just " another pop promo ... like MTV " for the DVD version of Rings Around the World and asked the directors to make the visuals as " extreme as possible " . Ciaran claims the directors had to " work even harder at creating something interesting " due to the limited budget available . 
 = = = Numero 6 video = = = 
 A promotional music video , directed by animator Numero 6 ( also known as David Nicolas ) , was produced to accompany the release of " It 's Not the End of the World ? " as a single . According to Gruff Rhys the band made separate videos for Rings Around the World 's three singles as they saw the videos included on the DVD release of the album as " pure art " whereas they needed promotional music videos that were more like adverts for the songs . The video won the special jury prize at the 2002 Imagina Festival and took silver at the D & AD awards in the same year . 
 The video begins with a shot of a computer generated man with a guitar and sunglasses walking down a set of spiral stairs singing along with " It 's Not the End of the World ? ' s " chorus . A baby is then shown playing with a toy tank before a man seen receiving his call up papers , having his head shaved by a barber then leaving on a steam train as people outside wave goodbye . The next shot features a battleship — the video then cuts to a small boy playing with a toy ship in the bath before joints of meat on hooks are seen moving from right to left through a tiled room spattered with blood . A shot of a military commander on horseback addressing his troops appears before the second chorus which again features a guitarist singing along as he walks down spiral stairs . 
 After brief footage of a tank driving across a desert landscape a baby is shown playing with a paper aeroplane . A hat is placed on the baby 's head and the head is then removed and fitted onto the body of a bomber pilot . The next scene shows a fleet of bombers bombing a city while an anti @-@ aircraft gunner fires at them and troops parachute down . A soldier is seen running across a bombed out city before two opposing troops are shown <unk> stabbing each other with bayonets on a battlefield landscape filled with human skulls . This scene is intercut with footage of two military leaders playing chess . 
 The third chorus features similar footage to the first two — a singer walking down a set of stairs . The two military leaders are then seen appearing on a game show , each pressing a buzzer which makes an image of a skull behind them light up . The video cuts to a shot of a baby sitting between two nuclear missiles before a zoomed out model of the Earth shows multiple mushroom clouds as the planet explodes ( this image was used as the front cover for Digipak CD version of the single ) . The final shot sees the two opposing commanders holding hands and kissing on a tiny piece of the earth as it floats through space while a red heart lights up behind them . The Numero 6 video appears on the DVD release of the band 's greatest hits album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 and the DVD version of the " It 's Not the End of the World ? " single . 
 David Nicolas also directed the Supermen Lovers ' Starlight music video in 2001 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 Digipak CD ( <unk> ) , 12 " ( <unk> ) 
 " It 's Not the End of the World ? " – 3 : 30 
 " The Roman Road " – 5 : 18 
 " Gypsy Space Muffin " – 3 : 32 
 DVD ( <unk> ) 
 " It 's Not the End of the World ? ( Video ) " – 3 : 30 
 " The Roman Road " – 5 : 18 
 " Gypsy Space Muffin " – 3 : 32 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals , string arrangements 
 Huw Bunford – guitar , string arrangements 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar , string arrangements 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards , string arrangements 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums , string arrangements 
 Harriet Harris – violin 
 S. Herbert – violin 
 Jackie Norrie – violin 
 Sonia <unk> – violin , string arrangements 
 Nick Barr – viola 
 Clare Smith – viola 
 Nick Cooper – cello 
 Sophie Harris – cello 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Cardiff Castle = 
 Cardiff Castle ( Welsh : Castell Caerdydd ) is a medieval castle and Victorian Gothic revival mansion located in the city centre of Cardiff , Wales . The original motte and bailey castle was built in the late 11th century by Norman invaders on top of a 3rd @-@ century Roman fort . The castle was commissioned by either William the Conqueror or by Robert Fitzhamon , and formed the heart of the medieval town of Cardiff and the Marcher Lord territory of Glamorgan . In the 12th century the castle began to be rebuilt in stone , probably by Robert of Gloucester , with a shell keep and substantial defensive walls being erected . Further work was conducted by Richard de Clare , 6th Earl of Gloucester in the second half of the 13th century . Cardiff Castle was repeatedly involved in the conflicts between the Anglo @-@ Normans and the Welsh , being attacked several times in the 12th century , and stormed in 1404 during the revolt of Owain Glyndŵr . 
 After being held by the de Clare and Despenser families for several centuries the castle was acquired by Richard de Beauchamp in 1423 . Richard conducted extensive work at the castle , founding the main range on the west side of the castle , dominated by a tall , octagonal tower . Following the Wars of the Roses the status of the castle as a Marcher territory was revoked and its military significance began to decline . The Herbert family took over the property in 1550 , remodelling parts of the main range and carrying out construction work in the outer bailey , then occupied by Cardiff 's Shire Hall and other buildings . During the English Civil War Cardiff Castle was initially taken by Parliamentary force , but was regained by Royalist supporters in 1645 . When fighting broke out again in 1648 , a Royalist army attacked Cardiff in a bid to regain the castle , leading to the battle of St Fagans just outside the city . Cardiff Castle escaped potential destruction by Parliament after the war and was instead garrisoned to protect against a possible Scottish invasion . 
 In the mid @-@ 18th century , Cardiff Castle passed into the hands of the Marquesses of Bute . John Stuart , the first Marquess , employed Capability Brown and Henry Holland to renovate the main range , turning it into a Georgian mansion , and to landscape the castle grounds , demolishing many of the older medieval buildings and walls . During the first half of the 19th century the family became extremely wealthy as a result of the growth of the coal industry in Glamorgan . The third Marquess , John Crichton @-@ Stuart , used this wealth to back an extensive programme of renovations under William Burges . Burges remodelled the castle in a Gothic revival style , lavishing money and attention on the main range . The resulting interior designs are considered to be amongst " the most magnificent that the gothic revival ever achieved " . The grounds were re @-@ landscaped and , following the discovery of the old Roman remains , reconstructed walls and a gatehouse in a Roman style were incorporated into the castle design . Extensive landscaped parks were built around the outside of the castle . 
 In the early 20th century the fourth Marquess inherited the castle and construction work continued into the 1920s . The Bute lands and commercial interests around Cardiff were sold off or nationalised during the period until , by the time of the Second World War , little was left except the castle . During the war , extensive air raid shelters were built in the castle walls , able to hold up to 1 @,@ 800 people . When the Marquess died in 1947 , the castle was given to the city of Cardiff . Today the castle is run as a tourist attraction , with the grounds housing the " Firing Line " regimental museum and interpretation centre . The castle has also served as a venue for events , including musical performances and festivals . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1st – 4th centuries AD = = = 
 The future site of Cardiff Castle was first used by the Romans as a defensive location for many years . The first fort was probably built about AD 55 and occupied until AD 80 . It was a rectangular structure much larger than the current site , and formed part of the southern Roman border in Wales during the conquest of the Silures . When the border advanced , defences became less important and the fort was replaced with a sequence of two , much smaller , fortifications on the north side of the current site . 
 A fourth fort was built in the middle of the 3rd century in order to combat the pirate threat along the coast , and forms the basis of the Roman remains seen on the castle site . The fort was almost square in design , approximately 635 feet ( 194 m ) by 603 feet ( 184 m ) large , constructed from limestone brought by sea from Penarth . The fort 's irregular shape was determined by the River Taff that flowed along the west side of the walls . The sea would have come much closer to the site than is the case in the 21st century , and the fort would have directly overlooked the harbour . This Roman fort was probably occupied at least until the end of the 4th century , but it is unclear when it was finally abandoned . There is no evidence for the re @-@ occupation of the site until the 11th century . 
 = = = 11th century = = = 
 The Normans began to make incursions into South Wales from the late 1060s onwards , pushing westwards from their bases in recently occupied England . Their advance was marked by the construction of castles , frequently on old Roman sites , and the creation of regional lordships . The reuse of Roman sites produced considerable savings in the manpower required to construct large earth fortifications . 
 Cardiff Castle was built during this period . There are two possible dates for the construction ; it is possible that William the Conqueror built a castle at Cardiff as early as 1081 on his return from his pilgrimage to St Davids . Alternatively the first Norman fortification may have been constructed around 1091 by Robert Fitzhamon , the lord of Gloucester . Fitzhamon invaded the region in 1090 , and used the castle as a base for the occupation of the rest of southern Glamorgan over the next few years . The site was close to the sea and could be easily supplied by ship , was well protected by the Rivers Taff and Rhymney and also controlled the old Roman road running along the coast . 
 Cardiff Castle was a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design . The old Roman walls had collapsed and the Normans used their remains as the basis for the outer castle perimeter , digging a defensive trench and throwing up a 27 @-@ foot ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) high bank of earth over the Roman fortifications . The Normans further divided the castle with an internal wall to form an inner and an outer bailey . In the north @-@ west corner of the castle a wooden keep was constructed on top of a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) tall earth motte , surrounded by a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide moat . The motte was the largest built in Wales . The overall size of the castle was around 8 @.@ 25 acres ( 3 @.@ 34 ha ) , with the inner bailey being around 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) in size . Mills were essential to local communities during this period , and the castle mill was located outside the west side of the castle , fed by the River Taff ; under local feudal law , the residents of Cardiff were required to use this mill to grind their own grain . 
 The conquered lands in Glamorgan were given out in packages called knights ' fees , and many of these knights held their lands on condition that they provided forces to protect Cardiff Castle . Under this approach , called a castle @-@ guard system , some knights were required to maintain buildings called " houses " within the castle itself , in the outer bailey . Anglo @-@ Saxon peasants settled the region around Cardiff , bringing with them English customs , although Welsh lords continued to rule the more remote districts almost independently until the 14th century . Cardiff Castle was a Marcher Lord territory , enjoying special privileges and independence from the English Crown . The medieval town of Cardiff spread out from the south side of the castle . 
 = = = 12th – 14th centuries = = = 
 <unk> was fatally injured at the Battle of Tinchebray in 1106 and died shortly afterwards . Henry I then gave the castle to Robert of Gloucester in 1122 , the king 's illegitimate son and the husband of <unk> 's daughter , Mabe . After the failed attempt of Robert Curthose , duke of Normandy , William the Conqueror 's eldest son , to take England from Henry I , Robert of Normandy was imprisoned in the castle until his death in 1134 . Robert held the castle during the troubled years of the Anarchy in England and Wales and passed it on to his son , William Fitz Robert . Around the middle of the century , possibly under Robert of Gloucester , a 77 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) wide , 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high shell keep was constructed on top of the motte , along with a stone wall around the south and west sides of the inner bailey . The polygonal shell keep has architectural links to a similar design at Arundel Castle . The building work was probably undertaken in response to the threat posed following the Welsh uprising of 1136 . 
 Tensions with the Welsh continued , and in 1158 Ifor Bach raided the castle and took William hostage for a period . A further attack followed in 1183 . By 1184 town walls had been built around Cardiff , and the West Gate to the town was constructed in the gap between the castle and the river . William died in 1183 , leaving three daughters , one of whom , Isabel , Countess of Gloucester was declared the sole heir to the estate by Henry II . This was contrary to normal legal custom in England , and was done in order that Henry could then marry her to his youngest son Prince John and thus provide him with extensive lands . John later divorced Isabel , but he retained control of the castle until she married Geoffrey de Mandeville in 1214 . 
 Upon Isabel 's death in 1217 the castle passed through her sister to Gilbert de Clare , becoming part of the Honour of Clare , a major grouping of estates and fortifications in medieval England . The castle formed the centre of the family 's power in South Wales , although the de Clares typically preferred to reside in their castles at Clare and Tonbridge . Gilbert 's son , Richard de Clare , 6th Earl of Gloucester , carried out building work at the castle in the late 13th century , constructing the Black Tower that forms part of the southern gateway seen today . On the ground floor the tower contained the <unk> <unk> and <unk> Wenn chambers , with three rooms constructed above them . Richard was also probably responsible for rebuilding the northern and eastern walls of the inner bailey in stone . The inner bailey was reached through a gatehouse on the eastern side , protected by two circular towers and later called the Exchequer Gate . The defensive work may have been prompted by the threat posed by the hostile Welsh leader Llywelyn ap Gruffudd , Prince of Wales . 
 Richard 's grandson , Gilbert de Clare , the last male de Clare , died at the battle of Bannockburn in 1314 and the castle was given to Hugh Despenser the Younger , the controversial favourite of Edward II . Poor harvests and harsh governance by the Despenser family encouraged a Welsh rebellion under Llywelyn Bren in 1316 ; this was crushed and Llywelyn was hanged , drawn and quartered in Cardiff Castle in 1318 on Hugh 's orders . The execution attracted much criticism from across both the English and Welsh communities , and in 1321 Hugh arrested Sir William <unk> as a scapegoat for the incident , first detaining him in the Black Tower and then executing him in the castle grounds . Conflict between the Despensers and the other Marcher Lords broke out soon after , leading to the castle being sacked in 1321 during the Despenser War . The Despensers recovered the castle and retained it for the rest of the century , despite the execution of Hugh Despenser for treason in 1326 . Under a 1340 charter granted by the Despensers , the castle 's constable was made the de facto mayor of Cardiff , controlling the local courts . 
 = = = 15th – 16th centuries = = = 
 By the 15th century , the Despensers were increasingly using Caerphilly Castle as their main residence in the region rather than Cardiff . Thomas le Despenser was executed in 1400 on charges of conspiring against Henry IV . In 1401 rebellion broke out in North Wales under the leadership of Owain Glyndŵr , quickly spreading across the rest of the country . In 1404 Cardiff and the castle were taken by the rebels , causing considerable damage to the Black Tower and the southern gatehouse in the process . On Thomas 's death the castle passed first to his young son , Richard , and on his death in 1414 , through his daughter Isabel to the Beauchamp family . Isabel first married Richard de Beauchamp , the Earl of Worcester and then , on his death , to his cousin Richard de Beauchamp , the Earl of Warwick , in 1423 . 
 Richard did not acquire Caerphilly Castle as part of the marriage settlement , so he set about redeveloping Cardiff instead . He built a new tower alongside the Black Tower in 1430 , restoring the gateway , and extended the motte defences . He also constructed a substantial new domestic range in the south @-@ west of the site between 1425 and 1439 , with a central octagonal tower 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) high , sporting defensive machicolations , and featuring four smaller polygonal turrets facing the inner bailey . The range was built of Lias ashlar stone with limestone used for some of the details , set upon the spur bases characteristic of South Wales and incorporated parts of the older 4th and 13th century walls . The buildings were influenced by similar work in the previous century at Windsor Castle and would in turn shape renovations at Newport and Nottingham Castles ; the octagonal tower has architectural links to Guy 's Tower , built at around the same time in Warwick Castle . A flower garden was built to the south of the range , with private access to Richard 's chambers . Richard also rebuilt the town 's wider defences , including a new stone bridge over the River Taff guarded by the West Gate , finishing the work by 1451 . 
 Cardiff Castle remained in the hands of Richard 's son , Henry and Henry 's daughter , Anne until 1449 . When Anne died , it passed by marriage to Richard Neville , who held it until his death in 1471 during the period of civil strife known as the Wars of the Roses . As the conflict progressed and political fortunes rose and fell , the castle passed from George , the Duke of Clarence , to Richard , Duke of Gloucester , to Jasper Tudor , the Duke of Bedford , back to Richard Neville 's wife Anne , back to Jasper and finally to Prince Henry , the future Henry VIII . The ascension of the Tudor dynasty to the English throne at the end of the wars heralded a change in the way Wales was administered . The Tudors were Welsh in origin , and their rule eased hostilities between the Welsh and English . As a result , defensive castles became less important . In 1495 Henry VII formally revoked the Marcher territory status of Cardiff Castle and the surrounding territories , bringing them under normal English law as the County of Glamorgan . 
 The Crown leased the castle to Charles Somerset in 1513 ; Charles used it while he was living in Cardiff . In 1550 William Herbert , later the Earl of Pembroke , then bought Cardiff Castle and the surrounding estates from Edward VI . The outer bailey contained a range of buildings at this time , and extensive building work was carried out during the century . The Shire Hall had been built in the outer bailey , forming part of a walled complex of buildings that included the lodgings for the traditional twelve holders of castle @-@ guard lands . The outer bailey also included orchards , gardens and a chapel . The castle continued to be used to detain criminals during the 16th century , with the Black Tower being used as a prison to hold them ; the heretic Thomas Capper was burnt at the castle on the orders of Henry VIII . The visiting antiquarian John Leland described the keep as " a great thing and strong , but now in some ruine " , but the Black Tower was considered to be in good repair . In the inner bailey , the Herberts built an Elizabethan extension to the north end of the main range , with large windows looking onto a new northern garden ; the southern garden was replaced by a kitchen garden . 
 = = = 17th – 18th centuries = = = 
 In 1610 the cartographer John Speed produced a map of the castle , and noted that it was " large and in good repair . " In 1642 , however , civil war broke out between the rival Royalist supporters of King Charles I and Parliament . Cardiff Castle was then owned by Philip Herbert , a moderate Parliamentarian , and the castle was initially held by a pro @-@ Royalist garrison . It was taken by Parliamentary forces in the early period of the war , according to popular tradition by a sneak attack using a secret passageway . The Royalist commander William Seymour , the Marquess of Hertford , then attacked the castle in turn , taking it in a surprise assault . Parliamentary forces and local troops then immediately besieged the castle , retaking it after five hours of fighting and reinstalling a garrison . In early 1645 Mr Carne , the High Sheriff , rebelled against Parliament , taking Cardiff town but initially failing to seize the castle . The King sent forces from Oxford , under the command of Sir Charles <unk> , to reinforce Carne but Parliament despatched a naval squadron to provide support to their forces from the sea . A small battle ensued before the castle was taken by the Royalists . 
 With the Royalist military position across the country worsening , King Charles himself came to Cardiff Castle that July to meet with local Welsh leaders . Relations between his commander in the region , Sir Charles Gerard , and the people of Glamorgan had deteriorated badly and when Charles left the castle , he was confronted by a small army of angry locals , demanding to be given control of the castle . These clubmen then declared themselves the " Peaceable Army " and increased their demands to include near independence for the region . After negotiations , a compromise was found in which the royal garrison would quit the castle , to be replaced by a local Glamorgan force , commanded by Sir Richard Beaupré ; in return , £ 800 and a force of a thousand men were promised to Charles . In September , Charles returned to South Wales and reneged on the agreement , disbanding the Peaceable Army , but his military position in the region was collapsing . The Peaceable Army 's leaders switched sides and forced the surrender of Cardiff and the castle to Parliament in mid @-@ September . 
 With the outbreak of fresh fighting in 1648 , a Royalist army of 8 @,@ 000 fresh recruits was mustered under the command of General Rowland Laugharne and Sir Edward <unk> , with the intent of retaking Cardiff . Parliamentary forces in Brecon under the command of Colonel Thomas Horton moved quickly to reinforce the castle , although with only 3 @,@ 000 men they were content to wait until a larger army under Oliver Cromwell could arrive from Gloucester . With time against them , the Royalist army attacked , leading to the battle of St Fagans just to the west of Cardiff , and a heavy Royalist defeat . 
 After the war , Cardiff Castle escaped the slighting , or deliberate damage and destruction , that affected many other castles . Probably because of the threat of a pro @-@ Royalist invasion by the Presbyterian Scots , a Parliamentary garrison was installed instead and the castle remained intact . The Herberts continued to own the castle as the Earls of Pembroke , both during the interregnum and after the restoration of Charles II . The castle 's constable continued to act as mayor of the town of Cardiff , controlling the meetings of the town 's burgesses , <unk> and aldermen ; the Herberts usually appointed members of the more important local gentry to this position during the period . 
 Lady Charlotte Herbert was the last of the family to control Cardiff Castle . She married twice , latterly to Thomas , Viscount Windsor and on her death in 1733 the castle passed to their son , Herbert . Herbert 's daughter , Charlotte Jane Windsor , married John Stuart , who rose to become the Marquess of Bute , beginning a family line that would control the castle for the next century . 
 In 1776 the Marquess began to renovate the property with the intention of turning it into a residence for his son , John . The grounds were radically altered under a programme of work that involved Capability Brown and his son @-@ in @-@ law , Henry Holland . The stone wall that separated the inner and outer baileys was destroyed using gunpowder , the Shire Hall and the knights ' houses in the outer bailey were destroyed and the remaining ground partially flattened ; the whole of the area was laid with turf . Considerable work was carried out on the main lodgings , demolishing the Herbert additions , building two new wings and removing many of the older features to produce a more contemporary , 18th century appearance . The keep and motte was stripped of the ivy and trees that had grown up them , and a spiral path was laid down around the motte . The motte 's moat was filled in as part of the landscaping . A summer house was built in the south @-@ east corner of the castle . Further work was planned on the property , including a reported proposal to roof the keep in copper , insert new windows and turn it into an assembly room for dances , but these projects were cut short by the Marquess 's son 's death in 1794 . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 In 1814 Lord Bute 's grandson , John , inherited his title and the castle . In 1825 the new Marquess began a sequence of investments in the Cardiff Docks , an expensive programme of work that would enable Cardiff to become a major coal exporting port . Although the Docks were not particularly profitable , they transformed the value of the Butes ' mining and land interests , making the family immensely wealthy . By 1900 , the family estate owned 22 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 900 ha ) of land in Glamorgan . 
 The second Marquess preferred to live on the Isle of Bute in Scotland and only used Cardiff Castle occasionally . The castle saw little investment and only four full @-@ time servants were maintained on the premises , meaning that cooked food had to be brought across from the kitchens at a nearby hotel . The castle remained at the centre of the Butes ' political power base in Cardiff , however , with their faction sometimes termed as " the Castle party " . During the violent protests of the Merthyr Rising of 1831 , the Marquess @-@ based himself at Cardiff Castle , from where he directed operations and kept Whitehall informed of the unfolding events . The governance of the city of Cardiff was finally reformed by an act of Parliament in the 1835 , introducing a town council and a mayor , severing the link with the castle constable . 
 The third Marquess of Bute , again called John , inherited the title and castle in 1848 . He was then less than a year old , and as he grew up he came to despise the existing castle , believing that it represented a mediocre , half @-@ hearted example of the Gothic style . Bute engaged the architect William Burges , to undertake the remodelling of the castle . The two shared a passion in medieval Gothic Revivalism and this , combined with Bute 's huge financial resources , enabled Burges to rebuild the property on a grand scale . Burges brought with him almost of all of the team that had supported him on earlier projects , including John Starling Chapple , William Frame and Horatio Lonsdale . Burges 's contribution , in particular his research into the history of the castle and his architectural imagination , was critical to the transformation . 
 Work began on Bute 's coming of age in 1868 with the construction of the 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) high Clock Tower . The tower , built in Burges 's signature Forest of Dean ashlar stone , formed a suite of bachelor 's rooms , comprising a bedroom , a servant 's room and the Summer and Winter smoking rooms . Externally , the tower was a re @-@ working of a design Burges had previously used in an unsuccessful competition entry for the Royal Courts of Justice in London . Internally , the rooms were sumptuously decorated with <unk> , carvings and cartoons , many allegorical in style , depicting the seasons , myths and fables . The Summer Smoking Room rested at the top of the structure and was two storeys high with an internal balcony that , through an unbroken band of windows , gave views of the Cardiff Docks , the Bristol Channel , and the Glamorgan countryside . The floor had a map of the world in mosaic . The sculpture was created by Thomas Nicholls . 
 As the rest of the castle was developed , work progressed along the rest of the 18th century range including the construction of the Guest Tower , the Arab Room , the Chaucer Room , the Nursery , the Library , the Banqueting Hall and bedrooms for both Lord and Lady Bute . In plan , the new castle followed the arrangement of a standard Victorian country house quite closely . The Bute Tower included Lord Bute 's bedroom and ended in another highlight , the Roof Garden , featuring a sculpture of the Madonna and child by Ceccardo Fucigna . Bute 's bedroom contained extensive religious iconography and an en @-@ suite bathroom . The Octagon Tower followed , including an oratory , built on the spot where Bute 's father died , and the Chaucer Room , the roof of which is considered by historian Mark Girouard to be a " superb example of Burges 's genius " . 
 The central part of the castle comprised a two @-@ storey banqueting hall , with the library below . Both are enormous , the latter to hold part of the bibliophile Marquess 's vast library . Both included elaborate carvings and fireplaces , those in the banqueting hall depicting the castle itself in the time of Robert , Duke of Normandy . The decoration here is less impressive than elsewhere in the castle , as much of it was completed after Burges 's death by Lonsdale , a less talented painter . The Arab Room in the Herbert Tower remains however one of Burges 's masterpieces . Its jelly mould ceiling in a Moorish style is particularly notable . It was this room on which Burges was working when he died and Bute placed Burges 's initials , and his own , and the date 1881 in the fireplace as a memorial . The central portion of the castle also included the Grand Staircase , recorded in a watercolour perspective prepared by Axel Haig . 
 Burges 's interiors at Cardiff Castle have been widely praised . The historian Megan Aldrich considers them amongst " the most magnificent that the gothic revival ever achieved " , J. Mordaunt Crook has described them as " three dimensional passports to fairy kingdoms and realms of gold " , and John Newman praises them as " most successful of all the fantasy castles of the nineteenth century . " The exterior of the castle , however , has received a more mixed reception from critics . Crook admires the variegated and romantic silhouette of the building , but architect John Grant considered them to present a " picturesque if not happy combination " of varying historical styles , and Adrian Pettifer criticises them as " incongruous " and excessively Gothic in style . 
 Work was also carried out on the castle grounds , the interior being flattened further , destroying much of the medieval and Roman archaeological remains . In 1889 , Lord Bute 's building works uncovered the remains of the old Roman fort for the first time since the 11th century , leading to archaeological investigations being carried out in 1890 . New walls in a Roman style were built by William Frame on the foundations of the originals , complete with a reconstructed Roman North Gate , and the outer medieval bank was stripped away around the new walls . 
 The grounds were extensively planted with trees and shrubs , including over the motte . From the late 18th century until the 1850s the castle grounds were completely open to the public , but restrictions were imposed in 1858 and as a replacement the 434 acres of land to the west and north of the castle was turned into Bute Park . From 1868 , the castle grounds were closed to the public altogether . Stables were built just to the north of the castle , but only half were completed during the 19th century . The Animal Wall was built along the south side of the castle , decorated with statues of animals , and the Swiss Bridge – a combination of summerhouse and river @-@ crossing – was erected over the river by the West Gate . Cathays Park was built on the east side of the castle , but was sold to the city of Cardiff in 1898 . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 John , the fourth Marquess , acquired the castle in 1900 on the death of his father , and the family estates and investments around the castle began to rapidly reduce in size . Cardiff had grown hugely in the previous century , its population increasing from 1 @,@ 870 in 1800 to around 250 @,@ 000 in 1900 , but the coal trade began to diminish after 1918 and industry suffered during the depression of the 1920s . John only inherited a part of the Butes ' Glamorgan estates , and in the first decades of the 20th century he sold off much of the remaining assets around Cardiff , including the coal mines , docks and railway companies , with the bulk of the land interests being finally sold off or nationalised in 1938 . 
 Development work on the castle continued . There was extensive restoration of the medieval masonry in 1921 , with architect John Grant rebuilding the South Gate and the barbican tower , and reconstructing the medieval West Gate and town wall alongside the castle , with the Swiss Bridge being moved in 1927 to make room for the new West Gate development . Further archaeological investigations were carried out into the Roman walls in 1922 and 1923 , leading to Grant redesigning the northern Roman gatehouse . The second half of the castle stables were finally completed . The Animal Wall was moved in the 1920s to the west side of the castle to enclose a pre @-@ Raphaelite themed garden . The grand staircase in the main range was torn out in the 1930s . During World War II , extensive air @-@ raid shelters were tunnelled out within the medieval walls , with eight different sections , able to hold up to 1 @,@ 800 people in total , and the castle was also used to tether barrage balloons above the city . 
 In 1947 , the John , the fifth Marquess , inherited the castle on the death of his father and faced considerable death duties . He sold the very last of the Bute lands in Cardiff and gave the castle and the surrounding park to the city on behalf of the people of Cardiff ; the family flag was taken down from the castle as part of the official hand @-@ over ceremony . The castle was protected as a grade I listed building and as a scheduled monument . 
 Cardiff Castle is now run as a tourist attraction , and is one of the most popular sites in the city . The castle is not fully furnished , as the furniture and fittings in the castle were removed by the Marquess in 1947 and subsequently disposed of ; an extensive restoration has been carried out , however , of the fittings originally designed for the Clock Tower by Burges . The Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama , founded in 1949 , was housed in the castle 's main range for many years , but moved into the castle 's former stables north of the castle in 1998 . A new interpretation centre , which opened in 2008 , was built alongside the South Gate at a cost of £ 6 @.@ 5 million , and the castle also contains " Firing Line " , the joint regimental museum of the 1st The Queen 's Dragoon Guards and the Royal Welsh . 
 The castle has been used for a range of cultural and social events . The castle has seen various musical performances , including by Tom Jones , Green Day and the Stereophonics , with a capacity to accommodate over 10 @,@ 000 people . During the 1960s and 1970s the castle was the setting for a sequence of military tattoos . 
 = Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary = 
 The Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary , formerly known as the Gibbon Wildlife Sanctuary or <unk> Reserve Forest ( Assamese : <unk> <unk> <unk> ় <unk> ্ <unk> ) , is an isolated protected area of evergreen forest located in Assam , India . The sanctuary was officially constituted and renamed in 1997 . Set aside initially in 1881 , its forests used to extend to the foothills of the <unk> mountain range . 
 Since then , the forest has been fragmented and surrounded by tea gardens and small villages . In the early 1900s , artificial regeneration was used to a develop well @-@ stocked forest , resulting in the site 's rich biodiversity . The Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary contains India 's only gibbons – the hoolock gibbons , and Northeastern India 's only nocturnal primate – the Bengal slow loris . 
 The upper canopy of the forest is dominated by the <unk> tree ( Dipterocarpus macrocarpus ) , while the Nahar ( <unk> ferrea ) dominates the middle canopy . The lower canopy consists of evergreen shrubs and herbs . The habitat is threatened by illegal logging , encroachment of human settlements , and habitat fragmentation . 
 = = History = = 
 The Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary derives from a patch of forest once part of the <unk> Reserve Forest in the civil district of <unk> in Assam , India . Set aside as a " Reserve Forest " ( RF ) on 27 August 1881 , it was named after its dominant tree species , <unk> or Dipterocarpus macrocarpus . At the time , it was considered an " integral part " of the foothill forests of the <unk> mountain range . 
 Although the sanctuary is currently completely surrounded by tea gardens and a few small villages , it used to connect to a large forest tract that ran to the state of Nagaland . The protected area started with 206 ha ( 0 @.@ 80 sq mi ) and then shrank in 1896 as sections were de @-@ reserved . As tea gardens began to emerge between 1880 and 1920 , and villages were established during the 1960s to rehabilitate people from <unk> and adjoining areas who had lost their lands to floods , the forest became fragmented and the reserve became isolated from the foothills . 
 Historically , sporadic evergreen trees covered the area along with <unk> bamboos ( <unk> sp . ) . In 1924 , artificial regeneration was introduced in an attempt to develop well @-@ stocked , even @-@ aged forest . These plantations along with the natural vegetation subsequently created a forest stocked with a rich variety of flora and fauna ( biodiversity ) . During the 1900s , forest areas were added to the reserve , eventually totaling 2 @,@ 098 @.@ 62 ha ( 8 @.@ 1 sq mi ) by 1997 . However , the sanctuary remains fragmented into five distinct segments . 
 On 30 July 1997 , in notification no . FRS 37 / 97 / 31 , the sanctuary was constituted under the civil district of <unk> and named it the " Gibbon Wildlife Sanctuary " after the only apes found in India : the hoolock gibbons ( genus <unk> ) . It is the only sanctuary in India named after a gibbon due to its distinction for containing the densest gibbon populations in Assam . On 25 May 2004 , the Assam Government renamed it as the " Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary " through notification no . FRP 37 / 97 / 20 . 
 = = Surrounding region = = 
 The sanctuary officially extends to the Dissoi Valley Reserve Forest , Dissoi Reserve Forest , and Tiru Hill Reserve Forest , which are used as dispersal areas for Indian elephants ( Elephas maximus indicus ) and other animals . Three extensive tea gardens that belong to the estates of Dissoi , <unk> , and <unk> span the distance between the Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary and the nearest forests in Nagaland , the Dissoi Valley Reserve Forest . 
 The tea gardens include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Dissoi and <unk> . Neighboring villages include Madhupur , <unk> , Rampur , <unk> A ( the western part ) , <unk> B ( the eastern part ) , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Biota and habitat = = 
 The Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary is classified as " Assam plains alluvial semi @-@ evergreen forests " with some wet evergreen forest patches . It receives 249 cm ( 98 in ) of rainfall on average per year . Situated at an altitude between 100 and 120 m ( 330 and 390 ft ) , the topography gently slopes downward from southeast to northwest . The <unk> River creates a waterlogged region dominated by semi @-@ <unk> plants along the border of the sanctuary , helping to create three distinct habitat zones or micro @-@ ecosystems in the park : the up @-@ slope zone , the down @-@ slope zone , and the flood @-@ prone zone . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The sanctuary has a very rich biodiversity and is home to the only apes in India , the western hoolock gibbon ( <unk> hoolock ) , as well as the only nocturnal primate found in the northeast Indian states , the Bengal slow loris ( Nycticebus bengalensis ) . 
 Other primates include the stump @-@ tailed macaque ( Macaca <unk> ) , northern pig @-@ tailed macaque ( Macaca <unk> ) , eastern Assamese macaque ( Macaca assamensis assamensis ) , rhesus macaque ( Macaca mulatta ) , and capped langur ( <unk> <unk> ) . Also found at the sanctuary are Indian elephants , tigers ( Panthera tigris ) , leopards ( Panthera pardus ) , jungle cats ( Felis chaus ) , wild boar ( Sus scrofa ) , three types of civet , four types of squirrel , and several other types of mammal . At least 219 species of bird and several types of snake are known to live in the park . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Most of the vegetation within Hoollongapar Gibbon Sanctuary is evergreen in character and is composed of several canopy layers . 
 The upper canopy consists mostly of Dipterocarpus macrocarpus rising 12 to 30 m ( 39 to 98 ft ) and having straight trunks . Other species found in the top canopy include Sam ( <unk> <unk> ) , Amari ( Amoora <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> spp . ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Udal ( Sterculia villosa ) and <unk> ( Castanopsis spp . ) . 
 Nahar ( <unk> ferrea ) dominates the middle canopy with its spreading crown , casting fairly heavy shade over a wide area . Other species that make up the middle canopy include <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( Terminalia <unk> ) , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> sp . ) <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> baccatum ) , Sassi ( <unk> <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> indica ) . 
 A variety of evergreen shrubs and herbs make up the lower canopy and ground layers . The most common of these are <unk> bamboo ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> bamboo ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( Calamus erectus ) , Jati bet ( Calamus spp . ) , <unk> bet ( Calamus spp . ) , Tora ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> imbricatum ) , and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The isolation of the park by numerous tea gardens creates a geographic barrier for migrating animals . The growing populations of tea garden workers also threatens the habitat since many people rely on the forest for firewood , traditional medicine and food . Large quantities of leaves and grass are collected from the forests to feed cattle . During the rainy season , herbicides and pesticides from the tea gardens wash through the sanctuary . 
 The tea gardens are also used by elephants as a migration route to Nagaland , making them vulnerable to frequent poaching . Railway lines further divide the park , stranding a single group of gibbons in the smaller fragment . Illegal logging and the encroachment by local people employed by the tea gardens degraded the habitat quality . 
 = Forever ( Mariah Carey song ) = 
 " Forever " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her fifth studio album , Daydream . It was released by Columbia Records on March 10 , 1996 , as an airplay @-@ only single from the album . The song was written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , and was composed throughout 1995 . Its lyrics describe a situation where the protagonist knows her relationship with her lover has withered away , however he will continue living in her memory forever . 
 The song 's music video is a collage of snippets from Carey 's shows at the Tokyo Dome , during her Daydream World Tour in 1996 . Most of the video is the performance of the song during one of the three Japanese shows on the tour . Serving as an airplay only song in the US , and a limited release around the world , the song achieved minimal chart success . In the United States , Billboard rules did not allow the charting of non @-@ commercially released songs . For this reason , it did not chart on the Hot 100 , however peaking at number two on the Adult Contemporary chart . Outside the US , the song peaked at number 11 in Canada , 40 in New Zealand and 44 in the Netherlands . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Forever " was written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff in early 1995 . The song is written in the key of A ♭ major and features a basic chord progression of A ♭ -C / G @-@ Fm / E ♭ -D ♭ -E ♭ . Throughout " Forever , " Carey 's voice spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of A5 . According to author Chris Nickson , the song 's instrumentation and throw @-@ back melody bring reminders of 1950s and 60s balladry . The throw @-@ back was featured through the chord changes , and in the way that the guitar arpeggios " stayed at the forefront of the music . " " Forever " finds Carey displaying subtle and harmonizing vocals , with Nickson describing her voice as " undeniably rich . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times described it as a " 50 's @-@ style rock @-@ and @-@ roll ballad , " while calling Carey 's voice " magnificent . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ken Tucker , an editor from Entertainment Weekly praised the song 's instrumentation , writing " I like the brisk waltz tempo of ' Forever . ' " " Forever " was released as an airplay only single in the US , and received a limited European release . Due to Billboard rules at the time of its release , " Forever " wasn 't eligible to chart on the Hot 100 . However , the song charted on the Adult Contemporary chart , peaking at number two . In Canada , the song peaked at number 11 on the Canadian RPM Singles Chart issue dated September 30 , 1996 . In New Zealand , the song entered the singles chart at its peak of number 40 , spending only one week in the chart . On the Dutch Singles Chart , " Forever " peaked at number 47 , fluctuating in the chart for a total of nine weeks . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 " Forever " was first performed in October 1995 in Carey 's concert at Madison Square Garden . The next year it was performed throughout all the shows on Carey 's Daydream World Tour in 1996 . The music video for " Forever " was filmed at one of the Japanese shows during the tour . It presents Carey singing the song on stage at the Tokyo Dome , and inter @-@ cuts scenes from other segments of the show . For the show and video , Carey wore a pair of black pants and matching blouse , together with a long leather trench coat . Her hair teased in a long wavy fashion , and is a golden @-@ auburn color . The video features three back @-@ up singers , one male and two female and a large projection screen on the stage 's rear . The live audio of this performance was released on the single . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 European CD Single 
 " Forever " – 4 : 01 
 " Forever " ( Live ) – 4 : 12 
 Australian CD Single 
 " Forever " – 4 : 01 
 " Underneath the Stars " – 3 : 33 
 " Forever " ( Live ) – 4 : 12 
 " Make It Happen " ( Live ) – 4 : 43 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Daydream liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ production , songwriting , vocals 
 Walter Afanasieff – co @-@ production , songwriting 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Peter Sarsgaard = 
 John Peter Sarsgaard ( / <unk> / ; born March 7 , 1971 ) is an American actor . He landed his first feature role in the movie Dead Man Walking in 1995 . He then appeared in the 1998 independent films Another Day in Paradise and Desert Blue . That same year , Sarsgaard received a substantial role in The Man in the Iron Mask ( 1998 ) , playing Raoul , the ill @-@ fated son of Athos . Sarsgaard later achieved critical recognition when he was cast in Boys Don 't Cry ( 1999 ) as John Lotter . He landed his first leading role in the 2001 film The Center of the World . The following year , he played supporting roles in Empire , The Salton Sea , and K @-@ 19 : The Widowmaker . 
 For his portrayal of Charles Lane in Shattered Glass , Sarsgaard won the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor and was nominated for the 2004 Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor . Sarsgaard has appeared in an eclectic range of films , including the 2004 comedy @-@ drama Garden State , the biographical film Kinsey ( 2004 ) , the drama The Dying Gaul ( 2005 ) and big @-@ budget films such as Flightplan ( 2005 ) , Jarhead ( 2005 ) , Orphan ( 2009 ) , An Education ( 2009 ) , Knight and Day ( 2010 ) , and the superhero film Green Lantern ( 2011 ) , Lovelace ( 2013 ) , Kelly Reichardt 's Night Moves ( 2013 ) , Woody Allen 's Blue Jasmine ( 2013 ) and Black Mass ( 2015 ) . Sarsgaard also appeared in the U.S. TV series The Killing ( 2013 ) as a man on death row perhaps wrongfully convicted for the brutal murder of his wife — a performance which he says included " some of the best acting I have ever done in my life . " His latest film , Experimenter , in which he stars alongside Winona Ryder , was released in the U.S. on October 16 , 2015 . 
 Sarsgaard has also appeared in Off @-@ Broadway productions including Kingdom of Earth , Laura Dennis , and Burn This . In September 2008 , he made his Broadway debut as Boris Alexeyevich Trigorin in The Seagull . Sarsgaard appeared in the off @-@ Broadway production of Uncle Vanya in January 2009 . Sarsgaard is married to actress Maggie Gyllenhaal . They have two daughters . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sarsgaard was born at Scott Air Force Base , Illinois , the son of Judy Lea ( née Reinhardt ) and John Dale Sarsgaard . His father was an Air Force engineer and later worked for Monsanto and IBM . He is American ( although his surname originates in Denmark , where two of his paternal great @-@ great @-@ grandparents were born ) . Sarsgaard was raised a Roman Catholic and served as an altar boy . His family moved more than 12 times during his childhood , following his father 's job . At the age of 7 , Sarsgaard originally wanted to become a soccer player and took up ballet to help improve his coordination . After suffering several bad concussions while playing soccer , he gave up the sport and became interested in writing and theater . 
 Sarsgaard attended Fairfield College Preparatory School , a private Jesuit boys ' school in Connecticut , where he became interested in movies . Following his graduation from Fairfield Prep , he attended Bard College in New York for two years before transferring to Washington University in St. Louis ( <unk> ) in 1991 , where he co @-@ founded an improvisational comedy troupe " Mama 's Pot Roast . " While at <unk> , Sarsgaard began performing in plays in an offshoot of New York 's Actors Studio ; His first role was as the servant Lawrence in Molière 's Tartuffe . In 1993 , he graduated with a degree in history and moved to New York . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Sarsgaard branched out with guest roles in television productions filmed in New York City , with Law & Order in 1995 , and New York Undercover ( 1997 ) as well as an appearance in the 1997 HBO special Subway Stories . He appeared in his first film role in Dead Man Walking ( 1995 ) , where he was cast as a murdered teenager , killed by Sean Penn 's character . 
 His next film roles were in a series of independent features : Another Day in Paradise ( 1997 ) , part of an ensemble cast that included James Woods , Melanie Griffith , Vincent Kartheiser , and Natasha Gregson Wagner , and In Desert Blue ( 1998 ) , where he had a supporting role in the film . He received his substantial role in the 1998 film The Man in the Iron Mask , where he played Raoul , the ill @-@ fated son of John Malkovich 's dueling Musketeer , Athos . The film uses characters from Alexandre Dumas ' d 'Artagnan Romances , and is very loosely adapted from some plot elements of The Vicomte de <unk> . The film received ambivalent reviews , but was a success at the box office , earning $ 182 million worldwide . 
 = = = 1999 – 2002 : Critical success = = = 
 In 1999 , Sarsgaard earned critical recognition in Kimberly Peirce 's Boys Don 't Cry , where he was cast as notorious killer John Lotter . The film is based on the real @-@ life story of Brandon Teena , who was raped and murdered in 1993 by Lotter and Tom Nissen after they found out that he was a trans man . Boys Don ’ t Cry received overwhelmingly positive acclaim from critics , and his performance was critically well received . According to The Boston Globe , " Peter Sarsgaard ... makes the killer 's terrible trajectory not only believable , but grounded in the most mundane <unk> behavior . He isn 't a drooling monster , he 's a guy you wouldn 't look twice at a bar or a convenience store . " A contributor from the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer wrote " It 's a marvelous performance supported ably by ... Sarsgaard as the unpredictable , sociopathic Lotter . " The film was screened at a special presentation at the 2000 Venice Film Festival . In regards to his character , as how Sarsgaard made him " likeable , sympathetic even " was because he wanted the audience " to understand why they would hang out with me . If my character wasn 't necessarily likable , I wanted him to be charismatic enough that you weren 't going to have a dull time if you were with him . " In another interview , Sarsgaard said he felt " empowered " by playing Lotter . 
 His first leading role was in the 2001 feature The Center of the World , where he plays Richard Longman , a lonely young entrepreneur who skips out on his company 's big initial public offering and pays a stripper ( Molly Parker ) $ 10 @,@ 000 to fly to Las Vegas with him . The film received average reviews , however , A.O. Scott of the New York Times , reported that the performances by both Sarsgaard and Parker " provide a rough grain of authenticity , capturing the blunted affect and aimless neediness of people in their 20s struggling to navigate a world of material abundance and impoverished emotional possibility . " Scott concluded in his recap that Sarsgaard made his character " seem like a genuinely nice guy , too innocent to grasp the sleaziness of his bargain with Florence . " 
 In 2002 , Sarsgaard starred in three films , K @-@ 19 : The Widowmaker , Empire and The Salton Sea . In K @-@ 19 : The Widowmaker , he portrayed a young Russian navy lieutenant . The film 's budget cost was $ 100 million to make , but upon release , it grossed $ 35 million in the United States and $ 30 million internationally , qualifying it as a box office failure . His next role was in Empire , a crime thriller , where he was cast in a supporting role . Sarsgaard played a meth addict in D. J. Caruso 's The Salton Sea . 
 = = = 2003 – present : Worldwide recognition = = = 
 2003 marked a significant turning point in Sarsgaard 's career , when he starred in the feature film Shattered Glass . He depicted journalist Charles Lane , the lead editor of The New Republic . Shattered Glass is based on the real events of journalist Stephen Glass ' career at The New Republic during the mid @-@ 1990s and his fall when his widespread journalistic fraud is exposed . During promotion of the film , Sarsgaard noted of his portrayal of Lane : " I just wanted to get his perspective on the actual events . [ ... ] I think that I tried to have some respect for myself and that way you 're respecting the real person you 're playing . I 've done it a number of times . And it 's always a little bit confusing . The best thing to do is just to ignore the fact , I think , that you 're playing somebody who is a real life character . " According to the San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , " Peter Sarsgaard is appealingly level , a stolid straight @-@ shooter as Lane " . A reviewer from the Chicago Tribune noted that Sarsgaard plays Lane with " great subtlety and grace " . The newspaper concluded with , " The character doesn 't seethe with personal resentment ; when he does a slow burn , he conveys a much deeper sense of a man 's value system being violated past the breaking point . " Sarsgaard 's performance in the film earned him his first Golden Globe Award nomination and an Independent Spirit Award nomination . 
 Following the success of Shattered Glass , Sarsgaard starred in several roles . In 2004 , he starred in the comedy @-@ drama Garden State , where he played Mark , the sarcastic best friend to Zach Braff 's character . In the same year , Sarsgaard portrayed Clyde Martin , in the biographical film Kinsey , a movie about the life of Alfred Kinsey , played by Liam Neeson . Kinsey was Sarsgaard 's first film role which featured full frontal nudity . Paul Clinton of CNN reported that Sarsgaard 's Clyde Martin " stands out " and " confirms that he 's without doubt one of the best character actors of his generation . " When asked about his kissing scenes with Neeson in Kinsey , Sarsgaard said : 
 It wasn ’ t as hard as , say , running around with all my gear on in Jarhead . I ’ d rather go for an awkward moment than physical exertion any day . The only thing that I think [ male actors ] get freaked out about when they have to do something like kiss a guy in a movie — when to their knowledge they ’ re straight — is that they ’ re afraid they ’ re going to be turned on . And if you ’ re not afraid that you ’ re going to be turned on — meaning that you know what you like — then really it ’ s not that hard . 
 In 2005 , Sarsgaard starred in the drama The Dying Gaul , where he plays Robert Sandrich , a struggling screenwriter who has written a serious love story about a man and his terminally ill partner . The film received favourable reviews . In an interview , Sarsgaard said , he felt like he was playing a character based on Craig Lucas , the director , whom he describes as " elitist in a fun way " . Because his character , a screenwriter , is also " elitist , " when he sells his soul by compromising his artistic vision , " ... the conflict seems bigger . Anyone can sell their soul . Even people with integrity . There 's always that temptation to guard against . Which is why it 's best to keep as much as possible hidden . " 
 Also in 2005 , he had a supporting role in the suspense film The Skeleton Key . His next film role was in Robert <unk> 's thriller Flightplan ( 2005 ) . In the film , Sarsgaard played an air marshall , who is ordered to keep guard of Jodie Foster 's character . Flightplan was screened at a special presentation at the 30th annual Toronto International Film Festival in 2005 . Despite the mixed reviews , the film was a financial success , earning $ 223 million worldwide , making it his highest @-@ grossing film to the end of 2008 . Sarsgaard 's next feature was Jarhead ( 2005 ) , opposite Jake Gyllenhaal . The movie is based on U.S. Marine Anthony Swofford 's 2003 Gulf War memoir of the same name . 
 Sarsgaard hosted Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) on January 21 , 2006 . In his introductory monologue , he tried to point out that he was a nice guy despite his sometimes macabre roles . Video clips were then played of Sarsgaard scaring the SNL cast . One sketch featured the Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) global scare , which was still fresh in many minds , and one of the skits included a promotion for the Peter Sarsgaard " SARS @-@ Guard " , a reference to the mania of facemasks worn in public by those fearing infection . 
 In 2007 , he starred in supporting roles in Year of the Dog and Rendition . Year of the Dog is a dark comedy about a lonely middle @-@ aged woman , played by Molly Shannon , who finds that animals are the only beings she can truly rely on . Sarsgaard plays Newt , an androgynous dog trainer , and love interest for Shannon 's character . He starred alongside Meryl Streep , Alan Arkin , Reese Witherspoon , and Jake Gyllenhaal in Rendition , a Gavin Hood @-@ directed political thriller about the US policy of extraordinary rendition . Viewed as a sex symbol , Sarsgaard was named one of Salon.com 's Sexiest Man Living in 2007 . 2008 saw Sarsgaard star in the drama Elegy , based on a Phillip Roth novel , The Dying Animal . The film received favorable good reception amongst critics . 
 In 2009 , Sarsgaard starred alongside Jon Foster and Sienna Miller in the drama The Mysteries of Pittsburgh . It is an adaptation of Michael Chabon 's novel of the same name . In the movie , Sarsgaard plays Cleveland , the rebellious bisexual boyfriend of Miller 's character . The Mysteries of Pittsburgh premiered at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival . His next film appearance was in the thriller Orphan , where he and Vera Farmiga play a married couple who lose a baby and adopt a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl , who is not as innocent as she claims to be . Furthermore , in the same year , Sarsgaard starred as David in Lone Scherfig 's coming of age film An Education . The role required Sarsgaard to speak in a British accent . An Education drew favorable reviews from critics . According to Variety , " Sarsgaard ... marvelously expresses the savoir faire that has such an impact on Jenny [ Carey Mulligan ] . " Sarsgaard played a federal agent in the action comedy film Knight and Day , released in June 2010 , in which he appeared alongside Tom Cruise and Cameron Diaz . In February 2010 , it was announced that Sarsgaard had been cast as villain Hector Hammond in the superhero film Green Lantern . The film was released in 2011 . 
 = = = Stage career = = = 
 In 1995 , Sarsgaard made his theatrical debut in the Off @-@ Broadway production of Horton Foote 's Laura Dennis , which was directed by James Houghton . Ben Brantley of The New York Times wrote : " Mr. Sarsgaard ... emerges as an actor to watch with a performance of breathtaking emotional conviction . " The following year he starred in Kingdom of Earth opposite Cynthia Nixon and directed by John Cameron Mitchell . His performance in the play received favorable reviews amongst critics . In October 2002 , Sarsgaard returned to theater in a New York production of Lanford Wilson 's Burn This , where he replaced Edward Norton . 
 In 2008 , Sarsgaard made his Broadway debut at the Royal Court Theatre of Anton Chekhov 's adaptation The Seagull alongside Kristin Scott Thomas , Mackenzie Crook and Carey Mulligan . In the production , he plays , Boris Alexeyevich Trigorin , a tortured writer who drives a rival to suicide and a young lover to ruin . For the role , Sarsgaard had been required to speak in a British accent , in which he wanted it to be " less liked by an American audience " . 
 Sarsgaard played Mikhail <unk> Astrov , a country doctor and philosopher , in the Classic Stage Company 's 2009 off @-@ Broadway production of Anton Chekhov 's Uncle Vanya in New York City . The cast also included Maggie Gyllenhaal , Mamie Gummer , Denis O 'Hare , and George <unk> . The production , directed by Austin Pendleton , began previews on January 17 and ended its limited run on March 1 . Joe Dziemianowicz of the New York Daily News gave the production one out of four stars , but complimented his performance , writing that Sarsgaard does a " credible job as the doctor " . In the Bloomberg review of Uncle Vanya , John Simon , wrote : " Sarsgaard can 't find the right tempi or emphases : shuttling between colorless rattle and silence @-@ studded <unk> , he fails at both infectious enthusiasm and self- effacing charm . " 
 In May 2010 , it was reported that Sarsgaard will star in Chekhov 's play Three Sisters . The production is scheduled to begin in 2011 , and Sarsgaard will reunited with Uncle Vanya director Austin Pendleton . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In an interview with the New York Times , Sarsgaard stated that he followed Catholicism , saying : " I like the death @-@ cult aspect of Catholicism . Every religion is interested in death , but Catholicism takes it to a particularly high level . [ ... ] Seriously , in Catholicism , you 're supposed to love your enemy . That really impressed me as a kid , and it has helped me as an actor . [ ... ] The way that I view the characters I play is part of my religious upbringing . To abandon curiosity in all personalities , good or bad , is to give up hope in humanity . " 
 Among his most notable romantic relationships , Sarsgaard dated burlesque dancer Dita Von Teese and model and actress Shalom Harlow . Early in his film career , he dated photographer <unk> Marder , a close friend from his days attending Bard College , who had featured Sarsgaard in some of her early work . Sarsgaard has been in a relationship with actress Maggie Gyllenhaal , the sister of his close friend Jake Gyllenhaal , since 2002 . In April 2006 , they announced their engagement , and on May 2 , 2009 , they married in a small ceremony in Brindisi , Italy . They have two daughters , Ramona Sarsgaard , born October 3 , 2006 , and Gloria Ray Sarsgaard , born April 19 , 2012 . The family lives in Brooklyn , New York . 
 Sarsgaard is vegan , although he says he cooks meat for his children . 
 In June 2013 , Sarsgaard and numerous other celebrities appeared in a video showing support for Chelsea Manning . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
