 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Ratatoskr = 
 In Norse mythology , Ratatoskr ( Old Norse , generally considered to mean " drill @-@ tooth " or " bore @-@ tooth " ) is a squirrel who runs up and down the world tree Yggdrasil to carry messages between the Veðrfölnir , perched atop Yggdrasil , and the wyrm Níðhöggr , who dwells beneath one of the three roots of the tree . Ratatoskr is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Ratatoskr contains two elements : <unk> and -toskr . The element <unk> is generally held to mean " tusk " . Guðbrandur Vigfússon theorized that the <unk> element means " the traveller " . He says that the name of the legendary drill Rati may feature the same term . According to Vigfússon , Ratatoskr means " tusk the traveller " or " the climber tusk . " 
 Sophus Bugge theorized that the name Ratatoskr is a loanword from Old English meaning " Rat @-@ tooth . " Bugge 's basis hinges on the fact that the -toskr element of the compound does not appear anywhere else in Old Norse . Bugge proposed that the -toskr element is a reformation of the Old English word <unk> ( Old Frisian tusk ) and , in turn , that the element <unk> represents Old English <unk> ( " rat " ) . 
 According to Albert Sturtevant , " [ as ] far as the element <unk> is concerned , Bugge 's hypothesis has no valid foundation in view of the fact that the [ Old Norse ] word Rata ( gen. form of Rati * ) is used in <unk> [ <unk> ] ( 106 , 1 ) to signify the instrument which Odin employed for boring his way through the rocks in quest of the poet 's mead [ ... ] " and that " Rati * must then be considered a native [ Old Norse ] word meaning " The Borer , <unk> " [ ... ] " . 
 Sturtevant says that Bugge 's theory regarding the element -toskr may appear to be supported by the fact that the word does not appear elsewhere in Old Norse . Sturtevant , however , disagrees . Sturtevant says that the Old Norse proper name <unk> ( derived from Proto @-@ Norse * <unk> ) refers to " a person who is characterized as having some peculiar sort of tooth " and theorizes a Proto @-@ Germanic form of -toskr . Sturtevant concludes that " the fact that the [ Old Norse ] word occurs only in the name Rata @-@ <unk> is no valid evidence against this assumption , for there are many [ Old Norse ] hapax <unk> of native origin , as is attested by the equivalents in the Mod [ ern ] Scandinavian dialects . " Modern scholars have accepted this etymology , listing the name Ratatoskr as meaning " drill @-@ tooth " ( Jesse Byock , Andy Orchard , Rudolf Simek ) or " bore @-@ tooth " ( John Lindow ) . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) says that Ratatoskr runs up and down Yggdrasil bringing messages between the eagle perched atop it and Níðhöggr below it : 
 Ratatoskr is described in the Prose Edda 's Gylfaginning 's chapter 16 , in which High states that 
 An eagle sits at the top of the ash , and it has knowledge of many things . Between its eyes sits the hawk called Vedrfolnir [ ... ] . The squirrel called Ratatosk [ ... ] runs up and down the ash . He tells slanderous gossip , provoking the eagle and Nidhogg . 
 = = Theories = = 
 According to Rudolf Simek , " the squirrel probably only represents an embellishing detail to the mythological picture of the world @-@ ash in Grímnismál " . Hilda Ellis Davidson , describing the world tree , states the squirrel is said to gnaw at it — furthering a continual destruction and re @-@ growth cycle , and posits the tree symbolizes ever @-@ changing existence . John Lindow points out that Yggdrasil is described as rotting on one side and as being chewed on by four harts and Níðhöggr , and that , according to the account in Gylfaginning , it also bears verbal hostility in the fauna it supports . Lindow adds that " in the sagas , a person who helps stir up or keep feuds alive by ferrying words of malice between the participants is seldom one of high status , which may explain the assignment of this role in the mythology to a relatively insignificant animal " . 
 Richard W. <unk> Jr. and Katie Ferrell theorize that " the role of Ratatosk probably derived from the habit of European tree squirrels ( Sciurus vulgaris ) to give a scolding alarm call in response to danger . It takes little imagination for you to think that the squirrel is saying nasty things about you . " 
 = The Boat Race 1884 = 
 The 41st Boat Race took place on 7 April 1884 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race , for which Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd acted as both umpire and starter for the first time , was won by Cambridge by margin of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 39 seconds . The victory took the overall record in the event to 22 – 18 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , and held the overall lead , with 22 victories to Cambridge 's 17 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss ( who rowed for the Dark Blues four times between the 1875 and the 1878 races ) and William Grenfell ( who represented Oxford in the 1877 and 1878 races ) . Herbert Edward Rhodes was the Cambridge coach ; he had rowed for the Light Blues four times between 1873 and 1876 and was Cambridge University Boat Club president in 1875 . The umpire for the race was Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1856 and 1859 ) and for the first time acted as starter . He replaced Edward Searle ( who had acted in that capacity since at least 1840 ) after the previous year 's chaotic start when one of the crews failed to hear his command to start . The race had been postponed by two days because of the funeral of the Prince Leopold , Duke of Albany . 
 The Cambridge crew took the unusual step of taking a two week break from practice in late @-@ January , after which they settled on a crew which , according to Drinkwater , was " considerably faster than Oxford on the day of the race . " Conversely he noted that the Dark Blue crew " did not come on at all well and were somewhat stale by the day of the race " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 12 @.@ 75 lb ( 75 @.@ 5 kg ) , 0 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 1 kg ) more than their opponents . Oxford saw two former Blues return to the crew , including A. R. Paterson who was rowing in his fourth consecutive Boat Race . The Cambridge crew contained four rowers with Boat Race experience , including Charles William Moore who was making his fourth appearance in the event . For the first time in three years , the race featured no non @-@ British competitors . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The Light Blues made the quicker start and held a clear water advantage by the time the crews passed the Crab Tree pub . Cambridge kept this advantage to Hammersmith Bridge at which point Oxford spurted and recovered some of the deficit , but the Cantabrigians increased their stroke rate to go clear once again by Corney Reach . Despite the efforts of the Oxford stroke W. D. B. Curry to push his crew , according to Drinkwater , " at Barnes Bridge they fell to pieces . " Cambridge went on to win by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 39 seconds , recording their first victory in six years , and took the overall record to 22 – 18 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Marcela Agoncillo = 
 Marcela Mariño de Agoncillo ( née Mariño y Coronel ; June 24 , 1860 – May 30 , 1946 ) , also simply known as Marcela Agoncillo , was a Filipina renowned in Philippine history as the principal seamstress of the first and official flag of the Philippines , gaining her the title of Mother of the Philippine Flag . 
 Agoncillo was a daughter of a rich family in her hometown of Taal , Batangas . Finishing her studies at Santa Catalina College , she acquired her learning in music and feminine crafts . At the age of 30 , Agoncillo married Filipino lawyer and jurist Don Felipe Agoncillo and bore him six children . Her marriage led to her important role in Philippine history . When her husband was exiled to Hong Kong during the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution , Agoncillo and the rest of the family joined him and temporarily resided there to avoid the anti @-@ Filipino hostility of some foreign countries . While in Hong Kong , General Emilio Aguinaldo requested her to sew a flag that would represent their country . Agoncillo , her eldest daughter and a friend manually sewed the flag in accordance with General Aguinaldo 's design which later became the official flag of the Philippines . 
 While the flag itself is the perpetual legacy of Agoncillo , she is also commemorated through museums and monuments like the marker in Hong Kong ( where her family temporarily sojourned ) , at her ancestral home in Taal , Batangas which has been turned into a museum , in paintings by notable painters as well as through other visual arts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Agoncillo was born on June 24 , 1860 in Taal , Batangas , Philippines to Francisco Mariño and Eugenia Coronel . She grew up in their ancestral house in Batangas built in the 1770s by her grandfather , Andres Marino . 
 As a daughter of a rich and religious family , Agoncillo was referred to in their town as <unk> <unk> which means " a virgin enthroned in the town church " . Stories told in the area related that people kept waiting patiently by the church patio for her appearance in the morning to attend mass accompanied either by a maid or an elder relative . 
 She was sent to a convent after her education in Manila . The convent she was studying in was the Santa Catalina College of the Dominican nuns , an exclusive school for girls , established in the Walled City of Intramuros where she finished her elementary and secondary education . In college , she learned Spanish , music , the feminine crafts and social graces . She spent her girlhood partly in their hometown and partly in the convent . Accordingly , Agoncillo was skilled in needlework . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Agoncillo was married to Don Felipe , a rich Filipino revolutionist and the first Filipino diplomat . They were both thirty and Don Felipe was already a judge when they finally wed . Agoncillo moved from Taal to Manila , where they lived together in a two @-@ story house on M.H. del Pillar St. , Malate , near the Malate church . 
 Six daughters were born to them : Lorenza ( " <unk> " ) , Gregoria ( " Goring " ) , Eugenia ( " Nene " ) , Marcela ( " <unk> " , named after her mother because they thought she would be their last child ) , Adela ( who died at the age of three ) and the youngest , Maria ( " Maring " , who was their last surviving child and died on July 6 , 1995 ) . Most of her daughters became teachers . Gregoria was the first Filipina to graduate from Oxford University . After the graduation of the three elder daughters , they were offered teaching positions . Lorenza was given an appointment to teach in Malate Catholic School . They so immersed themselves in their respective teaching careers that not one of them chose to be married . Marcella Agoncillo cared for all of her daughters until they reached maturity . One of her favorite pieces of advice to them was to " live honestly and well , and to work hard and not depend on family property " . 
 Besides the legal services rendered by Don Felipe to the impoverished , Agoncillo and her daughters observed every Thursday as a day of charity , when a queue of needy people seeking alms would form in the Agoncillo driveway . No one ever left their house empty @-@ handed . Agoncillo would hand them a bag of rice in addition to the money she gave them . This practice lasted until the couple retired . 
 = = Living in Hong Kong = = 
 After learning of the plans of the Governor @-@ General of the Philippines to deport Don Felipe , he sailed to Yokohama , Japan , staying there only briefly until proceeding to Hong Kong where he joined other Filipino exiles who found asylum when the revolution broke out in 1896 . Twenty @-@ two months after the departure of Don Felipe for Hong Kong , Agoncillo and the rest of the family ( her last two daughters were not yet born ) followed him into exile . They rented a house at 535 Morrison Hill in the Wan Chai district . While in Hong Kong , Agoncillo gave birth to their last child on March 22 , 1906 . 
 Felipe , being an exile himself , received any Filipino who came into their house . Thereafter , the place became a sanctuary for other Filipino revolutionary exiles . They initiated meetings in the Agoncillos ' residence , especially during the critical months of March and April 1898 . Among these folks were Gen. Antonio Luna and Gen. Aguinaldo . Also , Josephine Bracken , Jose Rizal 's fiancée , sought refuge in their house when the Spanish authorities threatened to torture her . 
 = = = Making of the Philippine flag = = = 
 After the signing of the Pact of Biak @-@ na @-@ Bato on December 14 , 1897 , General Aguinaldo , after their voluntary exile , visited the Agoncillo residence in Hong Kong . After having met them , Aguinaldo requested that Agoncillo immediately hand @-@ sew a flag according to his design which would embody the national aspirations of all Filipinos . After receiving the request , Agoncillo delegated her eldest daughter , five @-@ year @-@ old Lorenza Agoncillo , and Mrs. Delfina <unk> de <unk> , Jose Rizal 's niece by his sister Lucia , to help her . 
 The process took only a short time , but it was difficult . The three worked manually and with the aid of a sewing machine . They had to redo the flag after the rays of the sun were not in the proper direction . Their eyes and hands suffered due to the prolonged work session . Made from fine silk which she bought in Hong Kong , the flag was embroidered in gold and contained stripes of blue and red and a white triangle with the sun and three stars on it . The flag was finished in five days and became known as " the sun and the stars flag " . 
 On May 17 , 1898 , the flag was delivered personally by Agoncillo and was packed among the things Aguinaldo brought back to Manila . This was the flag that was hoisted from the window of Aguinaldo 's house in Kawit , Cavite , during the proclamation of Philippine independence on June 12 , 1898 accompanied by the Philippine National Anthem Marcha Filipina . However , she did not witness either this first public display of the flag or the time when the flag was unfurled during the Malolos Congress because her husband remained in Hong Kong and she remained with him . 
 In response to the message written by Gen. Aguinaldo , Agoncillo wrote the following statement when she was interviewed : 
 In the house at 535 Morrison Hill , where I lived with my family , exiled from our country on account of the national cause , I had the good fortune to make the first Philippine flag under the direction of an <unk> [ r ] <unk> leader Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo y <unk> ... It took me five days to make that National Flag , and when completed , I myself delivered it to Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo before boarding the transport <unk> [ ug ] h ... Gen. Aguinaldo is the best witness who can give the information whether or not that flag was the first to be displayed in Cavite at the beginning of the revolutionary government against the government of Spain in these islands . 
 = = Post @-@ exile and death = = 
 Agoncillo and her daughters stayed in Hong Kong from 1895 to 1906 . She took care of their house , which became an asylum . Their funds had run out because of the heavy expenses incurred by Don Felipe for his diplomatic activities in France and in the United States . She once had to sell the children 's <unk> and their jewels to support her family and to pay for their voyage back to Manila . The other money was also used to help boost the revolutionary funds . Their support for the revolution made them an impoverished family ; however , they gained it back when Don Felipe returned to his profession . 
 After the fall of the first Philippine Republic and the establishment of the American regime , Agoncillo and her family ended their exile and went back to Manila as soon as they were fetched by Don Felipe after his diplomatic activities abroad had ended . The Agoncillos settled in their family house in Malate . After the death of Don Felipe , Agoncillo 's remaining family suffered from starvation due to their meager supply of food , water and other needs . The Japanese conquerors also contributed to their anguish during the period of the Japanese invasion . Taking this all in stride , Marcela remained pragmatic and a source of inspiration . After their house was incinerated during the Japanese occupation , all she said to her remaining daughters was " We will then have to go to Taal . " 
 Though she endured the 1945 Battle of Manila , the health of Agoncillo , who was alternatively called " Doña Marcela " and " Lola <unk> " during her old age , was steadily deteriorating . She continued to mourn her deceased husband to such an extent that her daughters found it necessary to hide all his remaining photographs . On May 30 , 1946 , she quietly died in Manila at the age of 86 . Her mortal remains were brought from Taal to Manila and interred alongside her husband in the Catholic cemetery of La Loma according to the wishes of her last will . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 Several commemorative figures were created in remembrance of Agoncillo 's historic family . On November 27 , 1955 , a marker was erected by the National Historical Institute of the Philippines and a museum was established in Taal , Batangas in accordance with her last wish and was named Marcela Marino Agoncillo Museum and Monument . The museum is Agoncillo 's ancestral house . The house @-@ turned @-@ museum permanently exhibits flags and a diorama depicting the sewing of the first flag . A bronze statue of her holding the flag was erected outside the house in its garden . In Hong Kong , a historical marker was created by the Hong Kong Antiquities Council at Morrison Hill Park to commemorate the site where the first Philippine flag was sewn . However , the place where the Agoncillos resided , the location of the Hong Kong Junta , and other locations of historical importance to Filipinos remain unmarked . 
 Agoncillo 's legacy is remembered through the visual arts as well . In 1996 , Filipino National Artist Napoleon Abueva created the concrete and marble sculpture Three Women Weaving the Filipino Flag at the UP Diliman to commemorate Agoncillo and the other two women who assisted her in their important task . Renowned Filipino painter Fernando <unk> painted the historical sewing and is nationally known as The Making of the Philippine flag . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Portrayed by <unk> <unk> in the 2012 film , El Presidente . 
 = Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik = 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik is the debut album of American hip hop duo OutKast , released on April 26 , 1994 , by LaFace Records . After befriending each other in 1992 , rappers André 3000 and Big Boi pursued recording music as a duo and worked with production team Organized Noize , which led to their signing to LaFace . The album was produced by the team and recorded at the Dungeon , D.A.R.P. Studios , Purple Dragon , Bosstown , and Doppler Studios in Atlanta . 
 A Southern hip hop album , Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik features live instrumentation in its hip hop production and musical elements from funk and soul genres . Wanting to make a statement about urban life as an African American in the South , OutKast wrote and recorded the album as teenagers and addressed coming of age topics with the album 's songs . They also incorporated repetitive hooks and Southern slang in their lyrics . 
 The album peaked at number 20 on the Billboard 200 , on which it charted for 26 weeks , and was eventually certified platinum in the United States . It was promoted with three singles , including " Player 's Ball " , which helped create buzz for the album . Upon its release , Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik received positive reviews from music critics and helped distinguish Southern hip hop as a credible hip hop scene , amid East Coast and West Coast hip hop 's market dominance . The album has since been viewed by writers as an important release in both hip hop and Atlanta 's music scene . 
 = = Background = = 
 André 3000 and Big Boi met in 1992 at the Lenox Square shopping mall when they were both 16 years old . The two lived in the East Point section of Atlanta and attended Tri @-@ Cities High School . During school , they participated in rap battles in the cafeteria . André 3000 dropped out of high school at age 17 and worked a series of jobs before he and Big Boi formed a group called 2 Shades Deep ; he returned to obtain his GED at a night school following the release of Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik . They briefly dabbled in street @-@ hustling to save up for recording money . 
 The duo also spent time at their friend Rico Wade 's basement recording studio , known as the Dungeon , with Wade 's production team Organized Noize and future members of hip hop group Goodie Mob . OutKast recorded demos at the studio , and Organized Noize member Ray Murray helped Big Boi , whose strength lay in songwriting , develop his rapping skills . After several local productions , the team was hired by LaFace Records to produce remixes to songs from TLC 's 1992 album <unk> ... On the TLC Tip . The team had André 3000 and Big Boi rap over them , which led to a record deal from LaFace for both Organized Noize and OutKast . The commercial success of Arrested Development 's 1992 alternative hip hop single " Tennessee " also encouraged LaFace to sign OutKast , the label 's first hip hop act . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After receiving a $ 15 @,@ 000 advance from LaFace in 1993 , OutKast started recording the album at the Dungeon . The studio featured mostly secondhand recording equipment . Recording sessions also took place at Bosstown , Dallas Austin 's D.A.R.P. Studios , Doppler Studios , and Purple Dragon in Atlanta . Located in midtown Atlanta , Bosstown developed a sentimental value for OutKast , who later bought the studio in 1999 and renamed it " Stankonia " after their fourth studio album . Throughout the album 's recording , the duo refined their artistry and drew on ideas from funk , contemporary R & B , and soul music . André 3000 also smoked marijuana during the sessions . They recorded over 30 songs for the album . 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was produced entirely by Organized Noize , which was made up of Rico Wade , Ray Murray , and Sleepy Brown . Production team Organized Noize utilized live instrumentation on the album , emphasizing musical instruments , including bass , keyboards , guitar , and organ , over conventional hip hop techniques such as DJing and sampling . They viewed that the feel of live instruments made the music sound more authentic and immediate . With their production , the team sought an organic , celebratory , " down @-@ home " vibe , as Brown later recalled , " We wanted Atlanta brothers to be proud of where they were from " . Brown also sung vocals for several tracks . 
 Along with Organized Noize , other members of the Dungeon Family worked on the album , including Goodie Mob , Mr. DJ , Debra Killings , and Society of Soul . The album was mixed at Sound on Sound in New York City , Bosstown , D.A.R.P. Studios , Tree Sound , and Studio LaCoCo in Atlanta . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 A Southern hip hop album , Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik incorporates analog elements such as Southern @-@ styled guitar licks , languid soul melodies , and mellow 1970s funk grooves . It also features digital hip hop production elements such as programmed snare beats , booty bass elements , including Roland TR @-@ 808 clave rhythms , and old school hip hop elements , including E @-@ mu SP @-@ 1200 @-@ styled drums and turntable scratches . Music writers characterize the album 's music and beats as " <unk> " and " mechanical " . Roni Sarig of Rolling Stone comments that the music shows " clear debts to East Coast <unk> like the Native Tongues and a West Coast level of attention to live instruments and smooth , irresistible melodies " . In Oliver Wang 's Classic Material , music writer Tony Green delineates the album 's release " at the tail end of a second hip @-@ hop ' golden age , ' a two @-@ year period ( 1993 – 94 ) that spawned Wu @-@ Tang 's Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) , Snoop Dogg 's Doggystyle , De La Soul 's <unk> <unk> , Nas 's Illmatic , and A Tribe Called Quest 's Midnight Marauders " , and comments that " like many albums released during that period , <unk> alluded to its roots ... while clearing the way for a new direction that used the peach cobbler soul funk of the Organized Noize production crew as a starting point . " 
 With the album , OutKast wanted to make a statement about urban life as an African American in the South , particularly Atlanta . Written when they were teenagers , much of the album addresses coming of age topics , and has themes of self @-@ empowerment and reflections on life in the New South . Encyclopedia of Popular Music editor Colin Larkin writes that the album " <unk> [ es ] tales of the streets of their local East Point and Decatur neighbourhoods " . The album 's segue tracks illustrate Southern life . The lyrics incorporate tongue @-@ twisters , triplet rhyme schemes , repetitive vocal hooks , Southern slang , such as the recurring phrase " ain 't no thang but a chicken wing " repeated throughout " Ain 't No Thang " . The duo also intersperse their lyrics with references to classic cars , marijuana use , pimps , and players , which Big Boi defines as " somebody who can take care of they business in the game , the game of life " . His flow is frenetic and has a rapid delivery , while André 3000 raps in a more relaxed cadence , with staccato rhymes , and occasionally sings on the album . Writer Martin C. Strong views that both rappers ' " lyrical panache " on the album has an " ebb and flow " similar to Kool Keith and Del the Funky Homosapien . 
 The song " Call of da Wild " discusses the temptation to drop out of school , while " Git Up , Git Out " encourages teenagers to follow their passions , be productive , and stop using drugs . The latter is an intertextual track that mixes themes of consciousness and political awareness with images of violence , sex , drugs , and gangsta culture . It features guest rapper Cee Lo Green exploring perspectives of both man child and maternal figure . " Funky Ride " has no rappers and is instead sung by R & B group Society of Soul , a side project of Organized Noize . It has an extended guitar solo and musical similarities to Funkadelic and Bootsy Collins . " <unk> ' Erb " explores themes of hedonism and addresses black @-@ on @-@ black violence and the negative effect it has on African @-@ American culture : " There 's only so much time left in this crazy world / I 'm just <unk> ' <unk> / Niggas killin ' niggas , they don 't understand ( it 's the master plan ) , I 'm just <unk> ' <unk> " 
 = = Singles = = 
 The album 's lead single , " Player 's Ball " , was released on November 19 , 1993 , Originally intended as a Christmas release , it featured the sound of sleigh bells in its original mix , but it was removed once the single began receiving more airplay . The single received its highest exposure in February 1994 with heavy airplay and promotion , including a music video directed by Sean " Puffy " Combs . Combs had received a copy of the single from LaFace founder L.A. Reid and invited OutKast to New York to perform as an opening act for The Notorious B.I.G. By March , the single had sold 500 @,@ 000 copies and risen to number one on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles , topping the chart for six weeks . 
 The single 's popularity among young black college students during <unk> increased its sales and helped it break into the Top 40 , a rare achievement for a hip hop song at the time . " Player 's Ball " spent 20 weeks and peaked at number 37 on the Billboard Hot 100 . On May 12 , 1994 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . The single helped create buzz for the album . 
 Neither of the album 's next two singles performed as well . The title track was released in July , and it reached number 74 on the Billboard Hot 100 in August . Its music video was directed by F. Gary Gray . " Git Up , Git Out " was released in October . It only charted on the Billboard Hot R & B Singles , peaking at number 59 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was released by LaFace Records on April 26 , 1994 . It peaked at number 20 on the U.S. Billboard 200 on May 14 . The album ultimately spent 26 weeks on the chart . It also reached number three on the Billboard Top R & B Albums , remaining on the chart for 50 weeks . By June , the album had sold 500 @,@ 000 copies . The album 's sales increased after OutKast 's appearance at the 1995 Source Awards in January . On April 5 , 1995 , Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was certified platinum by the RIAA , for shipments of one million copies in the US . By August , it had sold 715 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album was reissued by LaFace in September 1998 . 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was well received by contemporary critics . James Bernard of Entertainment Weekly preferred the album 's Southern hip hop over " Arrested Development 's suspiciously peppy , idealized version of down @-@ home " and stated , " it 's about time someone told today 's weed @-@ obsessed youth to ' get up , get out and get something / Don 't spend all your time trying to get high . ' " Dennis Hunt of the Los Angeles Times cited " Git Up , Git Out " as the album 's highlight and commended the duo 's " sauntering , hard @-@ core tales of the ' hood " , writing that they " bristle with clever humor and sharp insights rather than rage . " Rob Marriott of The Source complimented the duo 's " organic " P @-@ Funk influence and praised their lyrics ' honesty , commenting that " while their rhyme style may swing a little too close to Hiero for my comfort , what really makes this album so listenable is that ... truthfulness reigns . " However , Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " rating in his consumer guide for The Village Voice . 
 Christgau remarked on OutKast 's early albums in a later consumer guide article , stating " If Dre and Big Boi were addressing real ' real life situations ' on Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik or ATLiens , they were drawling too <unk> for any Yankee to tell . " In a retrospective review of the album , Steve Juon of RapReviews called it " a stellar debut album " , but noted some musical flaws , including the " monotonous bassline and chorus " of " <unk> " , the " out of place " " Funky Ride " , and the album 's segue tracks . Music journalist Peter Shapiro found its production " rich , deep and detailed , but never as seductive or crowd @-@ pleasing as Dr. Dre 's " and commended the album as " a melancholy depiction of the game that never shied away from its consequences " . Although he found " occasional dull and mediocre spots " , Allmusic editor Stanton <unk> called the album " an extremely strong showing " and praised the duo 's " inventive sense of rhyme flow " and " mixture of lyrical acuity , goofball humor , Southern drawl , funky timing , and legitimate offbeat personalities . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite its success , Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik had some detractors , including hip hop tastemakers who were unaccustomed to the album 's style . At the 1995 Source Awards , OutKast won in the " Best Newcomer " category , but were booed upon taking the stage and delivering their acceptance speech ; Big Boi managed to deliver his shout outs , while André 3000 was nervous and only said , " The South got somethin ' to say . " The latter recalled how the album was received by some listeners , " People thought that the South basically only had bass music . At first people were looking at us like ' Um , I don 't know . ' " Hip hop magnate Russell Simmons reacted negatively to the album at the time , but later expressed regret and said of the album in retrospect , " At the time , I didn 't understand their music — it sounds so different from what I was used to that I foolishly ... claim [ ed ] that they ' weren 't hip @-@ hop . ' The same way people didn 't understand ' Sucker MCs ' a decade earlier , I didn 't understand that instead of operating outside of hip @-@ hop , OutKast was actually expanding hip @-@ hop . They were offering one of the most honest expressions , and expression so honest that it went completely over my head at first . " 
 After the album was certified platinum , LaFace Records gave OutKast more creative control and advanced money for their 1996 follow @-@ up album ATLiens . After acquiring their own recording studio , the duo immediately started working on new material and assimilated themselves with music recording and studio equipment , as they sought to become more ambitious artists and less dependent on other producers . The two also became more accustomed to playing live , particularly Big Boi , and André 3000 significantly changed his lifestyle , as he adopted a more eccentric fashion sense , became a vegetarian , and stopped smoking marijuana . The album 's success also opened up more opportunities for Organized Noize , who subsequently worked on TLC 's <unk> ( 1994 ) . The Organized Noize @-@ produced hit " Waterfalls " became a massive success and earned the production team enough clout with LaFace to endorse Goodie Mob to the label . Organized Noize produced Goodie Mob 's acclaimed 1995 debut Soul Food and continued their crossover into R & B production , including work on Curtis Mayfield 's 1997 album New World Order . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was a seminal album for Southern hip hop . During the early 1990s , the scene was largely discredited by the rest of the hip hop community as misogynistic and inferior to other scenes , particularly East Coast and West Coast hip hop . Those scenes dominated the hip hop market , and acts from other regional scenes were often produced by either East Coast or West Coast producers . The album offered an artistically credible alternative , both musically and lyrically , to those regional scenes and was produced by an Atlanta @-@ based production team . Music journalist T. Hasan Johnson notes " Outkast 's first submission to the music industry " as significant for how they " broke from the binary production options split by California and New York artists " , viewing that their decision to boast their region and a native production team " signaled a break from the conventional split between East and West hip hop aesthetics and openly demonstrated that the South could produce street @-@ certified , quality music . " Nicole Hodges <unk> cites its release as a critical moment in hip hop and writes that it " marked a break in bicoastal hip hop sound " . 
 The album presaged hip hop 's " Dirty South " aesthetic , which later achieved mainstream recognition . Its smooth musical style , drawing on soul and funk musical traditions , and the duo 's clever lyrics helped define Southern hip hop 's sound , which influenced acts like Goodie Mob , Joi , and Bubba Sparxxx . In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Rolling Stone journalist Roni Sarig writes that the album " marked a coming out for a region that would dominate hip @-@ hop by the decade 's end " , commenting that , with it , OutKast " helped define a new stream of hip @-@ hop that would rejuvenate the music in the late ' 90s and early 2000s . " Allmusic 's Stanton <unk> comments that " no one sounded like OutKast in 1994 " and that the album showcased Organized Noize as it " began forging one of the most distinctive production sounds in popular music in the ' 90s " . 
 Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik was also a significant release during the burgeoning <unk> music scene . The scene started as a black music revival in Atlanta during the late 1980s , and developed with the success of LaFace Records and the national attention received by Atlanta @-@ based recording artists and producers such as Toni Braxton , Kris Kross , Jermaine Dupri , and Babyface . The album offered realistic depictions of the city and veered from the Afrocentric themes of Arrested Development and Dupri 's mainstream stylings . It was named the third best album of 1994 in ego trip 's list of " Hip Hop 's 25 Greatest Albums by Year 1980 – 98 " . Vibe included it as one of the " 150 Essential Albums of the Vibe Era ( 1992 – 2007 ) " . The magazine also included the album on their 2004 list of " 51 Essential Albums " that represent " a generation , a sound , and in many cases , a movement " , writing that " [ OutKast ] determined the South had something to say , and after emerging form the Dungeon production lab , they said it all , sometimes sang it all — pointedly , <unk> , and putting on absolutely no East Coast pretense . Classic . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks produced by Organized Noise 
 Notes 
 " Funky Ride " is sung by Society of Soul . 
 " <unk> Flam ( Interlude ) " contains a sample of " Ghetto Head <unk> " by P.A. 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Immaculate Conception Catholic Church ( Celina , Ohio ) = 
 Immaculate Conception Catholic Church is a parish of the Roman Catholic Church in Celina , Ohio , United States . Founded later than many other Catholic parishes in the heavily Catholic region of western Ohio , it owns a complex of buildings constructed in the early 20th century that have been designated historic sites because of their architecture . Leading among them is its massive church , built in the Romanesque Revival style just 43 years after the first Catholic moved into the city : it has been called northwestern Ohio 's grandest church building . 
 = = Parish history = = 
 Catholics were active in southern Mercer County by the 1830s ; St. John the Baptist parish in Maria Stein and St. Rose parish in St. Rose were established in 1837 , and St. Henry parish in St. Henry and St. Joseph parish in St. Joe were also founded before 1840 . Despite the growing Catholic presence to the south , the county seat was strongly Protestant in its early history : when it was platted in 1834 , the proprietors donated lots for the use of congregations of the Baptist , Methodist , and Presbyterian faiths , and not a single Catholic was resident in the village for more than a quarter of a century . Beginning with Owen Gallagher in 1860 , Catholics began to migrate into Celina , and starting in 1864 , Mass was celebrated biweekly in a factory owned by one of the members . At this time , no priest lived in Celina ; the celebrant was typically Joseph Gregory Dwenger , then the pastor of Holy Rosary parish in nearby St. Marys . A parish was formally erected in Celina in 1864 and dedicated to the Immaculate Conception . 
 With the creation of the parish , more Catholics were attracted to Celina ; the parish grew to the point that a church building was needed , and the Archbishop of Cincinnati , John Baptist Purcell , came to Celina to lay the cornerstone on August 3 , 1864 . Members subscribed to the building fund throughout that year and the following ; it was completed in November 1865 , and Joseph Dwenger dedicated it on December 8 , 1865 . This building was a brick structure , measuring approximately 40 feet ( 12 m ) by 60 feet ( 18 m ) ; it cost $ 7 @,@ 000 to build . However , the parish continued to grow , and a building fund for a new edifice was started in 1899 . Construction of the replacement church building began in the following year , and it was dedicated in 1903 at a cost of $ 52 @,@ 000 . In the early twentieth century , it was widely considered the finest church building in all of northwestern Ohio , and decades later , its architecture still dominates all of downtown Celina . 
 Since the parish 's earliest years , members of the Missionaries of the Precious Blood have provided pastoral care for the members ; Dwenger was a member of this society , as were the other five priests who served there in its first decade . The first priest to live in Celina was <unk> <unk> , who arrived in 1876 ; the members acquired a small frame house to use as a rectory . Soon after <unk> 's arrival , the parish constructed a building for their parochial school . The structure built for this school was two stories tall and measured approximately 40 feet ( 12 m ) by 36 feet ( 11 m ) ; it replaced a frame building in which the school had started in 1871 . A convent was built in 1879 to house the first of the Sisters of the Precious Blood , who came in that year to teach at the parish school ; it was replaced by a larger structure in 1949 , located northeast of the rest of the buildings related to the parish . 
 Today , Immaculate Conception continues to be an active parish in the Archdiocese of Cincinnati . It is clustered with Our Lady of Guadalupe parish in Montezuma and St. Theresa , Little Flower of Jesus parish in Rockford ; all three churches are part of the St. Marys Deanery . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Church = = = 
 The church itself is a large brick building constructed in the shape of a Greek cross ; it was designed by Andrew DeCurtins of Lima and built under the supervision of John Burkhart of Kenton . A Romanesque Revival structure erected in 1903 , it is centered on a large bronze dome . Worshippers may enter the building through its eastern end ; the facade is pierced by three large doorways and a massive rose window . Capping the facade are two square towers ; each one includes an octagonal belfry and is topped with a smaller bronze dome . Inside , the church is heavily decorated ; many of the walls feature paintings , and the altar is distinctly Romanesque in its style . The entire building rests on a stone foundation with a basement . 
 Architectural historians have grouped the Precious Blood @-@ related churches of far western Ohio into four different generations : the first , composed primarily of small log buildings from the first years of settlement until 1865 ; the second , composed of moderately sized brick churches built between 1865 and 1885 ; the third , composed mostly of large High Gothic Revival churches with massive towers constructed from 1885 to 1905 ; and the fourth , composed of churches built between 1905 and 1925 in a wide range of styles . Immaculate Conception 's place at the end of the third generation is significant : its Romanesque Revival style is atypical of that period and much more common in the fourth generation that would soon arise , putting it in somewhat of a transitional place between the third and fourth generations . 
 = = = Rectory = = = 
 Located immediately west of the church , the Immaculate Conception rectory is a large square three @-@ story brick house . It is the third residence to serve as the parish 's rectory : members bought a frame house near the church in 1876 , and after a new school building was completed in 1889 , the priest moved into the old school . In 1908 , the parish spent $ 2 @,@ 000 to buy land from John Schlosser immediately west of the church ; on this land they built the present rectory for $ 10 @,@ 000 . Divided into three bays on the front and six bays on each side , it sits on a foundation of cut stone with a stone water table and a basement . Individuals may enter through a large entryway on the southern front of the house or through a smaller doorway on the rear of the eastern side of the house . 
 Dominating the appearance of the house from the street is a large verandah @-@ style porch , supported by large stone columns , on the southern @-@ facing front of the house ; an enclosed porch , smaller but two stories high and supported by wooden pillars , is located on the rear portion of the house 's east side . Projecting from the front of the house , above the porch , is a small wing with a gable , semicircular window , and elaborate cornice . The house is built in a combination of styles ; it includes many Italianate details , but its design appears to have been influenced by the architecture of the Sears Modern Homes . 
 = = = Elementary school = = = 
 Sitting immediately north of the church is the Immaculate Conception Elementary School , which was erected in 1918 at a cost of $ 70 @,@ 000 . Two stories tall and built of brick with a flat asphalt roof , it is divided into sixteen bays on each of its two sides . Among its leading architectural features are a central projection on its eastern front , the arched doorway in that projection , and ornamental panels around the entrance . The school occupies the site of an earlier school that was built in 1889 ; the present building was constructed because the previous structure had become too small . In its early years , the present building housed both the elementary school and the high school , which was only a three @-@ year course for its first ten years . Because of continued growth in the high school , a new building was constructed specifically for it on the opposite side of the street . The architect for the elementary school was an unknown member of the DeCurtins family , who was related to the designer of the church building , Andrew DeCurtins . Unlike the newer building , the old elementary school remains a functioning school building . Due to falling enrollment and increasing expenses , the school was losing significant amounts of money by the late 2000s . Operating the school cost $ 874 @,@ 243 in the 2008 @-@ 2009 school year , while income was only $ 375 @,@ 459 . In 2010 , the church announced that it would close the school at the end of the 2010 @-@ 2011 school year unless finances improved markedly . 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Located on the eastern side of Walnut Street across from the other buildings of the church complex , the former Immaculate Conception High School was built in 1933 under the supervision of William and Joseph <unk> . The building was designed by Fred DeCurtins , a relative of the architect who designed the church building , and the nephew of the architect who designed the elementary school . Members of the DeCurtins family , who lived primarily in the community of Carthagena , designed many churches and other religious buildings in Mercer County and the surrounding region , including the area 's first church built with a tall tower , St. Aloysius ' Church in Carthagena . Although Fred DeCurtins designed the church building constructed in 1937 for the new parish in the northern Mercer County village of Rockford , architectural historians believe that Immaculate Conception High School was the last building designed by the DeCurtins family for an entity connected to the Missionaries of the Precious Blood . The school closed at the end of the 1972 school year , and by the late 1970s , the parish no longer needed its high school building ; although it remained in church ownership , it was leased for use by the Celina City School District for use as a ninth @-@ grade academy . 
 Three stories tall , the high school is a brick and stone building constructed on a concrete foundation with a basement and topped with a flat composite roof . Its overall shape is that of a square , divided into thirteen bays on the front and sixteen bays on the sides . The first floor of its west @-@ facing main facade is pierced by the large main entrance , which features an arched entrance with a cross @-@ tipped stone gable at the top . A similar entrance is present on the building 's southern side . Among its most prominent architectural features are eight stone columns on the main facade , which bracket groups of five windows on each story . These columns rise to different heights , creating a distinctive vertical effect . Such a style is common among more conservative modernist architects , who wish to combine older designs with current trends : historic elements are simplified and given a modernist style . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1977 , the church , rectory , and schools were recorded by a historic preservation program run by the Ohio Historical Society , known as the Ohio Historic Inventory . This survey found the church in excellent condition , the elementary school in fair condition , and the high school and rectory in good condition . Although no historic preservation program was in effect , no threats to historic integrity were identified for any of the buildings , except for the elementary school , which was deemed to be in danger from being outdated . 
 Two years later , the complex was listed on the National Register of Historic Places because of the well @-@ preserved and historically significant architecture of its buildings . At the same time , the same designation was given to more than thirty other churches and other buildings in far western Ohio that were related to the Missionaries of the Precious Blood , using the multiple property submission process . Centered on the community of Maria Stein , the location of the Convent of Mary , Help of Christians , this predominately Catholic region is dotted with many large Romanesque Revival or Gothic Revival churches whose tall spires rise above tiny communities and can be seen from miles around . Because of the way that these churches dominate the region , the area has become known as the " Land of the Cross @-@ Tipped Churches . " 
 = Pleasant Dreams = 
 Pleasant Dreams is the sixth studio album by the American punk rock band the Ramones released on July 20 , 1981 , through Sire Records . While the band members wanted Steve Lillywhite to produce , Sire chose Graham Gouldman in an attempt to gain popularity through a well @-@ known recording manager . The recording process brought about many conflicts between band members , most notably the strife between Joey Ramone and Johnny Ramone , where Johnny began dating one of Joey 's ex @-@ girlfriends . There were also disputes about the overall genre of the album , with Johnny leaning towards hard rock and Joey towards pop music . Ultimately , the album incorporated a high production value and a variation of tone throughout the album . Pleasant Dreams featured songs such as " We Want the Airwaves , " " She 's a Sensation , " and " Come On Now , " strayed from traditional punk rock and took on different styles . 
 The album was not commercially acclaimed , which came as a surprise to Sire since they had insisted the band record with Gouldman in an effort to increase fan @-@ base ; it peaked at number fifty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 and only charted outside of the US in Sweden . The album was not critically acclaimed either , as it received several mixed articles by reviewers , who insisted the album to be less playable than their first four albums . 
 = = Conception = = 
 The writing process for Pleasant Dreams began in January 1981 . With Sire Records management being insistent on allowing a celebrity record producer to work on the album , they hired Graham Gouldman — songwriter and musician for the British band 10cc — to produce the album . Prior to working with Gouldman , the Ramones had been with audio engineer Ed Stasium to record several demos and , though Sire rejected , the band had intended that Steve Lillywhite produce the album . The studio recording process began on March 30 , 1981 , and initiated several conflicts between band members . This tension was partially due to Dee Dee Ramone 's drug addiction . Additionally , Marky Ramone and Joey Ramone were both developing alcohol problems , resulting in the frustration of Johnny Ramone . These conflicts and differences became evident in the song writing , as each song was credited to individual rather than multiple members ; Pleasant Dreams was the first album in which writing is acknowledged this way . 
 The time period of recording was a high @-@ point in musical style for both Joey and Johnny , though they directed their sound towards different styles of music : Joey 's inspiration by pop music became evident in his writing , while Johnny 's keenness of hard @-@ rock guitar riffs are apparent in much of his performing on the album . Johnny thought that this did not result well for the band 's sound , saying : " I knew going in that this was not going to be the type of album I wanted . It really could have used another two of three punk songs ... All I want to do is keep our fans happy and not sell out . I 'm fighting within the band . They are trying to go lighter , looking for ways to be more commercial . I 'm against the band for doing that . " Joey countered Johnny 's point of preventing the band from selling out by explaining : " By Road to Ruin [ and ] End of the Century , I was doing the majority of the songwriting . I started feeling that the Ramones were faceless ; there were no individual identities in the band . " He went on to say that this method worked well in the beginning of their career , but would later annoy Joey since " everything [ he ] wrote , the band would take credit for . " 
 During early stages of the album 's development , Joey was dating Linda Danielle . After the album was released , however , Danielle left Joey and became Johnny 's girlfriend . Ramones ' road manager Monte Melnick relates : " Joey was devastated . It affected him deeply . Johnny knew it was bad and kept Linda totally hidden from that point on . She didn 't come to many shows and if she did he 'd hide her in the back ; she wouldn 't come backstage . He 'd run out to meet her and leave as soon as they were done . " While Johnny would eventually marry Linda , Joey held a strong grudge against them both , and , though they continued to perform and tour together , the two rarely talked to each other . Joey explained that Johnny had " crossed the line " once he started dating Danielle , and noted that " he destroyed the relationship and the band right there . " Johnny defended himself by stating that had Danielle not left Joey for him , " he wouldn 't have even been talking about her and saying how much he loved her because he wouldn 't have been obsessed about it . " 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 The album opens with " We Want the Airwaves , " which has instrumentation that strays from traditional punk rock and more so towards hard rock . Music journalist Chuck Eddy described the song as " a sort of Black Sabbath punk rock . " Though rumors of the album 's third track , " The KKK Took My Baby Away , " being about Johnny stealing Joey 's girlfriend have circulated in the music business , the song was actually written some time before Joey had reportedly found out about this . Joey 's brother Mickey Leigh relates : " The fluky connection between Johnny and the KKK raised a specter that keeps friends and fans speculating to this day . At the time , though , it had to be an unusual situation for him being that , as often happens with song lyrics , his words now took on a whole new meaning . " The following track , " Don 't Go , " was described in Musician , Player , and Listener as " Spector @-@ ish , " referring to the song 's high production value through Phil Spector , the infamous producer of the band 's previous record , End of the Century . According to the book , the lyrics detail " an archivist 's sense of young love . " Everett True , author of Hey Ho Let 's Go : The Story of the Ramones ( 2005 ) , explains that the album 's fifth track , " You Sound Like You 're Sick , " is very bass incorporated , saying that it " returns to the bassist 's traditional institutionalised theme . " Side A ends with " It 's Not My Place ( In the 9 to 5 World ) , " which was described by music critic David Fricke to be " driven home " by drummer Marky 's " feisty , Bo Diddley @-@ style " drum beat , and noted that it borrows the middle eight ( of thirty @-@ two @-@ bar form ) from The Who song " Whiskey Man . " 
 Side B of the album begins with " She 's a Sensation , " which was said by author Dave Thompson to have a 60 's melody which " melts through the hard rock . " The next song , " 7 @-@ 11 , " deals with dating at a young age where the couple goes on dates to places like convenience stores and record swaps . The lyrics follow a boy who meets a girl by a Space Invaders machine , and eventually has to let her go after she dies in a car crash . True relates : " You can lose your heart within the singer 's torched ' 7 @-@ 11 ' . Joey details in time @-@ honoured girl group fashion the beauty of young love that takes place among the most mundane , humdrum of surroundings . " " You Didn 't Mean Anything to Me , " written by Dee Dee , reflects the desolation and vacillation which the bassist was feeling in his personal life as well as while he was with the band . This is evident through lines like " Every dinner was crummy / Even the ones for free . " The pop @-@ oriented song " Come On Now " was described by True as a " sparkling rush of blood to the head from the " comic book boy , " and said that it ranged alongside songs from The Dave Clark Five and 1910 <unk> Company . The eleventh track on the album is titled " This Business Is Killing Me , " and was written by Joey to detail how everyone expects him to please others , but he simply cannot please everyone all the time . Pleasant Dreams concludes with " Sitting in My Room , " which contained lyrics quoted by David Fricke in the conclusion of his review on the album , saying : " ' It 's us against them , ' sneers Joey in " Sitting in My Room . ' ' They just wanna worry ... / They just wanna be so lame / Maybe they should try and sniff some glue . ' Or put Pleasant Dreams on the box and crank it up to ten . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Released on July 20 , 1981 , the album was not commercially acclaimed , failing to spawn a single hit . Though Sire Records had merged with Warner Bros. Records , none of the singles from Pleasant Dreams were released in the US . Sire had insisted that the album be produced by a celebrity producer , hiring Graham Gouldman to the job expecting this to help expand the band 's fan @-@ base . Joey relates : " The record company told us the album would bomb if we didn 't use Graham Gouldman , so we worked with <unk> the album bombed anyway . " The album would only chart in the US and Sweden , peaking at fifty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 and thirty @-@ five on the Sverigetopplistan chart — the singles released from the album failed to chart . 
 Pleasant Dreams received mixed reviews by critics , with many pointing out that the high quality sound production made the band stray from their roots even more so than the change in style . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , senior editor for AllMusic , noted that Gouldman steers the band 's style away from " bubblegum , British invasion , and surf fetishes " and toward " acid rock and heavy metal . " He went on to say that the sound quality is " too clean to qualify as punk " and sad that the music on the album " has lost sight of the infectious qualities that made their earlier records such fun . " 
 Music critic Robert Christgau said that the album " comes off corny " compared to the band 's first four releases , which he described as " aural rush and conceptual punch . " He also said that the songs featured on the album were better than End of the Century and claimed the album was " less focused " compared to Leave Home , but " fun anyway . " David Fricke of Rolling Stone began his review by writing " Pity the poor Ramones , " and went on to give it a mixed review . He deemed the album a " comic relief " and noted its contents of " fortified vocal harmonies , an occasional dash of keyboards , a certain production gimmickry . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following track listing can be verified with AllMusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel can be verified with AllMusic . 
 Ramones 
 Joey Ramone – lead vocals 
 Johnny Ramone – lead guitar 
 Dee Dee Ramone – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Marky Ramone – drums 
 Additional musicians 
 Dick Emerson – keyboards 
 Dave Hassel – percussion 
 Graham Gouldman - backing vocals 
 Russell Mael - backing vocals 
 Ian Wilson - backing vocals 
 Deborah Harry - backing vocals 
 Kate Pierson - backing vocals 
 Cindy Wilson - backing vocals 
 Production 
 Michael <unk> – photos 
 Sire Records – label 
 Graham Gouldman – producer 
 Guy Juke – uncredited cover art 
 = Perovskia atriplicifolia = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia ( / <unk> <unk> / ) , commonly called Russian sage , is a flowering herbaceous perennial plant and subshrub . Although not a member of Salvia , the genus of other plants commonly called sage , it is closely related to them . It has an upright habit , typically reaching 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 2 m tall ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 ft ) , with square stems and grey @-@ green leaves that yield a distinctive odor when crushed . It is best known for its flowers . Its flowering season extends from mid @-@ summer to late October , with blue to violet blossoms arranged into showy , branched panicles . 
 Native to the steppes and hills of southwestern and central Asia . Successful over a wide range of climate and soil conditions , it has since become popular and widely planted . Several cultivars have been developed , differing primarily in leaf shape and overall height ; ' Blue Spire ' is the most common . This variation has been widely used in gardens and landscaping . P. atriplicifolia was the Perennial Plant Association 's 1995 Plant of the Year , and the ' Blue Spire ' cultivar received the Award of Garden Merit from the Royal Horticultural Society . 
 The species has a long history of use in traditional medicine in its native range , where it is employed as a treatment for a variety of ailments . This has led to the investigation of its phytochemistry . Its flowers can be eaten in salads or crushed for <unk> , and the plant has been considered for potential use in the phytoremediation of contaminated soil . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia was described by George Bentham in 1848 , based on a specimen collected by William Griffith in Afghanistan , now preserved at the Kew Gardens herbarium as the species 's holotype . The specific epithet atriplicifolia means " with leaves like Atriplex " , referring to its similarity to saltbush . Commonly known as Russian sage , P. atriplicifolia is neither native to Russia nor a member of Salvia , the genus generally referred to as sage . 
 A Chinese population was described as a separate species in 1987 and given the name Perovskia <unk> , but has since been considered synonymous with P. atriplicifolia . 
 = = = Phylogenetics = = = 
 Within the family Lamiaceae , the large genus Salvia had long been believed monophyletic , based on the structure of its stamina . Several smaller genera , including <unk> , Perovskia , and <unk> were also included in tribe Mentheae , but were thought more distantly related . In 2004 , a molecular phylogenetics study based on two cpDNA genes ( rbcL and <unk> @-@ F ) demonstrated that Salvia is not monophyletic , but comprises three identifiable clades . Clade I is more closely related to Perovskia than to other members of Salvia . 
 P. atriplicifolia has been the subject of subsequent studies seeking to clarify the relationships within Mentheae . Further research combined palynological analysis of pollen grains with rbcL sequencing to provide additional support for the relationship between Perovskia and Salvia clade I. It also distinguished between P. atriplicifolia and P. abrotanoides , while confirming their close relationship . A subsequent multigene study ( four cpDNA markers and two <unk> markers ) redrew parts of the Mentheae cladogram , making <unk> a sister group to Perovskia . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 Several cultivars of P. atriplicifolia have been developed . They are primarily distinguished by the height of mature plants and the depth of the leaf @-@ margin incisions . Many of these cultivars , especially those with deeply incised leaves , may actually be hybrids of P. atriplicifolia and P. abrotanoides . In that context , some may be referred to by the hybrid name P. × hybrida . 
 The most common cultivar , ' Blue Spire ' , is among those suspected of being a hybrid . It was selected from German plantings by the British Notcutts Nurseries , and first exhibited in 1961 . ' Blue Spire ' grows to approximately 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) , and has large , darker blue flowers . In 1993 , it received the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 <unk> ' reaches a height of 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 3 m ( 3 ft 11 in to 4 ft 3 in ) ; this tall , sturdy cultivar 's name is German for filigree , in reference to its lacy , fern @-@ like foliage . ' Little Spire ' is shorter , with a mature height of only 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 ft 0 in ) . ' <unk> ' is similar in height to ' Blue Spire ' but more upright . Allan Armitage established the late @-@ flowering cultivar ' Mystery of Knightshayes ' from a plant at Knightshayes Court . Other cultivars include ' Blue Haze ' , ' Blue Mist ' , ' Hybrida ' ( also called ' <unk> ' ) , ' Lace ' , ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' , and ' <unk> ' . 
 = = Description = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia is a deciduous perennial subshrub with an erect to spreading habit . Superficially , it resembles a much larger version of lavender . Multiple branches arise from a shared <unk> , growing to a height of 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 2 m ( 1 ft 8 in – 3 ft 11 in ) , with occasional specimens reaching 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . The mature plant may be 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 m across ( 2 ft 0 in – 3 ft 11 in ) . The rigid stems are square in cross @-@ section , and are covered by an indumentum formed by stellate , or star @-@ shaped , trichomes and oil droplets . Especially during autumn , these hairs give the stems a silvery appearance . 
 The grayish @-@ green leaves are arranged in opposite pairs , and attached to the stems by a short petiole . They are generally 3 – 5 cm long ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 @-@ inch ) and 0 @.@ 8 – 2 cm wide ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ) , although narrower in some populations . The overall leaf shape is oblate , a rounded shape longer than it is wide , to lanceolate , shaped like the head of a lance . They are <unk> , with a deeply incised leaf margin that may be either wavy or sharp @-@ toothed ; even within a single community of P. atriplicifolia , there can be considerable variation in the details of leaf shape . Leaves near the top of branches may merge into bracts . The foliage is aromatic , especially when crushed , with a fragrance described as sage @-@ like , a blend of sage and lavender , or like turpentine . 
 The flowering season of P. atriplicifolia can be as long as June through October , although populations in some parts of its range , such as China , may bloom in a much more restricted period . The inflorescence is a showy panicle , 30 – 38 cm long ( 12 – 15 in ) , with many branches . Each of these branches is a raceme , with the individual flowers arranged in pairs called <unk> . Each flower 's calyx is purple , densely covered in white or purple hairs , and about 4 mm long ( 0 @.@ 16 @-@ inch ) . The corolla is tube @-@ shaped , formed from a four @-@ lobed upper lip and a slightly shorter lower lip ; the blue or violet blue petals are about 1 cm long . The style has been reported in both an exserted — extending beyond the flower 's tube — form and one contained within the flower ; all known examples of P. atriplicifolia in cultivation have exserted styles . Gardening author Neil Soderstrom describes the appearance of the flowers from a distance as " like a fine haze or fog " . 
 Fruits develop about a month after flowering , and consist of dark brown oval <unk> , about 2 mm × 1 mm ( 2 ⁄ 25 by 1 ⁄ 25 inch ) . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Nine species of Perovskia are recognized . P. abrotanoides shares much of the range of P. atriplicifolia , but is distinguished by its bipinnate leaves . Hybrids between these two species may occur naturally . Restricted to Turkestan in its native range , P. <unk> is less upright ; some forms have white flowers . The flowers of P. <unk> are yellow . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and ecology = = 
 Widely distributed across Asia in its native range , Perovskia atriplicifolia grows in western China , Pakistan , Afghanistan , Iran , Turkey , and parts of eastern Europe . It is found in steppes and on hillsides , and grows at higher elevations in mountainous regions , including the Himalayas . It has been recorded at 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) of altitude in the Karakoram . In Pakistan 's Quetta district , it is often found in association with the grass Chrysopogon <unk> , and may serve as an indicator species for soils with low calcium carbonate and chloride availability . The harsh habitats preferred by P. atriplicifolia are comparable to the sagebrush steppe of North America . 
 In parts of its range , such as the <unk> , these steppe ecosystems are employed as rangeland for grazing animals such as sheep and goats , although this forage is generally of poor nutritional quality . P. atriplicifolia can serve as an important source of phosphorus and zinc , despite being high in poorly @-@ digested material such as neutral detergent fiber and lignin . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Following its introduction to the United Kingdom in 1904 , the Irish gardener and author William Robinson was immediately taken with the plant , which he described as being " worth a place in the choicest garden for its graceful habit and long season of beauty . " The Royal Horticultural Society records the establishment of cultivars beginning with P. ' Hybrida ' , selected at a Hampshire nursery in the 1930s . By the late 1980s and early 1990s , P. atriplicifolia had gained widespread popularity , and in 1995 , it was selected as the Perennial Plant Association 's Plant of the Year . 
 = = = Planting and care = = = 
 P. atriplicifolia is a perennial plant suitable for a wide range of conditions . The species prefers full sun . Specimens planted in partially shaded locations tend to spread or flop , although this behavior can be controlled somewhat by pinching young shoots or by providing a strong @-@ standing accompaniment that the plant can drape itself around for support . Flowers bloom only on new growth . Plants trimmed to 15 – 61 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 24 @.@ 0 in ) in early spring provide the best subsequent growth and flowering . 
 Tolerant of both heat and cold , it is grown in North America in United States Department of Agriculture hardiness zones three through nine , although some cultivars may be better suited than others to extremes of temperature . It is successfully grown from the southwestern United States , north and east across much of the country , and across the Canadian border into Ontario and Quebec . In the coldest of these areas , it may require considerable protection to survive the winter . In the United Kingdom , the Royal Horticultural Society has assigned it hardiness rating H4 , indicating that it tolerates temperatures as low as − 10 to − 5 ° C ( 14 to 23 ° F ) , hardy in most of the country through typical winters . 
 It also tolerates a variety of soil conditions . Although young specimens perform best when planted in a mixture of peat and either sand or perlite , P. atriplicifolia can thrive in sandy , chalky , or loamy soil , or heavy clay soil with sufficient drainage . It can endure a wide range of soil pH , as well as exposure to salty conditions near oceans . Its deep @-@ feeding taproot makes it especially drought tolerant ; for this reason it has seen wide use for xeriscaping in the Intermountain West . Overwatering and over @-@ fertilization can damage its roots and lead to a rapid decline in health . P. atriplicifolia is otherwise generally free from plant pathogens . In cultivation , it is also rarely selected as forage by grazing animals , and so is considered both a deer @-@ resistant and rabbit @-@ resistant plant . 
 = = = Landscaping = = = 
 Popular landscaping authors , including Gertrude Jekyll and Russell Page , have praised P. atriplicifolia for its usefulness in gardens and landscaping features . It is most commonly planted as an accent feature , such as an " island " in an expanse of lawn , but it can also be used as filler within a larger landscaping feature , or to enhance areas where the existing natural appearance is retained . Gardening author Troy Marden describes P. atriplicifolia as having a " see @-@ through " quality that is ideal for borders . Some experts suggest groups of three plants provide the best landscape appearance . It is also suitable for container gardening . 
 It attracts bees , birds , and butterflies , and contributes color to gardens — both the blue of its late @-@ season flowers , and the silvery colors of its winter stalks . 
 = = = Propagation = = = 
 P. atriplicifolia is frequently propagated by cuttings . Because its woody crown is resistant to division , softwood cuttings are taken from shoots near the base , generally in late spring . Hardwood cuttings selected in mid @-@ to @-@ late summer also provide a viable propagation technique . The plant is also grown from seed in cultivation . Such seeds require exposure to cold for 30 – 160 days to germinate , and seed @-@ raised specimens may not preserve the characteristics of named cultivars . In the commercial greenhouse or nursery setting , P. atriplicifolia 's relatively large size and rapid growth can adversely affect quality or make plants more difficult and expensive to transport ; the use of plant growth regulators such as <unk> chloride and <unk> may be more cost @-@ effective than large @-@ scale pruning . 
 Some members of the Lamiaceae can spread unchecked and become invasive plants . Planting of P. atriplicifolia near wild lands has been discouraged by some gardening guides out of concern for its potential to spread , but it is not considered invasive , and has been suggested as a substitute for purple loosestrife for this reason . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Perovskia atriplicifolia has a long history of use in traditional medicine , especially as an antipyretic . It has also been employed as an antiparasitic and analgesic in Tibet , and smoked elsewhere as a euphoriant . In Balochistan , Pakistan , a decoction of the plant 's leaves and flowers has been considered an anti @-@ diabetic medication and a treatment for dysentery . 
 In addition to its use in folk medicine , P. atriplicifolia is sometimes used in Russia to flavor a vodka @-@ based cocktail . Its flowers are eaten in parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan , including Kashmir , adding a sweet flavor to salads ; they can also be crushed to yield a blue colorant that can be employed in cosmetics or as a textile dye . This species is considered a candidate for use in phytoremediation because of its rapid growth , tolerance for harsh conditions , and ability to accumulate toxic heavy metals from polluted soil . 
 = = = Phytochemistry = = = 
 Because of its extensive <unk> tradition , the phytochemistry of P. atriplicifolia has been the topic of several studies . Analysis of the plant 's essential oil has identified over two dozen compounds , although the compounds detected and their relative prevalence have not been consistent . Most analyses have identified various monoterpenes and <unk> as the dominant components , such as carene , <unk> , limonene , γ @-@ <unk> , and ( + ) -β @-@ <unk> , although the essential oil of a sample from the Orto Botanico dell 'Università di Torino had camphor as its most prevalent component . Other monoterpenes , camphene , α @-@ pinene , and β @-@ pinene are also present , as are sesquiterpenes such as γ @-@ cadinene , δ @-@ cadinene , trans @-@ caryophyllene , and α @-@ humulene . Several terpenoid alcohols — <unk> , <unk> , and menthol — have been extracted from P. atriplicifolia , as have caffeic acid and ferulic acid . More complex compounds have been isolated , some of which were first identified in this manner , including <unk> ; the glycosides <unk> A and B ; and <unk> A and B , a pair of triterpenes that are similar to oleanane . 
 The essential oil has displayed antimicrobial properties in vitro , and can function as a biopesticide , especially regarding <unk> castaneum beetles and Camponotus maculatus carpenter ants . Several terpenoids isolated from P. atriplicifolia have been investigated for potential inhibitory effects on the hepatitis B virus . Its traditional use as an anti @-@ inflammatory has been attributed to the ability of the <unk> ( + ) <unk> and five other compounds to act as leukotriene antagonists . The <unk> acid derivative <unk> may also contribute to an anti @-@ inflammatory effect as an <unk> 5 @-@ lipoxygenase inhibitor . Interaction with opioid and cannabinoid receptors has been proposed as the mechanism of traditionally reported analgesic effects . 
 = Doppelgänger ( 1969 film ) = 
 Doppelgänger is a 1969 British science fiction film directed by Robert Parrish and starring Roy Thinnes , Ian Hendry , Lynn Loring and Patrick Wymark . Outside Europe , it is known as Journey to the Far Side of the Sun , which is now the more popular title . In the film , a joint European @-@ NASA mission to investigate a planet in a position parallel to Earth , behind the Sun , ends in disaster with the death of one of the astronauts ( Hendry ) . His colleague ( Thinnes ) discovers that the planet is a mirror image of Earth . 
 The first major live @-@ action film of Century 21 writers @-@ producers Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , noted for Thunderbirds and other 1960s " Supermarionation " puppet television series , shooting for Doppelgänger ran from July to October 1968 . Using Pinewood Studios as the principal production base , Parrish also filmed on location in both England and Portugal . The professional relationship between the Andersons and their director became strained as the shooting progressed , while creative disagreements with cinematographer John Read resulted in his resignation from Century 21 . 
 Doppelgänger premiered in August 1969 in the United States and October of that year in the United Kingdom . Although the film in general has been praised for the quality of its special effects and set design , the plot device of the parallel Earth has attracted criticism , with some commentators judging it to be clichéd and uninspired in comparison to the precedent established by earlier science fiction . In addition , although Doppelgänger has frequently been interpreted as a pastiche of major science @-@ fiction films of the 1960s , including 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) , some of the devices and imagery used have been dismissed as weak imitations of the originals . Since release , it has been termed a cult film . 
 Actors and props from Doppelgänger would re @-@ appear in a later Anderson TV series , UFO . Although the Andersons incorporated adult themes into their script in an effort to distinguish the film from their children 's TV productions , cuts to more mature content , in this case a shot of a pack of contraceptive pills , were required to permit an A and , later , PG certificate from the BBFC . The film has had only a limited DVD run . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2069 , the unmanned Sun Probe locates a planet lying on the same orbital path as Earth on the opposite side of the Sun . Dr Kurt Hassler ( Herbert Lom ) of the European Space Exploration Council ( EUROSEC ) has been relaying the spacecraft 's flight data to a rival power in the East ; after tracing the transmissions to Hassler 's laboratory , Security Chief Mark Neuman ( George Sewell ) catches the scientist in the act and kills him . EUROSEC director Jason Webb ( Patrick Wymark ) convinces NASA representative David Poulson ( Ed Bishop ) that the West must be the first to send a mission to investigate the planet . With EUROSEC member states France and Germany unwilling to provide financial support , Webb obtains majority funding from NASA ; American astronaut Colonel Glenn Ross ( Roy Thinnes ) and British astrophysicist Dr John Kane ( Ian Hendry ) , the head of the Sun Probe project , are assigned to the mission . 
 Launched from the EUROSEC Space Centre in Portugal in the spacecraft Phoenix , Ross and Kane spend the first half of their six @-@ week round trip in stasis with " Heart Lung Kidney " machines managing their life functions . Three weeks after launch , the astronauts are revived in the planet 's orbit . Scans for the existence of extraterrestrial life are inconclusive , and Ross and Kane decide to make a surface landing . As the astronauts descend through the atmosphere , an electrical storm damages their Dove lander shuttle , which crashes in a mountainous region that is revealed to be near Ulan Bator , Mongolia . When an air @-@ sea rescue unit returns Ross and Kane , the latter critically injured , to the Space Centre , it is apparent that the Phoenix mission has come to an untimely end after three weeks and that the astronauts have returned to Earth . 
 Neuman and EUROSEC official Lise Hartman ( Loni von Friedl ) interrogate Ross , who denies that he aborted the mission . Shortly after , Kane dies from his injuries . Eventually , Ross concludes that he is not on Earth , but indeed on the unknown planet – a Counter @-@ Earth that is a mirror image of his . ( Signs of this reversal include a clock whose hands move anticlockwise , a tape deck 's reels that turn clockwise and an oscilloscope that scans from right to left . In addition , while driving at night , Ross almost collides with another vehicle that he believes to be on the wrong side of the road . ) 
 Many at EUROSEC , including Ross 's wife , Sharon ( Lynn Loring ) , are baffled by the astronaut 's claims that all aspects of life on the planet are reversed . However , Webb 's view starts to change when Ross demonstrates the ability to read aloud from a sign , without hesitation , when it is reflected in a mirror ; Webb is later convinced of the truth when X @-@ rays from Kane 's post @-@ mortem examination reveal that his internal organs are positioned on the " wrong " side of his body . Ross conjectures that the two Earths lie parallel , inferring that his counterpart from this world is experiencing similar events on the far side of the Sun . 
 Webb suggests that Ross recover the flight recorder from Phoenix and return to his Earth . EUROSEC builds a replacement for Dove designed to be compatible with the reversed technologies of Phoenix . Modifications include the reverse @-@ polarisation of the electric circuits , although no one is certain that the differences between the two Earths extend to the direction of current . Ross christens the new shuttle Doppelganger , a German word denoting a duplicate of a person or object . 
 Lifting off and entering orbit , Ross attempts to dock with Phoenix . However , Doppelganger experiences a technical malfunction , indicating that current is constant after all . The shuttle detaches from Phoenix and loses contact with EUROSEC , falling through the atmosphere towards the Space Centre with Ross struggling to disengage the automatic landing control . EUROSEC is unable to repair the fault from the ground , and Doppelganger crashes into a parked spacecraft . Ross is incinerated in the collision and a chain reaction destroys much of the Space Centre , killing personnel and destroying all records of Ross 's presence on the Counter @-@ Earth . 
 Many years later , an embittered and wheelchair @-@ bound Jason Webb , long since dismissed from EUROSEC , has been admitted to a nursing home . In his dementia , he sees his reflection in a mirror placed in front of a window . Reaching out to touch his reflected image , Webb crashes through the mirror and dies . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 As his first contribution to live @-@ action film , Gerry Anderson had directed Crossroads to Crime , a 1960 B feature , for Anglo @-@ Amalgamated . Talent agent Leslie Grade had since approached Anderson with a proposal for a film starring actor Arthur Haynes , but discussions between Grade and Anderson had not produced a commission . In the summer of 1967 , during the production of Anderson 's Supermarionation television series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , Universal Pictures executive Jay Kanter arrived in London from the United States . Planning to establish a European production office , Kanter expressed his willingness to provide funding for promising film ideas . Lew Grade , brother to Leslie and Anderson 's financier at his TV distributor ITC Entertainment , arranged a meeting with Kanter for Anderson to pitch a story concept concerning the hypothesis of a " replicated " or " mirror " Earth . According to Anderson , he " thought , rather naïvely , what if there was another planet the other side of the Sun , orbiting at exactly the same speed and the same size as Earth ? That idea then developed into the planet being a replicated Earth and that 's how it ended up , a mirrored planet ... We were perfectly poised – I was Lew Grade 's golden boy and the [ Century 21 ] studio was a big success story . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 With the assistance of scriptwriter Tony Williamson , Anderson and his wife , Sylvia , had drafted a 194 @-@ page treatment long before the initial meeting with Kanter . The Andersons had originally intended to film the script as a one @-@ hour drama for ATV ; Sylvia explained that since the concept " was too good for a television play , I suggested to Gerry that we try to develop it as a movie . " Responding to claims that Doppelgänger had " dark " scripting , Gerry stated that he wanted the film to have an interesting and entertaining premise . He also discussed the significance of the title , which was suggested to him by Century 21 co @-@ director John Read : Doppelgänger being " a German word which means ' a copy of oneself ' , and the legend goes that if you meet your doppelganger , it is the point of your death . Following that legend , clearly , I had to steer the film so that I could end it illustrating the meaning of that word . " 
 When Kanter expressed dissatisfaction with the draft , Gerry hired Donald James , a novelist whom he considered " a classy writer with a good reputation " , to strengthen the characterisation . Although the film retained its original 2069 setting , the scenes set on the Counter @-@ Earth underwent significant changes while James completed his revisions . Fundamentally , the characters of Ross and Kane switched roles : in the Andersons ' draft , it was Ross who is injured in the Dove crash and Kane who was interrogated at the EUROSEC Space Centre . In scenes absent from the finished film , Kane is diagnosed with brain damage on the basis of his apparent insanity , while Ross regains consciousness to find that the accident has left him blind . The return mission to Phoenix fails due not to an electrical fault , but rather because of a structural defect in the second Dove module , which disintegrates in the atmosphere of the Counter @-@ Earth with Kane trapped inside . EUROSEC Headquarters is left intact , and Kane 's funeral is attended by his wife , the Rosses and Jason Webb . 
 Despite remaining unenthusiastic with the script , Kanter agreed to commission it as a film on the condition that he reserve the right to select a " bankable " director . Anderson would have selected David Lane , who had directed the two Thunderbirds film sequels , Thunderbirds Are Go ( 1966 ) and Thunderbird 6 ( 1968 ) . After a ten @-@ week delay to filming , Robert Parrish , an American director whose latest project had been shelved , accepted the post . Parrish 's film career up to 1968 had included co @-@ editing Body and Soul ( for which he had shared the 1947 Academy Award for Best Film Editing ) and co @-@ directing the 1967 James Bond spoof , Casino Royale . Anderson remembered Parrish as being " very ingratiating " , stating that he " told us he loved the script and said it would be an honour to work with us . Jay Kanter gave Bob the thumbs up and we were in business . " Although the box office failure of Casino Royale had prompted Anderson to question Parrish 's ability , he stated that Doppelgänger could not have been made without his recruitment : " It wasn 't a question of , ' Will we get on with him ? ' or , ' Is he the right man ? ' He was a name director , so we signed him up immediately . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Heading the cast of Doppelgänger is Roy Thinnes in the role of Colonel Glenn Ross of NASA . Anderson , who perceived a likeness to fellow American actor Paul Newman , cast Thinnes as the male lead after viewing his performance in the television series The Invaders ( 1967 – 68 ) . In the Andersons ' draft script , Ross 's first name is Stewart , and he is said to have been the first man to walk on Mars . In a 2008 interview , Thinnes said , " I thought [ Doppelgänger ] was an interesting premise , although now we know that there isn 't another planet on the other side of the Sun , through our space exploration and telescopic abilities . But at that time it was conceivable , and it could have been scary . " To conform to the script 's characterisation of Ross , and to the detriment of his respiratory health , Thinnes ended up smoking many packets ' worth of cigarettes in the course of the production . Reporting on Thinnes ' intention to demand a non @-@ smoking clause in his next film contract , in September 1969 Australian newspaper The Age stated , " He smokes about two packets a day , but the perpetual lighting up of new cigarettes for continuity purposes was too much . " 
 Ian Hendry stars as Dr John Kane , British astrophysicist and head of the Phoenix project . Hendry , who had appeared in the television series The Avengers ( 1961 – 69 ) and , according to Anderson , " was always drinking " , performed the stunt sequence depicting the aftermath of the Dove crash while drunk : " ... he was pissed as a newt , and it was as much as he could do to stagger away . Despite all that , it looked exactly as it was supposed to on @-@ screen ! " In the draft script , Kane 's first name is Philip , and he has a wife called Susan . In scenes deleted from the completed film , a romance between Kane and Lise Hartman , a EUROSEC official portrayed by Austrian actress Loni von Friedl , is played out at Kane 's villa and on a beach in Portugal . 
 Lynn Loring stars as Sharon Ross , the Colonel 's wife . The role of the female lead had first been offered to Gayle Hunnicutt , who quit at the start of the filming after unexpectedly falling ill . Hunnicutt 's withdrawal resulted in the casting of Loring , Thinnes ' wife since 1967 and star of the television series The F.B.I. ( 1965 – 74 ) . Had she remained in the role , Hunnicutt would have appeared in a nude scene scripted to distance the tone of Doppelgänger from that of earlier Anderson productions . In a 1968 interview in the Daily Mail newspaper , Anderson expressed his intention to change the public 's perception of Century 21 , who , in his view , had been " typecast as makers of children 's films " . On rumours that Doppelgänger would receive an X certificate from the British Board of Film Censors ( BBFC ) for adult content , he replied , " We want to work with live artists doing subjects unsuitable for children . " For the final cut of the film , the original nude shots were replaced with softer alternatives depicting Sharon stepping into and out of a shower . 
 The draft script describes Sharon as the daughter of a United States Senator , and she is said to be in a romantic affair with EUROSEC public relations officer Carlo <unk> . In the completed film , Italian actor Franco De Rosa briefly stars as Paulo Landi . The affair is implied in one scene but not explored further , prompting Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn , authors of What Made Thunderbirds Go ! The Authorised Biography of Gerry Anderson , to suggest that De Rosa starred in a role " all but cut from Doppelgänger " . In a deleted scene , on finding Paolo and Sharon in bed together at the Rosses ' villa , Glenn angrily ejects the couple from the room and throws them both into a swimming pool . Archer and Hearn note an additional subplot concerning the Rosses ' attempts to conceive a child and the deceit of Sharon , who has been using birth control pills to inhibit pregnancy without Glenn 's knowledge . 
 Completing the main cast , Patrick Wymark stars as Jason Webb , director of EUROSEC . Having selected him on the basis of his performance as John Wilder in the television series The Plane Makers ( 1963 – 65 ) and The Power Game ( 1965 – 70 ) , Anderson stated that Wymark 's acting impressed him as much as Hendry 's , but also that his similar drinking habits resulted in slurred lines on set . During the filming of one scene , Wymark " had to list these explanations ... and on take after take he couldn 't remember that ' two ' followed ' one ' . We had to do it over and over again . " Archer and Hearn identify Wymark 's portrayal of Webb , a character described as " John Wilder ( 2069 model ) " in publicity material , as the dominant performance of the film . The draft script describes Webb as a former British Minister of Technology , who is now romantically involved with his secretary , Pam Kirby . 
 Among the supporting cast , George Sewell stars as Mark Neuman , a German Operations Chief in EUROSEC who uncovers Dr Hassler 's dealing with Communist China and whose parallel self directs the interrogation of Ross after the Dove crash . His surname in the draft script is Hallam . Finally , Ed Bishop stars as David Poulson , a NASA official . Bishop replaced English actor Peter Dyneley , who had voiced characters for Thunderbirds ( 1965 – 66 ) , after the producers decided that Dyneley bore too much of a resemblance to Wymark and that scenes featuring both the characters of Poulson and Webb would confuse audiences . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Fifteen weeks of principal photography commenced on 1 July 1968 at Pinewood Studios , Buckinghamshire ; shooting wrapped on 16 October having run alongside that for Joe 90 . In September , location shooting in Albufeira , Portugal was accelerated for completion in two weeks as opposed to a month after politician Marcello Caetano deposed incapacitated Prime Minister Antonio Salazar , Parrish fearing that the coup d 'état would cause the production of Doppelgänger to fall behind schedule . Filming in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire used the exterior of Neptune House ( now part of the BBC 's Elstree Studios ) as a double for EUROSEC Headquarters in Portugal . <unk> Hall ( part of the Pinewood complex ) appears as the old Webb 's nursing home . 
 To create the illusion of the parallel Earth – apparent in images such as reversed text – both quickly and cheaply , the production staff inverted the film negatives using an optical process known as " flop @-@ over " . This technique saved the time and money that would otherwise needed to have been spent in building sets and props with specially reversed elements , or organising road closures to film cars driving on the " wrong " side of the road . However , the scenes set in or around the parallel EUROSEC Headquarters required careful rehearsal and co @-@ ordination with cast and crew prior to filming . The incorporation of the flop @-@ over technique results in some continuity errors : for example , the terminals of the Heart Lung Kidney machines onboard Phoenix are seen to be connected first to Ross and Kane 's left wrists , then their right . 
 The production staff encountered difficulties in realising a scene at the start of the film depicting an international teleconference being conducted using high @-@ resolution viewing monitors . Due to both the limited use of colour TV at the time of production , and the need to avoid black @-@ and @-@ white so as to honour the futuristic setting of Doppelgänger , it was decided to position the actors playing the conference delegates behind the set and cut the " screens " out of the set wall . Silver paper was added to reflect the studio lighting , producing a realistic impression of a high @-@ resolution image . Altered eyelines strengthen the audience 's perception that each delegate is facing a camera rather than the other actors in the scene , and are in different locations around the world . Archer and Hearn promote the teleconference scene as an example of how Anderson " proved once again that his productions were ahead of their time . " 
 During the course of the production , the creative styles of Anderson and Parrish came into conflict . Anderson remembered that on several occasions Kanter was called on to mediate : " [ Sylvia and I ] both knew how important the picture was to our careers , and we both desperately wanted to be in the big time . " During one session , Parrish refused to follow the shooting script , having determined independently that not all the scripted scenes were essential to the plot . When Anderson reminded Parrish of his contractual responsibilities , the director announced to the cast and crew , " Hell , you heard the producer . If I don 't shoot these scenes which I don 't really want , don 't need and will cut out anyway , I 'll be in breach of contract . So what we 'll do is shoot those scenes next ! " Anderson discussed how the production of Doppelgänger presented new challenges , explaining , " I had worked for so many years employing directors to do what I told them ... Suddenly I came up against a Hollywood movie director who didn 't want to play and we ended up extremely bad friends . " In his 2002 biography , Anderson stated that his sole regret about the film " [ was ] that I hired Bob Parrish in the first place . " Sylvia Anderson comments that Parrish 's direction was " uninspired . We had a lot of trouble getting what we wanted from him . " 
 One dispute among the founders of Century 21 – Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , Reg Hill and John Read – emerged from the filming of other scenes , including one in which the character of Lise Hartman bathes in a shower . Read , the director of photography , had complied with Parrish 's instructions to light the sequence in silhouette . Anderson , who had intended the scene to display full @-@ frontal nudity from actress Loni von Friedl , demanded a re @-@ shoot , insisting that Read honour his obligations not just to Parrish as director but also to his Century 21 partners . According to Sylvia Anderson , " Gerry was very keen to show that he was part of the ' Swinging Sixties ' and felt that seeing a detailed nude shot – as he visualised it – was more ' with it ' than the more subdued version . " Anderson clashed with Read and Parrish for a second time when special effects shots of Phoenix were filmed with a hand @-@ held camera : " I knew enough about space travel to know that in a vacuum a spacecraft will travel as straight as a die ... [ Parrish ] told me that people were not familiar with space travel and therefore they would expect to see this kind of movement . " Refusing to re @-@ film the scenes on the basis that Parrish 's instructions had precedence over Anderson 's , Read resigned from both Century 21 and the production of Doppelgänger at the Andersons ' and Hill 's request . Anderson elaborated : " Clearly John was in a difficult position . I do now understand how he must have felt , but in my heart I feel he couldn 't play a double role . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The production base for special effects was Century 21 Studios in Slough , Berkshire , which had been prepared for filming on the last Supermarionation series , The Secret Service . Supervising director Derek Meddings oversaw the shooting of more than 200 effects shots , including the destruction of EUROSEC Headquarters at the end of the film . A six @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) Phoenix scale model , which emulated the design of the NASA multi @-@ stage Saturn V rocket , had to be rebuilt after unexpectedly igniting and nearly injuring a technician . For authenticity , the effects staff mounted the shots of the Phoenix lift @-@ off outdoors in a section of the Century 21 car park so as to film against a genuine sky backdrop . Archer and Hearn describe the sequence as " one of the most spectacular " of its kind produced by Century 21 . Sylvia Anderson , who considers it indistinguishable from a Cape Kennedy launch , comments that she is " still impressed by the magic of the effects . Technology has come a long way since the early Seventies , but Derek 's effects have endured . " 
 Although Century 21 had constructed a life @-@ size Dove capsule in Slough , it could not be used for filming at Pinewood Studios due to an arrangement with the National Association of Theatrical Television and Kine Employees ( <unk> ) to build and use such props exclusively on @-@ site . Once the original had been incinerated , carpenters at Pinewood re @-@ built the prop , although Anderson remained disappointed with the finished product , which he considered inferior . Reviewing the scale models of Doppelgänger , Martin Anderson of the entertainment website Den of Geek describes the Phoenix command module as " beautifully ergonomic without losing too much NASA @-@ ness " , and the Dove lander module as " a beautiful fusion of JPL gloss with classic lines " . He argues that the Phoenix launch sequence stood as the finest example of Meddings ' work until his contributions to the 1979 James Bond film Moonraker , and praises his efforts all the more for the absence of computer animation in the late 1960s . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Composer Barry Gray recorded his score , his favourite of all his musical contributions to the Anderson productions , in three days from 27 to 29 March 1969 . Fifty @-@ five musicians attended the first studio session , with 44 at the second and 28 at the last . The track titled " Sleeping Astronauts " , which accompanies the scenes of Ross and Kane 's journey through the Solar System , features an <unk> Martenot , played by French <unk> <unk> <unk> . Archer and Hearn credit " Sleeping Astronauts " as " one of the most enchanting pieces Gray ever wrote " , and state that the soundtrack , which has not yet received a commercial release , evokes a " traditional Hollywood feel " that is in contrast to the 2069 setting of Doppelgänger . 
 The inspiration for the title sequence , set inside the secret laboratory of Dr Hassler , was the espionage theme embodied by the character : in what Archer and Hearn describe as an imitation of the style of 1960s James Bond films , a miniature camera is seen to be concealed inside Hassler 's artificial eye . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 When production on Doppelgänger ended in October 1968 , all 30 episodes of Joe 90 had been completed and the Andersons ' upcoming television series , The Secret Service , had entered pre @-@ production . The final cut was given a mediocre reception by Universal Pictures executives , causing the film 's release to be postponed for a year . It received an A certificate from the British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) on 26 March 1969 , dispelling rumours of an X rating and fulfilling the Andersons ' objective that Doppelgänger be suitable for children accompanied by adults . To secure an A certificate , brief cuts were made to shots of contraceptive pills , shortening the running time from the original 104 minutes . 
 Doppelgänger opened at the Odeon Cinema in London 's Leicester Square on 8 October 1969 , having premiered on 27 August in the United States . On 1 November , it debuted in Detroit , Michigan , commencing a second round of presentations in American cinemas . The film received a disappointing box office reception on general release . 
 British distributors Rank released the film under its original name in the UK and the rest of Europe . The title Journey to the Far Side of the Sun was adopted in the United States and Australia , since it had been determined by Universal that the audiences of these countries might not understand the meaning of the term " doppelganger " . Simon Archer and Stan Nicholls , authors of Gerry Anderson : The Authorised Biography , concede that Journey to the Far Side of the Sun – which has superseded Doppelgänger as the more popular title – provides a clearer explanation of the plot , but argue that it lacks the " intrigue and even poetic quality of Doppelgänger " . 
 = = = TV broadcasts = = = 
 Two prints of Doppelgänger in its original 35 mm format , for UK release , are known to exist . One is retained by the British Film Institute ( BFI ) , the other by Fanderson , the official fan society dedicated to the Gerry Anderson productions . The original prints of Doppelgänger position Ian Hendry before Roy Thinnes in the opening credits ; in the Journey to the Far Side of the Sun format , Thinnes is billed before Hendry . Certain UK prints alter the final scene featuring the old Jason Webb with the addition of a short voice @-@ over from Thinnes in character as Ross , who is heard speaking a line that he says to Webb earlier in the film : " Jason , we were right . There are definitely two identical planets . " 
 In the UK , Doppelgänger has been aired on TV under the title Journey to the Far Side of the Sun and has been formatted accordingly . Broadcasts have often contained inverted picture due to a mistake made in transferring the original print to videotape . Prior to a screening in the 1980s , a telecine operator viewed the print and , being unfamiliar with the premise of the film , concluded that the scenes set on the parallel Earth had been reversed in error . An additional " flop @-@ over " edit restored the image to normal , which became the standard for all broadcasts but compromised the plot : if Doppelgänger is screened in this modified form , the viewer is led to conclude that the parallel Ross has landed on the non @-@ reversed , normal Earth . 
 = = = Home video releases = = = 
 Previously available in laserdisc format , Doppelgänger was released on NTSC Region 1 DVD in both 1998 and – in digitally @-@ remastered form – 2008 . The 2008 release included PAL Region 2 but was titled Journey to the Far Side of the Sun rather than Doppelgänger . No additional material is present on the Region 1 releases ; the Region 2 version includes a film trailer . While the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) has certified the film G since its original release , before the 2008 DVD release the BBFC re @-@ rated Doppelgänger PG ( from the original A ) for " mild violence and language " . A Blu @-@ ray version was released in Region A in April 2015 as Journey to the Far Side of the Sun . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since its original release , Doppelgänger has had a mixed critical reception in both the UK and the US , although Archer and Nicholls argue that it has acquired cult status . Gary <unk> , co @-@ writer of <unk> ( 1988 ) , ranks the film 81st in his book Top 100 Sci @-@ Fi Movies , praising Doppelgänger as a " fine example of speculative fantasy in the late ' 60s " . He expresses satisfaction with Thinnes ' and Wymark 's performances , the characterisation ( and the themes entailed , including adultery , infertility and corruption ) and the " Fourth of July @-@ style " special effects , calling the film " enigmatic " . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 In a review published in The Times in October 1969 , John Russell Taylor praised the concept of the film as " quite ingenious " but suggested that the title and pre @-@ release marketing had revealed too much of the plot for the film to sustain the interest of its audience . Commenting in New York magazine in November , Judith Crist introduced Doppelgänger as " a science @-@ fiction film that comes up with a fascinating premise three @-@ quarters of the way along and does nothing with it . " She praised the production as being " nicely gadget @-@ ridden " and raising questions on the conflict between politics and science , but criticised the editing . Variety magazine cited a confusing plot , and related the crash of the Dove module to the coherence of the scriptwriting in its declaration that , " Astronauts take a pill to induce a three @-@ week sleep during their flight . Thereafter the script falls to pieces in as many parts as their craft . " 
 In his 1975 work A Pictorial History of Science Fiction Films , Jeff Rovin stated that the film was " confusing but colourful " , and commended it for its " superb special effects " . Although it was argued to be better than average for the genre in The Miami News in September 1969 and The Montreal Gazette in April 1972 , a December 1969 edition of the Pittsburgh Press dismissed it as " a churned out science @-@ fiction yarn ... Let 's hope there 's only one movie like this one " , and ranked it among the worst films of the year . The The Montreal Gazette review maintained that , although the quality deteriorates towards the end of the film , " until then it 's a reasonably diverting futuristic melodrama . " 
 = = = Retrospective reviews = = = 
 In a 2008 review for Den of Geek , Martin Anderson praised Robert Parrish 's direction and Derek Meddings ' effects . However , the dialogue , described as " robust and prosaic " , was said to sit " ill @-@ at @-@ ease with the metaphysical <unk> " . Anderson also expressed concern about the editing , stating that every effects shot precedes another shot " with that ' Hornby ' factor , slowing up the narrative unnecessarily " . Doppelgänger is awarded a rating of three stars out of five , and is summarised as " an interesting journey with many rewards " . Glenn Erickson , commenting in 2008 on the website DVD Talk , argued that Doppelgänger " takes an okay premise but does next to nothing with it . We see 100 minutes of bad drama and good special effects , and then the script opts for frustration and meaningless mystery . " He complained of unappealing cinematography , comparing it to the premise of Thunderbirds in so far as " people stand and talk a lot " , while defining the script as being composed of " at least 60 percent hardware @-@ talk and exposition ... How people move about – airplane , parachute , centrifuge – is more important than what they 're doing . " 
 On the subject of effects , Erickson asserted that sequences such as the " thuddingly generic , drama @-@ challenged main rocket launch " detract from the human factor of the film . Other design elements were criticised : viewing the costumes as dated , Erickson added that " the actors are defeated by the Barbie doll house surroundings " , and suggested that the visuals of Doppelgänger match an ethos of " the future will be a shopping mall " . Despite judging Doppelgänger " good " ( a rating higher than " fair " but lower than " excellent " ) , Erickson argued that the opportunities presented by the parallel Earth concept were squandered in the determination to turn the production into " an excuse to show cool rocket toys " . 
 Doppelgänger is given a rating of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five in a negative review published on the Film4 website , which praises the effects work and costume design but criticises the scenes with the character of Dr Hassler for their irrelevance to the main plot , and the subtext of the Rosses ' troubled marriage as an unnecessary diversion from the narrative . Although Ross and Kane 's mission through space is described as a " brief , trippy light show " , the review questions the originality of having a parallel Earth as the focus , and the depth of the script 's vision : " Anderson 's has to be the cheapest alternate Earth ever . Whereas audiences might expect a world where the Roman Empire never fell or the Nazis won World War II , here the shocking discovery is that people write backwards . That 's it . " Doppelgänger is only recommended for fans of the Anderson productions , and is considered " an occasionally interesting failure " . 
 Gary Westfahl of the webzine SF Site asserts that the use of a near @-@ perfect parallel Earth is uninspired , referring to the setting as " the most boring and unimaginative alien world imaginable " . Among other reviews , TV Guide magazine describes Doppelgänger as a " strange , little film " with an " overwritten script " , and considers the subplot concerning Dr Hassler 's treachery to be distracting . It awards a rating of two stars out of four . To Chris Bentley , writer of episode guides on the Anderson productions , Doppelgänger is a " stylish and thought @-@ provoking science @-@ fiction thriller " . 
 Sylvia Anderson suggested that American audiences , who were less familiar with the Supermarionation productions of Century 21 , were more enthusiastic . She explained , " It was all too easy to compare our real actors with our puppet characters and descriptions such as ' wooden ' , ' expressionless ' , ' no strings attached ' and ' puppet @-@ like ' were cheap shots some of the UK critics could not resist ... <unk> is the lazy man 's friend , and boy , were we typecast in Britain . " On Doppelgänger , she said in 1992 , " I saw it on TV a couple of years ago and I was very pleased with it . I thought it came over quite well . " 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 Archer and Nicholls cite among possible causes of the commercial failure of Doppelgänger its " quirky , offbeat nature " and the loss of public interest in space exploration after the Apollo 11 mission . The subject of the July 1969 Moon landing dominated a contemporary review in The Milwaukee Journal , in which Bennett F. <unk> noted comparisons with Doppelgänger : " ... the spacemen find a few bugs in their ' LM ' and crash on the planet . And do they ever have their hands full in getting back to Earth ! " Writing that the proliferation of technical dialogue hampers the acting , he concluded , " ... the makers of this space exploiter may get lots of mileage at the box office , but Neil , Buzz and Mike did it better on TV . " 
 It has also been suggested that the 1968 releases of 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Planet of the Apes established an unattainable standard for other films of the science @-@ fiction genre . Erickson argues that the film is inferior to 2001 for its depiction of a realistic " working future " in which humans remain attached to commercialism . Comparing the visual style of Doppelgänger to that used by film director Stanley Kubrick , he notes similarities in the use of close @-@ up eye shots and various " psychedelic " images , regretting that " all these borrowings are fluff without any deeper meaning . " Film4 's review describes the final scenes featuring the character of Jason Webb as " hell @-@ bent on recreating the enigmatic finale of 2001 by using a mirror , a wheelchair and a tartan blanket . " 
 Martin Anderson discusses connections between Doppelgänger and other science @-@ fiction films of the 1960s and 1970s , such as Solaris , acknowledging a " lyrical " tone in the dialogue . Ultimately , however , Doppelgänger " doesn 't bear comparison with Kubrick or [ Solaris director Andrei ] Tarkovsky . " Comparing Doppelgänger to 2001 , Rovin writes that the effects of the former " [ occasionally ] outshine " those of the latter . " He goes onto state that the film " attempts to kindle a profundity similar to that of [ 2001 ] in its abstract <unk> about the dichotomy of dual worlds , but fails with a combination of meat @-@ and @-@ potatoes science fiction and quasi @-@ profound themes . " He suggests that it is " neither a kid 's film nor a cult film " , but rules that " the elements that comprise the finished effort are more than individually successful . " 
 Erickson contrasts perceived failures on the part of the script with the efforts of Nigel Kneale for the 1958 BBC serial Quatermass and the Pit and the 1964 film adaptation of the 1901 H.G. Wells novel The First Men in the Moon . Both Douglas Pratt and the Institute of Contemporary Arts ( ICA ) in London liken the concept of the alternative Earth to the plot of " The Parallel " , a 1963 episode of the American television series The Twilight Zone : in the episode , an astronaut returns to Earth to find that his world has undergone many changes – some trivial , some drastic – and concludes that he has arrived in a parallel universe . Critic S. T. Joshi compares the theme of duplication in Doppelgänger to the premise of Invasion of the Body Snatchers ( 1956 ) , in which characters ' fears that their relatives have been abducted and replaced with alien impostors are vindicated with the appearance of the Pod People , an extraterrestrial species with the power to create doppelgangers that are nearly indistinguishable from humans . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Despite the polarised critical reception and commercial failure of Doppelgänger , Lew Grade offered the Andersons further opportunities to film in live action . Their first television series not based on puppetry was UFO , which premièred in the UK in 1970 . Doppelgänger is considered an immediate precursor to UFO , and has also been described as a " trial run " for the Andersons ' second live @-@ action series , Space : 1999 . UFO featured actors , costumes , props , locations and music that had previously appeared in Doppelgänger . Of the film 's cast , Ed Bishop , Keith Alexander , Cy Grant , Martin King and Jeremy Wilkin had previously had an association with the Andersons : all had provided voices for Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons except Alexander , who had voiced characters for the penultimate Supermarionation series , Joe 90 . With 11 other cast members , all but Grant and King appeared in at least one episode of UFO , in which Bishop had in the lead role of Commander Ed Straker . 
 Special effects elements from Doppelgänger that were recycled for UFO included the scale models of Phoenix and Dove . Futuristic cars ( which consultants from the Ford corporation based on the chassis of the Zephyr Zodiac ) and jeeps ( adapted from British Leyland Mini <unk> ) were also re @-@ used . Neptune House , one of the filming locations for Doppelgänger , became the face of the Harlington @-@ Straker Film Studios where the <unk> Organisation is headquartered . Tracks from Barry Gray 's score that were recycled for UFO included " Sleeping Astronauts " and " Strange Planet " , the latter serving as the ending theme music . The teleprinter images that served as the focus of the film 's titles formed a creative element that was imitated in the opening titles of UFO . 
 In a retrospective of Anderson 's career published on the IGN website , it is stated that the discussion of politics and economics in Doppelgänger contrast with the conventions of 1960s science fiction . Furthermore , such aspects are reflected in the atmosphere of UFO in so far as the characters " were constantly having to deal with the pressures of having to show progress under the scrutiny of accountants and elected officials , much the same way NASA was starting to in the US . " Commenting on the parallels between the film and the television series , Martin Anderson makes another connection to Kubrick : turning his attention to the scripting , he argues , " the most interesting common ground between the two projects remains the bleak ending ( s ) and the slight flirtation with the acid @-@ induced imagery and mind fucks of 2001 . " 
 = Lam Tin = 
 Lam Tin is an area in the Kwun Tong District in southeastern New Kowloon , Hong Kong . Lam Tin is primarily a residential area but also hosts a major transport interchange and several shopping attractions . Lam Tin was once a large field in the vicinity of Kowloon Bay . During the Song dynasty , it was a site of salt production . Since the 1980s a number of housing estates were constructed in Lam Tin . 
 A high @-@ density residential district built on a coastal knoll , Lam Tin hosts residential housing estates , transport infrastructure , mass @-@ transit facilities , shopping centres , recreational areas and many other buildings and structures . It is home to 130 @,@ 000 residents , making up a fifth of Kwun Tong District 's population . 
 = = Geographical location = = 
 In common speech , the name Lam Tin in the past usually included the areas of Lei Yue Mun and Yau Tong . However , new infrastructure and housing estates that were built there are not now considered part of Lam Tin . Conventional boundaries of Lam Tin : west to Laguna City , southeast to Kwong Tin Estate , north to the entrance of Tseung Kwan O Tunnel , southwest to Victoria Harbour . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Lam Tin is overlooked to the east by Black Hill , or Ng Kwai Shan . The rock below this locality is Hong Kong Granite from the Cretaceous period . Most granite rock in Lam Tin is medium @-@ grained . The granite in Lam Tin is of the Lion Rock suite . Farther towards the shore , a small area of land to the west of Cha Kwo Ling was reclaimed . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 The entire Lam Tin area is located in Kwun Tong District . Politically , Lam Tin is the name of a constituency of Kwun Tong District , which includes the area of the former Lam Tin Estate . However , in common speech , the name Lam Tin usually refers to a larger area which includes nine constituencies of Kwun Tong District . 
 Constituencies of the Kwun Tong District Council within the Lam Tin area 
 <unk> Hing Tin ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Tak Tin ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Lam Tin ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Kwong Tak ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Ping Tin ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Hong Pak ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Yau Tong Sze Shan West ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Lai Kong ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> King Tin ( <unk> ) 
 = = History = = 
 Located along the coast of southern China , Lam Tin was first settled around the 9th century BC by the Nanyue people . The Qin dynasty conquered the Nanyue in the late 3rd century BC as part of their unification of China . Since then , the land presently known as Lam Tin became identified as part of China . 
 Lam Tin , called Ham Tin Shan ( <unk> ) at that time , literally meaning " salty field hill " , had been part of Kowloon Bay salt @-@ fields ( <unk> , also known as <unk> <unk> ) under the management of Dongguan County or Xin 'an County in different dynasties . The salt @-@ fields were first officially operated by the Song dynasty in 1163 . 
 The Kowloon Bay salt @-@ fields were rich in salt , and this brought wealth to the residents near the bay . Gradually , Ham Tin Shan became villages . Because of the region 's shoreline location , agricultural activities started with the plantation of high @-@ salinity crops . With a quarry found in So Mo Ping ( now Sau Mau Ping ) , the region gradually became a small fishing , farming and quarrying town . 
 In 1662 , the Kangxi Emperor moved all residents along southern China coastline inland by 50 Chinese miles and abandoned the salt @-@ fields in hopes of weakening the pirate Zheng Chenggong 's power through cutting his support from coastline residents . Although the residents were allowed to return in 1669 , after the Kangxi Emperor discovered that the migration brought great economic harm , the salt industry in Ham Tin never prospered again . 
 In 1841 , the British Empire acquired Hong Kong . The western half of the Kowloon Bay salt @-@ fields becoming part of British Hong Kong in 1860 and the eastern half in 1898 . In the 20th century , the salt @-@ fields were abandoned for reclamation to facilitate the building of Kai Tak Airport . To reflect this change in land usage , Ham Tin was renamed Lam Tin of similar pronunciation because the village no longer produced salt . The name Lam Tin came from <unk> , Shaanxi , which came from a phrase " <unk> " , literally " produced from the blue fields is jade " . The name Lam Tin was officially endorsed on 1 September 1970 . 
 The colonial government built Lam Tin Estate in the 1960s to settle low @-@ income residents during the influx of population from mainland China after the Korean War . Gradually , Lam Tin became a common term to Hongkongers describing the areas around Lam Tin Estate . The dragon emblem painted on Block 15 of Lam Tin Estate was a symbol of Lam Tin 's unity until the building 's demolition in 1998 . The land of Lam Tin Estate was absorbed into Ping Tin Estate , Kai Tin Estate , Tak Tin Estate and Kwong Tin Estate . 
 With the building of three major transport structures in the late 20th century – the Kwun Tong Bypass , the Eastern Harbour Crossing , and the MTR – Lam Tin became even more interconnected with the rest of Hong Kong , spurring a population surge in the district and becoming a major transport interchange . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Lam Tin is known as one of the most important transport interchange centres in Hong Kong . It is a frequently visited bus @-@ bus and rail @-@ bus interchange station in East Kowloon . 
 When the British arrived , most Lam Tin residents travelled on foot or by boat to nearby villages such as Ma Tau Wai . Over the years , the government built roads , tunnels and railways in Lam Tin to facilitate transport between Lam Tin and other districts , making Lam Tin a bridge between different areas of Eastern Hong Kong . 
 = = = Highway and road surface = = = 
 The first road was Lei Yue Mun Road , which succeeded Kwun Tong Road and ran between Kwun Tong and Lei Yue Mun . Cha Kwo Ling Road was later built to tap traffic to Cha Kwo Ling . However , the roads had insufficient capacity to effectively serve the district . Both Lei Yue Mun Road and Kwun Tong Road were widened and became segments of today 's Route 7 . 
 The first road that carried commuters into and out of Lam Tin was Kai Tin Road . It was built in the 1960s to facilitate major road transports . The construction of Kai Tin Road required the blasting of Lam Tin Hill , which attracted much attention to nearby residents . Owing to its method of construction , Kai Tin Road became a direct outlet from the hill . 
 Built together with Kai Tin Road were Ping Tin Street , On Tin Street and Tak Tin Street , which all served Lam Tin Estate . Later Ping Tin and Tak Tin became names of new residential areas after Lam Tin Estate was demolished . 
 In 1989 Eastern Harbour Crossing was completed . Kwun Tong Bypass was completed in 1991 . To construct an interchange for both roads , the intersection between Lei Yue Mun Road and Kai Tin Road was rebuilt into a flyover @-@ roundabout . This made Lam Tin a bridge between the Eastern Harbour Crossing and the Kwun Tong Bypass of Route 2 , with Lei Yue Mun Interchange as the exit point . 
 In 1990 Tseung Kwan O Tunnel was built with its southern entrance in Lam Tin , adding a convenient and direct route to Tseung Kwan O. Junk Bay Chinese Permanent Cemetery was built in the same year . Despite being located in Tseung Kwan O , the cemetery 's only motor @-@ enabled exit is located in Lam Tin . As a result , Lam Tin becomes crowded with people tending graves during the various festivals . 
 The 1990 and 1992 construction of Sceneway Garden and Laguna City , respectively , increased the traffic congestion in the Lam Tin area , mainly near Sai Tso Wan . One of the new arteries built to relieve the problem is Wai Fat Road , a four @-@ lane dual carriageway which serves as an interchange between Route 2 and Route 7 and an outlet from Kwun Tong Bypass to Kwun Tong Industrial Area . 
 Pik Wan Road and Lin Tak Road were also built in 1992 to facilitate transport to newly built areas higher up Lam Tin Hill . Because it hangs off a precipice and carries only two @-@ lanes , Lin Tak Road was surrounded by both questions of convenience and concerns about its safety . 
 As part of the 2001 construction of Ocean Shores in Tseung Kwan O , a segment of the former Po Lam Road South was rebuilt and extended to meet Pik Wan Road near Kwong Tin Estate . The reconstructed road was renamed O King Road and became the first road connection to modern Tiu Keng Leng . 
 = = = MTR = = = 
 Between 1979 and 1989 , the Kwun Tong Line of the MTR terminated at Kwun Tong Station . A storage railroad depot that developed behind the station , consisting of three parallel and interchanged tracks , terminating at Kwun Tong Law Court , eventually became part of the passenger railway after the later extension of Kwun Tong Line . 
 In 1984 , the government decided to build a second railway tunnel and a second road tunnel to alleviate traffic congestion in the Cross Harbour Tunnel resulting in Eastern Harbour Crossing , the first railway @-@ road tunnel in Hong Kong . The tunnel enabled Kwun Tong Line 's extension to Quarry Bay , with an additional stop , Lam Tin , built in the middle . The new MTR station , opened on 8 November 1989 , caused an influx of population into Lam Tin . 
 Built at the same was Lam Tin Bus Terminus , located on the opposite side of Lei Yue Mun Road and housing platforms for franchised buses , minibuses , taxis and cross @-@ border buses . It is also connected to Sceneway Plaza by staircases and escalators . Following the construction of these new facilities , Lam Tin gradually became a major transport interchange in Hong Kong . 
 As part of the Tseung Kwan O Line project , Kwun Tong line was briefly extended to North Point on 27 September 2001 but soon diverted to Tiu Keng Leng when the Tseung Kwan O Line opened on 18 August 2002 . Now , Lam Tin is on the Kwun Tong Line , the third station from the terminus station of Tiu Keng Leng at Rennie 's Mill . 
 = = = <unk> buses = = = 
 The first bus terminus built in Lam Tin was then called Lam Tin Bus Terminus , which is today 's Tak Tin Bus Terminus . It is built on the slope of Lam Tin Hill , in the north part of Lam Tin Estate , to serve the neighbourhood 's residents . Buses ran from Kwun Tong to the bus terminus through Lei Yue Mun Road , then turned left and ascended the hill along Kai Tin Road , Ping Tin Street , On Tin Street and Tak Tin Street . 
 Between 1989 to 1994 , Lam Tin MTR Station , Laguna City and Pik Wan Road were built . To serve these newly populated areas , three new bus termini were constructed : Lam Tin MTR Bus Terminus , now commonly named Lam Tin Bus Terminus as shown on the wall painting of the terminus ; Laguna City Bus Terminus , which took up routes originally terminating at Kwun Tong Ferry ; and Kwong Tin Bus Terminus , with new routes initiated to serve exclusively Lam Tin and the area nearby . 
 To disambiguate the names of the termini from one another , the original Lam Tin Bus Terminus was renamed Lam Tin ( North ) Bus Terminus , and " Lam Tin Bus Terminus " now usually refers to Lam Tin MTR Bus Terminus . After reconstruction of Lam Tin Estate , Lam Tin ( North ) Bus Terminus was surrounded by Tak Tin Estate . As a result , the terminus got a common name " Tak Tin Bus Terminus " . 
 The area near Ping Tin Street became Ping Tin Estate after the reconstruction . A space underneath the buildings was reserved for a new bus terminus . On 6 July 2003 , Ping Tin Bus Terminus was opened and overtook most of the routes from Tak Tin Bus Terminus . 
 = = = = Bus termini and routes in Lam Tin = = = = 
 There are five bus terminals in Lam Tin , namely : 
 Lam Tin Bus Terminus ( with the full name Lam Tin MTR Station Bus Terminus ) with routes <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> 
 Laguna City Bus Terminus with routes 40 , <unk> , 621 
 Ping Tin Bus Terminus with routes 15 , 15A , 15P , 38 , <unk> , <unk> , 603 , <unk> , <unk> , 889 
 Tak Tin Bus Terminus ( with the official name Lam Tin ( North ) Bus Terminus ) with route E22 
 Kwong Tin Bus Terminus ( with the full name Lam Tin ( Kwong Tin Estate ) Bus Terminus ) with routes 14B , <unk> , 16 , <unk> , <unk> 
 Excluding the bus routes mentioned above , the following routes also stop in Lam Tin , but not terminating : 14 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , 601 , <unk> , 606 , 606A , <unk> , 619 , <unk> , <unk> , 641 , 671 , 690 , <unk> , 694 . 
 = = = Surface transport = = = 
 Surrounded by hills , Lam Tin does not have direct access to the Victoria Harbour . However , merchant ships and ferries dock at Kwun Tong Pier and Lei Yue Mun Pier , which are both within 15 minutes ' walk from Lam Tin , and provide surface transport for Lam Tin residents . Another reason for Lam Tin 's absence of an outlet to the Harbour is the presence of an Eastern Harbour Crossing entrance inside the district , whose buses and MTR overtook ferries for cross @-@ harbour transport . 
 = = Residence = = 
 The first modern housing estate in Lam Tin was Lam Tin Estate . The estate was built in the 1960s and the 1970s to settle the influx of mainland immigrants . The late 1980s saw the district 's first private residential buildings . Various facilities built during the 1990s made Lam Tin a compact residential area , however Lam Tin Estate was demolished in the 1990s and was redeveloped into Ping Tin Estate , Tak Tin Estate and Kai Tin Estate . 
 Most of the residents in Lam Tin are Chinese , but due to an influx of Japanese immigrants during the 1990s , people of Japanese descent have become common in Lam Tin , particularly in Sceneway Garden and Laguna City , which now features a Japanese kindergarten . 
 = = = Lam Tin Estate = = = 
 Lam Tin Estate consisted of tower blocks numbered 1 to 24 . Blocks 1 to 14 of Lam Tin Estate were built between 1962 and 1965 as type 4 public housing buildings ( <unk> ) ; the other 10 towers were built between 1969 and 1975 as type 6 public housing buildings ( <unk> ) . There was no Block 9 , leaving the number of buildings in Lam Tin Estate at 23 . 
 The Chinese dragon , which has symbolised unity of Chinese people since it was the first national emblem of unified China , is painted in multicolour on Block 15 's south and north facing walls because it was the 500th public housing building in Hong Kong . Block 15 's distinctive imagery made it a recognisable symbol of Lam Tin and the district 's unity . After demolition and reconstruction , Block 15 became part of Ping Tin Estate . 
 Building structure of Lam Tin Estate 's blocks is standardised by the government . As types 3 , 4 and 6 buildings , the 23 towers of Lam Tin Estate were shaped as <unk> and resembled candy @-@ boxes standing on a knoll . Most buildings were 16 @-@ storeys high and housed about 800 units . Each building had an estimated capacity of 3 @,@ 000 residents and an approximate space allocation at 30 ft ² per person . Bathrooms and kitchens were combined into one compartment , as were living rooms and bedrooms . Lifts only reached some of the floors . To access the other floors , one needed to exit the lift at a level nearby and hike upstairs or downstairs . On the ground floor beneath the buildings were a variety of shops which served the residents . Although densely packed , the living environment of Lam Tin Estate fostered close relationships in the neighbourhood . 
 Owing to the ageing of buildings , the reconstruction of Lam Tin Estate was announced in September 1995 as part of an urban renewal project . Demolition started in 1997 and was completed in 2002 . After reconstruction , Lam Tin Estate became Kai Tin Estate , Tak Tin Estate , Ping Tin Estate and Hong Yat Court . 
 = = = Laguna City and Sceneway Garden = = = 
 Laguna City and Sceneway Garden were the earliest large @-@ scale private @-@ housing estates built in Lam Tin . Both were built by Cheung Kong Holdings and completed in the early 1990s . 
 In the late 1980s , Cheung Kong acquired two pieces of land in Lam Tin , one being a former Shell oil depot , the other above the newly built Lam Tin MTR Station and bus terminus , and developed them into Laguna City and Sceneway Garden respectively . Laguna City was completed in 1991 and Sceneway Garden was completed in 1992 . 
 Sceneway Garden is built on the podium above Lam Tin Station . The podium was built in a valley between Cha Kwo Ling and Lam Tin Hill , which hosted a waste @-@ car dump @-@ site before its construction . It has a total of 17 towers and a gross floor area of 280 @,@ 760 m ² . There are altogether <unk> flats housing approximately 20 @,@ 000 people . It also has two carparks , one for residents and one for visitors . Built together with Sceneway Garden was Sceneway Plaza , which is a major shopping mall in southeastern Kowloon . 
 Laguna City is built along Lam Tin 's waterfront taking over the land from the former oil depot . Part of Laguna City is built on reclaimed land . Laguna City consists of four phases , totalling 38 towers upon its 1991 completion . Built together with Laguna City was Laguna Park , which was completed in 1994 and then handed over to Urban Council . Laguna Park has a total area of 320 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 30 @,@ 000 m2 ) . Phases 1 , 2 and 4 of Laguna City are managed by the same company , while phase 3 has an independent management authority . Similarly , phases 1 , 2 and 4 share the same owners ' committee , whereas phase 3 has its own . 
 = = = List of villages and housing estates in Lam Tin = = = 
 In addition , Ko Chun Court and Ko Yee Estate in Yau Tong and Ma Yau Tong Village in Tiu Keng Leng are sometimes considered part of Lam Tin . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Being a compact residential area , Lam Tin has various facilities to satisfy its residents ' daily needs . These include shopping malls , recreational facilities , water and other supplies . Furthermore , during the 1970s and 1980s , Lam Tin hosted landfills . 
 = = = Shopping = = = 
 To meet the daily demands of its residents , Lam Tin hosts a number of shopping malls and markets . Most residential estates host individual shopping malls , and some of them have wet markets in addition to malls . These include : 
 = = = Schools = = = 
 To serve its residents , Lam Tin has a number of schools . They include kindergartens , primary schools and secondary schools . Some schools in Lam Tin are subsidised , others are private . 
 List of schools in Lam Tin 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Lam Tin has a number of public parks , recreation grounds and indoor sports centres for its residents ' use , including Lam Tin Park and Sai Tso Wan Recreation Ground . It is also home to part of the Wilson Trail . There are also a few government indoor activity centres , including Lam Tin West Community Centre , Lam Tin South Indoor Sports Ground and Lam Tin Complex , as well as a number of private recreational facilities . 
 Lam Tin Park was built along Black Hill in 1991 to serve the needs of the fast @-@ growing community . It consists mainly of hiking trails and walkways , with a 5 @-@ a @-@ side football pitch and a children 's playground . It also serves as an entrance to the Wilson Trail . The whole of Lam Tin and Victoria Harbour can be viewed from the lookout point at the peak of Lam Tin Park . 
 Sai Tso Wan Recreation Ground was built between 1995 and 2004 over the former Sai Tso Wan Landfill . During the construction , the former landfill underwent a series of restoration works . A final capping layer was added to prevent leakage ; a landfill gas control system was used to deploy methane from the decomposed rubbish as fuel , and a leachate management system was built to collect leachate for further processing . The recreation ground started its operation on 30 April 2004 . 
 The Lam Tin Complex on 1 Hing Ting Street was built between 2009 to 2013 . The facilities of the complex includes two indoor swimming pools ( <unk> and <unk> metres respectively ) , the Kwun Tong Music Centre , a self @-@ study room , rooftop gardens , and the new two @-@ floor Lam Tin Public Library , which relocated from smaller premises in Tak Tin Estate . 
 Besides recreation grounds , Lam Tin also hosts Stage 3 of Wilson Trail . The section starts at Exit A of Lam Tin MTR Station , runs east along Kai Tin Road and Lei Yue Mun Road , up Black Hill along the road towards Junk Bay Chinese Permanent Cemetery , west along the Black Hill , and finally leaves Lam Tin near Ma Yau Tong towards the section 's terminus at Tseng Lan Shue . 
 = = = Supplies = = = 
 Lam Tin has an underground network of safe water , town gas and domestic electricity supplies . Electricity in the area is served by China Light and Power . Town gas in the area is served by the <unk> Company . 
 The entire Lam Tin area is served by both tap water and flushing sea water supplies . The tap water is piped either from surface water or <unk> River into two service reservoirs and then pumped to individual households . The two service reservoirs that serve Lam Tin are Lam Tin Low Level Fresh Water Service Reservoir and Lam Tin High Level Service Reservoir . Built together with Lam Tin Estate , the low level reservoir is covered with a concrete @-@ surfaced football field . The reservoir is now located between Kai Tin Estate and Tak Tin Estate . The high level reservoir , on the other hand , is farther away from residential estates . It is located near Lam Tin Park , on the slope of Black Hill . 
 = = = Waste disposal = = = 
 From 1978 to 1981 , Sai Tso Wan Landfill ( <unk> ) served East Kowloon . Approximately 1 @.@ 6 million tonnes of domestic waste and commercial waste were dumped in the site during its four @-@ year operation . The disposed waste stacked up to 65 metres high . After its closure in 1981 , it was sealed with soil and planted over with Grasslands and trees . Sin Fat Road , which runs up the hill and hosts Sceneway Garden <unk> Terminus , was constructed . Sai Tso Wan Landfill was later rebuilt into Sai Tso Wan Recreation Ground . 
 An area in Ma Yau Tong near today 's Lam Tin Park was known as Ma Yau Tong Central Landfill ( <unk> ) . The area measured 10 @.@ 87 hectares , and operated until 1986 when it became the last urban landfill to be closed , after which it was sealed and converted to government @-@ owned grassland . 
 Since the total closure of urban landfills in 1986 , rubbish from Lam Tin is first transferred to a treatment plant in Kowloon Bay where it is compressed , and then to South East New Territories Landfill ( <unk> ) where it is disposed of . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Succession ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Succession " is the thirteenth episode of NBC 's second season of 30 Rock and the thirty @-@ fourth episode overall . It was written by Andrew Guest and one of the seasons ' co @-@ executive producers , John Riggi ; it was directed by Gail Mancuso . It first aired on April 24 , 2008 in the United States . Guest stars in this episode include Will Arnett , Marceline Hugot , Chris Parnell , Brian Stack , Tom <unk> and Rip Torn . 
 In this episode Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) and Devon Banks ' ( Will Arnett ) race to be the new CEO of General Electric comes to an end ; in a parody of Amadeus , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) gets the idea to make a pornographic video game with Frank ( Judah Friedlander ) playing Salieri to his Mozart , and Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) prepares to become the new Head of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming . In keeping with the Amadeus parody , the music of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart ( a favorite of Jeff Richmond , the show 's regular composer ) is used to score much of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack meets with retiring corporate head Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) , who discloses that he has chosen Jack over his soon @-@ to @-@ be son @-@ in @-@ law Devon to run the company . Jack is overjoyed and chooses Liz to replace himself as Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming . Liz accepts when she learns of the higher salary and tells her staff " Suck it monkeys , I 'm going corporate . " Meanwhile , Devon returns with intent to sabotage Jack , but Liz attempts to make Devon look bad by forcibly making out with him in front of a security camera . 
 At this time , Tracy begins to feel he is an embarrassment to his son . Hoping to make his family proud , Tracy searches for a legacy and decides to produce the world 's first pornographic video game . Despite Frank 's skepticism , Tracy has some success in designing the game by conquering the uncanny valley , a scale on which the strangeness of special effects are measured . 
 A depressed Devon becomes resigned to the fact that Jack will receive the promotion . Don Geiss , however , goes into a diabetic coma , despite the efforts of Dr. Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) , before he can announce his decision . Devon denies knowing that Geiss had chosen Jack as his successor . The next day , Devon appears in Jack 's office , revealing he has convinced the board to put Kathy Geiss ( Marceline Hugot ) , his fiancée , in charge , with Devon acting as the power behind the throne . He then kicks Jack out of his office . 
 = = Production = = 
 Chris Parnell , who played Dr. Leo Spaceman in this episode , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey was the head writer on Saturday Night Live from 1999 until 2006 . Various other cast members of Saturday Night Live have appeared on 30 Rock , including Rachel Dratch , Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis and Molly Shannon . Tina Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of Saturday Night Live . Alec Baldwin has also hosted Saturday Night Live fourteen times , the second highest number of episodes of any host of the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Succession " was viewed by an average of 5 @.@ 5 million American viewers upon its original broadcast . The episode also achieved a 2 @.@ 8 / 7 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The 2 @.@ 8 refers to 2 @.@ 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and the 7 refers to 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode also ranked first place among males aged 18 – 34 against episodes of CSI and Grey 's Anatomy . 
 The episode received some positive feedback from critics . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad described " Succession " as " a great episode " with " a lot of great lines " . Sassone compared the episode to a soap opera , and hoped that the pornographic video game storyline would be continued . Robert Canning of IGN complimented Devon 's appearances on 30 Rock , and felt that " Succession " would be the first episode in a new story arc , which was a good thing . He rated the episode an 8 out of 10 . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger praised the episode as " fabulous " . Sepinwall noted that " Succession " included an " inspired riff on Amadeus " , and compared Tracy and Frank when they were working on a pornographic video game to Mozart and Salieri . Less positively , he commented on the " one @-@ note @-@ ness of Will Arnett as Devon Banks " , and did not like the Baby Mama ad that was displayed on screen during the " Mozart montage " . 
 = Władysław IV Vasa = 
 Władysław IV Vasa ( Polish : Władysław IV Waza ; Russian : <unk> IV <unk> , tr . Vladislav IV Vaza ; Latin : Vladislaus IV Vasa or Ladislaus IV Vasa ; Lithuanian : <unk> Vaza ; 9 June 1595 – 20 May 1648 ) was a Polish prince from the Royal House of Vasa . He reigned as King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania from 8 November 1632 to his death in 1648 . 
 Władysław IV was the son of Sigismund III Vasa ( Polish : Zygmunt III Waza ) and his wife , Anna of Austria ( also known as Anna of Habsburg ) . In 1610 the teen @-@ aged Władysław was elected Tsar of Russia by the Seven Boyars , but did not assume the Russian throne due to his father 's opposition and a popular uprising in Russia . Nevertheless , until 1634 he used the title of Grand Duke of Muscovy . 
 Elected king of Poland in 1632 , Władysław was fairly successful in defending the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth against invasion , most notably in the Smolensk War of 1632 – 34 , in which he participated personally . He supported religious tolerance and carried out military reforms , such as the founding of the Commonwealth Navy . He was also a renowned patron of the arts and music . He failed , however , to realize his dreams of regaining the Swedish crown , gaining fame by conquering the Ottoman Empire , strengthening royal power , and reforming the Commonwealth . 
 He died without a legitimate male heir and was succeeded to the Polish throne by his half @-@ brother , John II Casimir Vasa ( Jan Kazimierz Waza ) . Władysław 's death marked the end of relative stability in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , as conflicts and tensions that had been growing over several decades came to a head with devastating consequences , notably the largest of the Cossack uprisings – the Khmelnytsky Uprising ( 1648 ) — and the Swedish invasion ( " the Deluge " , 1655 – 60 ) . 
 = = Royal titles = = 
 In Latin : " Vladislaus <unk> Dei gratia rex Poloniae , magnus dux <unk> , Russiae , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> rex , electus magnus dux <unk> . " 
 In English : " Władysław IV , by grace of God the King of Poland , Grand Duke of Lithuania , Ruthenia , Prussia , Masovia , Samogitia , Livonia , and hereditary King of the Swedes , Goths and Vandals , elected Grand Duke of Muscovy . " 
 In 1632 Władysław Zygmunt Waza – Jagiellon was elected King of Poland . By paternal inheritance , he legally succeeded as King of Sweden . His titles were the longest of any Polish king ever . 
 = = Life = = 
 Władysław IV 's father , Sigismund III Vasa , grandson of Sweden 's King Gustav I , had succeeded his father to the Swedish throne in 1592 , only to be deposed in 1599 by his uncle , subsequently King Charles IX . This resulted in a long @-@ standing feud , with the Polish kings of the House of Vasa claiming the Swedish throne . This led to the Polish – Swedish War of 1600 – 29 and later to the Deluge of 1655 . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 The marriage of Anne of Austria to Sigismund III was a traditional , politically motivated marriage , intended to tie the young House of Vasa to the prestigious Habsburgs . Władysław was born 9 June 1595 at the King 's summer residence in <unk> , near Kraków , a few months after the main Wawel Castle had been consumed by fire . 
 Władysław 's mother died on 10 February 1598 , less than three years after giving birth to him . He was raised by one of her former ladies of the court , Urszula <unk> . Urszula eventually became a powerful player at the royal court , with much influence . Władysław 's Hofmeister was Michał Konarski , a Polish @-@ Prussian noble . Around early 17th century Urszula lost much of her influence , as Władysław gained new teachers and mentors , such as priests Gabriel <unk> , Andrzej <unk> and Marek <unk> , and in the military matters , Zygmunt Kazanowski . Much of his curriculum was likely designed by priest Piotr Skarga , much respected by <unk> III . Władysław studied for several years in the Kraków Academy , and for two years , in Rome . 
 At the age of 10 Władysław received his own prince court . Władysław formed a friendship with Adam Kazanowski and his brother , Stanisław . It is reported that young Władysław was interested in arts ; later this led to him becoming an important patron of arts . He spoke and wrote in German , Italian and Latin . Władysław was liked by szlachta ( Polish nobility ) , however his father 's plans to secure him the throne of Poland ( vivente rege ) were unpopular and eventually crushed in the Zebrzydowski Rebellion ( rokosz ) . 
 = = = Tsar = = = 
 With the intensification of the Polish intervention in Muscovy , in 1609 , the royal family moved to their residence in Vilnius , capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . There he witnessed the fire of Vilnius , an event which even required the royal family to evacuate their residence in the Vilnius Castle . Shortly afterwords , that year , Władysław , aged 15 , was elected Tsar by Muscovy 's aristocracy council of Seven boyars , who overthrew tsar Vasily <unk> during the Polish @-@ Muscovite War and Muscovy 's Time of Troubles . His election was ruined by his father , Sigismund , who aimed to convert Muscovy 's population from Orthodox religion to Catholicism . Sigismund refused to agree to the boyar 's request to send prince Władysław to Moscow and his conversion to Orthodoxy . Instead , Sigismund proposed that he should reign as a regent in Muscovy instead . This unrealistic proposal led to a resumption of hostilities . Briefly , beginning in 1610 , Władysław struck Muscovite silver and gold coins ( <unk> ) in the Russian mints in Moscow and Novgorod with his titulary Tsar and Grand Prince Vladislav <unk> of all Russia . 
 Władysław tried to regain the tsar 's throne himself , organizing a campaign in 1616 . Despite some military victories , he was unable to capture Moscow . The Commonwealth gained some disputed territories in the Truce of Deulino , but Władysław was never able to reign in Russia ; the throne during this time was instead held by tsar Michael Romanov . He held on to the title , without any real power , until 1634 . Likely , the failure of this campaign showed Władysław the limits of royal power in Poland , as major factors for the failure included significant autonomy of the military commanders , which did not see Władysław as their superior , and lack of funds for the army , as the Polish parliament ( sejm ) refused to subsidize the war . 
 = = = Prince = = = 
 Before he was elected king of the Commonwealth , Władysław fought in many campaigns , seeking personal glory . After his final campaign against Russians in 1617 – 1618 ( the end of Dymitriads ) , in 1619 he went to Silesia , looking for an opportunity to aid the Habsburgs in their struggle against the Czech Hussites in the Thirty Years ' War . That opportunity never came , but from that point onward , Władysław had a good relationship with George William , Elector of Brandenburg . 
 The following year Władysław took part in the second phase of the Polish – Ottoman War , a consequence of the long series of struggles between Poland and the Ottomans over Moldavia . In 1621 Władysław was one of the Polish commanders at the Battle of Chocim ; reportedly he was struck ill , but despite that , he proved a voice of reason , convincing other Polish commanders there to stay and fight . His advice was correct , and the battle eventually ended with a peace treaty that returned the status quo from before the Ottoman invasion . This peace treaty also gave Władysław an international reputation as a " defender of Christian faith " , and increased his popularity in the Commonwealth itself . 
 In 1623 , while near Gdańsk ( Danzig ) , he witnessed the arrogant attitude of Gustavus Adolphus , whose navy took opportunity of its sea superiority to demand concessions from Gdańsk ( Commonwealth had no navy ) . In 1624 king Sigismund decided that time has come for Władysław to travel , like many of his peers , to Western Europe . For security reasons , Władysław traveled under a fake name , <unk> ( from Polish <unk> , meaning sheaf , as seen in the Vasa 's coat of arms ) . In his voyage ( 1624 – 1625 ) he was accompanied by <unk> Stanisław Radziwiłł and other , less notable courtiers . First , he travelled to Wrocław ( Breslau ) , then Munich , where he met Maximilian I , Elector of Bavaria . In Brussels he met Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia of Spain ; in Antwerp , Rubens . Near Breda he met Ambrosio Spinola . It was during his stay with Spinola that he was impressed by the Western military techniques ; this was later to be reflected when he became king : military matters were always important to him . While not a military genius , and surpassed by his contemporary , Commonwealth hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski , Władysław was known as a fairly skillful commander on his own . In Rome , he was welcomed by Pope Urban VIII , who congratulated him on his fighting against the Ottomans . During his stay in Florence he was impressed by opera , and decided to bring this form of art to the Commonwealth , where it was previously unknown . In Genoa and Venice he was impressed by the local shipyards , and in Pisa he witnessed a specially organized mock naval battle , experiences which resulted in his later attempt to create the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth Navy . 
 After returning to Poland , in 1626 he fought against the Swedes in the last phase of the Polish – Swedish War , where in 1626 he took part in the battle of Gniew . His involvement in this conflict , which lasted till the Truce of Altmark in 1629 , was rather limited , and he spent much time in other parts of the country . During that period and afterward , he lobbied for support of his candidature for the Polish throne , as his father , Sigismund , was getting more advanced in his age , and the succession to the Polish throne did not occur through inheritance but rather , through the process of royal elections . While Władysław , and his father Sigismund , tried to ensure Władysław 's election during Sigismund 's life , this was not a popular option for the nobility , and it repeatedly failed , up to and including at the sejm of 1631 . The sudden heart attack that Sigismund suffered on 23 April 1632 , and his death in the morning hours of 30 April , forced the issue to be taken up again . 
 = = = King = = = 
 The election sejm of 1632 eventually concluded in the election of Władysław ; he had no serious other contenders . The decision on who would be the Commonwealth 's next king was reached on 8 November , but as the pacta conventa were not yet ready , the official announcement was delayed until 13 November . In the pacta conventa , Władysław pledged himself to fund a military school and equipment ; to find a way to fund a naval fleet ; to maintain current alliances ; not to raise armies , give offices or military ranks to foreigners , negotiate peace treaties or declare war without the Sejm 's approval ; not to take a wife without the Senate 's approval ; to convince his brothers to take an oath to the Commonwealth ; and to transfer the profits from the Royal Mint to the Royal Treasury rather than to a private treasury . When the election result had been announced by the Crown Grand Marshal , Łukasz Opaliński , the nobility ( szlachta ) , who had taken part in the election , began festivities in honor of the new king , which lasted three hours . Władysław was crowned in the Wawel Cathedral , in Kraków on 6 February in the following year . 
 = = = = Military campaigns = = = = 
 In an attempt to take advantage of the confusion expected after the death of the Polish king , Tsar Michael of Russia ordered an attack on the Commonwealth . A Muscovite army crossed the Commonwealth eastern frontier in October 1632 and laid siege to Smolensk ( which was ceded to Poland by Russia in 1618 , at the end of the <unk> wars ) . In the war against Russia in 1632 – 1634 ( the Smolensk War ) , Władysław succeeded in breaking the siege in September 1633 and then in turn surrounded the Russian army under Mikhail Shein , which was then forced to surrender on 1 March 1634 . It was during that campaign that Władysław started the modernisation program of the Commonwealth army , emphasising the usage of modern infantry and artillery . Władysław proved to be a good tactician , and his innovations in the use of artillery and fortifications based on Western ideas greatly contributed to the eventual Polish – Lithuanian success . King Władysław wanted to continue the war or , because the Polish – Swedish Treaty of Altmark would soon be expiring , ally with the Russians to strike against Sweden . However , the Sejm wanted no more conflict . As Stanisław Łubieński , the Bishop of Płock , wrote two weeks after Shein 's surrender : " Our happiness is in remaining within our borders , guaranteeing health and well @-@ being . " The resulting Peace of <unk> ( Treaty of <unk> ) , favourable to Poland , confirmed the pre @-@ war territorial status quo . Muscovy also agreed to pay 20 @,@ 000 rubles in exchange for Wladyslaw 's renunciation of all claims to the <unk> and return of the royal insignia , which were in the Commonwealth possession since the Dymitriads . 
 Following the Smolensk campaign , the Commonwealth was threatened by another attack by the Ottoman Empire . During the wars against Ottomans in 1633 – 1634 Władysław moved the Commonwealth army south of the Muscovy border , where under the command of hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski it forced the Turks to renew a peace treaty . In the resulting treaty , both countries agreed again to curb the border raids by Cossacks and the Tatars , and the Ottomans confirmed that the Commonwealth to be an independent power , and had not to pay tribute to the Empire . 
 After the southern campaign , the Commonwealth had to deal with a threat from the north , as the armistice , ending the Polish – Swedish War ( 1600 – 1629 ) was expiring . The majority of Polish nobles preferred to solve the problem through negotiations , unwilling to pay taxes for a new war , provided that Sweden was open to negotiations and concessions ( in particular , to retreat from the occupied Polish coastal territories ) . Władysław himself was hoping for a war , which could yield some more significant territorial gains , and even managed to gather a sizeable army , with navy elements , near the disputed territories . Sweden , weakened by involvement in the Thirty Years ' War , was however open to a peaceful solution . Władysław could not go against the decision of the Sejm and Senate , and agreed to support the treaty . Thus both sides agreed to sign the Armistice of Stuhmsdorf ( Sztumska Wieś ) on 12 September 1635 , favourable to the Commonwealth , which regained the Prussian territories , and called for a reduction of the Swedish tolls on the maritime trade . 
 = = = = Politics = = = = 
 In the three months between his election and coronation , Władysław sounded the waters regarding the possibility of a peaceful succession to the Swedish throne , following the recent death of Gustavus Adolphus , but this , as well as his proposal to mediate between Sweden and its enemies , was rejected , primarily by the Swedish chancellor and head of the regency council , Axel Oxenstierna . 
 Władysław IV owed nominal allegiance to the Imperial Habsburgs as a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece . His relationship with the Habsburgs was relatively strong ; although he was not above carrying some negotiations with their enemies , like France , he refused Cardinal Richelieu 's 1635 proposal of an alliance and a full @-@ out war against them , despite potential lure of territorial gains in Silesia . He realized that such a move would cause much unrest in a heavily Catholic Commonwealth , that he likely lacked the authority and power to push such a change of policy through the Sejm , and that the resulting conflict would be very difficult . From 1636 onward , for the next few years , Władysław strengthened his ties with the Habsburgs . 
 In the meantime , Władysław still tried to take a leading role in European politics , and negotiate a peaceful settlement to the Thirty Years ' War , a settlement which he hoped would ease his way into regaining the Swedish crown . Following the armistice of Stuhmsdorf , Władysław came to increasingly realize that his prospects for regaining the Swedish throne were dim . In the years 1636 – 1638 he proposed several reforms to strengthen his and his dynasty 's power in the Commonwealth . His first plan was an attempt to secure a hereditary province within the country , which would not be threatened by the possible power shift following a future royal election ; this , however , did not gain sufficient support in the Sejm . Next , Władysław attempted to create an order of chivalry , similar to the Order of the Golden Fleece , but this plan was scuttled down as well , with the szlachta and the magnates seeing this as an attempt to create a royal , loyalist elite , and traditionally opposing anything that could lead to the reduction of their extensive power . Popular vote and opposition also resulted in the failure of the plan to raise taxes from trade tariffs ; here it was not only the nobility but even the merchants and burghers from towns , like Gdańsk ( Danzig ) who were able to muster enough support ( including from foreign powers ) to stop the king 's reforms . In fact , the defeat of his plans was so total , that he was forced to make certain conciliatory gestures to the nobility , as the Sejm passed several laws constraining his authority ( such as to hire foreign troops ) , further indicating the limits of royal power in the Commonwealth . 
 = = = = Marriages = = = = 
 Early in his reign , there were plans regarding a marriage of Władysław and Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia , Princess Palatine ( daughter of Frederick V , Elector Palatine ) . This was however unpopular , both with Catholic nobles and the Catholic Church , and when it became clear to Władysław that this would not convince the Swedes to elect him to their throne , this plan , with quiet support from Władysław himself , was dropped . 
 Ferdinand II , Holy Roman Emperor 's proposal of marriage between Władysław and Archduchess Cecilia Renata of Austria ( sister of future Ferdinand III , Holy Roman Emperor ) arrived in Warsaw somewhere during spring 1636 . In June that year , Władysław sent Jerzy Ossoliński to the Imperial Court , to work on improving the Imperial @-@ Commonwealth relations . The king 's trusted confessor , father Walerian Magni ( of Franciscan religious order ) , and voivode Kasper <unk> arrived in Regensburg ( Polish : <unk> ) on 26 October 1636 with consent and performed negotiations . The Archduchess ' dowry was agreed for 100 @,@ 000 złoty 's , the Emperor also promised to pay the dowries of both of Siegmund III 's wives : Anna and <unk> . Additionally the son of Władysław and Cecilia Renata was to obtain the duchy of Opole and Racibórz in Silesia ( Duchy of Opole and Racibórz ) . However , before everything was confirmed and signed Ferdinand II died and Ferdinand III backed from giving the Silesian duchy to the son of Władysław . Instead a dowry was awarded to be secured by the Bohemian estates of <unk> ( <unk> ) . On 16 March 1637 a " family alliance " was signed between the Habsburgs and the Polish branch of the House of Vasa . Władysław promised not to sign any pacts against the Habsburgs , and to transfer his rights to the Swedish throne in case of his line 's extinction ; in return , Habsburg promised to support his efforts to regain the Swedish crown , and to transfer to him some territory in case of gains in a war against the Ottomans . The marriage took place in 1637 , on 12 September . 
 The next few years were similarly unsuccessful with regards to his plans . Eventually , he tried to bypass the opposition in the Sejm with secret alliances , dealings , and intrigues , but did not prove successful . Those plans included schemes such as supporting the Holy Roman Emperor 's raid on Inflanty in 1639 , which he hoped would lead to a war ; an attempted alliance with Spain against France in 1640 – 1641 , and in 1641 – 1643 , with Denmark against Sweden . On the international scene , he attempted to mediate between various religious factions of Christianity , using the tolerant image of the Commonwealth to portray himself as the neutral mediator . He organized a conference in Toruń ( Thorn ) that begun on 28 January 1645 , but it failed to reach any meaningful conclusions . 
 After Cecilia 's death in 1644 , the ties between Władysław and the Habsburgs were somewhat loosened . In turn , the relations with France improved , and eventually Władysław married the French princess Ludwika Maria Gonzaga de Nevers , daughter of Karol I Gonzaga , prince de Nevers , in 1646 . 
 Władysław 's last plan was to orchestrate a major war between the European powers and the Ottoman Empire . The border with the Empire was in a near constant state of low @-@ level warfare ; some historians estimate that in the first half of the 17th century , Ottoman raids and wars resulted in the loss ( death or enslavement ) of about 300 @,@ 000 Commonwealth citizens in the borderlands . The war , Władysław hoped , would also solve the problem of unrest among the Cossacks , a militant group living in the Ukraine , near the Ottoman border , who could find worth in such a campaign , and turn their attention to fighting for the Commonwealth , instead of against it . As usual , he failed to inspire the nobility , rarely willing to consider sponsoring another war , to agree to this plan . He received more support from foreign powers , from Rome , Venice and Muscovy . With the promise of funds for the war , Władysław started recruiting troops among the Cossacks in 1646 . The opposition of the Sejm , demanding that he dismiss the troops , coupled with Władysław 's worsening health , crippled that plan as well . Władysław still did not give up , and attempted to resurrect the plan in 1647 , and with support of magnate Jeremi Wiśniowiecki ( who organized military exercises near Ottoman border ) , attempted unsuccessfully to provoke the Ottomans to attack . 
 On 9 August 1647 , his young son , then seven years old , fell suddenly ill and died ; the death of his only legitimate heir to the throne was a major blow to the king , who even did not have the courage to attend the funeral held in Kraków . 
 = = = = Death = = = = 
 While hunting near Merkinė ( <unk> ) in early 1648 , Władysław suffered from a case of gallstone or kidney stone . His condition worsened due to an incorrect medication . He was conscious that those are his final days , and had time to dictate his last will and receive last rites . Władysław died around 2 am on the night from 19 to 20 May 1648 . 
 His heart and viscera were interred in the Chapel of St. Casimir of Vilnius Cathedral . He had no legitimate male heirs . He was succeeded by his half brother John II Casimir Vasa . 
 = = = = Character = = = = 
 Władysław has been described as outgoing and friendly , with a sense of humor , optimistic , a " people 's person " , able to charm many of those who interacted with him . On the other hand , he had a short temper and when angered , could act without considering all consequences . 
 Władysław was criticized for being a spendthrift ; he lived lavishly , spending more than his royal court treasury could afford . He also dispensed much wealth among his courtiers , who were seen by people farther from the court as taking advantage of the king . He has also been known to maintain several mistresses throughout his life , including during his married period . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Władysław had many plans ( dynastic , about wars , territorial gains : regaining Silesia , Inflanty ( Livonia ) , incorporation of Ducal Prussia , creation of his hereditary dukedom etc . ) , some of them with real chances of success , but for various reasons , most of them ended in failure during his 16 @-@ year reign . Though his grand international political plans failed , he did improve the Commonwealth foreign policy , supporting the establishment of a network of permanent diplomatic agents in important European countries . 
 Throughout his life , Władysław successfully defended Poland against foreign invasions . He was recognized as a good tactician and strategist , who did much to modernize the Polish Army . Władysław ensured that the officer corps was significantly large so that the army could be expanded ; introduced foreign ( Western ) infantry to the Polish Army , with its pikes and early firearms , and supported the expansion of the artillery . His attempt to create a Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth Navy resulted in the creation of a new port village , Władysławowo . Despite promising beginnings , Władysław failed to secure enough funds for the fleet creation ; the ships were gone – sunk , or stolen – by the 1640s . 
 The king , while Catholic , was very tolerant and did not support the more aggressive policies of the Counter @-@ Reformation . When he took power , the Senate of Poland had 6 Protestant members ; at the time of his death , it had 11 . Despite his support for religious tolerance , he did fail , however , to resolve the conflict stemming from the Union of Brest split . Despite his support for the Protestants , he did not stop the growing tide of intolerance , either in Poland or abroad , as shown by the fate of the <unk> Academy , or an international disagreement between the faiths . Neither did he get involved with the disagreement about the Orthodox Cossacks , a group that he respected and counted on in his plans . 
 In internal politics he attempted to strengthen the power of the monarchy , but this was mostly thwarted by the szlachta , who valued their independence and democratic powers . Władysław suffered continuing difficulties caused by the efforts of the Polish Sejm ( parliament ) to check the King 's power and limit his dynastic ambitions . Władysław was fed up with the weak position of the king in the Commonwealth ; his politics included attempting to secure a small , preferably hereditary territory – like a duchy – where his position would be much stronger . 
 Władysław used the title of the King of Sweden , although he had no control over Sweden whatsoever and never set foot in that country . However , he continued his attempts to regain the Swedish throne , with similar lack of results as his father . He might have been willing to trade his claim away , but the offer was never put down in the negotiations . 
 Some historians see Władysław as a dreamer who could not stick to one policy , and upon running into first difficulties , ditched it and looked for another opportunity . Perhaps it was due to this <unk> that Władysław was never able to inspire those he ruled to support , at least in any significant manner , any of his plans . Władysław Czapliński in his biography of the king is more understanding , noting the short period of his reign ( 16 years ) and the weakness of the royal position he was forced to deal with . 
 Several years after his death , a diplomatic mission from Muscovy demanded that publications about Władysław 's victories in the Smolensk War of 1633 – 1634 be collected and burned . Eventually , to much controversy , their demand was met . Polish historian Maciej <unk> noted : " under the reign of Władysław IV , such a shameful event would have never been allowed . " 
 = = = Patronage = = = 
 One of the king 's most substantial achievements was in the cultural sphere ; he became a notable patron of the arts . Władysław was a connoisseur of the arts , in particular , theater and music . He spoke several languages , enjoyed reading historical literature and poetry . He collected paintings and created a notable gallery of paintings in the Warsaw castle . Władysław assembled an important collection of Italian and Flemish Baroque paintings , much of which were lost in the wars after his death . He sponsored many musicians and in 1637 created the first amphitheater in the palace , the first theater in Poland , where during his reign dozens of operas and ballets were performed . He is credited with bringing the very genre of opera to Poland . Władysław 's attention to theater contributed to the spread of this art form in Poland . He was also interested in poetry , as well as in cartography and historical and scientific works ; he corresponded with Galileo . 
 Notable painters and engravers Władysław supported and who attended his royal court included Peter Paul Rubens , Tommaso <unk> Peter <unk> de <unk> , Wilhelm Hondius , <unk> Strobel , and Christian <unk> . His royal orchestra was headed by <unk> Marco Scacchi , seconded by <unk> <unk> . 
 One of the most renowned works he ordered was the raising of the Sigismund 's Column in Warsaw . The column , dedicated to his father , was designed by the Italian @-@ born architect Constantino <unk> and the sculptor Clemente <unk> , and cast by Daniel <unk> . He was less interested in decorative architecture ; he supported the construction of two palaces in Warsaw – Kazanowski Palace and Villa Regia . Among other works sponsored by or dedicated to him is Guido Reni 's The Rape of Europa . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Fund accounting = 
 Fund accounting is an accounting system emphasizing accountability rather than profitability , used by non @-@ profit organizations and governments . In this system , a fund is a self @-@ balancing set of accounts , segregated for specific purposes in accordance with laws and regulations or special restrictions and limitations . 
 The label , fund accounting , has also been applied to investment accounting , portfolio accounting or securities accounting – all synonyms describing the process of accounting for a portfolio of investments such as securities , commodities and / or real estate held in an investment fund such as a mutual fund or hedge fund . Investment accounting , however , is a different system , unrelated to government and nonprofit fund accounting . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Nonprofit organizations and government agencies have special requirements to show , in financial statements and reports , how money is spent , rather than how much profit was earned . Unlike profit oriented businesses , which use a single set of self @-@ balancing accounts ( or general ledger ) , nonprofits can have more than one general ledger ( or fund ) , depending on their financial reporting requirements . An accountant for such an entity must be able to produce reports detailing the expenditures and revenues for each of the organization 's individual funds , and reports that summarize the organization 's financial activities across all of its funds . 
 A school system , for example , receives a grant from the state to support a new special education initiative , another grant from the federal government for a school lunch program , and an annuity to award teachers working on research projects . At periodic intervals , the school system issues a report to the state about the special education program , a report to a federal agency about the school lunch program , and a report to another authority about the research program . Each of these programs has its own unique reporting requirements , so the school system needs a method to separately identify the related revenues and expenditures . This is done by establishing separate funds , each with its own chart of accounts . 
 = = State and local government funds = = 
 State and local governments use three broad categories of funds : governmental funds , proprietary funds and fiduciary funds . 
 Governmental funds include the following . 
 General fund . This fund is used to account for general operations and activities not requiring the use of other funds . 
 Special revenue ( or special ) funds are required to account for the use of revenue earmarked by law for a particular purpose . State and federal fuel tax revenues require special revenue funds , because federal and state laws restrict these taxes to transportation uses . 
 Capital projects funds are used to account for the construction or acquisition of fixed assets , such as buildings , equipment and roads . Depending on its use , a fixed asset may instead be financed by a special revenue fund or a proprietary fund . A capital project fund exists only until completion of the project . Fixed assets acquired and long @-@ term debts incurred by a capital project are assigned to the government 's General Fixed Assets and Long @-@ Term Debts . 
 Debt service funds are used to account for money that will be used to pay the interest and principal of long @-@ term debts . Bonds used by a government to finance major construction projects , to be paid by tax levies over a period of years , require a debt service fund to account for their repayment . The debts of permanent and proprietary funds are serviced within those funds , rather than by a separate debt service fund . 
 Permanent funds should be used to report resources that are legally restricted to the extent that only earnings , and not principal , may be used for purposes that support the reporting government ’ s programs — that is , for the benefit of the government or its citizenry . 
 Proprietary funds include the following . 
 Internal service funds are used for operations serving other funds or departments within a government on a cost @-@ reimbursement basis . A printing shop , which takes orders for booklets and forms from other offices and is reimbursed for the cost of each order , would be a suitable application for an internal service fund . 
 Enterprise funds are used for services provided to the public on a user charge basis , similar to the operation of a commercial enterprise . Water and sewage utilities are common examples of government enterprises . 
 <unk> funds are used to account for assets held in trust by the government for the benefit of individuals or other entities . The employee pension fund , created by the State of Maryland to provide retirement benefits for its employees , is an example of a fiduciary fund . Financial statements may further distinguish fiduciary funds as either trust or agency funds ; a trust fund generally exists for a longer period of time than an agency fund . 
 = = = Fixed assets and long @-@ term debts = = = 
 State and local governments have two other groups of self @-@ balancing accounts which are not considered funds : general fixed assets and general long @-@ term debts . These assets and liabilities belong to the government entity as a whole , rather than any specific fund . Although general fixed assets would be part of government @-@ wide financial statements ( reporting the entity as a whole ) , they are not reported in governmental fund statements . Fixed assets and long @-@ term liabilities assigned to a specific enterprise fund are referred to as fund fixed assets and fund long @-@ term liabilities . 
 = = = Basis of accounting = = = 
 The accrual basis of accounting used by most businesses requires revenue to be recognized when it is earned and expenses to be recognized when the related benefit is received . Revenues may actually be received during a later period , while expenses may be paid during an earlier or later period . ( Cash basis accounting , used by some small businesses , recognizes revenue when received and expenses when paid . ) 
 Governmental funds , which are not concerned about profitability , usually rely on a modified accrual basis . This involves recognizing revenue when it becomes both available and measurable , rather than when it is earned . Expenditures , a term preferred over expenses for modified accrual accounting , are recognized when the related liability is incurred . 
 Proprietary funds , used for business @-@ like activities , usually operate on an accrual basis . Governmental accountants sometimes refer to the accrual basis as " full accrual " to distinguish it from modified accrual basis accounting . 
 The accounting basis applied to fiduciary funds depends upon the needs of a specific fund . If the trust involves a business @-@ like operation , accrual basis accounting would be appropriate to show the fund 's profitability . <unk> basis is also appropriate for trust funds using interest and dividends from invested principle amounts to pay for supported programs , because the profitability of those investments would be important . 
 = = = Financial reporting = = = 
 State and local governments report the results of their annual operations in a comprehensive annual financial report ( CAFR ) , the equivalent of a business 's financial statements . A CAFR includes a single set of government @-@ wide statements , for the government entity as a whole , and individual fund statements . The Governmental Accounting Standards Board establishes standards for CAFR preparation . 
 Governments do not use the terms profit and loss to describe the net results of their operations . The difference between revenues and expenditures during a year is either a surplus or a deficit . Since making a profit is not the purpose of a government , a significant surplus generally means a choice between tax cuts or spending increases . A significant deficit will result in spending cuts or borrowing . Ideally , surpluses and deficits should be small . 
 = = Federal government funds = = 
 Federal government accounting uses two broad groups of funds : the federal funds group and the trust funds group . 
 = = = Federal funds group = = = 
 General fund . Technically , there is just one general fund , under the control of the United States Treasury Department . However , each federal agency maintains its own self @-@ balancing set of accounts . The general fund is used to account for receipts and payments that do not belong to another fund . 
 Special funds are similar to the special revenue funds used by state and local governments , earmarked for a specific purpose ( other than business @-@ like activities ) . 
 Revolving funds are similar to the Proprietary funds used by state and local governments for business @-@ like activities . The term , revolving , means that it conducts a continuing cycle of activity . There are two types of revolving funds in the Federal Funds Group : public enterprise funds and <unk> revolving <unk> enterprise funds are similar to the enterprise funds used by state and local governments for business @-@ like activities conducted primarily with the public . The Postal Service Fund is an example of a public enterprise fund . 
 <unk> revolving funds are similar to the internal service funds used by state and local governments for business @-@ like activities conducted within the federal government . 
 = = = Trust funds group = = = 
 Trust funds are earmarked for specific programs and purposes in accordance with a statute that designates the fund as a trust . Its statutory designation distinguishes the fund as a trust rather than a special fund . The Highway Trust Fund is an example of trust funds . 
 Trust Revolving Funds are business @-@ like activities , designated by statute as trust funds . They are , otherwise , identical to public enterprise revolving funds . 
 Deposit funds are similar to the agency funds used by state and local governments for assets belonging to individuals and other entities , held temporarily by the government . State income taxes withheld from a federal government employee 's pay , not yet paid to the state , are an example of deposit funds . 
 = = = Accounting basis and financial reporting = = = 
 The United States government uses accrual basis accounting for all of its funds . Its consolidated annual financial report uses two indicators to measure financial health : unified budget deficit and net operating ( cost ) / revenue . 
 The unified budget deficit , a cash @-@ basis measurement , is the equivalent of a checkbook balance . This indicator does not consider long @-@ term consequences , but has historically been the focus of budget reporting by the media . Except for the unified budget deficit , the federal government 's financial statements rely on accrual basis accounting . 
 Net operating ( cost ) / revenue , an accrual basis measurement , is calculated in the " Statements of Operations and Changes in Net Position " by comparing revenues with costs . The federal government 's net operating ( cost ) / revenue is comparable with the net income / ( loss ) reported on an income statement by a business , or the surplus / ( deficit ) reported by state and local governments . 
 = = Nonprofit organizations = = 
 Nonprofit organizations generally use the following five categories of funds . 
 Current fund – unrestricted . This fund is used to account for current assets that can be used at the discretion of the organization 's governing board . 
 Current funds – restricted use current assets subject to restrictions assigned by donors or <unk> . 
 Land , building and equipment fund . Cash and investments reserved specifically to acquire these assets , and related liabilities , should also be recorded in this fund . 
 Endowment funds are used to account for the principal amount of gifts the organization is required , by agreement with the donor , to maintain intact in perpetuity or until a specific future date or event . 
 Custodian funds are held and disbursed according to the donor 's instructions . 
 = = = Basis of accounting and financial reporting = = = 
 The Report of Consolidated Financial Statements , used for annual financial reporting by nonprofit organizations , is similar to the CAFR used by state and local governments . However , nonprofit organizations use accrual basis accounting for their funds . A nonprofit 's financial statements generally include the following . 
 Statement of financial position or balance sheet . Similar to the balance sheet of a business , this statement lists the value of assets held and debts owed by the organization at the end of the reporting period . 
 Statement of activities or statement of support , revenue and expenses . This statement resembles the income statement of a business , but uses the terms excess or deficit rather than profit or loss . It shows the net results , by each fund , of the organization 's activities during the fiscal year reported . The excess or deficit is applied as a change in fund balances , rather than an increase or decrease in owner 's equity . 
 Statement of functional expenses distributes each expense of the organization into amounts related to the organization 's various functions . These functions are segregated into two broad categories : program services and supporting services . Program services are the mission @-@ related activities performed by the organization . Non @-@ program supporting services include the costs of fund @-@ raising events , management and general administration . 
 Statement of Cash Flows identifies the sources of cash flowing into the organization and the uses of cash flowing out during the reported fiscal year . 
 Standards for nonprofit financial statements are set by the Financial Accounting Standards Board . The Board 's most recent proposal , announced to the public on April 22 , 2015 , could establish new standards for financial performance and liquidity information available to donors and lenders . 
 = = Fund accounting fiscal cycle ( fictitious example ) = = 
 The following is a simplified example of the fiscal cycle for the general fund of the City of Tuscany , a fictitious city government . 
 = = = Opening entries = = = 
 The fiscal cycle begins with the approval of a budget by the mayor and city council of the City of Tuscany . For Fiscal Year 2009 , which began on July 1 , 2008 , the Mayor 's Office estimated general fund revenues of $ 35 million from property taxes , state grants , parking fines and other sources . The estimate was recorded in the fund 's general ledger with a debit to Estimated Revenues and a credit to Fund Balance . 
 An appropriation was approved by the city council , authorizing the city to spend $ 34 million from the general fund . The appropriation was recorded in fund 's general ledger with a debit to Fund Balance and a credit to Appropriations . 
 In subsidiary ledgers , the appropriation would be divided into smaller amounts authorized for various departments and programs , such as : 
 The complexity of an appropriation depends upon the city council 's preferences ; real @-@ world appropriations can list hundreds of line item amounts . An appropriation is the legal authority for spending given by the city council to the various agencies of the city government . In the example above , the city can spend as much as $ 34 million , but smaller appropriation limits have also been established for individual programs and departments . 
 = = = Recording revenues = = = 
 During Fiscal Year 2009 , the city assessed property owners a total of $ 37 million for property taxes . However , the Mayor 's Office expects $ 1 million of this assessment to be difficult or impossible to collect . Revenues of $ 36 million were recognized , because this portion of the assessment was available and measurable within the current period . 
 = = = Payroll expenditures = = = 
 The city spent a total of $ 30 million on its employee payroll , including various taxes , benefits and employee withholding . A portion of the payroll taxes will be paid in the next fiscal period , but modified accrual accounting requires the expenditure to be recorded during the period the liability was incurred . 
 = = = Other expenditures = = = 
 The Public Works Department spent $ 1 million on supplies and services for maintaining city streets . 
 = = = Closing entries = = = 
 At the end of the fiscal year , the actual revenues of $ 36 million were compared with the estimate of $ 35 million . The $ 1 million difference was recorded as a credit to the fund balance . 
 The city spent $ 31 million of its $ 34 million appropriation . A credit of $ 3 million was applied to the fund balance for the unspent amount . 
 When the current fiscal period ended , its appropriation expired . The balance remaining in the general fund at that time is considered unexpended . City government agencies are not allowed to spend the unexpended balance , even if their expenditures during the now @-@ ended fiscal period were less than their share of the expired appropriation . A new appropriation is necessary to authorize spending in the next fiscal period . ( Liabilities incurred at the end of the fiscal period for goods and services ordered , but not yet received , are usually considered expended , allowing payment at a later date under the current appropriation . Some jurisdictions , however , require the amounts to be included in the following period 's budget . ) 
 Instead of re @-@ applying the unspent balance from the general fund to the same programs , the city council may choose to spend the money on other programs . Alternatively , they may use the balance to cut taxes or pay off a long @-@ term debt . With a large surplus , reducing the tax burden will normally be the preferred choice . 
 = Without ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Without " is the second episode of the eighth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States and Canada on November 12 , 2000 on Fox and subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on February 18 , 2001 . It was written by executive producer Chris Carter and directed by Kim Manners . The episode helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology and continues from the seventh season finale , " Requiem " , and season eight premiere , " Within " , in which Fox Mulder was abducted by aliens who are planning to colonize Earth . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 0 in the United States and was seen by 15 @.@ 1 million viewers . As with the previous episode , " Within , " it was generally well received by critics , although some detractors criticized various plot points . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) continues his search for Mulder , and attempts to uncover an alien bounty hunter within their ranks . After the task force is called off , Scully is surprised to learn that Doggett , the leader of the team , has been assigned to the X @-@ Files . 
 " Without " heavily featured elements of Mulder 's abduction by aliens , and as such , new sets were designed to create the alien ship Mulder was imprisoned in . The production crew of The X @-@ Files designed the set in a decidedly " low @-@ tech " and " interesting " manner . In addition , unusual filming techniques were used , such as special lenses and motion control , in order to achieve the desired footage . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is currently missing , having been abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem . " His partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) has been working with Agent John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) in order to locate him . After consulting with The Lone Gunmen , a trio of conspiracy theorists made up of John Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) , Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) and Richard Langly ( Dean Haglund ) , Scully finds evidence that Mulder may be in Arizona . Doggett receives news that Gibson Praise ( Jeff Gulka ) , a boy with potentially extraterrestrial DNA , may be in hiding in Arizona as well . The two , along with Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and a task force of FBI agents arrive and , after searching , find Mulder and Praise on the corner of a mountain . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 As the episode begins , " Mulder " and Gibson Praise are cornered at the edge of a mountain by pursuing agent John Doggett . Suddenly , " Mulder " walks off the edge of the cliff and appears to fall to his death ; however , when the FBI agents are sent down to retrieve his body , they find that it has disappeared . Dana Scully realizes that what appeared to be her partner was actually an Alien Bounty Hunter sent to retrieve Praise . The Bounty Hunter , who has returned to the school , continues his search for Praise . Meanwhile , Scully follows a girl , Thea ( Christine <unk> ) , she had previously observed to be Praise 's friend throughout the desert until she is able to locate Praise . After Doggett explains the events on the clifftop to Alvin Kersh , Walter Skinner tells him that Kersh is setting him up to fail . Shortly afterwards , the Bounty Hunter ( now disguised as agent Scully ) attacks Agent Landau . Skinner and the real Scully eventually manage to drive the alien away . 
 After Skinner and Scully find and retrieve Praise , Skinner takes him to the nearest hospital , where his friend Thea visits him , closing the door behind her . In search for Mulder in the desert , Scully sees a bright light in the sky which she thinks is a spaceship , but is later revealed to be a helicopter . The helicopter lands and Doggett insists Scully travel with him to the hospital ; she reluctantly accepts . At the hospital , two other FBI agents assure the two agents that nothing has happened to Praise ; however , they soon discover that he has vanished . Scully leaves to search for Praise , while Doggett stays in an attempt to catch the intruder . He checks the ceiling space , where he finds Skinner badly injured . Meanwhile , Scully finds Praise , along with Skinner , who claims to be protecting the boy . Skinner , who is actually the Alien Bounty Hunter , attempts to kill her but Scully grabs her gun and shoots him in the neck , killing the Bounty Hunter . After Doggett reports the case to Kersh , he is assigned to the X @-@ File division with Scully . The episode ends showing Mulder still held in captivity as six Alien Bounty Hunters look on . 
 = = Production = = 
 Fox Mulder 's abduction was devised by Chris Carter towards the end of seventh season as a way of allowing the actor to leave the series . Duchovny fulfilled his contractual obligations after the seventh season and felt that there was not much else to do with the character following the previous seven years . 
 Production designer Cory Kaplan explains how she was attracted to the idea of using primitive materials when she states , " We all see super @-@ tech now , but the idea of low @-@ tech was much more interesting to me , much more visual . So , you take elements of rock and steel and chisel them into interesting shapes . " She also describes the creation of the set by stating , " I found the backdrop from Alien , and Bill Roe lit it very dimly and put it behind . And it was just this rotating platform with this humongous dental piece that could rotate around as well and pull his face apart . " According to Makeup Supervisor Cheri <unk> @-@ Medcalf , Matthew Mungle helped in the creation of the alien torture machine by making the cheeks and putting the hooks in . The makeup supervisor adds that the hooks would actually stretch out and that David Duchovny " sat pretty good through all that . " 
 Unusual filming techniques were also used . Visual Effects Supervisor John Wash recalls , " We devised a laser effect where a device is going into his mouth and some other weird lens effects that were going over the scene to give it an alien , other @-@ world @-@ like quality . " On the subject of using not only a <unk> minuscule method of filming but also additional sound effects , supervising producer Paul Rabwin recounts , " I had to set up a very , very highly magnified lens to try to get this little device coming right at us . It was very , very scary . We ended up putting some really cool sound effects in there , little servos and motors . " 
 The sequence in which multiple Alien Bounty Hunters appear involved the use of motion control , a method in which a motion @-@ control camera on a computerized module is repeatedly run through the same motion while elements are continually added . The shot , according to John Wash , was one of the few times in the series in which the production crew was able to use motion control and therefore presented a slight challenge . In the filming of the sequence , both a blank plate , for just the set , and lighting elements , that were in the set , were shot before the production crew filmed five different passes , each one with the Alien Bounty Hunter in a different position . The production crew were finally able to clone the Bounty Hunter by blending all the passes together . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Without " premiered on American television on November 12 , 2000 on Fox . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 0 , meaning that it was seen by 9 @.@ 0 % of the nation 's estimated households , and was viewed by 9 @.@ 07 million households , and 15 @.@ 1 million viewers . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Once in a great while a story takes a turn that you never expect ... Tonight this is one of them . " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 The episode was met with relatively positive reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five . The two praised the episode 's plot , citing the abduction and search for Mulder as components to the arcs " brilliance " . Shearman and Pearson noted that the final scene , featuring Mulder surrounded by the alien bounty hunter was created with " beauty , emotion , and horror which in collision make The X @-@ Files one of the best shows on TV . " 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club wrote that both " Without " and " Within " form " a great way to pick up after the cliffhanger ending of the previous season " and that " the pair of episodes [ ... ] work well as an introduction to the new narrative status quo . " He awarded both entries a " B + " but noted , however , that " Without " nearly came across as " strained or stalling " , but " manages to get by with the general freakiness of the alien bounty hunter " . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode a rare " A + " . The previous episode , " Within " , also received an " A + " grade , making them the only two episodes of The X @-@ Files to receive this rating from the site . 
 Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly was positive towards both this episode and the season premiere , " Within , " awarding the episodes an " A- " . George Avalos and Michael Liedtke from the Contra Costa Times praised the episode and noted that the Scully / <unk> dynamic and the hunt for Fox Mulder worked towards the show 's strengths . Tom <unk> from Space.com positively commented on Scully 's conversion from skeptic to believer , writing , " Regardless of whether it 's aliens , <unk> , or pizza delivering vampires , The X @-@ Files is all about phenomena that don 't stand in the face of ' rational ' explanations . It took her a long time , but like Mulder before her , Scully eventually came to accept that there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in her philosophy . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a more mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris criticized both Scully becoming the believer as well as the " sky turning out to be a helicopter gimmick " , which she notes " has gotten way too old . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations wrote a relatively negative review of the episode . He noted , " All [ ' Without ' ] did was remind me why the show is a hollow shell of what it once was as long as Fox Mulder is strapped to an alien table and why The Doggett and Pony Show holds absolutely no appeal to me whatsoever . " 
 = The Portopia Serial Murder Case = 
 Portopia Renzoku Satsujin Jiken ( <unk> , literally The Portopia Serial Murder Incident ) , also known as The Portopia Serial Murder Case , is an adventure game designed by Yuji Horii and published by Enix ( now Square Enix ) . It was first released on the NEC PC @-@ 6001 in June 1983 , and later ported to other personal computers . Chunsoft ported the game to the Family Computer ( or Famicom ) , the Japanese version of the Nintendo Entertainment System ( or NES ) , on November 29 , 1985 , and to different mobile phone services starting in 2001 . It is the first part of the Yuuji Horii Mysteries trilogy , along with its successors Hokkaido Chain Murder : The Disappearance of <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Rensa Satsujin : <unk> ni Kiyu , 1984 ) and The Karuizawa Kidnapping Guide ( <unk> , Karuizawa <unk> Annai , 1985 ) . 
 The game is an investigation adventure , sophisticated for its time , in which the player must resolve a murder mystery by searching for clues , exploring different areas , interacting with characters , and solving item @-@ based puzzles . The game , especially its Famicom version , was received positively in Japan , where it was an influential title that defined the visual novel genre . An unofficial English fan translation of the Famicom version was released on June 16 , 2006 by DvD Translations . DvD Translations released an improved Rev. B patch on October 31 , 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Portopia Renzoku Satsujin Jiken follows a first @-@ person perspective and narrative . The various events are described with still pictures and text messages . The player interacts with the game using a verb @-@ noun parser which requires typing precise commands with the keyboard . Finding the exact words to type is considered part of the riddles that must be solved . While sound effects are present , the game lacks music and a save function . It features a branching dialogue conversation system where the story develops through entering commands and receiving answers to them from the player 's sidekick or non @-@ player characters . 
 The game allows multiple different ways to achieve objectives , adding an element of nonlinear gameplay . This included travelling between different areas in a generally open world and making choices that determine the dialogues and order of events as well as alternative outcomes depending on who the player identifies as the culprit . However , only one of the characters is the true culprit , while the others are red herrings ; if the player closes the case with the wrong culprit , then the player will face criticism from the police chief and need to re @-@ open the case . The game includes a phone that could be used to manually dial any number , which is needed to contact several non @-@ player characters . The game also features an inventory system requiring the examination and collection of items , which could be used as evidence later in the game . 
 With no keyboard , the Famicom version replaces the verb @-@ noun parser with a menu list of fourteen set commands selectable with the gamepad . This is similar to the command selection menu system introduced in Yuji Horii 's murder mystery adventure game Okhotsk ni Kiyu : Hokkaido Rensa Satsujin Jiken , which was released in 1984 , in between the PC and Famicom releases of Portopia . One of the commands on the menu allowed the player to use the D @-@ pad to move a cursor on the screen in order to look for clues and hotspots , similar to a point @-@ and @-@ click interface . The Famicom version of Portopia also features branching menu selections , which includes using the pointer as a magnifying glass to investigate objects , which is needed to find hidden clues , and as a fist or hammer to hit anything or anyone , which could be used to carry out interrogation beatings on suspects . Additional sequences were also added , notably an underground dungeon maze reportedly influenced by Wizardry , giving those sequences a style similar to role @-@ playing video games . 
 = = Setting and characters = = 
 Although the story of the game is fictional , it is set in real Japanese cities ; mainly Kobe , in addition to a few sequences in Kyoto and <unk> . The president of a successful bank company , Kouzou Yamakawa ( <unk> ) , is found dead by his secretary Fumie Sawaki ( <unk> <unk> ) inside a locked room in his mansion . Signs seem to indicate that Kouzou stabbed himself ; however , the police sends a detective to investigate further . 
 The detective in charge of the case is an unnamed , unseen , and silent protagonist who essentially embodies the player . He works with an assistant named Yasuhiko Mano ( <unk> ) , nicknamed <unk> ( <unk> ) , who is the one who actually speaks and executes most of the player 's commands . Other characters include , among others , Yukiko ( <unk> ) , daughter of a man named Hirata ( <unk> ) ; and Toshiyuki ( <unk> ) , Kouzou 's nephew and heir . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was conceived by Yuji Horii around 1981 , when he was 27 years old , shortly after he bought his first computer and learned to program with it by modifying other games . During this time , he read a PC magazine article about a computer game genre called adventure games in the United States . Horii noticed the lack of such games in the Japanese market and decided to create an adventure game of his own , one that was " a program in which the story would develop through entering a command and by receiving an answer to it . " The game was developed using the BASIC programming language . 
 Following its 1983 release , the game was ported to various Japanese personal computers . A Famicom port was then released in 1985 and was the first adventure game to be released on that platform . The Famicom version was also the first collaboration between Yuuji Horii and Koichi Nakamura of Chunsoft , before Dragon Quest . The Famicom version was programmed by Nakamura , who was 19 years old at the time . The game was never released in the Western world , largely due to its mature content , involving themes such as murder , suicide , fraud , bankruptcy , interrogation beatings , drug dealings , and a strip club . The lack of a Western release prompted ROM hacking group DvD Translations to develop an unofficial translation of the Famicom version . 
 The first mobile phone version of the game was branded as a part of a Horii Yūji Gekijō ( <unk> , " Yūji Horii Theater " ) trilogy along with mobile versions of Hokkaido Rensa Satsujin Okhotsk ni Kiyu and Karuizawa <unk> Annai . It was released in 2003 on EZweb and Yahoo ! Keitai services . It features a list of set commands similar to the Famicom version but also improved graphics , no free @-@ moving cursor , and a save function . The games of the trilogy , which was retitled Yuuji Horii Mysteries ( <unk> ) , were re @-@ released in 2005 and 2006 on the same services . The second Portopia version possesses the same content as the first mobile one , in addition to updated graphics , background music , a bonus function obtained after completing the game , and a hint option which nullifies the ending bonus if it is used too frequently . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Famicom version of the game sold 700 @,@ 000 copies . The game was well received in Japan for allowing multiple ways to achieve objectives , its well @-@ told storyline , and its surprising twist ending . The Japanese press described it as " a game without game over " because " there was technically no way to lose . " According to Square Enix , it was " the first real detective adventure " game . The game , along with Super Mario Bros. , inspired Hideo Kojima ( creator of the Metal Gear series ) to enter the video game industry . He praised Portopia for its mystery , drama , humor , 3D dungeons , for providing a proper background and explanation behind the murderer 's motives , and expanding the potential of video games . 
 In 2003 , Portopia Renzoku Satsujin Jiken ranked 19th in a poll to determine the thirty best Famicom games ; the poll was conducted by the Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography as part of its " Level X " exhibition . The English @-@ language webzine <unk> Times Monthly compared the game to the later @-@ released <unk> where the player must examine and collect objects and find their true purpose later on , and recommended Portopia to fans of " slower paced games that require [ players ] to think through puzzles " . John Szczepaniak of Retro Gamer called the game simple , but praised its pacing and quality of writing , and considers the gameplay and plot to be sophisticated for its time . He also considers it " one of the most influential games " as it was responsible for defining the visual novel genre , comparing it to the role of Super Mario Bros. , Tetris and Street Fighter in defining their own respective genres ( platform game , puzzle game , and fighting game , respectively ) . He noted that it contains elements found in later titles such as Dragon Quest , Snatcher , Déjà Vu , 428 : <unk> <unk> Shibuya de , and 999 : Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors . 1UP also noted that Portopia is very similar to <unk> Simulations ' Déjà Vu released several years later and that Horii 's own seminal console role @-@ playing game Dragon Warrior used storytelling techniques and a menu @-@ based command system very similar to Portopia . Nintendo 's successful Famicom Detective Club series of adventure games were also inspired by Portopia . 
 = Flag of Lithuania = 
 The flag of Lithuania consists of a horizontal tricolor of yellow , green and red . It was re @-@ adopted on March 20 , 1989 , almost two years before the re @-@ establishment of Lithuania 's independence and more than three years before the collapse of the Soviet Union . 
 It was first used in Lithuania 's first period of independence ( in the 20th century ) from 1918 to 1940 , which ceased with the occupation first by Soviet Russia and Lithuania 's illegal annexation into the Soviet Union , and then by Nazi Germany ( 1941 – 44 ) . During the post @-@ WW2 Soviet occupation , from 1945 until 1989 , the Soviet Lithuanian flag consisted first of a generic red Soviet flag with the name of the republic , then changed to the red flag with white and green bars at the bottom . The last alteration to the current flag occurred in 2004 when the aspect ratio changed from 1 : 2 to 3 : 5 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Historical state flag = = = 
 The earliest known flags with a Lithuanian identity were recorded in the 15th @-@ century <unk> <unk> , written by Jan Długosz . At the Battle of Grunwald in 1410 , two distinct flags were present . The majority of the 40 regiments carried a red banner depicting a mounted knight in pursuit . This flag , known as the Vytis , would eventually be used as the Lithuanian war flag , and again in 2004 as the state flag . The remainder of the regiments carried a red banner displaying the Columns of Gediminas . Those that bore the Vytis , also known as the Pahonia , were armies from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , while those who bore the Columns of Gediminas were from noble families of Lithuania . Until the end of the 18th century , when it was annexed by the Russian Empire , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania used the Vytis as its flag . 
 = = = Creation of modern flag = = = 
 The birth of the yellow , green , and red tricolor occurred during a drive by other European republics to change their flags . One example that gave life to the idea of the tricolor was the French blue , white and red flag adopted after the French Revolution . The only tricolor that existed for Lithuania before the yellow , green and red flag was a green , white and red flag used to represent Lithuania Minor . 
 It is not known who originally suggested the yellow , green and red , but the idea is usually attributed to Lithuanian exiles living elsewhere in Europe or in the United States during the 19th century . These three colors were frequently used in folk <unk> and traditional dress . At the Great Seimas of Vilnius of 1905 , this flag was favored over the Vytis banner as the flag of the Lithuanian nation . The Vytis , strongly advocated by Jonas Basanavičius , was not chosen for three reasons : the first was that as part of the drive for national identity , the Seimas wished to distance itself somewhat from the flag of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , which also encompassed now @-@ distinct nations such as Belarus , and Ukraine . The second issue was the choice of the color red by revolutionaries who aligned themselves with Marxist or Communist causes . And finally , the flag with Vytis would be too complicated and could not be easily sewn . 
 Debates about the national flag occurred again in 1917 during the Vilnius Conference . Two colors , green and red , were chosen based on their prevalence in folk art . Artist Antanas <unk> decorated the conference hall with small red and green flags . However , the delegates did not like the design as it was too dark and gloomy . Then <unk> <unk> suggested adding a narrow strip of yellow ( to symbolize the rising sun ) in between the red ( clouds lit up by the morning sun ) and green ( fields and forests ) . However , the delegates decided that the matter should be settled by a special commission , composed of Basanavičius , <unk> , and <unk> . On April 19 , 1918 , they submitted their final protocol to the Council of Lithuania . The flag was supposed to be a tri @-@ color ( yellow at the top , green in the middle , and red at the bottom ) with Vytis in the upper left corner or in the middle . The Council accepted the proposal , but the 1922 Constitution of Lithuania did not include any mention of the coat of arms . It adopted the national flag that is used today . Any of the debates failed to produce a historical flag . Discussions of the national flag continued ; its opponents considered gold an inappropriate color , since the combination of yellow , green and red did not follow the existing rules of heraldry . However , no changes were made during the inter @-@ war period . 
 = = = Soviet period = = = 
 During World War II , Lithuania was occupied by the Soviet Union ( 1940 – 1941 , 1944 – 1990 ) and Nazi Germany ( 1941 – 1944 ) . The use of the national flag during this period was prohibited and prosecuted . Two flags were used during the period of Soviet occupation ( 1944 – 1989 ) : immediately after the war , the flag consisted of a red field , golden hammer and sickle with the Latin characters <unk> TSR ( Lithuanian SSR in the Lithuanian language ) above them in gold sans @-@ serif lettering . That flag was replaced in 1953 by the last flag used by the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic — a red flag , with the hammer and sickle and star in the hoist . At the bottom of the flag , a white and green horizontal bar was placed . The red portion of the flag took 8 / 12 of the flag 's width , the white 1 / 12 and the green 3 / 12 
 = = = Restoration of modern flag = = = 
 During 1988 , when the Lithuanian movement towards independence was gaining strength , the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet again recognized the tricolor as the national flag , by amending article 168 of the Constitution ( Fundamental Law ) of the Lithuanian SSR . The flag was defined as rectangular tricolor which consists of three equally sized horizontal stripes : the upper is yellow , the middle is green , the lower is red ; the flag ratio was to be 1 : 2 ( as that of Soviet flags ) . This flag was confirmed by the Provisional Constitution of 11 March 1990 № I @-@ 10 . 
 After independence from the Soviet Union , the tricolor flag was written into the new Constitution of Lithuania , which was adopted by a referendum in 1992 . This constitution has not specified the flag aspect ratio and therefore it has remained 1 : 2 until 2004 , when 1991 law " On the national flag and other flags " was revised by 8 July 2004 law № IX @-@ <unk> , making flag ratio 3 : 5 . 
 = = Design and symbolism = = 
 Passed on June 26 , 1991 , the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on the Lithuanian State Flag governs the design , sizes and use of the state flag . The law was last amended on July 8 , 2004 , with the most notable changes including the switching of the national flag ratio from 1 : 2 to 3 : 5 and the official adoption of a historical flag as the state ( government ) flag . The amendment came into force on September 1 , 2004 , after it was approved by President Valdas Adamkus . 
 The yellow in the flag is meant to symbolize the sun and prosperity , the green is for the forests , the countryside , liberty , and hope , and the red represents the blood and bravery of those who have died for Lithuania . The proper colors of both the national and state flag are made according to the Pantone Matching System , specifically Pantone textile @-@ paper ( TP ) . The ratio of both the national and state flag must be 3 : 5 , with the standard flag size to be 1 meter by 1 @.@ 7 meters . Different sizes of the flag can be created , but they must conform to the color codes and ratio requirements set in the law . The official Pantone colors have been published since 2004 ; the list below shows the official colors and their suggested equivalents : 
 = = State ( historical ) flag = = 
 In 2004 , along with the law authorizing the change of the flag ratio , a state flag was adopted . This flag displays the national emblem in a banner form . The ratio of the flag is the same as that of the national flag , i.e. 3 : 5 . The state flag , called the historical flag in law , was proposed by <unk> <unk> , the vice @-@ speaker of the Seimas , and by <unk> <unk> , the chairman of the Commission of Heraldry . This flag was also proposed at the same time as the grand coat of arms ; both were meant to honor the 750th anniversary of the coronation of Mindaugas in 1253 . The designer of the State ( historic ) flag and coat of arms was Arvydas <unk> . Historically , this flag was used during the Battle of Grunwald , and has served as the government flag for Central Lithuania from 1922 until 1939 . This was one of the few flags considered to become the national flag during the drive for national independence . Several other countries , including Finland , Spain , Venezuela , Germany and Thailand , have an official national flag for civilian use and a state flag for government use . 
 Under the National Flag Law , the state flag is permanently hoisted at three locations : the Royal Palace of Lithuania , Trakai Island Castle , and the grounds of the Vytautas the Great War Museum in Kaunas . In addition , the flag is hoisted at the following locations on these days : 
 February 16 – next to the House of the Signatories , on <unk> Street in Vilnius 
 March 11 – next to Seimas Palace 
 July 6 – next to the Presidential Palace , Vilnius 
 July 15 – next to the Ministry of Defense 
 October 25 – next to the Seimas Palace , the Presidential Palace , and the <unk> 11 building that houses the Government of Lithuania 
 = = Flag protocol = = 
 The flag can be flown vertically or horizontally from public buildings , private homes , businesses , ships , town squares , or during official ceremonies . If the flag is flown horizontally , the yellow stripe must be at top ; when flown vertically , the yellow stripe must be facing Left with the red stripe facing Right . While the flag should be flown from sunrise to sunset , government offices in Lithuania and abroad must fly the flag on a 24 @-@ hour basis . The flags must conform to the legal standards , and cannot be soiled or damaged in any way . 
 For mourning activities , the flag can be flown in either of the following ways . The first method , commonly known as half @-@ staffing , is performed when the flag is hoisted to the top of the flagpole , then lowered to the pole 's one @-@ third position . The other method is to attach a black ribbon to a flag that is permanently affixed to a staff . The ribbon itself is ten centimetres wide and it is attached to the mast so that the ends of the ribbon reach the bottom of the flag . During a funeral ceremony , the flag may be used to cover the coffins of government officials , soldiers , signatories of the Act of the Re @-@ Establishment of the State of Lithuania , and persons designated by an act of the President ; these flags are later folded and presented to the next of kin before interment . 
 When flying the Lithuanian flag with other flags , the following is the correct order of precedence : The national flag , the historical ( state ) flag , flags of foreign states , the flag of the European Union , international NGOs , the presidential standard , military and government standards , county flags , city flags and any others . When foreign flags are used alongside the Lithuanian flag , the flags are sorted according to their countries ' names in the Lithuanian language . The only exception is when the congress or meeting held in Lithuanian dictates a different language to be used for sorting . The European Union flag has been hoisted since Lithuania became a member of the organization . While not mentioned by name in the law , the flag of NATO can be used in Lithuania , since it belongs to that organization as well . It is also common to fly the flags of Estonia and Latvia during certain occasions , mainly the celebration of independence of the three Baltic states . The Law of the Republic of Lithuania on the National Flag and Other Flags governs the rules , use , protocol and manufacturing of the national and other flags used inside the country . 
 = = = National flag days = = = 
 As part of the flag protocol , the daily display of the Lithuanian flag is encouraged , but is strongly encouraged or legally required on the following days : 
 Apart from these days , the flag is flown at election polling sites . The national government , under Article 4 , Section 7 of the flag law , is given the authority to call for the display of the national flag and to determine special conditions , such as marking for mourning . 
 = = Other Lithuanian flags = = 
 A naval ensign has been used by Lithuania starting in 1992 . The ensign has a white background charged with a blue cross , with the national flag in the canton . The width of each cross is 1 / 7th of the total width of the ensign , with the ratio being 1 : 2 . Historically , this flag was used as the ensign of the Kaunas Yacht Club , but with a different ratio of 2 : 3 . The naval jack consists of a white field , charged with a blue anchor covered by the naval badge of Lithuania . The badge consists of the Columns of Gediminas in yellow on a red disc . A masthead pennant have been adopted by the Lithuanian Navy to use on their ships . 
 The President of Lithuania was officially given a standard by the Seimas in 1993 . The standard is the State Emblem of Lithuania charged in the center on a single @-@ color background . Under state law , the background color is stated as purple , but the color used in practice is dark red . The ratio of the standard is 1 : 1 @.@ 2 . 
 Each county of Lithuania has adopted a flag , each of them conforming to a pattern : a blue rectangle , with ten instances of the Cross of Vytis ( double cross or ) appearing in gold , acts as a fringe to the central feature of the flag , which is chosen by the county itself . Most of the central designs were adapted from the counties ' coat of arms . 
 = = Similar flags = = 
 Save for the exact color shades and aspect ratio , the flag is identical to the flag of the Danish island <unk> , also located by the Baltic Sea , and to that of the Colombian department of Bolívar . It is also similar to the flag of Myanmar , which is defaced with a large white star . 
 = = = Countries = = = 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 = = = Cities = = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 = = = Other = = = 
 = Indian Head gold pieces = 
 The Indian Head gold pieces or Pratt @-@ Bigelow gold coins were two separate coin series , identical in design , struck by the United States Mint : a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half dollar piece , or quarter eagle , and a five @-@ dollar coin , or half eagle . The quarter eagle was struck from 1908 to 1915 and from 1925 – 1929 . The half eagle was struck from 1908 to 1916 , and in 1929 . The pieces remain the only US circulating coins with recessed designs . These coins were the last of their denominations to be struck for circulation , ending series which had begun in the 1790s . 
 President Theodore Roosevelt , from 1904 , vigorously advocated new designs for United States coins , and had the Mint engage his friend , the sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , to design five coins ( the four gold pieces and the cent ) that could be changed without congressional authorization . Before his death in August 1907 , Saint @-@ Gaudens completed designs for the eagle ( $ 10 piece ) and double eagle , although both required subsequent work to make them fully suitable for coining . 
 With the eagle and double eagle released into circulation by the end of 1907 , the Mint turned its attention to the half eagle and quarter eagle , originally planning to duplicate the double eagle 's design . The Mint had difficulty fitting the required inscriptions on the small gold coins . President Roosevelt , in April 1908 , convinced Mint Director Frank Leach that it would be a better idea to strike a design similar to that of the eagle , but below the background , to secure a high @-@ relief effect . Such coins were designed by Boston sculptor Bela Lyon Pratt at the request of the President 's friend , William Sturgis Bigelow . After some difficulty , the Mint was successful in this work , though Pratt was unhappy at modifications made by the Mint 's engravers , headed by longtime Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber . 
 The two pieces were struck until World War I caused gold to vanish from circulation , and then again in the late 1920s . Neither coin circulated much ; the quarter eagle saw popularity as a Christmas present . In 1933 , President Franklin Roosevelt stopped the issuance of gold in coin form , and recalled many pieces which were in private or bank hands . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In 1904 , US President Theodore Roosevelt complained about the artistic quality of American coinage to his Secretary of the Treasury , Leslie Mortier Shaw , and asked if it were possible to hire a private sculptor such as the President 's friend Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens to give modern , artistic designs to US coins . At Roosevelt 's instigation , Shaw had the Mint ( part of the Department of the Treasury ) hire Saint @-@ Gaudens to redesign five denominations of US coinage that could be changed without an Act of Congress : the cent and the four gold pieces ( the quarter eagle , half eagle , eagle and double eagle ) . By the Mint Act of 1792 , an " eagle " was made equivalent to ten dollars . 
 Mint officials originally assumed that whatever design was selected for the double eagle would simply be scaled down for the three lower denominations . In May 1907 , however , President Roosevelt decided that the eagle and double eagle would bear different designs , a departure from past practice . In August ( the month of Saint @-@ Gaudens ' death from cancer ) , outgoing Mint Director George E. Roberts wrote , " no instructions have been received from the President as to the half and quarter eagle , but I expected that the eagle design would be used upon them " . After considerable difficulties , the Mint issued the eagle and double eagle based on Saint @-@ Gaudens ' designs later that year . The eagle featured Liberty wearing an Indian headdress on the obverse and a perched bald eagle on the reverse ; the double eagle featured Liberty striding forward on the obverse and a flying eagle on the reverse . 
 Due to the difficulties with the two larger coins , little attention was given to the half eagle and quarter eagle until late 1907 . On November 28 , 1907 , Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou wrote in a letter that the double eagle design was to be used for the two small gold pieces . On December 2 , Mint Director Frank Leach instructed the Philadelphia Mint to prepare coinage dies for the small pieces , using the double eagle design . Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber replied a week later that it would be difficult to put all the legends that were required by law on the new pieces , such as the name of the country . On the double eagle , " E Pluribus Unum " is placed on the edge , an impractical setting on pieces about the size of the nickel and dime . Philadelphia Mint Superintendent John Landis forwarded Barber 's letter to Leach with his own note , stating , " I know it will be difficult to put the inscription ' E Pluribus Unum ' on the periphery of a quarter eagle , but I do not see where else it can [ go ] and we must try to do it " . 
 Barber was assigned the task of solving these difficulties . He planned to use his low @-@ relief version of Saint @-@ Gaudens ' double eagle design , but he made slow progress on the assignment . Leach wrote to Saint @-@ Gaudens ' attorney to ask if the sculptor 's assistant Henry Hering could do the work . Hering was willing , and asked for enlarged models of the double eagle designs . Barber opposed bringing in outsiders , citing delays in the preparation of the earlier gold coin designs which he attributed to the Saint @-@ Gaudens studio : " it is entirely unnecessary to trouble Mr. Hering any further , unless another year is to be wasted in vain endeavor " . On January 3 , 1908 , Leach wrote to Hering to inform him that all work would be done by the Mint . 
 = = Innovation = = 
 The President 's friend , Dr. William Sturgis Bigelow , had been in Japan for most of 1907 ; on his return to his Boston home he heard about the Saint @-@ Gaudens coinage from Senator Henry Cabot Lodge . Bigelow was one of a number of Roosevelt 's friends given early specimens of the double eagle . He wrote to the President on January 8 , 1908 , praising the Saint @-@ Gaudens coins and stating that he was working with a Boston sculptor , Bela Pratt , on an idea that would allow coins to be struck in high relief . Pieces struck in this manner would have the designs protected from wear and be able to stack easily ( both problems with high relief coins ) . The President responded to express his interest on January 10 , and Pratt was soon busy on a model for him to examine . Roosevelt did not then tell the Mint of the new proposal . 
 The newly released eagle and double eagle had provoked considerable controversy over their omission of the motto " In God We Trust " , and with Congress already preparing to require the motto 's use , Leach ordered work suspended on the half and quarter eagle on January 18 . The Mint had not expected to have to put " In God We Trust " on small coins of the double eagle design , on which it was already having trouble finding space for the other required legends . On the assumption the bill would succeed , Leach had Barber continue with his work , and at least one pattern half eagle was struck on February 26 for Leach to show the President . 
 Pratt completed plaster models for the coin , using the obverse design for the ten @-@ dollar piece as the basis , but using a photograph of an unknown , male Indian from his photo collection rather than Saint @-@ Gaudens ' female Liberty . He displayed one model in his Connecticut studio , and sent another to Bigelow for presentation to the President the next time the two friends met . Roosevelt and Bigelow had lunch with Mint Director Leach on April 3 . The President was enthusiastic about the proposed coin . Leach recalled in his memoirs : 
 Originally it was the intention to give the $ 5 and $ 2 @.@ 50 pieces the same design as that used on the double eagle or $ 20 piece , but before final action to that end was taken President Roosevelt invited me to lunch with him at the White House . His purpose was to have me meet Doctor William Sturgis Bigelow of Boston , a lover of art and friend of the President , who was showing great interest in the undertaking for improving the appearance of American coins , and who had a new design for the smaller gold coins . It was his idea that the commercial needs of the country required coins that would " stack " evenly , and that the preservation of as much as possible of the flat plane of the piece was desirable . A coin , therefore , with the lines of the design , figures , and letters depressed or <unk> , instead of being raised or in relief , would meet the wishes of the bankers and business men , and at the same time introduce a novelty in coinage that was artistic as well as adaptable to the needs of business . 
 As a result of the White House lunch meeting , Leach agreed to abandon the idea that the double eagle design be used for the small gold pieces , and to cooperate with Bigelow and Pratt in the making of the new coins . Leach even undertook to reimburse Pratt 's fee of $ 300 to Bigelow from government funds . The President wanted to see Saint @-@ Gaudens ' standing eagle from the ten @-@ dollar piece adapted in a recessed surface for the smaller pieces , and , if it did not constitute a change of design , used on the ten @-@ dollar piece as well ( a project that did not go beyond the talking stage ) . Bigelow wrote to Pratt on May 1 after conferring with Leach , stating that the Mint Director would likely not object if Pratt were to improve Saint @-@ Gaudens ' standing eagle , but " I would not , if I were you , get too far from the original , as the President likes it . Perhaps you can make him like it better . " 
 Dies had been cut for the Saint @-@ Gaudens half eagle , causing Leach to ask for a legal opinion on whether that constituted a change of design — if it did , no further change could be made for 25 years without an Act of Congress . The opinion must have been satisfactory , as Roosevelt approved Pratt 's obverse design in mid @-@ May , subject to minor changes requested by the Mint . Leach decided that both the Mint and Pratt would make versions of the standing eagle reverse ; Pratt 's was adopted . Pratt sent the models and casts to the Mint on June 29 . Barber did not make master dies based on Pratt 's work until he returned from his August vacation at Ocean Grove , New Jersey . Experimental pieces to a total face value of $ 75 ( likely ten half eagles and ten quarter eagles ) were sent to Leach in Washington from the Philadelphia Mint on September 21 . Leach showed the pieces to the President , who kept a half eagle and gave it to Bigelow . As Leach had worked against practices that allowed pattern coins to leave the Mint , the coin sent to Bigelow may have been the only pattern not to be melted . The present location of the coin is not known ; no pattern coins of the Indian Head gold pieces are presently known to exist . Leach approved the designs subject to some " improvements " which Barber wanted to make . The Mint Director wrote to Superintendent Landis on September 26 @,@ 
 I desire that this shall be accomplished as soon as possible as I am under obligation to the President to have several thousand pieces coined by the first of November next and I want enough half eagle dies prepared so that a couple of pairs at least can be supplied [ to ] Denver and San Francisco . The quarter eagle will be coined only at your institution . 
 After production of the new coins began , Bigelow received one of each ; he showed them to Pratt who wrote to his mother , " They have ' knocked spots ' out of my design at the mint . They let their die cutter spoil it , which he did most thoroughly ... but they tried to retouch it and gee ! They made a mess of it . With a few deft strokes the butcher or blacksmith [ Barber ] who is at the head of things there , changed it from a thing that I was proud of to one [ of which ] I am ashamed . " 
 = = Design = = 
 The half eagle and quarter eagle are identical in design , and are unique in American coinage in having <unk> ( engraved , as opposed to bas @-@ relief ) designs . The obverse features the head of a Native American man , wearing a headdress and facing left . The designer 's initials , <unk> , are found just above the date . The reverse features a standing eagle on a bunch of arrows , its left talon holding an olive branch in place . The mint mark is found to the left of the arrowheads . 
 Although Saint @-@ Gaudens ' design for the eagle had featured Liberty in an Indian @-@ style headdress , no attempt was made to make her features appear to be Native American . According to numismatist Mike <unk> in his book on early 20th century American gold coinage , the obverse of the eagle had featured " Lady Liberty topped with a fanciful head covering designed to look like an Indian headdress " . Until Saint @-@ Gaudens ' and Pratt 's pieces were struck , only Mint Chief Engraver James Longacre had attempted to depict Indians on US circulating coinage ( in the 1850s ) , with his Indian Head cent and Indian Princess designs for the gold dollar and three @-@ dollar pieces . After Pratt , only James Earle Fraser 's depiction of an Indian in 1913 on the Buffalo nickel would appear until the 2000 arrival of the Sacagawea dollar . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule in 1970 dismissed complaints made at the time of issuance that the Indian was too thin : " the Indian is far from emaciated , and the coins show more imagination and daring of design than almost any other issue in American history . Pratt deserves to be admired for his medals and coins . " Vermeule suggests that Pratt 's design " marked a transition , in the ' emaciated ' Indian at least , to naturalism " . 
 Breen suggests the sunken surfaces were similar to those on coins from Egypt 's Fourth Dynasty . Under the Mint Act of 1792 , the obverse was to bear an " impression emblematic of Liberty " ; he notes that a Native American on the obverse was particularly appropriate " for after all the Indians were free peoples before the white man 's laws made them third @-@ class citizens " and suggests that Pratt 's eagle , before it was modified by Barber , was " worthy of J.J. Audubon " . 
 = = Production , circulation , and collecting = = 
 Dies for the half eagle were sent to the mints in Denver and San Francisco ; both western mints reported difficulties in striking the new pieces . Landis wrote to his counterparts at the other mints , advising them that the planchets , or blanks , needed to be shaved very slightly to strike properly . The new coins proved to be thinner than earlier coins of their denomination , due to the field being raised above the design . This meant that automated sorting machines could not reliably sort them when mixed with earlier coins . 
 The new gold pieces entered circulation in early November 1908 , attracting some negative comment . Philadelphia numismatist Samuel Chapman wrote to Roosevelt in early December to criticize the new coins . The indentations in the new coins would harbor dirt and germs , Chapman argued ; the coins could be easily counterfeited by carving a disc of metal . They could not adequately stack , and they were in any event not handsome , with the Indian " emaciated " . 
 According to numismatic historian Roger Burdette , " Chapman 's letter caused some consternation at the White House " . The President prepared a reply in which he expressed himself strongly to Chapman , but Bigelow persuaded him to substitute a milder letter over Bigelow 's signature , defending the new coins . Bigelow 's letter replied to Chapman 's complaint about the Indian , " The answer to this is that the head was taken from a recent photograph of an Indian whose health was excellent . Perhaps Mr. Chapman has in mind the fatter but less characteristic type of Indian sometimes seen on the reservations . " Chapman wrote again , and had the correspondence published in the numismatic press , but no one at the lame duck Roosevelt White House bothered to reply , according to Burdette , " the new coins were issued and would remain as they were for twenty @-@ five years , or until Congress ordered them changed " . Leach wrote to Bigelow on January 2 , 1909 , " I was somewhat amused by their savage attack , and should have liked to have been in a position to reply to this unjust criticism . However , I am pleased to say that adverse criticism of the coins is an exception . I feel very well pleased with the result . " 
 Both the half and quarter eagle were struck each year through 1915 . While " hard money " circulated in quantity in the West , in the East banknotes were much more common . A common use of the small gold pieces was as Christmas presents — the pieces would be produced at the various mints late in the year , be purchased from banks in December and return to vaults by late January . The establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 increased the circulation of banknotes , and the Mint ceased to strike quarter eagles after 1915 and half eagles after 1916 . An additional factor was the economic unrest caused by World War I , causing gold prices to rise and coins made of that metal to vanish from circulation . After the war , gold did not return to circulation , and most gold coins struck were double eagles , used for international transactions and backing for gold certificates . 
 The quarter eagle remained popular as a Christmas gift but did not initially come back into production as the Treasury held stocks of the pieces from the prewar years . This surplus was slow to dissipate , as gift givers preferred the older Liberty Head quarter eagle that had been struck until 1908 . With the Liberty Head pieces becoming rarer and acquiring a premium above face value , the quarter eagle was finally struck again in 1925 , principally to be given as presents . The 1925 quarter eagle was struck only at Denver , and it was then struck from 1926 to 1929 only at Philadelphia . With the economic collapse which started the Depression , the quarter eagle was not called for in commerce , and the Mint halted production . 
 The half eagle was not struck again until 1929 , at Philadelphia . Coins of that date have a rarity not reflected in the mintage of 668 @,@ 000 as few entered commerce . Gold coins not released were melted in the mid @-@ 1930s , along with those recalled from banks and private holders , after President Franklin Roosevelt in 1933 ended the issuance of gold coins . Roosevelt 's actions put an end to the quarter and half eagle series , which had begun in 1796 and 1795 , respectively . 
 There are only 15 different Indian Head quarter eagles by date and mintmark ; the key is the 1911 struck at Denver ( 1911 @-@ D ) , which the 2014 A Guide Book of United States Coins values at $ 2 @,@ 850 even in well @-@ circulated VF ( Very Fine , or 20 on the Mint State scale ) condition . The half eagle series is longer ; 24 pieces by date and mint mark . The final entry , 1929 is the key date for the half eagle series , followed by the 1909 @-@ O , struck at the New Orleans Mint in its final year of operation . 
 = Bergen Line = 
 The Bergen Line ( Norwegian : Bergensbanen or <unk> ) , also called the Bergen Railway , is a 371 @-@ kilometre ( 231 mi ) long standard gauge railway line between Bergen and Hønefoss , Norway . The name is often applied for the entire route from Bergen via Drammen to Oslo , where the passenger trains go , a distance of 496 kilometres ( 308 mi ) . It is the highest mainline railway line in Northern Europe , crossing the Hardangervidda plateau at 1 @,@ 237 metres ( 4 @,@ 058 ft ) above sea level . 
 The railway opened from Bergen to Voss in 1883 as the narrow gauge Voss Line . In 1909 the route was continued over the mountain to Oslo and the whole route converted to standard gauge , and the Voss Line became part of the Bergen Line . The line is single track , and was electrified in 1954 @-@ 64 . The Bergen Line is owned and maintained by the Norwegian National Rail Administration , and served with passenger trains by Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) and freight trains by CargoNet . The Flåm Line remains as the only branch line , after the closure of the Hardanger Line . The western section from Bergen to Voss is also served by the Bergen Commuter Rail , and was shortened following the 1966 opening of the Ulriken Tunnel . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First step to Voss = = = 
 The first documented idea of building a railway between Norway 's two largest cities was launched by Hans <unk> on 24 August 1871 in <unk> . The forest supervisor in Voss suggested building the railway via Voss and Hallingdal to connect with the Krøderen Line . Back in 1866 the same person had launched the idea of the Jæren Line . Within days of the launch of the Bergen Line the city council had assimilated support for the suggestion . In 1872 the railway director Carl Abraham Pihl and two engineers went on a survey tour to look at the suggested line . At the time it was common that proposals for railways came from local initiative , and that local municipalities and private investors would then pay about 20 % of the investments , the state covering the rest , mostly through foreign debt . 
 = = = = Political processes = = = = 
 On 20 October 1871 two engineers traversed the two possible routes from Bergen to Voss ; the one via Fana , Os and Hardangerfjord , the other via Dale and <unk> . Though covering a less populated area , the latter would be cheaper to build , and have less elevation . A railway committee was created on 25 January 1872 with a limited mandate , which was increased again 20 December . At the same time there was a dispute between the Ministry of Labour and Pihl about whether to prioritize the Bergen Line , but in July 1872 surveys were performed in person by Pihl and two engineers , and their report was positive . At the same time he launched the idea of a branch line up Valdres to Lærdal . 
 By 1873 agreement had been reached as to the right @-@ of @-@ way to Voss , but not onwards towards Oslo . On 13 January 1874 Bergen city council started issuing stock for the Voss Line , to begin with 400 @,@ 000 Norwegian <unk> ( NOK 1 @.@ 6 million ) was issued . In the 1873 parliamentary election the railway supporter Peter <unk> was elected , spending the next few years furiously defending the railway . Parliament chose to not issue new railway projects in the 1874 session , and instead make a complete plan for all railway construction in the country — to be proposed by a committee . When the report was launched on 20 March 1875 , the Voss Line was not included since it could not show a higher profitability than 1 % . During the 1875 session there was not a majority for the Voss Line , partially due to the lack of capital available for local investors . This was based on a claim from Johan Jørgen Schwartz , the chairman of the committee , that the investment costs were underestimated . This was countered by Nils Henrik Bruun , a constructor from Bergen , who was willing to construct all tunnels on the railway for less than the budgeted sum . When <unk> in addition was willing to act as personal guarantee for Bruun in case of his death , the majority in the parliament shifted . On 9 June 1875 parliament voted with 61 against 42 to build Vossebanen . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Vossebanen was built with narrow gauge , 1 @,@ 067 mm ( 3 ft 6 in ) . The first parts of the construction started in December 1875 , while the largest part started in March 1876 . During the winter the engineers had done the last finesses on the plans . At any given time at least 800 men worked on construction , and at the peak 1 @,@ 800 men were employed . They worked 12 hours per day , for which they had a daily wage of NOK 2 @.@ 55 , the highest wage for navvies in the country . To a large extent the labor came from Sweden , who had just finished the Norway / <unk> Line and had an excess of skilled labor for construction . This import of labor had the effect of pumping money into the local economy , and several taverns were built along the line . There were some accidents , and several deaths among the workers . 
 The construction work was finished in 1882 and some test services began , though not scheduled until the spring of 1883 . Official opening commenced on 11 July 1883 . Many of the navvies settled on Vossebanen after construction , and started working for the NSB as part of the operation . 
 = = = Across the mountain = = = 
 By the time the Voss Line was completed Norway had plunged into recession . Parliament was not willing to give more money to railways , and the country had to make do with a transport plan launched in 1886 that did not follow up with any funding . On 1 March 1894 parliament after five days of debate chose , with 60 against 53 votes , to build the Bergen Line . Several different routes had been proposed , including over Krøderen , or down Numedal ( which later would get the Numedal Line ) . In the end Hallingdal was chosen , connecting to Hønefoss and via Sandvika . To save costs a preliminary line would connect Hønefoss to Roa with the branch Roa – Hønefoss Line . The final stage would be along the Gjøvik Line to Oslo . The line would also connect to the system via the Randsfjorden Line at Hønefoss . 
 Local financing was ready within a year , yet it took six years to survey the line properly , and construction start had to wait until 1901 . Construction started with the building of roads to get in supplies to the construction sites , completed in 1902 . The construction was exceptionally challenging , at high altitudes in a region without roads and with a climate that saw many meters of snow in the winter and temperatures far below freezing . 113 tunnels , totaling 28 kilometres ( 17 mi ) had to be built ; the longest being the 5 @,@ 311 metres ( 17 @,@ 425 ft ) <unk> Tunnel , alone costing NOK 3 million and the longest tunnel north of the Alps . It took six years to build , and had to be excavated manually through solid gneiss . Laying of track was started in 1906 , and in 1907 the two groups , both having started at their own end , met at Ustaoset . A small celebration was made at the spot ( see image ) . 
 It had been decided that the Bergen Line , unlike the Voss Line , was to be built with standard gauge . So the newly laid line from Bergen to Voss had to be converted in time for the opening of the Bergen Line . This was especially challenging because of the continuous traffic on the line , with 36 departures per day to Nesttun , six to Garnes and four to Voss . In preparation a few curves had to be straightened , the tunnels widened and the bridges strengthened . On the night of 10 / 11 August 1904 all the track was changed and in the morning the trains could operate on standard gauge to Voss . 
 The first services started on 1 July 1907 from Voss to Myrdal . An official opening train attempted to cross part of the line to Gulsvik on 9 December 1907 , but got stuck in heavy snow and had to return . It turned out that the railway had to close and it took one and a half month to clear it for snow . Even a rotary snowplow at 750 kW was not powerful enough to get rid of the snow . A new attempt to open the line in 1908 succeeded , and a train went from Gulsvik to Bergen . The line from Roa to Gulsvik was still under construction , so passage was along the Drammen Line via the <unk> Line with ship over Krøderen to Gulsvik . The first scheduled train from Oslo West Station en route to Bergen departed 10 June 1908 . 
 On 25 November 1909 a train en route from Bergen rolled into Oslo <unk> , and two days later the railway was officially opened at Voss . King Haakon VII stated upon the opening that the line was the Norwegian engineering masterpiece of his generation . 
 = = = Steaming up = = = 
 World War II was a demanding time for the railway line , as the track was in heavy use for both civilian and military transportation , and much of the equipment and maintenance was lacking . On 28 February 1944 a descending eastbound freight train loaded with oil and petrol lost its braking power and became a runaway train , finally ploughing into a westbound passenger train at <unk> , just east of Geilo . The crash and subsequent fire killed 25 civilians and an unknown number of German soldiers . Poor lubrication oil combined with the cold weather is believed to have caused the accident . 
