 = = = Electrification = = = 
 Norway is a country with abundance of hydroelectricity and NSB saw huge amounts of money burning up with the imported coal . Plans for electrification of the line is as old as the railway itself , and in 1912 the line from Nesttun to Bergen was proposed electrified and rebuilt to double track , having seen the <unk> Line open with electric traction in 1908 . During the planning of the Hardanger Line and the Flåm Line during the 30s the suggestion again arose , and both the branch lines were built with electric traction , but not the main line . <unk> were raised proposing a conversion to the locomotives running on oil or coal dust . In 1939 a plan for national electrification was launched , and the Voss Line was top priority . But the breakout of World War II set the plans back , and not until the 50s was it again possible to afford such investments . Vossebanen took electric traction into use on 2 July 1954 . 
 In 1952 a new plan was launched by parliament to electrify 1 @,@ 153 kilometres ( 716 mi ) of railway , with the line from Voss to Hønefoss prioritized fourth . The following year NSB launched the " away with the steam " <unk> , that would replace all steam locomotives with electric or diesel traction . Since electrification was not imminent , NSB introduced diesel traction on the Bergen Line in 1958 , predominantly using Di 3 stock . Travel time between the two termini was reduced by about one hour . During summer the Class 66 diesel multiple units were put into service , but they were not heavy enough to cope with winter and thus only served during the summer months . The line was electrified in four stages , from Roa to Hønefoss on 1 February 1961 , from Hønefoss to Ål on 1 December 1962 , from Ål to Ustaoset on 15 December 1963 and finally from Ustaoset to Voss on 7 December 1964 . As the point of electrification moved across the mountain , so did the point NSB changed locomotive on the train . The new locomotive El 13 was put into service on the electric parts . The electrification cost NOK 143 million . 
 The express trains have as one of the main lines always been allocated the newest locomotives by NSB . When the El 14 was delivered in 1968 , it was put into service on Bergensbanen , as was the El 16 in 1977 , the El 17 in 1981 , and finally the El 18 in 1996 . The older locomotives have been relegated to freight service . In 2000 electric multiple units were put into service with the Class 73 tilting trains , branded as Signatur and capable of 210 kilometres per hour ( 130 mph ) . However , they cannot be used at those speed on any part of the Bergen Line , and only some parts of the Asker Line and around Finse can they operate quicker than the locomotive hauled trains . There has also been reason to doubt their winter capability on the very demanding Bergen Line . Occasionally they have been stuck in the snow , and on February 21 , 2007 a multiple unit derailed after running into a pack of snow . As refurbished carriages become available , the multiple units will be removed from the line , and replaced by traditional locomotive @-@ hauled trains . 
 = = = Through the first mountain = = = 
 The first 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) form Bergen to <unk> represented a very roundabout way , and it was clear that it would be possible to reduce the line by 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) with the construction of three tunnels , Ulriken Tunnel ( 7 @,@ 660 metres or 25 @,@ 130 feet ) , <unk> Tunnel ( 2 @,@ 177 metres or 7 @,@ 142 feet ) and <unk> Tunnel ( 40 metres or 130 feet ) . The idea was approved by parliament in 1956 , based on private financing from the businessman Fritz Rieber . Construction started in 1959 with the tunnels being finished in 1963 while the tracks were finished laid on 29 May 1964 when the first train entered the tunnel . 
 Rieber has suggested a package for the politicians , where he would create a company that would borrow money to build both the Ulriken Tunnel , a shortening of the line from Hønefoss to Sandvika ( the Ringerike Line ) and electrify the railway . Since NSB based their fares on the route length traveled , financing would be covered by a surcharge equal to the distance saved ; ticket price would remain the same and within twenty years the debt would be covered . The government opposed the suggestion — Trygve Bratteli commenting that even though the financing was private , it would still have to use the same funding as government debt , and would jeopardize other projects , like the Nordland Line . 
 In 1980 the Oslo Tunnel was opened , allowing trains along the Drammen Line to go to the new Oslo Central Station , an upgrade of the former Oslo Ø . As a consequence of this , passenger trains were since the late 1980s rerouted via Drammen instead of via Roa , following the Drammen Line and the Randsfjord Line to Hønefoss . This allows the trains to pass through more densely populated areas and on trackage with more capacity . However , the change of route actually increased the length between the two termini with 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) . But the better track standard via Drammen results in about the same travel time . Freight trains still goes via Roa . 
 = = = Lowering the peak = = = 
 During winter NSB had large costs keeping the line snow @-@ free . Large diesel @-@ electric snowploughs were stationed at Finse , and tens of kilometers of snow sheds were built on the most vulnerable parts . Especially the 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) part between Finse Station and Hallingskeid was a tear on resources , and heavy snowfall and drifts regularly closed the entire line . A solution was proposed by NSB 's director Robert <unk> in 1984 , involving construction of a 10 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) tunnel between the two stations . 
 In 1989 the Parliament of Norway approved the plans , including the upgrade of part of the line east of Finse . In total NOK 750 million was invested in rebuilding 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) of line , shortening it by 4 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) . At the same time the permitted speed could be increased from 70 kilometres per hour ( 43 mph ) to 170 kilometres per hour ( 110 mph ) . The tunnel opened on 16 June 1992 while the rest of the upgrades opened in five steps in the period 1995 – 98 . The highest point of the line was reduced from 1 @,@ 301 metres ( 4 @,@ 268 ft ) to 1 @,@ 237 metres ( 4 @,@ 058 ft ) — located inside the tunnel . After the opening the base for snow removal was closed at Finse . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The Bergen Line as a through line is used for up to five express trains operated by Norwegian State Railways , as well as freight trains by CargoNet . From Myrdal to Bergen there are commuter rail services operated by NSB . 
 = = = Line = = = 
 The total distance from Oslo to Bergen via Drammen is 493 kilometres ( 306 mi ) , while the Bergen Line proper is 372 kilometres ( 231 mi ) . The line has 182 tunnels , totaling ca . 73 kilometres ( 45 mi ) , of which ten are over 2 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . Finse Station remains the highest elevated station at 1 @,@ 222 @.@ 2 metres ( 4 @,@ 010 ft ) , while the highest point is in the Finse Tunnel at 1 @,@ 237 metres ( 4 @,@ 058 ft ) . 
 = = = Commuter rail = = = 
 NSB operates a commuter rail service from Bergen with two hourly departures to Arna , plus fourteen daily departures to Voss , of which up to six continue to Myrdal . Rolling stock is the Class 69 multiple units . The first part to Arna represents an important part of the public transport in Bergen , since the rail direct line through the mountain Ulriken is considerably faster than driving around . 
 = = = Express service = = = 
 Express trains operated by NSB have always been the primary passenger service on Bergensbanen . Passenger trains follow the Drammen Line and the Asker Line to Drammen , before heading north to Hønefoss on the Randsfjord Line . The express trains offer both transport from villages along the line to either Bergen or Oslo , as well travel between Norway 's two largest cities . Up to two day trains are provided with Class 73 multiple units , while the remaining services are with locomotive hauled trains . Six nights a week there is a night train service . Several parts of the line service places without road access , such as Finse and Myrdal . Operating deficits are covered by the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications . 
 = = = Freight = = = 
 Freight trains are operated by CargoNet , hauled by El 14 and El 16 locomotives . Most transport is from the terminal at Alnabru in Oslo to the terminal at Bergen Station . Freight trains use the Roa @-@ Hønefoss Line instead of going via Drammen since it is shorter — distance is more important than speed for freight trains . CargoNet operates up to four daily trains from Oslo , plus one from Drammen . Rail freight on Bergensbanen increased by 80 % from 2001 – 05 , but further growth is not possible without better infrastructure ; CargoNet has indicated they want five more passing loops , as well as extending them to increase train length from 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) to 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , claiming they could double freight traffic with adequate infrastructure . 
 = = = Heritage = = = 
 Parts of the closed sections of Vossebanen , from Midttun to Garnes has been converted to a heritage railway — the Old Voss Line — that is operated with steam trains by the Norwegian Railway Club during the summer . At Finse there is a navvy museum , and the old navvy road has become a cycle track . 
 The branch Flåm Line has been converted to a tourist route . The railway has spectacular scenery and a vertical descent of 864 metres ( 2 @,@ 835 ft ) or 5 @.@ 5 % along the 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) route from Myrdal to Flåm . Operation is still performed by NSB , but marketing is performed by Flåm Utvikling . The stock used on the railway are El 17 hauling B3 wagons , all painted green . 
 = = Future propositions = = 
 = = = Closing = = = 
 In 2002 the Norwegian National Rail Administration warned that lack of funding might lead to a closure of all long @-@ distance passenger trains in Norway , including the Bergen Line . Torild Skogsholm , Minister of Transport and Communications assured that it was not the government 's policy to close railway lines . In 2004 the Progress Party suggested closing down the railway line and replacing it with a motorway between Bergen and Oslo , arguing that the railway was unprofitable , and that bus transport was cheaper while easier truck transport would aid business . Other political parties rejected the proposal pointing out the better environmental performance of the railway and that the railway transports large volumes of freight . On 16 June 2011 , a welding accident caused a fire at Hallingskeid Station , causing the complete destruction of the platform . This caused a temporary closure of the line until 23 June 2011 . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 Ulriken Tunnel represents the largest bottleneck on the Bergen Line , due to the commuter trains to Arna . Building double track on the westernmost part of Bergensbanen would free up capacity not only of that part of the line , but the whole line across the mountains . 
 The original plans for Bergensbanen from 1894 included the construction of a new line — the Ringerike Line — from Hønefoss to Sandvika just west of Oslo . This line would reduce the distance on Bergensbanen by 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) and 50 minutes travel time . There has been a continual decision to build this railway line , but it has never received any funding . These plans were discussed more after 2000 , and a detailed plan has been done . Combined with other improvements totaling investments of NOK 7 billion , travel time could be reduced to four and a half hours . The project is scheduled to be built between 2019 and 2024 . 
 = = = High @-@ speed rail = = = 
 Several suggestions for high @-@ speed rail from Oslo to Bergen have been launched . Preliminary studied performed for the National Rail Administration with positive cost @-@ benefit ratios on building high @-@ speed rail from Oslo to Bergen . The most suitable route would approximately follow the existing route ( but a new tunnel Oslo – Hønefoss ) . Oslo – Trondheim and Oslo – Halden are assumed to be built earlier because of lower cost . Two lobbyist suggestions to the route have also been launched . The one involves a " high @-@ speed ring " from Oslo , via Numedal to Geilo , then following Bergensbanen to Bergen and continuing south to Stavanger and back to Oslo via Kristiansand . Norsk Bane has launched the idea of building a common line from Oslo to <unk> and then from branching off to Bergen and Stavanger . 
 Such long @-@ distance high @-@ speed railways are not included in the preliminary long @-@ term plan for 2010 – 2040 , and it is likely that railways Hamar – Trondheim and Drammen – <unk> will be built first since they are easier to build . It is likely that a high @-@ speed railway to Bergen will be built sometime in the period 2030 – 2060 . 
 = = Stations = = 
 = I 'm Not Your Hero = 
 " I 'm Not Your Hero " is a song written , recorded and performed by Canadian duo Tegan and Sara and produced by Greg Kurstin for the album Heartthrob ( 2013 ) . Recorded at Echo Studio and EastWest Studios in California in 2012 , it was released on October 21 of that year as a promotional single . The lyrics for the new wave synthpop ballad were written by Sara Quin , and discuss her teenage life in the 1990s when she was unable to identify with the lives of pop culture figures and had unforeseen thoughts about her later life . Guitar chords , drums , bass guitar , synths and harmonized vocals are also played in the track . 
 " I 'm Not Your Hero " was mostly well @-@ received by critics for its songwriting and composition . The track garnered comparisons to the works of Santigold , Fleetwood Mac and The Temper Trap . Commercially , it peaked at number 58 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 and 157 on the French SNEP singles chart . Tegan and Sara have performed it at the Austin City Limits Music Festival , their Let 's Make Things Physical tour , and on shows and services such as Soundcheck and Queen 's TV . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 In November 2011 , it was revealed on Tegan and Sara Quinn 's official website that they were writing new material for their seventh studio album : " [ we ] are back in our home studios working away at more songs . We ’ re really looking forward to making a new record now . Our hope is to be in the studio by early 2012 . " " I 'm Not Your Hero " was written for the album , which was later named Heartthrob and recorded between February and May 2012 . Sara , who wrote the lyrics , said the song was based on her life as a teenager when she was unable to identify with the lives of pop culture figures and had unforeseen thoughts about her future . She claimed the lyrics were about her political views from watching The West Wing , her identity and her sexuality . Tegan stated that when Sara showed the song to her and the producers , it was initially more of a love song and much more acoustic and slow than the final mix that would be released , and said she " was haunted by it almost immediately . I found the verses to be quintessential Sara . " 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Naked in a <unk> Publishing , the new wave synthpop ballad is performed in common time at a tempo of 122 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A Major , with the vocal range spanning from E4 to D6 . A chord progression of A5 − E5 − F ♯ m − Dmaj7 − F ♯ m − E − Dmaj7 is followed in the verse , D − A in the pre @-@ chorus , and D − E − F ♯ m − D in the chorus . The track opens with guitar chords before loud drums are played . Harmonized vocals , bass guitar and blurred synthesizers are also parts of the track 's arrangement . Reviewers made comparisons of its musical structure to songs such as " L.E.S. Artistes " by Santigold The Temper Trap 's " Sweet Disposition " , and the works of Fleetwood Mac . Alt Rock Live author Martine Johansen found the " non @-@ traditional " rhythms " strangely reminiscent " of 
 = = Release and live performances = = 
 " I 'm Not Your Hero " was first available for digital download in the United Kingdom as part of their compilation extended play called In Your Head : An Introduction to Tegan and Sara , which was issued on October 19 , 2012 . On October 21 , it was released as a promotional single for worldwide streaming . It received mostly positive reviews from critics upon its release , some calling it one of the best songs off Heartthrob . Brodsky described it as " a track that honors their previous work but shows their dedication to musical development . " Bryne Yancey of Punknews.org wrote the song " blows out its chorus rather impressively from the verses with some neat , alternated instrumentation . " A more mixed opinion came from Billboard 's Jason Lipshutz ; he praised the song 's " eloquent " message , but felt the track overall was not as engaging as the other songs on the album . 
 In an interview with MTV Hive , Tegan and Sara said " I 'm Not Your Hero " was one of their favorite songs to perform live . The duo first did so , along with " Now I 'm All Messed Up " and " I Was a Fool " , in Vancouver on September 23 , 2012 . They performed it at the 2012 Austin City Limits Music Festival , and the song was also a part of the set list of their 2014 " Let 's Make Things Physical " promotional tour . In April 2014 , the pair played it at the Juno Awards in Burton Cummings Theatre live on Queen 's TV . The duo has performed two acoustic renditions of the song , one in November 2012 in a studio session for Alter The Press ! , and in July 2013 on their interview by the WNYC program Soundcheck . 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 The following information adapted from the liner notes of Heartthrob : 
 Locations 
 Recorded and engineered at Echo Studio , Los Angeles , California ; drums recorded at EastWest Studios , Hollywood , California 
 Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Mastered at Bernie Grundman Mastering , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Protocol of Corfu = 
 The Protocol of Corfu ( Greek : <unk> της <unk> , Albanian : <unk> i <unk> ) , signed on May 17 , 1914 , was an agreement between the representatives of the Albanian Government and the Provisional Government of Northern Epirus , which officially recognized the area of Northern Epirus as an autonomous self @-@ governing region under the sovereignty of the prince of the newly established Principality of Albania . The agreement granted the Greeks of the districts of Korytsa and Argyrokastro , which form Northern Epirus , wider religious , educational , cultural and political autonomy , inside the borders of the Albanian state . 
 After the end of the Balkan Wars ( 1912 – 1913 ) , the subsequent peace treaties ceded the region to Albania . This turn of events catalyzed an uprising among the local Greeks , which led to the Northern Epirote Declaration of Independence , on February 28 , 1914 . The International Commission of Control , an organization responsible for securing peace and stability in the region , eventually intervened and the Protocol of Corfu was signed on May 17 , 1914 . However the protocol ’ s terms were never implemented because of the politically unstable situation in Albania following the outbreak of World War I , and it was eventually annulled in 1921 during the Conference of Ambassadors . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the First Balkan War , the Greek Army defeated the Ottoman forces and pushed north through the region of Epirus , reaching a line from Himara on the Ionian coast east to Prespa Lake by February 1913 . Pending the final adjudication of the Great Powers regarding the border between Greece and the newly established state of Albania , the region remained under Greek military control . On 17 December 1913 , the Protocol of Florence ceded the northern part of this area , which became known as " Northern Epirus " , to Albania . This turn of events was highly unpopular among local Greeks , who decided to declare their independence and secure the region against any opposing threat . The Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus was thus proclaimed in Argyrokastro ( Gjirokastër ) on 28 February 1914 , with Georgios Christakis @-@ Zografos , a distinguished Epirote politician from Lunxhëri , as its head . 
 Meanwhile , the Greek army evacuated from the region , and , on 1 March , Korytsa ( Korçë ) was ceded to the newly formed Albanian gendarmerie . Serious disturbances broke out in a number of places between the Autonomist forces and Albanian gendarmerie units and irregulars . Meanwhile , an International Commission formed by the Great Powers to secure stability and peace in the region was unable to achieve an agreement between the two sides . 
 = = Negotiations = = 
 By early May , the Albanian authorities , being unable to suppress the revolt , became willing to start discussions with the intervention of the International Commission . Thus , Prince William of Wied of Albania asked the Commission , which represented the Albanian government , to initiate negotiations . Subsequently , on May 6 , the members of the Commission informed Zografos that they were willing to discuss the demands of the Northern Epirote side . 
 Since incorporation into Greece was not an option after the recent political developments , Zografos proposed three main solutions to the representatives of the International Commission : complete autonomy under the sovereignty of the Albanian prince , administrative and canton type autonomy , and direct administration and control by the European Powers . The Northern Epirote side also demanded the extension of the area in which the Greek population would enjoy education in its native language to include the regions around Vlorë and Durrës ( in central Albania , to the north of Northern Epirus ) , the appointment of Greek Orthodox higher officials in the main towns of Northern Epirus and the exemption from military service of the local population , even in time of war . 
 The representatives of both sides met for negotiations in <unk> , a coastal town in Northern Epirus , but the final negotiations took place in the nearby island of Corfu , Greece . Finally , on May 17 , 1914 , the representatives of Northern Epirus and Albania signed an agreement that granted the chief demands of the Epirotes and became known as the Protocol of Corfu . The Protocol is prefaced by a signed agreement of the Commission : 
 The International Commission of Control , in order to avoid the resumption of hostilities , believes it to be its duty to reconcile as much as possible the point of the Epirote populations with regard to the special disposition which they ask for , and that of the Albanian Government . 
 It is with this idea in mind that the Commission has agreed to submit to the Great Powers which it represents , as well as to the Albanian Government , the enclosed text , which is the result of discussions between the members of the Commission and the Epirote delegates . 
 = = = Terms = = = 
 The Protocol fulfilled the main demands of the Northern Epirote side . According to its terms , the two provinces of Korytsa and Argyrokastron , which constituted Northern Epirus , would become autonomous under Albanian sovereignty and under the auspices of Prince William of Wied ; he , however , was granted no effective power whatsoever . 
 The Albanian government , in agreement with the Commission , had the right to appoint and dismiss governors and upper rank officials , taking into account the demographic composition of the local religious communities . Other terms included the proportional recruitment of natives into the local gendarmerie , and the prohibition of military levies from non @-@ indigenous people of the region . In Orthodox schools , the Greek language would be the sole medium of instruction , except for grades one through three . However , religious education would be exclusively in Greek . Moreover , Greek was also made equal to Albanian in all public affairs , including courts and elective councils . 
 As for the coastal area of Himara , the special autonomous status that it enjoyed during the Ottoman era was renewed , with the addition that a foreigner was to be appointed as its " captain " for 10 years . Moreover , the Protocol stated that the city of Korçë – which was under control of the Albanian gendarmerie – was to come under the Northern Epirote administration . The Great Powers would guarantee the implementation of the terms of the Protocol , while its execution and maintenance was entrusted to the International Control Commission . 
 = = = Reactions and approval = = = 
 On June 1 the Great Powers ( including Italy and Austria @-@ Hungary ) approved the results of the negotiations and on June 23 the terms of the Protocol were officially approved by the Albanian Government . The Greek government , without being involved until then in the situation , was aware of the negotiations and the possibility of a final agreement . Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos advised Georgios Christakis @-@ Zografos to approve the protocol ’ s terms without asking for even wider autonomy . 
 The Northern Epirote representatives in the following Panepirotic Assembly of <unk> had to take the final decision on whether to accept the Protocol . The Protocol was eventually accepted after the intervention of Venizelos ; however the representatives of Himara found the terms too humiliating , arguing that the only viable solution would be union with Greece and not autonomy inside the Albanian state . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Political situation and outbreak of World War I = = = 
 Soon after the outbreak of World War I ( July 1914 ) , the situation in Albania became unstable and political chaos ensued . When the country became split into a number of regional governments , Prince William departed the country in September 1914 . On 27 October , after approval from the Great Powers , the Greek army re @-@ entered Northern Epirus . The Provisional Government of Northern Epirus formally ceased to exist , declaring that it had accomplished its objectives . The region was de facto annexed to Greece until the second half of 1916 , when Italian troops evicted the Greek army from the area . 
 = = = Interwar Period and Annulment of the Protocol = = = 
 In 1921 the Protocol of Corfu was annulled during the Conference of Ambassadors and Northern Epirus was definitively ceded to the Albanian state . However attempts to re @-@ establish an autonomous Northern Epirus continued . In 1921 the Albanian government , during the country 's entrance to the League of Nations , committed itself to protect the rights of minorities within its territory , which were ratified by the local Parliament next year . However , these rights were granted within a much more limited area compared to the Protocol , which included only some villages in the regions of Himara , Gjirokastër and <unk> , and none of the main towns . Moreover , Greek education was viewed as a potential threat to the territorial integrity of the Albanian state and Greek schools were either closed or converted to Albanian ones . As a result of this policy , education in Greek was limited and for a time virtually eliminated ( 1934 – 1935 ) . Only after the intervention of the Permanent Court of International Justice , in April 1935 , did the Albanian side allow the reopening of Greek @-@ language schools and waive its insistence on the use of Albanian in Greek schools . 
 The Albanian state led also efforts to establish an independent orthodox church , contrary to the provisions of the Protocol of Corfu and thereby reducing the influence of Greek language in the region . According to a 1923 law , priests who were not Albanian speakers , as well as not of Albanian origin , were excluded from this new autocephalous church . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Protocol of Corfu is often mentioned by Northern Epirote and human rights organizations when referring to the discrimination against the Greek minority in Albania . On the other hand , in Albanian historiography this agreement is scarcely mentioned or its interpretation is often grounded on different positions : it is seen as an attempt to divide the Albanian state and as a proof of the Great Powers ' disregard for the national integrity of Albania . 
 Notably , during the 1960s , the Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev asked the communist leader of Albania Enver Hoxha about giving autonomy to the minority , but this initiative was without any result . The autonomy question remains one of the main issues on the diplomatic agenda in Albanian @-@ Greek relations , after the collapse of the communist regime in Albania ( 1991 ) . Moreover , a certain degree of autonomy , based on the terms of the Protocol of Corfu , is the main objective of the organization Omonoia , as well as the Unity for Human Rights Party , which represents the Greek minority in the Albanian government . Such proposals were rejected in 1991 by the Albanian government , thus spurring Omonoia 's radical wing to call for Union with Greece . In another incident , in 1993 , Omonoia ’ s chairman was immediately arrested by the Albanian police , after explaining in public that the goal of the Greek minority was autonomy inside the Albanian borders , based on the terms of the Protocol . 
 = Chase Promenade = 
 Chase Promenade ( formerly Bank One Promenade ) is an open @-@ air , tree @-@ lined pedestrian walkway that opened July 16 , 2004 . It is part of Millennium Park , which is located in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois in the United States . The Promenade was made possible by a gift from the Bank One Foundation . It is 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) and used for exhibitions , festivals and other family events as well as private rentals . 
 The Chase Promenade has hosted the 2005 Revealing Chicago : An Aerial Portrait photo exhibition , the 2008 Paintings Below Zero exhibition and the 2009 Burnham Pavilions . The Burnham Pavilions were the cornerstone of the citywide Burnham Plan centennial celebration . 
 = = Details = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid @-@ 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . Today , Millennium Park trails only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 The Promenade , which spans the park from Randolph Street on the north to Monroe Street on the south , has three sections : North Promenade , Central Promenade , and South Promenade . Throughout the year it is available for private rental , and it has permanent tent anchors that make it accommodating year @-@ round . 
 = = = Past exhibitions = = = 
 The city has used the Promenade to host several festivals and exhibitions . 
 Revealing Chicago : An Aerial Portrait was displayed on the Central Chase Promenade and South Boeing Gallery from June 10 to October 10 , 2005 . The exhibit featured 100 images from Chicago metropolitan area taken on 50 flights that occurred between March 2003 and August 2004 at various seasons of the year . Photographer Terry Evans , a Chicagoan , says that although 90 % of the photographs were taken while in a helicopter , her preferred method of travel is hot air balloon , but Chicago was usually too windy to shoot by balloon . 
 Chicago Tribune art critic Alan G. Artner noted that the Mark di Suvero installation ( 2007 – <unk> ) hosted at the smaller Boeing Galleries was limited to his midsize pieces , and even these were a bit tightly bunched . He felt the Chase Promenade might have served as a better forum and would have left the artist unfettered to choose from a wider range of pieces . 
 From February 1 through February 29 , 2008 , Millennium Park hosted a winter celebration called the Museum of Modern Ice . This event featured an exhibition located on the Central Promenade by artist Gordon Halloran entitled Paintings Below Zero . The exhibition 's centerpiece was an abstract artwork on the surface of four ice panels that measured 95 by 12 feet ( 29 @.@ 0 by 3 @.@ 7 m ) . In addition to the ice wall painting , Halloran painted the surface of the McCormick Tribune Ice Rink . 
 In 2009 , the celebration of the fifth anniversary Millennium Park and the 100th anniversary of the Burnham Plan will include two temporary the privately funded pavilions located on the South end of the Chase Promenade . The pavilions by Zaha Hadid and Ben van Berkel will feature information highlighting the Burnham Plan and its implications for Chicago 's present and future . They will be on display from June 19 – October 31 , 2009 . 
 = 2009 Giro d 'Italia , Stage 1 to Stage 11 = 
 The 2009 Giro d 'Italia began on 9 May , with Stage 11 occurring on 20 May . The first stage , like it had been since 2007 , was a team time trial , a stage where each member of the team raced together against the clock . Like most cycling Grand Tours do , the beginning of the 2009 Giro included a string of flat stages that were contested by sprinters . These stages were contested by Alessandro Petacchi and Mark Cavendish , among others , with Petacchi in victory becoming one of the only riders to defeat Cavendish in a sprint in the 2009 season . 
 At the end of the race 's first week and beginning of its second were three hilly medium @-@ mountain stages . These stages took the Giro through Austria and Switzerland before returning to Italy . Each of these stages took more than five hours to complete , and the rain that fell each day combined with the difficulties presented by the numerous ascents and descents made the courses potentially unsafe in the riders ' opinion . This opinion was perhaps validated by the life @-@ threatening injuries sustained by Pedro Horrillo in the eighth stage after he crashed while descending a mountain . While the ninth stage was meant to be a showy criterium in celebration of this being the 100th anniversary of the Giro d 'Italia , the riders collectively protested the safety conditions of that stage and the ones before it . This meant it would be neutralized , with every rider receiving the same finishing time as the stage winner regardless of when they finished . 
 The tenth stage was the longest of this year 's Giro , and one of its most mountainous . It , along with a stage later in the race , were both called the race 's queen stage , its most difficult stage . Danilo Di Luca won this stage to pad his overall lead going into the second half of the Giro . 
 = = Stage 1 = = 
 9 May 2009 — Lido ( Venice ) , 20 @.@ 5 km ( 12 @.@ 7 mi ) ( team time trial ) 
 The 2009 Giro began , as it had since 2007 , with a team time trial ( TTT ) . The 20 @.@ 5 km ( 12 @.@ 7 mi ) ride over a perfectly flat course in Venice decided who would wear the first pink jersey . 
 Team Columbia – High Road was the first team to ride the course , and wound up being the stage winners . They all finished together , which is relatively uncommon ( especially for a winning team : only Caisse d 'Epargne , which took the course nearly a minute slower , managed to also have all nine riders cross the finish line together ) . Garmin – Slipstream , who had said previously it was their goal to replicate their TTT victory from the 2008 Giro d 'Italia , finished officially 6 seconds back of Team Columbia – High Road , but they had only the minimum of 5 riders finishing together ( the team 's time is taken for the fifth rider to cross the line ) . As the first Team Columbia – High Road rider to cross the line , Mark Cavendish was awarded the first pink jersey as general classification ( GC ) leader ; he was also awarded the white jersey as youth classification leader . 
 = = Stage 2 = = 
 10 May 2009 — <unk> to Trieste , 156 km ( 97 mi ) 
 This stage was very flat . It had only one categorized climb , at low elevation , near the end . This climb award the first points in the mountains classification and thus , the first green jersey awarded to its leader . The riders took three laps of an 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) finishing circuit in Trieste , with the points for the climb taken on their second time over the hill at Montebello . 
 Leonardo Scarselli was free of the main field for most of the stage after escaping early in the morning . The bunch caught him with 31 km ( 19 mi ) to race , though . David García won the climb in Trieste to become the first wearer of the green jersey , and Alessandro Petacchi won the group sprint to the line , narrowly edging out race leader Mark Cavendish . 
 A crash on the third pass over the Montebello hill meant the field was broken , with only 51 riders together for the sprint finish . The rest of the peloton finished 13 seconds back , and since this crash occurred outside 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from the finish line , all time lost stood as lost . Notables among those who lost 13 seconds were Levi Leipheimer and Ivan Basso . 
 = = Stage 3 = = 
 11 May 2009 — Grado to Valdobbiadene , 198 km ( 123 mi ) 
 This stage was also flat , and ended in a mass sprint . 
 A five rider breakaway , which had a maximum advantage of seven minutes , took the points at the one intermediate sprint and the one categorised climb of the day , but were caught with some 38 km ( 24 mi ) remaining . A number of crashes occurred starting at the 50 km ( 31 mi ) remaining mark , and a series of attempted breaks meant that the peloton was fragmented , and Alessandro Petacchi took a second successive stage from a depleted group sprint . 
 The biggest victim of the repeated crashes was Garmin – Slipstream leader Christian Vande Velde , who had to retire from the Giro with a broken rib and a hairline fracture of his pelvis . The crashes also made it so Mark Cavendish was not with the main peloton as it approached the finish line ; he came to within 15 seconds of the group before abandoning the attempt to reach them , and essentially conceding the pink jersey . Petacchi 's second straight stage win gave him the race leadership . 
 = = Stage 4 = = 
 12 May 2009 — Padova to San Martino di Castrozza , 162 km ( 101 mi ) 
 This was the first mountain stage of the Giro , with a high climb coming at 123 km ( 76 mi ) and a mountain finish at San Martino di Castrozza . 
 A group of 6 riders escaped after just 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . This group comprised Serafin Martinez , Francesco Bellotti , Davide Viganò , Ian Stannard , Francesco De Bonis , and Jens Voigt . They attained a maximum advantage of six and a half minutes , and with a healthy pace of 45 km / h ( 28 mph ) through the stage 's first three hours , it appeared possible that one of them would be the stage winner . The pace caught up with the group as they reached the foot of the day 's final climb , and only Voigt and Bellotti remained together as the climb began . Two kilometers into the climb , Voigt attacked again and tried to solo to victory over the last 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . 
 The top GC men in the peloton and the specialist climbers formed a chase group that overhauled Voigt in the final 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . The attacks of Colombian climber Mauricio Soler had been responsible for driving this group to catch the remnants of the breakaway , and he attacked again in the final 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) , quickly getting a gap over the competition and appearing poised for the stage win . As Soler had been the one who caused the crash that kept Mark Cavendish from potentially defending the pink jersey the day before , his combativeness on this stage was described as his " redemption " . 2007 Giro d 'Italia winner Danilo Di Luca timed his sprint to the line just right and overtook Soler for the victory . Sixteen riders finished with the same time as Di Luca , ten more were six seconds back , and a further 26 were inside a minute of his winning time . Thomas Lövkvist , who finished in the same group as Di Luca , took a narrow lead in the overall classification after the stage . However , Di Luca later tested positive for EPO and was stripped of his victory . The stage win was subsequently awarded to Stefano Garzelli , the runner @-@ up . 
 = = Stage 5 = = 
 13 May 2009 — San Martino di Castrozza to Alpe di Siusi , 125 km ( 78 mi ) 
 This was one of the shortest road race stages in the 2009 Giro , but its profile was quite unusual . It saw the riders start where they ended the previous day , on the mountaintop at San Martino di Castrozza , climb some 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) for a categorized climb at Passo Rolle , and then descend over 1 @,@ 700 m ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) before climbing most of that distance right back for another mountaintop finish at Alpe di Siusi . 
 A seven @-@ man breakaway was clear over the Passo Rolle climb and took a maximum lead of four and a half minutes in the valley between peaks . Giovanni Visconti was briefly race leader on the road , as he began the stage just under three minutes behind pink jersey wearer Thomas Lövkvist in the General Classification . The peloton , paced by Liquigas , caught them without about 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) left to race , leading the way for Sylwester Szmyd and then Ivan Basso to try to fracture the field before the finish . Six riders were able to keep his pace to the finish , with Denis Menchov the first to Alpe di <unk> for the stage win . The other six in the leading group kept close to the stage winner , with only Carlos Sastre losing more than ten seconds . Danilo Di Luca became the new race leader after his second place on the stage . 
 Damiano Cunego , Lance Armstrong and Stefano Garzelli , all of whom had been considered as possible favorites for overall victory in the Giro , all lost more than two minutes on this stage , being unable to take Liquigas ' pace on the way up to Alpe di <unk> . As they , along with Michael Rogers , had shown weakness on the climb , one report named as the only remaining possibilities for Giro champion Menchov , Di Luca , Lövkvist , Basso , Levi Leipheimer , and Sastre . The victory gave Menchov stage wins in all three Grand Tours for his career , and his team Rabobank its first ever Giro d 'Italia stage win . 
 = = Stage 6 = = 
 14 May 2009 — Brixen to <unk> ( Austria ) , 248 km ( 154 mi ) 
 This stage was one of the longest in the 2009 Giro . The first half of the stage was undulating , without a categorized climb . The second half featured two short climbs with a flat 22 km ( 14 mi ) valley in between them . The descent from the second climb , <unk> , left a flat 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) to race before the finish in Austria . 
 The day 's breakaway comprised five riders , and it formed after 55 km ( 34 mi ) in the saddle . Their maximum advantage was just under eight minutes . Michele Scarponi and Vasil Kiryienka shed their mates on the second climb of the day , about 60 km ( 37 mi ) from the finish . Scarponi dropped Kiryienka 50 km ( 31 mi ) later and went it alone for the stage win . The pink jersey group absorbed all the other members of the morning breakaway and finished half a minute behind Scarponi , with six from that group gaining four seconds on race leader Danilo Di Luca at the finish . Lance Armstrong lost even more time , finishing 43 seconds behind second place man Edvald Boasson Hagen . 
 = = Stage 7 = = 
 15 May 2009 — Innsbruck ( Austria ) to Chiavenna , 244 km ( 152 mi ) 
 The race returned to Italy , after also passing through Switzerland , in another long stage . The one climb of the day occurred a little over 200 km ( 120 mi ) into the stage , the Passo Maloja . The entire stage to that point was on a slight increase in elevation , while the finish was on a long and drastic descent into Chiavenna . Its profile made it seem an inviting stage for breakaway attempts . 
 This stage saw numerous breakaways get away and stay away for a time . The first of them comprised four riders , coming clear after 24 km ( 15 mi ) . This group attained a maximum advantage of over nine minutes , but the peloton was able to catch them before the Passo Maloja . Right at the summit , Alessandro Bertolini attacked and came free for a time . He was able to lengthen his escape somewhat by descending the Passo Maloja in an extremely aerodynamic position , out of the saddle with all his weight over the handlebars . A crucial four @-@ man break took place 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the finish line , with Bertolini able to stay with them as they caught him , making it a five @-@ man leading group . Andriy Hryvko tried to make his way up to them after they were well away , but could not make it . Despite the presence of more experienced riders and riders noted as sprinters in the break , it was young Norwegian Edvald Boasson Hagen who made it to the line first . 
 Controversy had arisen before the Giro when it was revealed that many of Astana 's sponsors in Kazakhstan had not paid their full obligations to the team , and that the riders had therefore not been paid their full salaries to that point in the season . In protest , the team wore new jerseys beginning with this stage , that had the names of those underpaying sponsors faded out to the point of being unreadable . 
 = = Stage 8 = = 
 16 May 2009 — <unk> to Bergamo , 209 km ( 130 mi ) 
 There were two categorized climbs on this course , including a fairly tall and steep one at Culmine di San Pietro after 64 km ( 40 mi ) . However , the amount of flat racing after the descent suggested that the type of finish this stage would see was far from certain . 
 Between the 30 km ( 19 mi ) and 40 km ( 25 mi ) marks in this stage , a ten @-@ man breakaway slowly formed . Their maximum advantage was just over four minutes as they neared the day 's second climb , the Colle del Gallo . A group of GC favorites and domestiques from their teams were first over this climb , with race leader Danilo Di Luca not among them at first , almost a minute back . As the leading group seemed unwilling to work together , Di Luca was able to bridge the gap and make it to them . Kanstantsin Sivtsov made the decisive attack of the day , coming clear some 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from the line , and though he never held even half a minute 's advantage , he managed to stay away for the stage win . 
 This stage also saw a dramatic and life @-@ threatening crash from Pedro Horrillo , on the Culmine di San Pietro . His bike skidded on wet leaves during the descent , causing him to lose control of his machine , slide into a guardrail , and tumble head over heels down the mountainside . Horrillo fell 60 m ( 200 ft ) and sustained fractures to his thighbones , kneecaps , and T12 and C3 vertebrae , as well as a punctured lung and internal bleeding . He was airlifted off the mountain and was then taken by ambulance to a nearby hospital . Horrillo woke up in the ambulance , but was put in a chemically induced coma to aid his treatment . He was taken out of the coma the next day , with scans revealing no brain damage . The peloton 's protest of Stage 9 the next day was largely in reaction to Horrillo 's serious injury . 
 After spending some five weeks in hospitals both in Italy and his native Spain , Horrillo eventually recovered . 
 = = Stage 9 = = 
 17 May 2009 — Milan , 165 km ( 103 mi ) ( Milano Show 100 ) 
 This stage was a circuit race . The field took 10 laps of a 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) course in Milan ( there was a 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) run @-@ in before the circuits began ) . The course was flat , and the stage figured to be a major sprinters ' battle . 
 The character of this stage changed drastically after the dramatic injury sustained by Pedro Horrillo the day before brought attention to safety conditions on this and other courses in the Giro . With the course passing over numerous different surfaces , including tram tracks and cobblestones , the peloton collectively protested racing this course , and as such it was neutralized , with everyone receiving the same time as the stage winner and no points were awarded for the points classification as had been planned . There were also parked cars at the side of the road in many places , forcing the riders into narrow tunnels to get through them . 
 Originally , the result of the riders ' protest was only that the stage times would not count . The peloton rode the first four laps very slowly , about 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) slower than previous stages , and at the end of the fourth lap , the race stopped altogether as race leader Danilo Di Luca took a microphone to address the crowd and explain why they were riding so slowly . Lance Armstrong , who along with Di Luca had been considered the voice of the peloton in the protest , apologized to the fans for the effect it had on what was supposed to be a grand spectacle , but also contended that it was the correct decision for the peloton to make . 
 The pace did eventually pick up , on the last lap , and the finish was contested in a bunched sprint , won by Mark Cavendish . 
 = = Stage 10 = = 
 19 May 2009 — Cuneo to <unk> , 262 km ( 163 mi ) 
 After the rest day , the riders were faced with the Giro 's longest stage , with numerous high mountain climbs along the course and the distinction of being the race 's queen stage . It was originally scheduled to include the Col d 'Izoard , which has been featured numerous times in the Tour de France as an Hors <unk> climb . Race officials later decided to alter the course , staying on the Italian side of the Alps , believing the stretches that were to take place in France were too remote and that radio communication in the area could not be assured . The course as it originally was designed mimicked exactly a course used in the 1949 Giro d 'Italia . 
 The resulting alterations caused the course to be even longer than first planned , 262 km ( 163 mi ) rather than 250 km ( 160 mi ) , with a small categorized climb just under 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) from the finish . This came after a 50 km ( 31 mi ) long descent from what became the course 's principal climb , Sestrière . The race 's overall contenders were expected to distinguish themselves on this stage . 
 A surprisingly fast beginning to the stage , with a first hour that covered over 50 km ( 31 mi ) , managed to keep any breakaways from going clear for over two hours . Twelve eventually came ahead of the peloton , with seven in the lead and five chasing between the leaders and the peloton . The third group on the road eventually dwindled to a select contingent of overall favorites , which included race leader Danilo Di Luca . Former Giro champion Stefano Garzelli attacked from this group on the day 's first climb and got to the leading group of five before the summit , claiming maximum points on it and on Sestrière to gain leadership of the mountains classification at the end of the day . Garzelli 's maximum advantage , at the summit of Sestrière , was just over six minutes . 
 A group of most of the top riders in the GC , paced by the race leader himself , caught every one of the twelve initial leaders , and subsequently Garzelli just before the day 's last climb , Prà Martino . Di Luca 's aggressive descent of Prà Martino gave him a gap over the elite group of riders who had been able to hold his wheel to that point , and the stage win . The day saw a big winner in time gains and a big loser : Lance Armstrong finished 29 seconds behind Di Luca in the same group as the man finishing sixth on the stage , gaining seven places in the GC , while Thomas Lövkvist lost over a minute and fell from second to eighth in the GC . 
 = = Stage 11 = = 
 20 May 2009 — Turin to Arenzano , 214 km ( 133 mi ) 
 The Passo del Turchino , famous for its use every year in the classic one @-@ day race Milan – San Remo , was visited 19 km ( 12 mi ) from the end of this stage . The climb is not difficult enough to be at all selective , so pre @-@ stage analysis led to expectations that either a mass sprint would occur or a breakaway of riders deep down in the GC would finish first on this stage . 
 Astana rider Chris Horner did not start the stage due to a leg injury sustained in a fall in Stage 10 , leaving Levi Leipheimer and Lance Armstrong without their usual support rider . At the 56 km ( 35 mi ) mark , Caisse d 'Epargne rider Joaquim Rodríguez dropped out after a 9th place finish in the previous stage . 
 A break formed after 65 km ( 40 mi ) , including Gustavo César , Cameron Meyer , Dmytro <unk> and Alessandro Donati . Soon after , Levi Leipheimer crashed , but was unhurt . The break was caught , and a solo break was formed by Vladimir <unk> . Astana drove the peloton up the Turchino , the day 's lone climb , with Armstrong leading the descent and race leader Danilo Di Luca somewhat surprisingly coming forward to hold Armstrong 's wheel . Some riders tried to escape for victory on the way into Arenzano , but the sprinters ' teams worked to keep the field together , and Mark Cavendish took another bunched sprint win over Tyler Farrar and Alessandro Petacchi . 
 It was after this stage , on the eve of the Cinque Terre time trial , that Danilo Di Luca gave his first of two positive tests for continuous erythropoiesis receptor activator ( CERA ) , the results of which became public after the Giro was over . 
 = Colony ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Colony " is the sixteenth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 10 , 1995 . It was directed by Nick Marck , and written by series creator Chris Carter based on a story developed by Carter and lead actor David Duchovny . " Colony " featured guest appearances by Megan Leitch , Peter Donat and Brian Thompson . The episode helped explore the series ' overarching mythology . " Colony " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 , being watched by 9 @.@ 8 million households in its initial broadcast . " Colony " is a two @-@ part episode , with the plot continuing in the next episode , " End Game " . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate the murders of human clones working in abortion clinics at the hands of a shapeshifting assassin ( Thompson ) . Mulder receives news that his younger sister Samantha ( Leitch ) , who had been abducted as a child , may have returned . It is one of the X @-@ Files episodes that " <unk> the monstrous through reproduction . " In the episode , " the bodies of the male clones are feminized " and Scully becomes the protector of the monstrous when in one scene she meets several identical men in white lab coats . 
 " Colony " introduced the recurring role of the Alien Bounty Hunter . Actor Brian Thompson auditioned and later won the role . Frank Spotnitz and Carter did not have much time to cast this character , but they knew this casting would be important since he was intended to be a recurring character . Thompson was chosen according to Spotnitz because he had a very " distinctive look " about him , most notably his face and mouth . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens in medias res with Fox Mulder in a field hospital in the Arctic . As Mulder is lowered into a tub of water , Dana Scully bursts in and tells the doctors that the cold is the only thing keeping him alive . Suddenly , Mulder 's heart monitor flatlines . 
 Two weeks earlier , in the Beaufort Sea , crewmen on a ship spot a light in the sky that soon crashes into the sea . A body is retrieved from the crash , revealed to be an Alien Bounty Hunter . Two days later , the Bounty Hunter arrives in Scranton , Pennsylvania , at an abortion clinic and kills a doctor by stabbing him in the back of the neck with a stiletto weapon , then sets the building on fire and escapes . Mulder receives emails containing the doctor 's obituary along with two other identical doctors . After interviewing an anti @-@ abortion priest who had threatened one of the doctors , they are able to use a newspaper advertisement looking for one of the men to track another one , Aaron Baker , to Syracuse , New York . 
 Mulder has a fellow FBI agent , Barrett Weiss , visit Baker 's residence . Weiss and Baker are both killed by the Bounty Hunter , who impersonates Weiss and tells Mulder and Scully that no one is home . After Walter Skinner hears of Weiss ' death and closes the case , the agents meet CIA official Ambrose Chapel , who tells them that the doctors are clones from a Soviet genetics program , and are being systematically killed by the Russian and U.S. governments . Mulder , Scully and Chapel head to pick up another doctor named James Dickens , but Dickens flees at the sight of Chapel , who is really the disguised Bounty Hunter . Dickens is killed by the Bounty Hunter in the subsequent pursuit , unknowingly aided by Mulder and Scully . 
 Scully doubts " Chapel 's " credibility , but Mulder believes his story due to his credentials and experience . Scully performs an autopsy on Weiss and finds that his blood has coagulated , while his red blood cell count is excessively high . Scully finds an address on a bag recovered from Dickens ' residence and heads there , discovering a lab that is in the process of being destroyed by " Chapel . " Meanwhile , Mulder is summoned to the home of his father , Bill , and learns that his sister Samantha has seemingly returned home after being abducted decades before . Samantha claims that she was returned around age nine with no memory , and recently recalled her experience through regression hypnosis . 
 Samantha tells Mulder that the Bounty Hunter and the clones are actually aliens , and the Bounty Hunter will begin chasing her as soon as he has killed the remaining clones . Meanwhile , Scully heads to a hotel to hide from the Bounty Hunter . Returning to the lab , she finds four more clones , who claim to be the last . Scully arranges for them to be transported to a safe place , but the Bounty Hunter follows her and watches . At her hotel room , Scully lets in a man who seems to be Mulder , only to receive a phone call from the actual Mulder soon after . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 As in all other episodes of The X @-@ Files at that point , the casting process took eight days . Megan Leitch , the woman who portrayed Samantha Mulder , did according to Frank Spotnitz a " phenomenal job " . Leitch returned to The X @-@ Files over the years to portray Samantha or one of her many clones . She had a lot of lines , which she felt were " very hard " and " specific . " Actor Darren McGavin , star of Kolchak : The Night Stalker , was originally sought to play the role of Bill Mulder , but was unable due to his work schedule . The role was ultimately played by Peter Donat . 
 Brian Thompson auditioned for the role of the bounty hunter in a casting session , where he was competing with another actor . Frank Spotnitz and Carter did not have much time to cast this character , but they knew this casting would be important since he intended to be a recurring character . Thompson was chosen according to Spotnitz because he had a very " distinctive look " about him , most notably his face and mouth . After casting him , they told Thompson 's agent that Thompson needed a hair cut , because at the start the Alien Bounty Hunter was supposed to be a kind of military pilot who 'd been shot down . But when the day came that Thompson came to Vancouver , there had been some " misunderstanding " and he hadn 't been told of the " <unk> " , so the hairstyle seen in this episode was a " compromise " of sorts . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 Carter said that while " Colony " was a " crystallization of the series ' mythology " , it " came about inadvertently " , following David Duchovny 's suggestion to face an alien bounty hunter . Thus he sat with the actor and decided to also add Mulder 's disappeared sister . The alien weapon , described by the cast and crew as " the ice pick " , was done with an air hose that ran through Brian Thompson 's arm . To create a unique and otherworldly sound made by the weapon used by the hunter , several sound effects were considered before co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin voiced the noise himself on a microphone . 
 Carter had initially wanted to set the first season episode " Ice " at the North Pole , but this was too ambitious at the time . " Colony " provided an opportunity to create an episode using such a setting . Some of the interior shots on the icebreaker were filmed on the HMCS Mackenzie , a decommissioned Canadian Forces destroyer , which was also used in the episode 's follow @-@ up , " End Game " , and the later second season episode " Død Kalm " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Colony " premiered on the Fox network on February 10 , 1995 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on December 11 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 9 @.@ 8 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 In a retrospective of the second season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a B + . The review stated that " untangling this web of shifting allegiances and identities requires intense concentration . Hang on , though ; the payoff 's worth it " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode an A , noting that it was " X @-@ Files in top form " . He praised how the character of Samantha Mulder was presented , saying that " In the seasons to come , we end up with enough Samantha 's [ sic ] to fill a clown @-@ car , but here , the reveal is shocking , effective , and unsettling " ; and also felt that the episode 's flashforward cold open was particularly well @-@ handled . Michelle Bush , in her book Myth @-@ X , wrote that " Colony " presents a moral dilemma for the characters , noting that " on the surface Mulder 's quest appears righteous , however , the results of his quest would suggest otherwise " , and adding " generally the ideology that focuses on a single life 's ( be that human or alien ) importance is successful , whereas Mulder 's ideology of finding the truth at all costs is not " . Duchovny 's portrayal of Fox Mulder in this episode has been cited as an example of the character 's reversal of traditional gender roles — his openness and vulnerability when confronted with what he believes is his prodigal sister casts him " in a pattern typically engendered as female . " 
 = Ohio State Route 85 = 
 State Route 85 ( SR 85 , OH 85 ) is an east – west state highway in the northeastern Ohio . The western terminus of SR 85 is in the center of Andover where it intersects U.S. Route 6 ( US 6 ) and SR 7 . Its eastern terminus is just over 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) east of Andover at the Pennsylvania State Line in the middle of the Pymatuning Causeway , where Pennsylvania Route 285 ( PA 285 ) continues east . 
 The shortest of three state routes that lie completely within Ashtabula County , the current SR 85 is a fraction of the route it was when first designated in the mid @-@ 1920s , when it ran from Euclid to Andover and onto the Pymatuning Causeway . When US 6 was designated in Ohio in the early 1930s , SR 85 was at first co @-@ signed with the U.S. highway from Euclid to Andover , but by the late 1930s , the SR 85 shields were removed from this stretch of roadway , leaving just the stretch of highway that exists today . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entirety of SR 85 is situated in the eastern portion of Ashtabula County . No part of SR 85 is included within the National Highway System , a system of routes deemed most important for the economy , defense and mobility of the country . 
 SR 85 begins at an intersection with US 6 and SR 7 at a rectangular traffic circle that encircles Andover Township Park in downtown Andover . The two @-@ lane state highway , which runs generally due east for its entire length , departs from the intersection and passes through a primarily commercial stretch of roadway to the point where it crosses the village limits of Andover , and enters into Andover Township . The tree @-@ lined highway passes a mix of businesses and residences before reaching a signalized intersection with Pymatuning Lake Road , a road that follows the western edge of the Pymatuning Reservoir and connects SR 85 with the facilities of Pymatuning State Park . East of the traffic light , SR 85 traverses the Pymatuning Causeway , which crosses the middle of the Pymatuning Reservoir . Approximately halfway across the causeway , the roadway hits the Pennsylvania state line . At that point , SR 85 comes to an end , and PA 285 picks up the rest of the route across the causeway . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 85 was first designated around 1923 , running from SR 2 in Euclid , to its current eastern terminus at PA 285 . When US 6 was routed into Ohio in 1932 , it was routed via the stretch of SR 85 between Euclid and Andover . For the six years following , US 6 and SR 85 were run concurrently along that stretch of roadway . By 1938 , SR 85 was truncated to its current routing between Andover and the connection to Pennsylvania Route 285 on the Pymatuning Causeway , leaving US 6 to be the lone route running between Euclid and Andover . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ashtabula County . 
 = Fifty Years of Freedom = 
 Fifty Years of Freedom : A Study of the Development of the Ideas of A. S. Neill is a 1972 intellectual biography of the British pedagogue A. S. Neill by Ray Hemmings . It traces how Homer Lane , Wilhelm Reich , Sigmund Freud and others influenced Neill as he developed the " Summerhill idea " , the philosophy of child autonomy behind his Summerhill School . The book follows Neill 's early life and career in rural , Calvinist Scotland and continues through the influence of his mentors , Lane and Reich , and the origins of Summerhill after World War I. Written fifty years from Summerhill 's founding , Fifty Years is a sociological and historical analysis of Neill 's ideas in the context of intellectual and educational trends both during Neill 's life and at the time of publication . Hemmings also surveyed progressive school leaders about Neill 's impact on the field , and reported their perception of influence on teacher – pupil relations . Fifty Years was first published in England in 1972 by George Allen and Unwin , and was later renamed Children 's Freedom : A. S. Neill and the Evolution of the Summerhill Idea for its 1973 American publication by Schocken Books . 
 Contemporary reviewers considered Fifty Years to be the best available biography of Neill . They largely praised its clarity and biographical detail and insight , but found the book 's philosophical sections comparatively weak and the author biased , as a former teacher from the school . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Fifty Years of Freedom is an intellectual biography of the British pedagogue A. S. Neill that traces the influence of Homer Lane , Wilhelm Reich , Sigmund Freud and others on his thought . Released fifty years after the school 's founding , the book is a sociological and historical analysis that presents the development of Neill 's " Summerhill idea " — the philosophy of his Summerhill School — in context of related social , political , educational , and intellectual trends . Hemmings himself saw the work as less of a biography than an analysis of Neill 's ideas in development and of the outward reception of these ideas . The book was first published in England in 1972 by George Allen and Unwin as Fifty Years of Freedom : A Study of the Development of the Ideas of A. S. Neill , and was later renamed Children 's Freedom : A. S. Neill and the Evolution of the Summerhill Idea for its 1973 American publication by Schocken Books . The book includes photographs . 
 The book follows the course of Neill 's life sequentially from his youth in " rural , Calvinist Scotland " to the start of Summerhill between the two World Wars . Hemmings focuses on Neill 's relation to education but also minds other biographical detail : the influence of Freudian psychoanalysis and Homer Lane 's theories in the 1920s , and of Wilhelm Reich 's psychological theories in the 1930s . Hemmings compares Neill 's thought with that of Maria Montessori , Bertrand Russell , Fred Clarke , Erich Fromm , Susan Sutherland Isaacs , Benjamin Spock , and contemporaries Paul Goodman , Ivan Illich , R. D. Laing , and Herbert Marcuse . Compared to pedagogues such as Russell , who advocated for the inculcation of certain virtues in a child 's education , Neill instead insisted that the child be left to make its own values and decisions apart from adult influence and manipulation . Hemmings also reviews the roles of freedom , authority , and anarchy throughout the maturation of Neill 's thought . The final sections explain Summerhill 's internal processes , philosophy , and position in both British and global social order . Hemmings contends that Summerhill has remained consistent to its principles while it cycled through roles as one of many 1920s educational experiments , a bastion in the 1930s , and an advocate for " children 's freedom " throughout the post @-@ World War II movement for " ' informal ' education " . 
 Hemmings conducted a study that surveyed 102 progressive heads — broadly defined — of infant , elementary , and secondary schools about Neill 's influence . Their responses indicated that Neill had significant impact on how the profession perceived teacher – pupil relations . The respondents also reported significant influence from Neill on moral and sex education . Contrarily , Neill had little impact on school curriculum and classroom teaching methods . Hemmings received little response from heads of state comprehensive schools . 
 Hemmings had previously taught at Summerhill . In 1973 , he was Lecturer in Education at the University of Leicester . Other contemporaneous and significant biographies of Neill include Neill 's autobiography ( Neill ! Neill ! Orange Peel ! , 1972 ) and Robert Skidelsky 's Part Three of English Progressive Schools ( 1969 ) . Jonathan Croall 's Neill of Summerhill ( 1983 ) later cited Hemmings 's book . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Though Hemmings did not think of his work as a biography , Richard L. Hopkins ( Comparative Education Review ) said it essentially was strongest as one . Hopkins wrote in 1976 that Hemmings 's book was the best biography of Neill available at the time , and called it " comprehensive " , " objective " , and " sympathetically thoughtful " . In comparison , Neill 's autobiography " rambles " and Skidelsky 's biography " preens " over " small insights " , while Hemmings unpacks larger issues to contextualize " a complex man in a complex world " . Reflecting on these three biographies of Neill , Hopkins added that Hemmings 's book would interest " comparative educators " most , as that it addressed the two points readers would find most interesting about Neill : the role of his history on his ideas , and the role of his ideas in the outside world . Still , Hopkins thought many readers would find the work " too long and detailed " . Hopkins himself found Hemmings 's book " a struggle to work through " , though more complete compared to Neill 's " easy " , " stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness " prose . Leonard W. Cowie ( British Journal of Educational Studies ) said that Fifty Years was written with " great competence " and would be both " interesting and essential " for those interested in understanding Neill . Choice recommended the " excellent volume " for " all readership levels " , and considered it more telling than Neill 's own autobiography . Shelley <unk> ( Library Journal ) agreed that Hemmings 's " admiring ... historical biography " remained " clear , cool , and evenhanded " . Sarah Curtis ( The Times Literary Supplement ) wrote in 1972 that Hemmings 's account of Neill was " the most lucid , dispassionate yet sympathetic " published . No system , she wrote , has reconciled the needs for individual freedom and societal regulation . 
 Commenting on the book 's survey study , Cowie ( British Journal of Educational Studies ) wrote that it was hard to ascertain Neill 's true pedagogical influence when state schools , which constitute the majority of schools , had a poor response rate . He added that the progressive education topics reported to be most influenced by Neill continued to be controversial in 1973 . Cowie asked whether challenges to authoritarian education were replaced by Neill 's methods or by chaos . Hopkins ( Comparative Education Review ) said the sociological study was more descriptive of Neill 's role than <unk> to the evolution of his philosophy . Hopkins wrote that the book functioned best as a biography , and that its philosophy sections were " piecemeal " and " sketchy " rather than " comprehensive and coherent " . Indeed , he felt that the study and the philosophical portions were more <unk> of Neill 's life than of " any broader picture " . Robert B. Nordberg ( Best Sellers ) appreciated some of the book 's " important points " , such that many advocates for educational freedom , in practice , instead seek more insidious techniques for controlling children . While Curtis ( The Times Literary Supplement ) felt that the book added little new content , she appreciated the book 's detail , such as that Neill 's A <unk> 's Log was based in fact , not fiction . 
 Multiple reviewers highlighted Hemmings 's association with the school . Cowie ( British Journal of Educational Studies ) wrote that although Neill did not want disciples , Hemmings " accepts generally the ' Summerhill idea ' " and would fit the role . Nicholas Tucker ( New Statesman ) too noted the book as " very one @-@ sided , verging on the uncritical " despite its readability and signs of thorough research . He said that a balanced account of Summerhill was elusive because of the " sensationalized " press and " rosy " recollections of Neill and his former pupils , similar to the memoirs of " Old Boys ' clubs elsewhere " . He wrote , however , that Hemmings 's position was understandable when considering the criticism that Summerhill and Neill withstood from " conventional educational wisdom " and " horrified hearsay " , which had turned the school into " a type of scholastic folk myth " to set straight . Still , Tucker saw less cause for Summerhill 's defense by the time of publication as Neill had wider acceptance . He had become a powerful figure in education and his school a template for the American free school movement . Cowie wrote that Neill seemed to be enjoying greater acceptance in his later life as Summerhill was " losing its uniqueness as ' that dreadful school ' " . Nordberg ( Best Sellers ) said that while Hemmings has some criticism for Neill and " open education " , " he is basically an enthusiast " who wrote a " sympathetic portrayal " . Even from this sympathetic angle , Nordberg felt that Neill came across as " the child of an overly strict and demanding father who has spent the rest of his life in a rather one @-@ dimensional crusade , more visceral than rational , against authority in all forms . " Altogether , Nordberg wrote , Fifty Years succeeds in its " systematic , scholarly look at the Summerhill idea " but fails to provide " a balanced , profound look " at its counterpart : " need for restraint , rationality , and responsibility in the world " . 
 Neill himself " liked " Fifty Years and thought Hemmings had done a " wonderful job " but " wasn 't critical enough " . He noted that the work received few reviews compared to his own . 
 = Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916 = 
 The Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916 were a series of shark attacks along the coast of New Jersey , in the United States , between July 1 and July 12 , 1916 , in which four people were killed and one injured . Since 1916 , scholars have debated which shark species was responsible and the number of animals involved , with the great white shark and the bull shark most frequently cited . The incidents occurred during a deadly summer heat wave and polio epidemic in the Northeastern United States that drove thousands of people to the seaside resorts of the Jersey Shore . Shark attacks on the Atlantic Coast of the United States outside the semitropical states of Florida , Georgia , and the Carolinas were rare , but scholars believe that the increased presence of sharks and humans in the water led to them in 1916 . 
 Local and national reaction to the fatalities involved a wave of panic that led to shark hunts aimed at eradicating the population of " man @-@ eating " sharks and protecting the economies of New Jersey 's seaside communities . Resort towns enclosed their public beaches with steel nets to protect swimmers . Scientific knowledge about sharks before 1916 was based on conjecture and speculation . The attacks forced ichthyologists to reassess common beliefs about the abilities of sharks and the nature of shark attacks . 
 The Jersey Shore attacks immediately entered into American popular culture , where sharks became caricatures in editorial cartoons representing danger . The attacks became the subject of documentaries for the History Channel , National Geographic Channel , and Discovery Channel , which aired 12 Days of Terror ( 2004 ) and the Shark Week episode Blood in the Water ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Incidents and victims = = 
 Between July 1 and July 12 , 1916 , five people were attacked along the coast of New Jersey by sharks ; only one of the victims survived . The first major attack occurred on Saturday , July 1 at Beach Haven , a resort town established on Long Beach Island off the southern coast of New Jersey . Charles <unk> Vansant , 25 , of Philadelphia was on vacation at the <unk> Hotel with his family . Before dinner , Vansant decided to take a quick swim in the Atlantic with a Chesapeake Bay Retriever that was playing on the beach . Shortly after entering the water , Vansant began shouting . Bathers believed he was calling to the dog , but a shark was actually biting Vansant 's legs . He was rescued by lifeguard Alexander Ott and bystander Sheridan Taylor , who claimed the shark followed him to shore as they pulled the bleeding Vansant from the water . Vansant 's left thigh was stripped of its flesh ; he bled to death on the manager 's desk of the <unk> Hotel at 6 : 45 p.m. 
 Despite the Vansant incident , beaches along the Jersey Shore remained open . Sightings of large sharks swarming off the coast of New Jersey were reported by sea captains entering the ports of Newark and New York City but were dismissed . The second major attack occurred 45 miles ( 72 km ) north of Beach Haven at the resort town of Spring Lake , New Jersey . The victim was Charles Bruder , 27 , a Swiss bell captain at the Essex & Sussex Hotel . Bruder was killed on Thursday , July 6 , 1916 , while swimming 130 yards ( 120 m ) from shore . A shark bit him in the abdomen and severed his legs ; Bruder 's blood turned the water red . After hearing screams , a woman notified two lifeguards that a canoe with a red hull had capsized and was floating just at the water 's surface . Lifeguards Chris Anderson and George White rowed to Bruder in a lifeboat and realized he had been bitten by a shark . They pulled him from the water , but he bled to death on the way to shore . According to The New York Times , " women [ were ] panic @-@ stricken [ and fainted ] as [ Bruder 's ] mutilated body ... [ was ] brought ashore . " Guests and workers at the Essex & Sussex and neighboring hotels raised money for Bruder 's mother in Switzerland . 
 The next two major attacks took place in Matawan Creek near the town of Keyport on Wednesday , July 12 . Located 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of Spring Lake and inland of Raritan Bay , Matawan resembled a Midwestern town rather than an Atlantic beach resort . Matawan 's location made it an unlikely site for shark @-@ human interaction . When Thomas Cottrell , a sea captain and Matawan resident , spotted an 8 ft ( <unk> ) long shark in the creek , the town dismissed him . Around 2 : 00 p.m. local boys , including epileptic Lester Stilwell , 11 , were playing in the creek at an area called the Wyckoff dock when they saw what appeared to be an " old black weather @-@ beaten board or a weathered log . " A dorsal fin appeared in the water and the boys realized it was a shark . Before Stilwell could climb from the creek , the shark pulled him underwater . 
 The boys ran to town for help , and several men , including local businessman Watson Stanley Fisher , 24 , came to investigate . Fisher and others dived into the creek to find Stilwell , believing him to have suffered a seizure . After locating the boy 's body and attempting to return to shore , Fisher was also bitten by the shark in front of the townspeople , losing Stilwell in the process . His right thigh was severely injured and he bled to death at Monmouth Memorial Hospital in Long Branch at 5 : 30 p.m. Stilwell 's body was recovered 150 feet ( 46 m ) upstream from the Wyckoff dock on July 14 . 
 The fifth and final victim , Joseph Dunn , 14 , of New York City was attacked a half @-@ mile from the Wyckoff dock nearly 30 minutes after the fatal attacks on Stilwell and Fisher . The shark bit his left leg , but Dunn was rescued by his brother and friend after a vicious tug @-@ of @-@ war battle with the shark . Joseph Dunn was taken to Saint Peter 's University Hospital in New Brunswick ; he recovered from the bite and was released on September 15 , 1916 . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 As the national media descended on Beach Haven , Spring Lake , and Matawan , the Jersey Shore attacks started a shark panic . According to Capuzzo , this panic was " unrivaled in American history , " " sweeping along the coasts of New York and New Jersey and spreading by telephone and wireless , letter and postcard . " At first , after the Beach Haven incident , scientists and the press reluctantly blamed the death of Charles Vansant on a shark . The New York Times reported that Vansant " was badly bitten in the surf ... by a fish , presumably a shark . " Still , State Fish Commissioner of Pennsylvania and former director of the Philadelphia Aquarium James M. Meehan asserted in the Philadelphia Public Ledger that the shark was preying on the dog , but bit Vansant by mistake . He specifically de @-@ emphasized the threat sharks posed to humans : 
 Despite the death of Charles Vansant and the report that two sharks having been caught in that vicinity recently , I do not believe there is any reason why people should hesitate to go in swimming at the beaches for fear of man @-@ eaters . The information in regard to the sharks is indefinite and I hardly believe that Vansant was bitten by a man @-@ eater . Vansant was in the surf playing with a dog and it may be that a small shark had drifted in at high water , and was marooned by the tide . Being unable to move quickly and without food , he had come in to bite the dog and snapped at the man in passing . 
 The media 's response to the second attack was more sensational . Major American newspapers such as the Boston Herald , Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Philadelphia Inquirer , Washington Post and San Francisco Chronicle placed the story on the front page . The New York Times ' headline read , " Shark Kills Bather Off Jersey Beach " . The growing panic had cost New Jersey resort owners an estimated $ 250 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in lost tourism , and bathing had declined 75 percent in some areas . A press conference was convened on July 8 , 1916 at the American Museum of Natural History with scientists Frederic Augustus Lucas , John Treadwell Nichols , and Robert Cushman Murphy as panelists . To calm the growing panic , the three men stressed that a third run in with a shark was unlikely , although they were admittedly surprised that sharks bit anyone at all . Nevertheless , Nichols — the only ichthyologist in the trio — warned swimmers to stay close to shore and to take advantage of the netted bathing areas installed at public beaches after the first attack . 
 Shark sightings increased along the Mid @-@ Atlantic Coast following the attacks . On July 8 , armed motorboats patrolling the beach at Spring Creek chased an animal they thought to be a shark , and Asbury Park 's Asbury Avenue Beach was closed after lifeguard Benjamin Everingham claimed to have beaten off a 12 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) long shark with an oar . Sharks were spotted near Bayonne , New Jersey ; Rocky Point , New York ; Bridgeport , Connecticut ; Jacksonville , Florida ; and Mobile , Alabama , and a columnist from Field & Stream captured a sandbar shark in the surf at Beach Haven . Actress Gertrude Hoffmann was swimming at the Coney Island beach shortly after the Matawan fatalities when she claimed to have encountered a shark . The New York Times noted that Hoffman " had the presence of mind to remember that she had read in the Times that a bather can scare away a shark by splashing , and she beat up the water furiously . " Hoffman was certain she was going to be devoured by the " Jersey man @-@ eater " , but later admitted she was " not sure ... whether she had had her trouble for nothing or had barely escaped death . " 
 Local New Jersey governments made efforts to protect bathers and the economy from man @-@ eating sharks . The Fourth Avenue Beach at Asbury Park was enclosed with a steel @-@ wire @-@ mesh fence and patrolled by armed motorboats ; it remained the only beach open following the Everingham incident . After the fatal attacks of Stilwell , Fisher , and Dunn , residents of Matawan lined Matawan Creek with nets and detonated dynamite in an attempt to catch and kill the shark . Matawan mayor Arris B. Henderson ordered the Matawan Journal to print wanted posters offering a $ 100 reward ( $ 2 @,@ 200 in 2016 dollars ) to anyone killing a shark in the creek . Despite the town 's efforts , no sharks were captured or killed in Matawan Creek . The " Matawan Journal " reported the shark account incident in the front page of its July 13 , 1916 issue with another article about the capture of a shark in Keyport a neighboring town in the issue of July 20 , 1916 . 
 Resort communities along the Jersey Shore petitioned the federal government to aid local efforts to protect beaches and hunt sharks . The House of Representatives appropriated $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 110 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) for eradicating the New Jersey shark threat , and President Woodrow Wilson scheduled a meeting with his Cabinet to discuss the fatal attacks . Treasury secretary William Gibbs McAdoo suggested that the Coast Guard be mobilized to patrol the Jersey Shore and protect bathers . Shark hunts ensued across the coasts of New Jersey and New York ; as the Atlanta Constitution reported on July 14 , " Armed shark hunters in motor boats patrolled the New York and New Jersey coasts today while others lined the beaches in a concerted effort to exterminate the man @-@ eaters ... " New Jersey governor James Fairman Fielder and local municipalities offered bounties to individuals hunting sharks . Hundreds of sharks were captured on the East Coast as a result of the attacks . The East Coast shark hunt is described as " the largest scale animal hunt in history . " 
 = = Identifying the " Jersey man @-@ eater " = = 
 After the second incident , scientists and the public presented theories to explain which species of shark was responsible for the Jersey Shore attacks or whether multiple sharks were involved . Lucas and Nichols proposed that a northward @-@ swimming rogue shark was responsible . They believed it would eventually arrive along New York 's coast : " Unless the shark came through the Harbor and went through the north through Hell Gate and Long Island Sound , it was presumed it would swim along the South Shore of Long Island and the first deep water inlet it reaches will be the Jamaica Bay . " 
 Witnesses of the Beach Haven fatality estimated that the shark was 9 feet ( 3 m ) long . A sea captain who saw the event believed it was a Spanish shark driven from the Caribbean Sea decades earlier by bombings during the Spanish – American War . Several fishermen claimed to have caught the " Jersey man @-@ eater " in the days following the attacks . A blue shark was captured on July 14 near Long Branch , and four days later the same Thomas Cottrell who had seen the shark in Matawan Creek claimed to have captured a sandbar shark with a gillnet near the mouth of the creek . 
 On July 14 , Harlem taxidermist and Barnum and Bailey lion tamer Michael Schleisser caught a 7 @.@ 5 foot ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) , 325 pound ( 147 kg ) shark while fishing in Raritan Bay only a few miles from the mouth of Matawan Creek . The shark nearly sank the boat before Schleisser killed it with a broken oar . When he opened the shark 's belly , he removed a " suspicious fleshy material and bones " that took up " about two @-@ thirds of a milk crate " and " together weighed fifteen pounds . " Scientists identified the shark as a young great white and the ingested remains as human . Schleisser mounted the shark and placed it on display in the window of a Manhattan shop on Broadway but it was later lost . The only surviving photograph appeared in the Bronx Home News . 
 No further attacks were reported along the Jersey Shore in the summer of 1916 after the capture of Schleisser 's shark . Murphy and Lucas declared the great white to be the " Jersey man @-@ eater " . Skeptical individuals , however , offered alternative hypotheses . In a letter to The New York Times , Barrett P. Smith of Sound Beach , New York wrote : 
 Having read with much interest the account of the fatality off Spring Lake , N.J. , I should like to offer a suggestion somewhat at variance with the shark theory . In my opinion it is most unlikely that a shark was responsible , and I believe it much more likely that the attack was made by a sea turtle . I have spent much time at sea and along shore , and have several times seen turtles large enough to inflict just such wounds . These creatures are of a vicious disposition , and when annoyed are extremely dangerous to approach , and it is my idea that Bruder may have disturbed one while it was asleep on or close to the surface . 
 Another letter to The New York Times blamed the shark infestation on the maneuvers of German U @-@ boats near America 's East Coast . The anonymous writer claimed , " These sharks may have devoured human bodies in the waters of the German war zone and followed liners to this coast , or even followed the Deutschland herself , expecting the usual toll of drowning men , women , and children . " The writer concluded , " This would account for their boldness and their craving for human flesh . " 
 Decades later , there is no consensus among researchers over Murphy and Lucas 's investigation and findings . Richard G. Fernicola published two studies of the event , and notes that " there are many theories behind the New Jersey attacks , " and all are inconclusive . Researchers such as Thomas Helm , Harold W. McCormick , Thomas B. Allen , William Young , Jean Campbell Butler , and Michael Capuzzo generally agree with Murphy and Lucas . However , the National Geographic Society reported in 2002 that " some experts are suggesting that the great white may not in fact be responsible for many of the attacks pinned on the species . These people say the real culprit behind many of the reported incidents — including the famous 1916 shark attacks in New Jersey that may have served as inspiration for Jaws — may be the lesser known bull shark . " 
 Biologists George A. Llano and Richard Ellis suggest that a bull shark could have been responsible for the fatal Jersey Shore attacks . Bull sharks swim from the ocean into freshwater rivers and streams and have attacked people around the world . In his book Sharks : Attacks on Man ( 1975 ) , Llano writes , 
 One of the most surprising aspects of the Matawan Creek attacks was the distance from the open sea . Elsewhere in the book are accounts of well @-@ documented shark @-@ human interactions at Ahwaz , Iran , which is 90 miles ( 140 km ) upriver from the sea . It may also be of interest to note that sharks live in Lake Nicaragua , a fresh @-@ water body , and in 1944 there was a bounty offered for dead freshwater sharks , as they had " killed and severely injured lake bathers recently . " 
 Ellis points out that the great white " is an oceanic species , and Schleisser 's shark was caught in the ocean . To find it swimming in a tidal creek is , to say the least , unusual , and may even be impossible . The bull shark , however , is infamous for its freshwater meanderings , as well as for its pugnacious and aggressive nature . " He admits that " the bull shark is not a common species in New Jersey waters , but it does occur more frequently than the white . " 
 In an interview with Michael Capuzzo , ichthyologist George H. Burgess surmises , " The species involved has always been doubtful and likely will continue to generate spirited debate . " Burgess , however , does not discount the great white : 
 The bull draws a lot of votes because the location , Matawan Creek , suggests brackish or fresh waters , a habitat that bulls frequent and whites avoid . However , our examination of the site reveals that the size of the " creek , " its depth , and salinity regime were closer to a marine embayment and that a smallish white clearly could have wandered into the area . Since an appropriate sized white shark with human remains in its stomach was captured nearby shortly after the attacks ( and no further incidents occurred ) , it seems likely that this was the shark involved in at least the Matawan fatalities . The temporal and geographical sequence of the incidents also suggests that earlier attacks may have involved the same shark . 
 The casualties of the 1916 attacks are listed in the International Shark Attack File — of which Burgess is director — as victims of a great white . 
 The increased presence of humans in the water proved a factor in the attacks : " As the worldwide human population continues to rise year after year , so does ... interest in aquatic recreation . The number of shark attacks in any given year or region is highly influenced by the number of people entering the water . " However , the likelihood that one shark was involved is contested . Scientists such as Victor M. <unk> and Jean Butler , relying on evidence presented by Lucas and Murphy in 1916 , assert that a single shark was responsible . On the other hand , Richard Fernicola notes that 1916 was a " shark year " as fishermen and captains were reporting hundreds of sharks swimming in the Mid @-@ Atlantic region of the United States . Ellis remarks that " to try to make the facts as we know them conform to the ' rogue shark ' theory is stretching sensationalism and credibility beyond reasonable limits . " He admits , " The evidence is long gone , and we will never really know if it was one shark or several , one species or another , that was responsible . " 
 In 2011 , further study was conducted in the Smithsonian Channel 's The Real Story : Jaws . The documentary takes a closer look at the series of events from different perspectives . It was demonstrated in the Matawan Creek attacks , for example , that the full moon of the lunar cycle , which would have coincided with the attacks , would have raised the salinity in the water by more than double just a few hours before high tide . This would have shown support for the theory that a great white could have been responsible . Other evidence such as Joseph Dunn 's injury suggested that the type of bite was more likely made by a bull shark as opposed to a great white , leading some to believe more than one shark was likely involved in the five incidents . 
 = = Revising science = = 
 Before 1916 , American scholars doubted that sharks would fatally wound a living person in the temperate waters of the United States without provocation . One skeptical scientist wrote , " There is a great difference between being attacked by a shark and being bitten by one . " He believed that sharks tangled in fishing nets or feeding on carrion might accidentally bite a nearby human . In 1891 , millionaire banker and adventurer Hermann Oelrichs offered a $ 500 reward in the New York Sun " for an authenticated case of a man having been attacked by a shark in [ the ] temperate waters " north of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . He wanted proof that " in temperate waters even one man , woman , or child , while alive , was ever attacked by a shark . " The reward went unclaimed and scientists remained convinced that the eastern coast of the United States was inhabited by harmless sharks . 
 Academics were skeptical that a shark could produce fatal wounds on human victims . <unk> Henry Weed Fowler and curator Henry Skinner of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia asserted that a shark 's jaws did not have the power to sever a human leg in a single bite . Frederic Lucas , director of the American Museum of Natural History , questioned whether a shark even as large as 30 feet ( 9 m ) could snap a human bone . He told the Philadelphia Inquirer in early 1916 that " it is beyond the power even of the largest Carcharodon to sever the leg of an adult man . " Lucas summed up his argument by pointing to Oelrichs 's unclaimed reward and that the chances of being bitten by a shark were " infinitely less than that of being struck by lightning and that there is practically no danger of an attack from a shark about our coasts . " 
 The Jersey Shore attacks compelled scientists in the United States to revise their assumptions that sharks were timid and powerless . In July 1916 , ichthyologist and editor for the National Geographic Society Hugh McCormick Smith published an article in the Newark Star @-@ Eagle describing some shark species as " harmless as doves and others the incarnation of ferocity . " He continued , " One of the most prodigious , and perhaps the most formidable of sharks is the man @-@ eater , Carcharodon carcharias [ great white ] . It roams through all temperate and tropical seas , and everywhere is an object of dread . Its maximum length is forty feet and its teeth are three inches ( 76 mm ) long . " 
 By the end of July 1916 , John Nichols and Robert Murphy were taking the great white more seriously . In Scientific American , Murphy wrote that the " white shark is perhaps the rarest of all noteworthy sharks ... their habits are little known , but they are said to feed to some extent on big sea turtles ... Judging from its physical make @-@ up , it would not hesitate to attack a man in open water . " He concluded that " because it is evident that even a relatively small white shark , weighing two or three hundred pounds , might readily snap the largest human bones by a jerk of its body , after it has bitten through the flesh . " 
 Robert Murphy and John Nichols wrote in October 1916 : 
 There is something peculiarly sinister in the shark 's make @-@ up . The sight of his dark , lean [ dorsal ] fin lazily cutting zig @-@ zags in the surface of some quiet , sparkling summer sea , and then slipping out of sight not to appear again , suggests an evil spirit . His leering , chinless face , his great mouth with its rows of knife @-@ like teeth , which he knows too well to use on the fisherman 's gear ; the relentless fury with which , when his last hour has come , he thrashes on deck and snaps at his enemies ; his toughness , his brutal , nerveless vitality and insensibility to physical injury , fail to elicit the admiration one feels for the dashing , brilliant , destructive , gastronomic bluefish , <unk> , or salmon . 
 After the Matawan attacks , Frederic Lucas admitted on the front page of The New York Times that he had underestimated sharks . The paper reported that " the foremost authority on sharks in this country has doubted that any shark ever attacked a human being , and has published his doubts , but the recent cases have changed his view . " Nichols later documented the occurrence of the great white shark in his biological survey Fishes of the Vicinity of New York City ( 1918 ) , " Carcharodon carcharias ( Linn . ) White Shark . " Man @-@ eater . " Accidental in summer . June to July 14 , 1916 . " 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 While sharks had been seen as harmless , the pendulum of public opinion quickly swung to the other extreme , and sharks quickly came to be viewed not only as eating machines , but also as fearless , ruthless killers . 
 After the first fatality , newspaper cartoonists began using sharks as caricatures for political figures , German U @-@ boats , Victorian morality and fashion , polio , and the deadly heat wave threatening the Northeast . Fernicola notes , " Since 1916 was among the years that Americans were trying to break away from the rigidity and conservatism of the Victorian period , one comic depicted a risqué polka @-@ dot bathing suit and advertised it as the secret weapon to keep sharks away from our swimmers . " Another cartoon depicted " an exasperated individual at the end of a dock that displays a ' Danger : No Swimming ' sign and mentions the three most emphasized ' danger ' topics of the day : ' Infantile Paralysis ( polio ) , Epidemic Heat Wave , and Sharks in the Ocean ' . " The cartoon is entitled " What 's a Family Man to Do ? " With America 's growing distrust of Germany in 1916 , cartoonists depicted U @-@ boats with the mouth and fins of a shark assaulting Uncle Sam while he wades in the water . 
 In 1974 , writer Peter Benchley published Jaws , a novel about a rogue great white shark that terrorizes the fictional coastal community of Amity Island . Chief of police Martin Brody , biologist Matt Hooper , and fisherman Quint hunt the shark after it kills four people . The novel was adapted as the film Jaws by Steven Spielberg in 1975 . Spielberg 's film makes reference to the events of 1916 : Brody ( Roy Scheider ) and Hooper ( Richard Dreyfuss ) urge Amity 's Mayor Vaughn ( Murray Hamilton ) to close the beaches on the Fourth of July after the deaths of two swimmers and a fisherman . Hooper explains to the mayor , " Look , the situation is that apparently a great white shark has staked a claim in the waters off Amity Island . And he 's going to continue to feed here as long as there is food in the water . " Brody adds , " And there 's no limit to what he 's gonna do ! I mean we 've already had three incidents , two people killed inside of a week . And it 's gonna happen again , it happened before ! The Jersey beach ! ... 1916 ! Five people chewed up on the surf ! " Richard Ellis , Richard Fernicola , and Michael Capuzzo suggest that the 1916 Jersey Shore attacks , <unk> 's rogue shark theory , and the exploits of New York fisherman Frank Mundus inspired Benchley . While Benchley states Mundus was an inspiration for Quint , he has denied the book was inspired by attacks off New Jersey in 1916 . The attacks are also briefly referred to in Benchley 's novel White Shark ( 1994 ) . 
 The 1916 fatal attacks are the subject of three studies : Richard G. Fernicola 's In Search of the " Jersey Man @-@ Eater " ( 1987 ) and Twelve Days of Terror ( 2001 ) and Michael Capuzzo 's Close to Shore ( 2001 ) . Capuzzo offers an in @-@ depth dramatization of the incident , and Fernicola examines the scientific , medical , and social aspects of the attacks . Fernicola 's research is the basis of an episode of the History Channel 's documentary series In Search of History titled " Shark Attack 1916 " ( 2001 ) and the Discovery Channel 's docudrama 12 Days of Terror ( 2004 ) . Fernicola also wrote and directed a 90 @-@ minute documentary called Tracking the Jersey Man @-@ Eater . It was produced by the George Marine Library in 1991 ; however , it was never widely released . 
 The attacks at Matawan are the subject of the National Geographic Channel documentary Attacks of the Mystery Shark ( 2002 ) , which examines the possibility that a bull shark was responsible for killing Stanley Fisher and Lester Stilwell ; Discovery Channel 's Blood in the Water ( 2009 ) ; Shore Thing , a fictional short film directed by <unk> and James Hill that received the award for Best Suspense Short at the 2010 NY International Film And Video Festival ; and Smithsonian Channel 's The Real Story : Jaws ( 2011 ) . 
 = Welara = 
 The Welara is a part @-@ Arabian pony breed developed from the Arabian horse and the Welsh pony . It was originally bred in England by Lady Wentworth at the Crabbet Arabian Stud in the early 1900s from imported Arabian stallions and Welsh pony mares . Breeding then spread throughout North America . In 1981 , a breed registry was formed in the United States , and a studbook began to be published . They are used for many disciplines of English riding , and are known for their refinement , hardiness and spirit . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 Welara stallions average 14 to 15 hands ( 56 to 60 inches , 142 to 152 cm ) and mares 13 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 53 to 59 inches , 135 to 150 cm ) . To be registered , Welaras must stand between 11 @.@ 2 and 15 hands ( 46 and 60 inches , 117 and 152 cm ) high . Crosses between Arabians and each of the four sections of Welsh Pony ( A , B , C and D ) tend to produce slightly different types of pony . Section A Welsh Pony crosses ( the smallest ) tend to be under 13 hands ( 52 inches , 132 cm ) , and be used mainly as light driving ponies and mounts for small children . Section B crosses usually stand 13 to 13 @.@ 2 hands ( 52 to 54 inches , 132 to 137 cm ) and can be used for driving and as riding ponies for larger children and small adults . Section C crosses average 13 @.@ 2 to 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 to 58 inches , 137 to 147 cm ) hands and tend to be a heavier pony , sometimes with feathered feet , although still showing the refinement of their Arabian ancestors . Section D crosses generally stand 13 @.@ 3 to 15 hands ( 55 to 60 inches , 140 to 152 cm ) high . The latter two types are suited to riding by average and slightly larger adults and for the majority of disciplines . 
 All colors other than Appaloosa are allowed for registration . Welara Sport Ponies may be of any color or size , without the restrictions of the purebred Welara . The mix of Arabian and Welsh blood gives the breed refinement , spirit and hardiness , as well as good movement . The head is small and slightly concave , the neck is arched ( and prone to be <unk> in stallions ) . The shoulders and croup are long and the back short . Welaras are used mainly in English riding , especially in hunter classes . They are also seen in show jumping , three @-@ day eventing , pleasure driving and as general leisure riding horses . Welara / Thoroughbred crosses are popular mounts for riders competing in hunter and jumper classes . 
 = = History = = 
 Crosses began to be made between the Arabian horse and the Welsh Pony in Sussex , England the early 1900s , by Lady Wentworth of the Crabbet Arabian Stud . She began breeding Arabian stallions , including Skowronek ( 1909 – 1930 ) , a Polish Arabian stud , to Welsh mares from North Wales , especially the Coed Coch stud farm , which she imported beginning in the early 1920s . Other breeders in England and North America soon followed suit , although at this time they were not focused on creating a new breed , and the cross became known as the Welara . 
 In 1981 , a breed registry , called the American Welara Pony Registry , was created in the US in order to develop and promote the breed . A studbook also began to be published , and pedigrees of Welaras were collected and preserved . Only Welsh and Arabian blood is allowed for purebreds , and all registered ponies must have at least 1 / 8 and no more than 7 / 8 blood from each breed . As of 2005 , the registry claimed slightly over 1 @,@ 500 ponies registered in North America , with around 100 new foals registered annually . Welara Sport Ponies may also be registered – these are ponies at least 50 percent Welara but with blood from other breeds , often the Thoroughbred . The association also registers pureblood Welsh and Arabian foundation stock . 
 Welaras have now spread to additional areas of the world , including the Caribbean , Oceania and Europe . In Europe , Welsh / Arabian crosses , sometimes with additional Thoroughbred blood , are often called " riding ponies " or " sport ponies " . In the US , the breed is seen most often in the central and western parts of the country . 
 = Battle of Öland = 
 The Battle of Öland was a naval battle between an allied Danish @-@ Dutch fleet and the Swedish navy in the Baltic Sea , off the east coast of Öland on 1 June 1676 . The battle was a part of the Scanian War ( 1675 – 79 ) fought for supremacy over the southern Baltic . Sweden was in urgent need of reinforcements for its north German possessions ; Denmark sought to ferry an army to Scania in southern Sweden to open a front on Swedish soil . 
 Just as the battle began , the Swedish flagship Kronan sank , taking with it almost the entire crew , including the Admiral of the Realm and commander of the Swedish navy , Lorentz Creutz . The allied force under the leadership of the Dutch admiral Cornelis Tromp took full advantage of the ensuing disorder on the Swedish side . The acting commander after Creutz 's sudden demise , Admiral Claes Uggla , was surrounded and his flagship Svärdet battered in a drawn @-@ out artillery duel , then set ablaze by a fire ship . Uggla drowned while escaping the burning ship , and with the loss of a second supreme commander , the rest of the Swedish fleet fled in disorder . 
 The battle resulted in Danish naval supremacy , which was upheld throughout the war . The Danish King Christian V was able to ship troops over to the Swedish side of the Sound , and on 29 June a force of 14 @,@ 500 men landed at <unk> , just south of Helsingborg in southernmost Sweden . Scania became the main battleground of the war , culminating with the bloody battles of Lund , Halmstad and Landskrona . Danish and Dutch naval forces were left free to raze Öland and the Swedish east coast all the way up to Stockholm . The Swedish failure at Öland also prompted King Charles XI to order a commission to investigate the fiasco , but in the end no one was found responsible . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1660s , Sweden reached its height as a European great power . It had recently defeated Denmark , one of its main competitors for hegemony in the Baltic , in the Torstenson War ( 1643 – 45 ) and the Dano @-@ Swedish War ( 1657 – 58 ) . At the Treaties of Brömsebro ( 1645 ) and Roskilde ( 1658 ) , Denmark was forced to cede the islands of Gotland and Ösel , all of its eastern territories on the Scandinavian Peninsula , and parts of Norway . In a third war , from 1658 to 1660 , King Charles X of Sweden attempted to finish off Denmark for good . The move was in part due to bold royal ambition , but also a result of Sweden 's being a highly militarized society geared for almost constant warfare , a fiscal @-@ military state . Disbanding the Swedish forces meant settling outstanding pay , so there was an underlying incentive to keep hostilities alive and let soldiers live off enemy lands and plunder . In the end , the renewed attack failed with interventions by the leading naval powers of England and the Dutch Republic . Charles ' plans to subdue Denmark were thwarted and Trøndelag and Bornholm were returned to Denmark in the Treaty of Copenhagen in 1660 while Sweden was allowed to keep the rest of its recent conquests . 
 Charles X died in February 1660 and was succeeded by a regency council — led by the queen mother Hedvig Eleonora — that ruled in the name of Charles XI who was only four at the time of his father 's death . Sweden had come close to almost complete control over trade in the Baltic , but the war revealed the need to work against the formation of anti @-@ Swedish alliances that included Denmark , especially with France , the most powerful state in Europe at the time . There were some successes in foreign policy with the anti @-@ French 1668 Triple Alliance of England , Sweden , and the Dutch Republic . 
 While the Swedish policy was to avoid war and to consolidate its gains , Danish policy after 1660 was to seek an opportunity to regain its losses . Under the Oldenburg King Frederick III , the foreign policy was aimed at isolating Sweden while setting itself up in a favorable position in future wars . Denmark attempted to position itself in the alliances among the 17th century Europe great powers . Bourbon France and the Habsburg @-@ dominated Holy Roman Empire competed for continental domination while the Dutch Republic and England fought several wars over naval hegemony . At the same time , Denmark sought to rid itself of the generous toll treaties it was forced to grant Dutch merchants after the Republic 's assistance in the wars against Sweden . Attempts were made to ally with both England and France , but without success . In the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1665 – 66 ) Denmark had to side with the Dutch at the Battle of Vågen , souring its relations with England . In 1670 France allied with England against the Republic . Sweden 's relations with France had improved greatly and in 1672 it joined the Anglo @-@ French coalition , pushing Denmark into the Dutch camp . 
 In 1672 , French King Louis XIV launched an attack on the Dutch Republic , igniting the Franco @-@ Dutch War . The attack was opposed by the Holy Roman Empire led by Leopold I. In 1674 , Sweden was pressured into joining the war by attacking the Republic 's northern German allies . France promised to pay Sweden desperately needed war subsidies only on the condition that it moved in force on Brandenburg . A Swedish army of around 22 @,@ 000 men under Carl Gustaf Wrangel advanced into Brandenburg in December 1674 and suffered a minor tactical defeat at the Battle of Fehrbellin in June 1675 . Though not militarily significant , the defeat tarnished the reputation of near @-@ invincibility that Sweden had enjoyed since the Thirty Years ' War and emboldened its enemies . By September 1675 , Denmark , the Dutch Republic , the Holy Roman Empire and Spain were all joined in war against Sweden and its ally France . 
 = = = Scanian War = = = 
 With the declaration of war against Sweden on 2 September 1675 , Denmark saw a chance to regain its recently lost eastern provinces . The southern Baltic became an important strategic theatre for both Denmark and Sweden . Denmark needed the sea lanes to invade Scania , and Sweden needed to reinforce Swedish Pomerania on the Baltic coast ; both stood to gain by taking control of the Baltic trade routes . As war broke out between Denmark and Sweden a strong naval presence also became essential for Sweden to secure its interests at home and overseas . 
 In October 1675 the Swedish fleet under Gustaf Otto Stenbock put to sea , but sailed no further than Stora Karlsö off Gotland before it had to turn back to Stockholm after less than two weeks , beset by cold and stormy weather , disease , and the loss of vital equipment . Stenbock , held personally responsible for the failure by King Charles XI , was forced to pay for the campaign out of his own pocket . During the winter of 1675 – 76 the Swedish fleet was placed under the command of Lorentz Creutz , who attempted to put to sea in January to February 1676 , but was iced in by exceptionally cold weather . 
 = = State of the fleets = = 
 The First Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1652 – 54 ) saw the development of the line of battle , a tactic where ships formed a continuous line to fire broadsides at an enemy . Previously , decisive action in naval engagements had been achieved through boarding and melee , but after the middle of the 17th century tactical doctrine focused more on disabling or sinking an opponent through superior firepower from a distance . This entailed major changes in military doctrines , shipbuilding , and professionalism in European navies from the 1650s onwards . The line of battle favored very large ships that could hold the line in the face of heavy fire , later known as ships of the line . The new tactics also depended on the ability of strong , centralized governments to maintain large , permanent fleets led by a professional officer corps . The increased power of the state at the expense of individual landowners led to the expansion of armies and navies , and in the late 1660s Sweden embarked on an expansive shipbuilding program . 
 In 1675 , the Swedish fleet was numerically superior to its Danish counterpart ( 18 ships of the line against 16 and 21 frigates against 11 ) , but it was older and of poorer quality than the Danish fleet , which had replaced a larger proportion of its vessels . The Swedes had problems with routine maintenance , and both rigging and sails were generally in poor condition . Swedish crews lacked the professionalism of Danish and Norwegian sailors , who commonly had valuable experience from service in the Dutch merchant navy , and the Swedish navy also lacked a core of professional officers . The Danish had seasoned veterans like Cort <unk> and Niels Juel . The Danish fleet was also reinforced with Dutch units under the command Philip van Almonde and Cornelis Tromp , the latter an experienced officer who had served under Michiel de Ruyter , famous for his skilled command in the Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 A Danish fleet of 20 ships under Admiral Niels Juel put to sea in March 1676 , and on 29 April his forces landed on Gotland , which surrendered . The Swedish fleet was ordered out on 4 May with 23 warships of over 50 guns , 21 of less than 50 and 16 minor supporting vessels manned by about 12 @,@ 000 men , but encountered adverse winds and was delayed until 19 May . Juel had by then left Visby , the main port on Gotland , to join up with a smaller Danish @-@ Dutch force at Bornholm , between the southern tip of Sweden and the northern coast of Germany . Together they intended to cruise between Scania and the island of Rügen to stop Swedish troops from landing on the island and reinforcing Swedish Pomerania . On 25 – 26 May the two fleets fought the indecisive battle at Bornholm . The Swedish force was superior in numbers but was unable to inflict any serious losses , and two of the fleet 's fireships were captured , one by the allies and the other by a Brandenburg squadron headed for Copenhagen . 
 Several Swedish accounts say that Creutz argued with his officers after Bornholm . Major Taube of the Mars testified that after the battle , the officers had been " scolded like boys " and that Creutz , " without regard for guilt or innocence , accused them almost all alike " . The army captain Rosenberg told a later inquiry that Creutz " almost had a paroxysm in the night " over the conduct of Johan Bär ( one of his flag officers ) at Bornholm , and that he swore " never to go to serve at sea with such rascals " . Maritime archaeologist Lars Einarsson has concluded that the relationship between Creutz and his subordinates had hit rock bottom before the battle . 
 After the unsuccessful action the Swedish fleet anchored off Trelleborg , where King Charles was waiting with new orders to recapture Gotland . The fleet was to refuse combat with the allies at least until they reached the northern tip of Öland , where they could fight in friendly waters . After the Swedish fleet left Trelleborg on 30 May , the allied fleet soon came in contact with it and began pursuing the Swedes . By this time the allies had been reinforced by a small squadron and now totaled 42 vessels , with 25 large or medium ships of the line . The reinforcements also brought with them a new commander , the Dutch Admiral General Cornelis Tromp , one of the ablest naval tacticians of his time . The two fleets sailed north and on 1 June passed the northern tip of Öland in a strong gale . The rough winds were hard on the Swedish ships . Many lost masts and spars . The Swedes , forming a barely cohesive battle line , tried to sail ahead of Tromp 's ships , hoping to get between them and the shore , thus putting themselves on the allied fleet 's windward side and gaining the tactical advantage of holding the weather gage . The Dutch ships of the allied fleet managed to sail closer to the wind and faster than the rest of the force , and slipped between the Swedes and the coast , snatching the weather gage . Later that morning the two fleets closed on each other , and were soon within firing range . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Around noon , as a result of poor coordination and signaling , the Swedish line unexpectedly turned toward the allied fleet . When the flagship Kronan came about in the maneuver it suddenly heeled over and began to take in water . According to master gunner Anders Gyllenspak , the sails were not reefed and the ship leaned over so hard that water flooded in through the lower gunports . As the ship was leaning over , a gust of wind pushed the ship on her side , bringing her masts and sails down in line with the surface of the sea . Shortly afterwards , the gunpowder store exploded and ripped the forward section of the starboard side apart . Kronan quickly lost buoyancy and sank , taking most of her 850 @-@ man crew with her . 
 The sudden loss of the flagship and the fleet admiral threw the already scattered Swedish line into confusion and sapped morale . Four ships from Creutz 's and Uggla 's squadrons immediately fled when they saw that the flagship was lost . Claes Uggla was next in command after Creutz and became the acting commander of the Swedish fleet . When the line came about , Uggla and his ship Svärdet came on a collision course with the still floating wreckage of Kronan , and were forced to jibe ( turn the stern into the wind direction ) to avoid it . Svärdet 's second turn was interpreted by many ships as a signal to turn again ; others interpreted it as the beginning of a general retreat , leading to major disorder . Uggla reduced speed in an attempt to gather his forces , but instead was separated from his squadron . 
 Tromp on Christianus Quintus , Vice Admiral Jens <unk> on Tre <unk> and Niels Juel on <unk> took advantage of the chaos . They quickly surrounded Svärdet and three supporting ships ( Hieronymus , Neptunus and <unk> , an armed merchantman ) and began to hammer them into submission . Several other Swedish vessels attempted to assist Uggla , but they were in a lee position and could not provide effective support . After about an hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to two hours of hard fighting Svärdet 's mainmast went overboard and Uggla had to surrender to Tromp . Despite this , Svärdet was ignited by accident or misunderstanding by the Dutch fireship ' t Hoen . The second largest Swedish ship after Kronan sank in the blaze and took with it 600 out of a crew of 650 , including Admiral Uggla himself . Only Hieronymus escaped the assault by the allied admirals , though badly damaged , and the others were captured by Juel on <unk> together with one of his lieutenants on Anna Sophia . 
 By six o 'clock in the evening the Swedes had lost two flagships along with two fleet admirals , including the supreme commander of the navy . The entire force now began a disorderly retreat : the smaller ships <unk> , <unk> , Gripen and <unk> were <unk> and captured and the rest of the ships sought shelter in friendly harbors . Most set course for Dalarö , north of Stockholm ; others tried for Kalmar Strait , between Öland and the Swedish mainland . The allied fleet tried to capitalize further on its victory by giving chase , but the dash up the coast had scattered its forces and there was disagreement among the Danish commanders on how far they should pursue the Swedish ships . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Swedish fleet had suffered a major blow by losing its two largest ships , its commander @-@ in @-@ chief and one of its most experienced admirals . Even after the battle , the misfortunes continued . Äpplet came off its moorings at Dalarö , went aground and sank . Around fifty survivors were picked up by pursuing Danish ships and taken as prisoners to Copenhagen . The battle gave Denmark undisputed naval supremacy and the Swedish fleet did not dare to venture out for the rest of the year . The army that had been amassed in Denmark could now be shipped to Scania to take the war to Swedish soil and on 29 June 1676 , 14 @,@ 500 troops were landed at <unk> south of Helsingborg . The Battle of Öland was the first major Swedish defeat at sea to Denmark and was followed by further Swedish defeats at Møn and Køge Bay in 1677 . The latter was a resounding success for Admiral Niels Juel and has become the most celebrated victory in Danish naval history . 
 The Battle of Öland was the first of several major Swedish defeats at sea that ended in complete Danish dominance over the southern Baltic for the duration of the Scanian War . That the main naval base in Stockholm was locked in ice during the winter of 1675 – 76 showed the necessity of an ice @-@ free harbor that was closer to Danish home waters . In 1679 , King Charles personally chose the site for a new base at what would later become Karlskrona . The lessons from the war also led to improvements in Swedish naval organization under the guidance of Hans <unk> ( 1641 – 1714 ) which included better funding and maintenance , increased readiness for mobilization in the southern Baltic and permanent recruitment of skilled personnel through the allotment system . 
 = = = The Swedish commission = = = 
 Within a week , the news of the failure at Bornholm and the major defeat at Öland reached King Charles , who immediately ordered that a commission be set up to investigate what had happened . Charles wanted to see if Bär and other officers were guilty of cowardice or incompetence . On 13 June , the King wrote " some of our sea officers have shown such cowardly and careless behavior " that they have " placed the safety , welfare and defense of the kingdom at great peril " , and that " such a serious crime should be severely punished " . 
 The commission began its work on 7 June 1676 . At the hearings , strong criticism surfaced and was directed against individual officers as well as Swedish conduct in general . Anders Homman , one of the officers on Svärdet , was among those who chastised his colleagues the hardest . In his testimony he said that that Admiral Uggla had exclaimed " look how those dog cunts run " when he was surrounded , fighting the allied flagships . Homman himself described the actions of his colleagues as those of " chickens running about the yard , each in his own direction " , and added that he " had been in seven battles , but had never seen our people fight so poorly " . 
 The commission did not find anyone guilty of negligence or misconduct , but Lieutenant Admiral Bär , commander of Nyckeln , and Lieutenant Admiral Christer <unk> , who had run aground on Äpplet , were never again given a command in the navy . Lieutenant Admiral Hans Clerck , commander of Solen , went through the process unscathed , and was promoted to full Admiral by the King before the commission even presented its verdict . Creutz has quite consistently been blamed for the loss of his ship by historians , and has been described as an incompetent sea officer and sailor who more or less single @-@ handedly brought about the sinking through lack of naval experience . Military historians Lars Ericson <unk> and Olof Sjöblom have attempted to nuance the picture by pointing out that Creutz 's task was akin to that of an administrator rather than a military commander . The practical issues of ship maneuvering should have been the responsibility of his subordinates , who had experience in naval matters . 
 = = = Disputes among the allied officers = = = 
 Despite the victories , several allied officers were displeased with the conduct of their forces . Naval historian Jørgen <unk> explains that the battle was fought " in a disorganized manner from beginning to end " since Tromp had given the order for each commander to attack the enemy ship closest to him . Most of the Danish fleet was unable to keep pace with the faster Dutch ships , so the race for an advantageous position along the coast had contributed to the scattering of the allied fleet . Juel later complained in a letter to the Danish Admiral of the Realm that the Dutch had not assisted him in pursuing the fleeing Swedes . He claimed that if he had received proper support , they could have " brought [ the Swedes ] such a fever on their throats that it would take years for all the doctors in Stockholm to cure it " . When Tromp sent a report of the battle to the Danish King he reproached his subordinates , but not by name , and asked that no punishment be dealt out . 
 The captain of ' t Hoen , the fireship that had set Svärdet ablaze after she had surrendered , was arrested and incarcerated directly after the battle , and was subjected to such harsh treatment that he died within a few days . Tromp later reported that his ship Delft , which had seen some of the roughest fighting , had lost around 100 men and that most of its officers were wounded . 
 = = Forces = = 
 Below is a list of the ships that participated in the battle . The figures in parentheses indicate the number of guns for each ship . 
 = 1996 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1996 Pacific hurricane season was one of least active Pacific hurricane seasons that most of the storms strike Mexico . It officially began May 15 , 1996 in the eastern north Pacific and on June 1 , 1996 in the central north Pacific . It ended on November 30 , 1996 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . The season slightly exceeded these bounds when tropical storm One @-@ E formed on May 13 . 
 Few storms formed this season , but it was very eventful . Twelve tropical cyclones formed during this season , of which five made landfall and two other impacted land areas . Two tropical cyclones that formed in other basins entered the eastern north Pacific Ocean . Early in the season three tropical cyclones impacted Mexico in a ten @-@ day span , while the first cyclone of the season formed before it officially began . Hurricane Douglas was the strongest storm , reaching Category 4 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale and had its beginnings in the Atlantic as Hurricane Cesar . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 This hurricane season officially started on May 15 , 1996 in the eastern Pacific , and on June 1 , 1996 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1996 . These dates limit the time period when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . In actuality the season exceeded these limits slightly with the formation of Tropical Depression One @-@ E on May 13 and ended on November 11 with the dissipation of Tropical Depression Twelve @-@ E. 
 This season was below average in activity . In the eastern north Pacific , eleven tropical cyclones formed . Of these , four became hurricanes , one of which were major hurricanes because they reached Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The remainder were tropical storms . In addition , one Atlantic hurricane , Hurricane Cesar , crossed into this zone from the Atlantic Ocean and was renamed Douglas . None of the systems in the eastern north Pacific crossed 140 ° W and entered the central Pacific . The last time that happened was in the 1979 season . 
 In the central north Pacific , one tropical depression formed . In addition , a depression crossed the dateline from the western Pacific before dissipating in this basin . None of these two systems reached tropical storm strength . 
 In terms of the number of storms , the season was below average . Despite this , there were a large number of landfalls . Of note is the fact that three tropical cyclones approached close to , or made landfall on , Mexico during a ten @-@ day span from June 23 to July 3 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One @-@ E = = = 
 The season had an early start on May 13 when a tropical wave in the open ocean organized into Tropical Depression One @-@ E. The depression moved west @-@ northwest and strengthened into a tropical storm on May 14 . On that day , the tropical storm reached its peak intensity , with maximum sustained winds at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 1 @,@ 000 hPa ( 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) . Wind shear steadily weakened the cyclone until it dissipated early on May 17 . This system was the only tropical storm to form in May during the period from 1992 @-@ 99 . 
 Tropical Storm One @-@ E was not assigned a name because it was determined to be a tropical storm after the season was over . The storm was initially forecast to become a tropical storm , but information available at the time did not warrant the upgrade . Subsequently , wind reports relayed from the US Coast Guard to the National Hurricane Center suggested that this cyclone was a tropical storm . 
 This tropical cyclone impacted two ships . The first — called the True Blue - was near the fringes of the storm and escaped . The other — the trimaran Solar Wind - provided wind observations until communications with the vessel were lost after 0600 UTC on May 14 . Despite a search by the US Coast Guard , the ship and its two @-@ person crew were never found . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two @-@ E = = = 
 On May 15 an area of disturbed weather in the Intertropical Convergence Zone developed into a tropical depression . The disturbance was not readily traceable back to a tropical wave from the Atlantic . On its first day of its existence , Tropical Depression Two @-@ E was a well @-@ organized system with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . As it slowly moved west , Two @-@ E experienced a few intermittent bursts of convection . However , the depression gradually became less organized during the remainder of its life . On May 18 , the cyclone 's organization deteriorated markedly until it dissipated the next morning . 
 Tropical Depression Two @-@ E never threatened land . Consequently , there were no reports of deaths or damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Alma = = = 
 On June 20 , the southern part of the same tropical wave that spawned Tropical Storm Arthur in the Atlantic overcame shear to strengthen into Tropical Depression Three @-@ E. It reached tropical storm intensity that same day . When the shear relaxed , Alma strengthened into a hurricane . Weak steering currents sent Alma towards the Mexican coast . It made landfall near Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán on June 23 and almost immediately went back out to sea . Alma slowly paralleled the coast as the topography disrupted the cyclone 's circulation . Alma weakened to tropical storm intensity on June 24 and to tropical depression intensity on June 26 . It dissipated the next day . Alma 's maximum winds were 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and Alma 's minimum pressure was 969 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . 
 Hurricane Alma was the first of three consecutive storms to come close to , or make landfall on , the Pacific coast of Mexico during a ten @-@ day span . At least three , and possibly twenty , people were killed . Three were killed when a house near Lázaro Cárdenas collapsed . There were unconfirmed reports that 17 people were killed by floods in the state of Puebla caused by Alma 's rains . Trees were downed and power was knocked out to many places . Roads were flooded and covered with debris throughout the affected area . 
 = = = Hurricane Boris = = = 
 On June 27 , a tropical wave developed convection and became Tropical Depression Four . It moved north and slowly intensified . The rate of intensification increased and the depression became a tropical storm on June 28 . Boris reached hurricane intensity on June 28 and peaked with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a central pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Boris then made landfall on June 29 about midway between Lázaro Cárdenas and Acapulco . Boris then moved offshore after turning to the southwest and dissipated on July 1 while south of Puerto Vallarta . 
 Hurricane Boris was , in general , a well @-@ forecast storm . Due to the short time when the system was at or above tropical storm intensity , long @-@ range forecasts were not verified . The average errors were 116 mi ( 187 km ) at one and a half days in the future . Boris caused at least five deaths . One person was killed in Tecpan . Nearby , three other people drowned and five fishers were missing . In Acapulco , a child was killed when a roof collapsed . Rain was heavy throughout the impacted region , with the highest totals in Guerrero . The highest total was 14 @.@ 98 in ( 380 mm ) at Paso de San Antonio , to the east of the point of landfall . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cristina = = = 
 On July 1 , a tropical wave organized into Tropical Depression Five @-@ E. The location of the depression was the easternmost since the depression that eventually became Hurricane Paul in the 1982 season . Five @-@ E strengthened into Tropical Storm Cristina on July 2 as it continued its west @-@ northwest track . Cristina was almost a hurricane at the time of its landfall near Puerto Angel on July 3 . It peak strength , which occurred at landfall , was 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and 991 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . Cristina dissipated over the mountains of Mexico on July 3 . 
 As a whole , both Cristina 's intensity and track were well @-@ forecast . However , the tropical cyclone 's short life made verification of a small number of forecasts limited . When Cristina was approaching , the Mexican government issued a tropical storm warning for the coast between Tapachula and Punta Maldonado on July 2 . 
 Tropical Storm Cristina killed one person , a fisherman , who was aboard a boat caught at sea . Another person from that boat was missing , and a third individual was rescued . Eleven other fishing boats , with a total of twenty @-@ two people aboard , were missing . Their fate is unknown . The National Hurricane Center received no reports of damage due to Tropical Storm Cristina ; however , there was flooding due to storm surge and damage from wind . It also produced rain . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six @-@ E = = = 
 On July 4 , a persistent area of thunderstorms organized into a tropical depression . Weak steering currents slowly moved it northwest . Easterly wind shear inhibited the development of the system . Despite the wind shear , Six @-@ E was forecast to strengthen into a tropical storm , but it instead weakened to a swirl of clouds and advisories were ended on July 5 . Tropical Depression Six @-@ E dissipated on July 6 . At its peak strength , Six @-@ E had winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) and a central pressure of 1 @,@ 003 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . 
 This cyclone never came ashore . Consequently , no reports of damage or deaths were received by the National Hurricane Center . 
 = = = Hurricane Douglas = = = 
 Hurricane Douglas was a continuation of Atlantic Hurricane Cesar , which crossed Central America . Continuing Cesar 's nearly due @-@ west heading , it was still a tropical storm when it entered the Pacific on July 29 , and quickly regained hurricane status . 
 Douglas strengthened over the next two days as it turned west @-@ northwest , paralleling the coast of Mexico . It reached its peak intensity on August 1 , with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a central pressure of 946 mbar ( 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) , making it the strongest hurricane of the season at a Category 4 strength . It slow weakening began on August 2 as it entered cooler waters , and it officially dissipated on August 6 , though like many Pacific hurricanes , a remnant circulation could be tracked westward for several days afterward . 
 Compared with the long @-@ tern average , Hurricane Douglas was a well @-@ forecast storm . The cyclone passed close enough to Mexico to necessitate a tropical storm warning starting on July 29 for the coast from Salina Cruz to Acapulco , with a watch along a further section of coast . The watches and warnings were discontinued on July 30 . 
 Hurricane Douglas brought up to 6 in ( 150 mm ) of rain on the south coast of Mexico and resulted in a 4 @-@ ft ( 1 @.@ 2 @-@ m ) storm surge . No deaths or damages were attributed to the Douglas portion of Hurricane Cesar @-@ Douglas . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seventeen @-@ W = = = 
 A tropical depression , which formed August 13 from a cutoff area of low pressure area , crossed the dateline on August 14 . It continued to head east , passing close to Midway Island . It dissipated on August 14 , although the remnants of the system hung around the area for a few more days . At its strongest in the central north Pacific , Tropical Depression Seventeen @-@ W had winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) and a pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . 
 Seventeen @-@ W brought light winds , with gusts reaching gale @-@ force , to Midway Island . It also brought about 2 @.@ 5 in ( 63 @.@ 5 mm ) of rain . After the cyclone dissipated , showers and gusty winds continued to occur on Midway and Kure for a few more days . 
 Seventeen @-@ W was the first tropical cyclone to cross the international dateline in either direction since Typhoon John in the 1994 season . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Elida = = = 
 A tropical wave organized into Tropical Depression Eight @-@ E on August 30 . The cyclone paralleled the coast of Mexico and also gradually decelerated . Despite some wind shear , Eight @-@ E strengthened into a tropical storm on September 2 and was named Elida . On September 3 and 4 , Elida came close to the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula at its peak intensity of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) and winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . The cyclone then drifted into cooler waters , was devoid of deep convection on September 5 , and dissipated the next day . 
 The storm was forecast slightly better than the long @-@ term averages for the eastern North Pacific . Elida posed enough of a threat to the Baja California Peninsula to require a tropical storm warning for the Baja California Peninsula south of Cabo San Lázaro on September 3 . The warning was lifted on September 5 after the threat ended . Moderate to heavy rains fell in association with the tropical cyclone across southwest Mexico and the Baja California Peninsula , with the maxima falling at San Marcos / Compostela in southwest mainland Mexico , which measured 6 @.@ 60 in ( 168 mm ) , and a maximum for Baja California of 3 @.@ 88 in ( 99 mm ) at La Poza Honda / <unk> . While passing offshore , the tropical storm killed six people and affected 1 @,@ 200 others , but Elida caused no known damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Fausto = = = 
 The precursor disturbance to Fausto was first noticed over Venezuela as early as August 31 , and may have been related to the tropical wave that spawned Hurricane Fran . By September 4 the wave had crossed Central America into the Pacific ; it steadily organized until it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fausto on September 10 . 
 Fausto intensified rapidly after it reached hurricane intensity on the September 12 , peaking with sustained winds of 105 knots ( 194 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 955 mb . The hurricane weakened as an approaching trough increased shear over the storm ; this same trough also turned the storm north on the September 13 , where it made landfall as a minimal hurricane on Baja California that day . On September 14 , the storm turned northeastward across the Gulf of California , and dissipated inland over the Sierra Madre range after its second landfall as a hurricane . Its extratropical remnants flared up briefly over northern Mexico and the U.S. state of Texas , but otherwise soon lost their identity . 
 Heavy rainfall was accompanied with the passage of this cyclone , with a storm total of 18 @.@ 50 inches ( 470 mm ) reported at San Vicente de la Sierra . Damage in Mexico was relatively minor , with only a single casualty caused by a downed power line . Damage totaled to around $ 800 @,@ 000 ( 1996 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Depression One @-@ C = = = 
 A tropical disturbance organized into a tropical depression on September 15 . It headed west until September 17 . That day , it turned to the west for two days before heading back west @-@ northwest on September 19 . It soon began to weaken and dissipated the next day . At its most intense , Tropical Depression One @-@ C had winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and unknown pressure . 
 The tropical cyclone caused no known impact and never came near land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Genevieve = = = 
 In the Gulf of Tehuantepec , an area of disturbed weather containing convection formed on September 23 . It moved westward without incident until September 27 , when it developed stronger convection and became Tropical Depression Ten @-@ E. Immediately thereafter , it strengthened into a tropical storm and was named Genevieve while it continued its westward track . 
 Genevieve slowly got better organized , and reached its peak intensity of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) and 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on September 29 . The tropical storm then turned to the west @-@ southwest as steering currents collapsed . The cyclone began a time of erratic motion , which included two loops . The erratic motion also exposed Genevieve to wind shear , and the tropical storm weakened to a tropical depression on October 1 . On October 6 , the shear temporarily weakened , and Tropical Depression Genevieve restrengthened into a tropical storm . The cyclone 's wandering continued , and it entrained dry air . This dry air weakened the system to a depression for a second time on October 8 , and Genevieve dissipated the next day . Brief flare @-@ ups of convection could still be seen for a few days thereafter . 
 Tropical Storm Genevieve was a rather poorly forecast storm . Most tropical cyclone prediction models indicated a northwesterly track that never happened , and also over @-@ intensified the system . In addition , advisories on Tropical Depression Genevieve were discontinued on October 3 , and only resumed three days later . Later analysis determined that Genevieve had been a tropical depression for this whole time . 
 Tropical Storm Genevieve never came near land , and consequently no watches or warnings were required for any location . The tropical cyclone had no impact on any land . 
 = = = Hurricane Hernan = = = 
 On September 30 , a tropical wave organized into Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E. Gradual strengthening ensued , and the depression strengthened into a tropical storm twelve hours later and was named Hernan . Hernan 's initial track was to the west , but the system gradually started to recurve . Its center of circulation reformed , and Hernan briefly turned to the northwest again . By October 2 , and Hernan was close to the coast . It strengthened into a hurricane that day . Late on October 2 and early on October 3 Hernan closely paralleled the coast . Interaction with land weakened the cyclone , and when Hernan made landfall on October 3 near Barra de Navidad , Jalisco , it was only a minimal hurricane . Land weakened the cyclone , and by the time it emerged into the ocean north of Puerto Vallarta , it was so disorganized that it dissipated on October 5 . At its strongest , Hurricane Hernan had winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a central pressure of 980 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . 
 The National Hurricane Center forecasts on the Hurricane were generally forecast slightly worse than the " average " system . Errors by tropical cyclone prediction models were attributed mainly to Hernan 's recurvature . In terms of intensity , this system was correctly predicted to become a hurricane although advisories <unk> its eventual intensity . 
 For the coast from Acapulco to Manzanillo , a tropical storm warning was issued on October 1 . A hurricane watch was issued from Zihuatanejo to Manzanillo on October 2 . It was upgraded to a warning later that day . Also on October 2 , the coast from Manzanillo to San Blas was placed under a tropical storm warning . Meanwhile , the hurricane warning was extended to Cabo Corrientes . On October 3 , the hurricane warning was extended to San Blas and the tropical storm warning was extended to Mazatlán . 
 Because it made landfall in a sparsely populated area , Hernan killed no one . Around 1 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed and 100 people were injured . Flooding occurred in <unk> , Jalisco . Flooding also caused washed @-@ out roads along Mexico Route 200 and 80 . In many areas , telephone service was interrupted and power outages occurred . Along the coasts of Colima and Jalisco , waves caused by Hernan reached 13 ft ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) in height . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twelve @-@ E = = = 
 A system acquired enough convection and became organized enough to be considered a tropical depression on November 7 . Although the environment was initially favourable and the system was almost upgraded into a tropical storm as was forecast , wind shear kept the cyclone weak . Its convection was eventually destroyed and advisories were ended on November 10 . Twelve @-@ E dissipated on November 11 and no deaths or damages were reported . 
 = = Other storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression Rick = = = 
 According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , on September 1 Tropical Depression Rick crossed the International Dateline , entering into CPHC 's area of responsibility ; however , this storm wasn 't included into CPHC database . The storm eventually became extratropical on September 3 over open waters . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 = = Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) = = 
 Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) is a measure of how active a season is . It is found by taking a tropical storm or hurricane 's windspeed in knots every six hours , squaring it , adding up the results , and dividing the total by 104 . The ACE of this season makes it a below @-@ normal season . It is one of the lowest totals ever recorded , indeed only the 2007 , 1977 and 2010 seasons had lower totals . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1996 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 2002 season . This is the same list used for the 1990 season , except for Winnie , which had interchanged with Wallis . 
 For storms that form in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , encompassing the area between 140 degrees west and the International Date Line , all names are used in a series of four rotating lists . The next four names that were slated for use in 1996 are shown below ; however , none of them were used . 
 = Rock & Chips = 
 Rock & Chips is a British television comedy @-@ drama and a prequel to the sitcom Only Fools and Horses . Set in 1960s Peckham , it focuses primarily on the lives of Del Trotter , Freddie Robdal and Joan and Reg Trotter . Nicholas Lyndhurst , who played Rodney in Only Fools and Horses , plays Robdal alongside James Buckley ( Del Boy ) , Kellie Bright ( Joan ) , Shaun Dingwall ( Reg ) and Phil Daniels ( <unk> ) . The Shazam Productions and BBC co @-@ production was written by Only Fools and Horses creator John Sullivan , directed by Dewi Humphreys and produced by Gareth Gwenlan . 
 The 90 minute production was conceived in 1997 and commissioned in 2003 , with the premise established in the final episode of Only Fools and Horses in 2003 . It was shelved and Only Fools and Horses spin @-@ off The Green Green Grass was developed ; its success led to the prequel being recommissioned in July 2009 . Filming began in October in London and the production was first broadcast on BBC One and BBC HD on 24 January 2010 . It was the second most watched programme of the day and gained mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story starts in February 1960 , by setting up the characters . Joan Trotter ( played by Kellie Bright ) is in an unhappy marriage with the work @-@ shy Reg ( Shaun Dingwall ) , whose father Ted ( Phil Daniels ) has just moved in . Her 15 @-@ year @-@ old son Derek , often shortened to Del Boy , ( James Buckley ) and his friends Boycie , Trigger , Jumbo Mills and new @-@ in @-@ town Denzil ( Stephen Lloyd , Lewis Osborne , Lee Long and Ashley Gerlach ) are still in school , following an increase in the school leaving age . She works at the local cinema with Trigger 's aunt Renee Turpin ( Emma Cooke ) and Raymond ( Billy Seymour ) for cinema manager Ernie Rayner ( Robert Daws ) , and at the Town Hall as " a part @-@ time filing clerk who sometimes makes the tea " . Convicted thief Freddie Robdal ( Nicholas Lyndhurst ) has just been released from Dartmoor Prison and returned to Peckham with explosives expert Gerald " Jelly " Kelly ( Paul <unk> ) . 
 At the Town Hall , Joan asks Mr Johnson ( Colin <unk> ) about applying for a flat in the new high @-@ rise estate ; she is told she is unlikely to get a tenancy , as preference will be given to those with young children . At the Nag 's Head , Freddie and Reg meet , and Reg invites him to his house to continue drinking . After meeting Joan and buying her a drink , Freddie realises that she is a Trotter , a family he has a dislike for . After they return to the Trotters ' house , Freddie shows his affection for Joan . 
 At the cinema , Joan is promoted to part @-@ time assistant manager and Rayner tells her that the safe sometimes contains over £ 2 @,@ 000 at weekends . She later tells Freddie , after he goes round to her house to offer Reg some work ( Reg was not at home as Freddie told him to meet him at the pub ) . They talk about art , and he invites her ( and Reg ) to his house @-@ warming party . In March , Joan has a Marilyn Monroe hairstyle and the safe at the cinema is broken into . Ahead of the party , Freddie gives Reg the use of his car , to return unused decorating materials to Guildford and he takes his father , Renee and her boyfriend Clayton Cooper ( Roger Griffiths ) with him . They run out of petrol on the way , leaving Freddie and Joan the only ones at the party . They dance , and Freddie admits that he wanted to be alone with Joan so they could talk about art . They end the night by sleeping together . 
 In June , Renee accompanies Joan to a pregnancy testing clinic , while the boys are on the Jolly Boys Outing to Margate ( providing Freddie and Jelly the opportunity to burgle a jewellers ) . On their journey home , Renee tells Joan about Freddie 's time in prison and she realises he burgled the cinema . After Freddie tells Kelly he thinks he 's in love with Joan , Reg announces her pregnancy in the pub . While Joan is completing a housing request form , Freddie goes to see her and she fails to acknowledge the baby is his . 
 The Trotters ' housing application is successful in August , September sees them view a flat in the new Sir Walter Raleigh House , which they have moved into in October . In November , Joan has her baby , which she calls Rodney ( after the " handsome actor " Rod Taylor , and to the surprise of everyone else ) . The closing scene sees Joan enter the balcony of her flat with Rodney in her arms . After telling him that Del will be very rich one day , Joan sees Freddie on a balcony in a tower opposite ; she shows him Rodney and nods her head , to his delight . 
 Throughout , the story tells of Del 's strained relationship with his father and his affection for his mother ; Reg 's affair with the barmaid at the Nag 's Head ; Del and Jumbo selling goods from the docks out of the back of a van ; Del and Boycie 's attempt at dating Pam and Glenda ( Jodie Mooney and Katie Griffiths ) ; Joan fending off advances from her perverted boss and provides an introduction to Roy Slater ( Calum MacNab ) and Albie Littlewood ( Jonathan <unk> ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer John Sullivan had the idea for a prequel to the sitcom Only Fools and Horses in 1997 ; its commission was announced in 2003 and the premise for the series was established in the final Only Fools and Horses episode " Sleepless in Peckham " in 2003 , where Rodney discovers a photograph of Freddie Robdal from 1960 . His uncanny resemblance to Rodney confirmed that he , and not Reg , was Rodney 's biological father . A lot of the groundwork for this had been both laid and explored in the Episode " The Frog 's Legacy " the 1987 Christmas Day hour @-@ long special . In the episode Rodney goes to ask about his father to which Albert diplomatically replies ' They 're rumours Rodney . That 's all . Rumours . ' The proposed prequel , was to be titled Once Upon a Time in Peckham , it would see young versions of Del , Boycie , Denzil and Trigger , and Sullivan said " Joanie will be a key character , and during the film will give birth to Rodney . " However , the prequel was shelved , and spin @-@ off The Green Green Grass was developed to follow secondary characters , Boycie , Marlene and their son Tyler , as they escape the London Mafia and attempt to live in the Shropshire countryside . It was reported in January 2009 that the prequel was being considered again , following the success of The Green Green Grass . In April 2009 , Sullivan told The Mail on Sunday that he had started writing the prequel , and that Lyndhurst was " keen " to play Robdal , a local criminal and Rodney 's biological father , although the production had yet to be commissioned . 
 On 3 July 2009 , the BBC announced that the prequel had been commissioned as a 90 @-@ minute comedy drama , titled Sex , Drugs & Rock ' n ' Chips , to be co @-@ produced by the BBC and Sullivan 's production company , Shazam Productions . Originally scheduled for August , filming began in October 2009 in London , lasting 19 days . Nicholas Lyndhurst , who played Rodney in Only Fools and Horses , would play villain and art connoisseur Freddie Robdal in a reprise of his role in the " Sleepless in Peckham " photograph , Kellie Bright ( Bad Girls , The Archers ) would play the " glamorous " Joan Trotter , her husband Reg would be portrayed by Shaun Dingwall ( Soldier Soldier ) , and his father by Phil Daniels ( Quadrophenia , EastEnders ) . James Buckley ( The Inbetweeners ) , would play the teenage Derek , Joan and Reg 's son , portrayed by David Jason in Only Fools and Horses . Dewi Humphreys ( The Green Green Grass ) would direct . It was announced in January 2010 that the production would be shown on 24 January on BBC One with the title Rock & Chips . 
 Sullivan said when the production was announced that it would " give us a bit of an insight into why Del and Rodney turned out they [ sic ] way they did " in a period " before The Beatles and Mary Quant made London the coolest place on the planet " when " the staple diet was rock salmon and chips and the flicks offer the only hint of glamour " . Expanding further on the basis for the prequel , he said : 
 ... the most important person in the flat [ in Only Fools and Horses ] was never , ever seen ; it was the spirit of Del 's ( and Rodney 's ) beloved mother Joan who had passed away 17 years before , and throughout the run of the series Del constantly referred to her and past events within the Trotter Family . ... But much of his historical information was at best contradictory , and at worse [ sic ] outright lies . We were left with a situation where the only person who really knew what had happened was an unreliable witness , so I decided to return to those misty days of 1960 to meet all those characters we 'd only ever heard about ... 
 . The ' Nags Head ' pub used in the pilot episode is a de @-@ furbished version of the existing ' Pelton Arms ' pub in Greenwich , <unk> <unk> which maintains the ' Only Fools And Horses ' look , style and ' feel ' . 
 The drama was produced by Gareth Gwenlan , who worked on Only Fools and Horses between 1988 and 2003 . Speaking to the Western Mail , he described it as " essentially a love story " between Joan and Freddie , and he said that Lyndhurst " told me he thinks it 's the best thing he 's ever done " . Speaking about the casting of Lyndhurst , he said he " would make a marvellous villain , which is something people will never have seen him do on TV before " . 
 In an interview in the press pack for the production , Lyndhurst described Freddie Robdal as " a villain – charming , but nasty " , and comparing him to Rodney , said that : " They 're from two entirely different suitcases as far as I 'm concerned . I didn 't want to bring into it anything that I 'd already done with Rodney and fortunately there wasn 't any opportunity to do so . They 're like chalk and cheese . " Speaking about the 19 day filming schedule and the " not great " budget , he also told Michael Deacon of The Daily Telegraph that : 
 I was very pleased it was made at all . ... There were people who said , ' I don 't think we 're going to do this ' , and we had to wait months to get the green light . We thought , ' Well , we haven 't got the budget we want , we haven 't got the schedule we want , so we 're going to have to make it as brilliant as we can . ' It was a costume drama and it needed a costume drama budget , and it didn 't get that . 
 Speaking about continuing the story , Gwenlan said that the production was " run on the idea it 'll be turned into a series . This one lays the groundwork and John [ Sullivan ] has enough for about two more series . " 
 On 13 September 2010 , while promoting the third series of The Inbetweeners on BBC Radio 5 Live , James Buckley confirmed that Rock & Chips would return for two more specials , one for Christmas 2010 , and the other for Easter 2011 . John Sullivan died on 23 April 2011 , five days before the final episode was broadcast . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overnight figures estimated Rock & Chips was seen by 7 @.@ 4 million viewers with a 28 % audience share , winning the slot against ITV 's Wild at Heart and the Dancing on Ice results show . It was the second most @-@ watched programme of the day , behind the first Dancing on Ice programme of the evening . Final figures showed it was seen by 8 @.@ 42 million viewers on BBC One and 279 @,@ 000 on BBC HD . 
 Sam Wollaston for The Guardian said he was missing the interplay between Rodney and Del Boy from the original , and that the only fun in the drama was " recognising the nods , working out who 's who and how it all fits into place . Otherwise , it 's pretty lame . " The Daily Mirror 's Jim Shelley didn 't find the storyline " interesting or convincing " , finding Lyndhurst 's performance as Freddie " laughable " and saying it was " bizarre " that the storyline " virtually abandoned its main character ( the young Del Boy ) and its best actor ( the engaging James Buckley from The Inbetweeners ) who played him " . In The Independent , Tom Sutcliffe said that " the narrative 's focus was blurred and the pacing weirdly off – quite a lot of the time you were well ahead of the drama and hanging around for it to catch up with you " . Benji Wilson from The Daily Telegraph also wasn 't impressed saying the viewer would have been disappointed if they " tuned in wanting to be entertained , enthused , or anything in between " , and that it was an " ocean @-@ going stinker " . 
 However , The Scotsman 's Paul Whitelaw said that , despite a " disjointed " plot and it being " overstretched at 90 minutes " : " It was actually pretty good . Not great , not perfect , but a watchable production from which everyone emerged with their dignity intact . " He said that Buckley " delivered a charming performance in what was effectively a supporting role . Wisely choosing to suggest Del 's familiar mannerisms without opting for outright impersonation , he carried off a difficult task with modest élan . " Writing for The Stage , Harry Venning found the performances " top notch " and praised the script as " first class " , saying " the comic moments were of the highest quality and beautifully crafted into the narrative " . Andrew Billen from The Times described Bright 's portrayal of Joan as " winsome " , said Lyndhurst " produced a detailed performance " and that " Rock & Chips was better than the sequel that preceded it . " Keith Watson in the Metro also praised the performances of Buckley and Bright , saying " They deserved a show all to themselves . " Although he found the period detail " squeaky clean " and " unconvincing " , he closed his review by saying : " Somehow it made me care about the Trotters in a way decades of Only Fools and Horses never came close to . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Episode list = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 The pilot of Rock & Chips was released on Region 2 DVD on 5 April 2010 . The Christmas special " Five Gold Rings " was released on DVD on 28 March 2011 . On 2 May 2011 a three @-@ disc DVD set titled " Rock & Chips - The Complete Collection " was released , comprising all three of the episodes . 
 = Unforgiven ( 2007 ) = 
 Unforgiven ( 2007 ) was the tenth annual Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It took place on September 16 , 2007 , from the <unk> in Memphis , Tennessee and featured talent from the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands . 
 The main match on the SmackDown brand was The Undertaker versus Mark Henry , which Undertaker won by pinfall after executing a Last Ride . The predominant match on the Raw brand was John Cena versus Randy Orton for the WWE Championship ; Cena lost the match by disqualification but retained the title . The primary match on the ECW brand was CM Punk versus Elijah Burke for the ECW Championship , which Punk won after pinning Burke with a rolling cradle . The featured matches on the undercard included The Great Khali versus Batista versus Rey Mysterio in a Triple Threat match for the World Heavyweight Championship and Triple H versus Carlito in a match where Carlito could not be disqualified . 
 The event had 210 @,@ 000 buys , down from the Unforgiven 2006 figure of 289 @,@ 000 buys . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main feud heading into Unforgiven on the SmackDown brand was between The Undertaker and Mark Henry . Their rivalry started in early 2006 when Henry 's interference caused Undertaker to lose a match for the World Heavyweight Championship against Kurt Angle . This culminated in a Casket match at WrestleMania 22 which Undertaker won , extending his WrestleMania winning streak to 14 – 0 . On the May 11 , 2007 episode of SmackDown , Henry , who made his return from an injury he sustained in mid @-@ 2006 , assaulted The Undertaker after Undertaker had retained the World Heavyweight Championship against Batista in a Steel Cage match . Following the assault , Edge cashed in his Money in the Bank contract to defeat Undertaker and win the World Heavyweight Championship . As a result , Undertaker was out of action for four months . In August , vignettes started airing about Undertaker 's return and his match with Henry at Unforgiven . 
 The main feud on the Raw brand was between John Cena and Randy Orton for the WWE Championship . Cena had retained the title against Orton at SummerSlam . The following night on Raw , Orton demanded a rematch for the title , but his request was declined by General Manager William Regal . Orton proceeded his demands to Mr. McMahon , who also refused to give him a rematch unless he proved himself . That night , Orton interfered in Cena 's match by assaulting Cena and kicking Cena 's father , who was at ringside , in the head . The following week , Orton was granted a title rematch against Cena at Unforgiven . 
 The main feud on the ECW brand was between CM Punk and Elijah Burke over the ECW Championship . The rivalry started on the September 11 , 2007 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , when Burke became the number one contender to the title . After the fact was revealed , Punk dropkicked Burke . Later that same night , Punk teamed up with Stevie Richards in the main event against Burke and Kevin Thorn , which saw Punk and Richards win the match . 
 The secondary feud on the SmackDown brand was between The Great Khali , Batista and Rey Mysterio for the World Heavyweight Championship . After Batista was unable to win the World Heavyweight Championship from Khali at SummerSlam , he participated in a tournament in which he lost to Mysterio , the eventual winner . As a result , Mysterio got a title shot against Khali at Unforgiven . On the September 7 , 2007 episode of SmackDown , after Mysterio defeated Chavo Guerrero in an " I Quit " match , Khali put Mysterio in a Khali Vise Grip . Batista made the save , and as a result , he was made a part of the match , making it a Triple Threat match at Unforgiven . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event began , Kane defeated Kenny Dykstra in a dark match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match was for the ECW Championship between CM Punk and Elijah Burke . Punk won the match after pinning Burke with a rolling cradle . As a result , Punk retained the ECW Championship . 
 Next was a match for the WWE Tag Team Championship between Matt Hardy and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) against Deuce ' n Domino , who dominated early in the match and mocked the champions because of their rivalry over the WWE United States Championship , which MVP held . Deuce N ' Domino took the advantage of Hardy and MVP 's fight with each other and isolated Hardy . Hardy tossed MVP out of the ring and delivered a Twist of Fate to Deuce followed by a pinfall victory . As a result , MVP and Matt Hardy retained the WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 The third match was between Triple H and Carlito in which Carlito could not be disqualified . Carlito took advantage of the situation as he could use any weapon . He attacked Triple H several times with steel chairs , and threw powder in his eyes . With the referee distracted , a blinded Triple H struck Carlito with a low blow followed by a Pedigree , leading to Triple H pinning Carlito to win the match . 
 The next match was for the WWE Women 's Championship between Candice Michelle and Beth Phoenix . Phoenix was in control early in the match . When Phoenix had Candice on her shoulders , Candice reversed the attack and pinned Phoenix with a crucifix . As a result , Michelle won the match , and retained the WWE Women 's Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The fifth match was a Triple Threat match for the World Heavyweight Championship between The Great Khali , Batista and Rey Mysterio . Late in the match , Mysterio performed a 619 onto Khali , and attempted to score the pinfall . Batista , however , pulled Mysterio off of Khali and threw him out of the ring . Batista picked Khali up and delivered a spinebuster . Batista then pinned Khali to win the match . As a result , Batista became the new World Heavyweight Champion . 
 The following match was for the World Tag Team Championship between the team of Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch and the team of Paul London and Brian Kendrick . Cade and Murdoch had the advantage over London and Kendrick early on . At one point , Murdoch pulled Kendrick outside of the ring , over the top rope , and threw him into Cade , who performed a sitout spinebuster onto Kendrick . London tried to help his partner until Cade superplexed him over the top rope . Murdoch took the advantage and pinned Kendrick for the win . As a result , Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch retained the World Tag Team Championship . 
 The seventh match was for the WWE Championship between John Cena and Randy Orton . Cena entered the ring with rage and started beating on Orton until Orton struck Cena down . Orton covered Cena , but he could only get a two count . Cena angrily lost his control and started beating Orton . The referee Mike Chioda tried to stop Cena from continuously punching Orton , but Cena continued and was disqualified . Therefore , Orton won the match , but not the title , because a title changes hands only by pinfall or submission . As a result , John Cena retained the WWE Championship . Outside the ring , Cena put Orton in the STFU while Cena 's father kicked in the head of Orton in the same way as Orton had kicked in his head on a previous episode of Raw . After the match , Jonathan Coachman booked John Cena in a Last Man Standing match against Orton for the WWE Championship at No Mercy . 
 The main event was between The Undertaker and Mark Henry . During the match , Henry hit Undertaker with a series of splashes and <unk> , but Undertaker was able to continue fighting in the match . Henry put Undertaker in the bear hug but Undertaker broke the hold . In the end , Undertaker delivered a Last Ride to Henry from the top rope . Undertaker then pinned Henry to win the match . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch continued to feud with Paul London and Brian Kendrick while Jeff Hardy got involved in a rivalry with Mr. Kennedy . At No Mercy , London and Kendrick teamed up with Hardy to take on the team of Cade , Murdoch and Kennedy in a six @-@ man tag team match . Cade , Murdoch and Kennedy won the match after Kennedy delivered a Green Bay Plunge to London . On the September 17 episode of Raw , Candice Michelle and Mickie James defeated Melina and Jillian in a tag team match . Beth Phoenix was at ringside during the match At No Mercy , Candice and Phoenix had a rematch for the Women 's Championship , which Phoenix won to capture the title . 
 On the September 18 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , General Manager Armando Estrada announced an " Elimination Chase " to determine the number one contender for the ECW Championship at No Mercy . The first match involved Elijah Burke , Kevin Thorn , Tommy Dreamer and Stevie Richards . Burke eliminated Richards from the Elimination Chase after pinning him . In the second round , which was held on the September 25 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , Burke went on to eliminate Kevin Thorn in a Triple Threat match after pinning him . On the October 2 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , Tommy Dreamer and Elijah Burke faced each other in the final match of the tournament . Dreamer won the final match after a DDT and was made the number one contender for the title until Estrada came and said that Elimination Chase was not over . He announced that Big Daddy V would be the final man in the Elimination Chase . Big Daddy V defeated Dreamer and became the number one contender to the ECW Championship . At No Mercy , CM Punk defended the ECW Championship against Big Daddy V and retained the title after Big Daddy V got disqualified . 
 On the September 21 episode of SmackDown , Michael Cole interviewed Rey Mysterio until John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) said that he would conduct the interview instead . JBL claimed that he was the best wrestler ever and insulted Mysterio . Mysterio attacked JBL and challenged him to a fight until JBL introduced Finlay as Mysterio 's opponent . Finlay attacked Mysterio with a shillelagh , which started a feud between the two . Finlay and Mysterio faced each other at No Mercy in a match which was fought to no contest . Also on the September 21 episode of SmackDown , the new World Heavyweight Champion Batista faced Mark Henry in a non @-@ title match which Batista won by disqualification . Henry was disqualified after The Great Khali interfered and attacked Batista . After the match , Khali performed a Khali Vise Grip on Batista and challenged him to a Punjabi Prison match for the World Heavyweight Championship . At No Mercy , the two faced each other in a Punjabi Prison match for the World Heavyweight Championship , which Batista won to retain the title . 
 John Cena and Randy Orton continued their feud over the WWE Championship , as the two were scheduled to compete in a Last Man Standing match for the title . The match , however , never occurred . On the October 1 episode of Raw , Cena defeated Mr. Kennedy in a non @-@ title match . After the match , Orton attacked Cena and then counted to ten , which Cena was unable to answer to . Cena was legitimately injured in the match , and as a result , the following night on ECW on Sci Fi , Mr. McMahon vacated the WWE Championship because Cena 's right pectoral tendon was legitimately torn while executing a hip toss during his match with Kennedy . At No Mercy , Mr. McMahon entered the ring and said that a new WWE Champion was to be crowned , and Orton was crowned as champion , but he was challenged by Triple H for the title on the spot . Triple H , however , defeated Orton to win the WWE Championship , but later that same night , Triple H lost the title to Orton back in a Last Man Standing match after a title defense against Umaga , who he was booked to face in a standard wrestling match . 
 = = Results = = 
 = The End of All Things = 
 " The End of All Things " is the fourteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science @-@ fiction drama television series Fringe , and the series ' 79th episode overall . In the episode , the fringe team investigates Olivia 's ( Anna Torv ) disappearance , ultimately tracing back to David Robert Jones ( guest star Jared Harris ) . 
 It was written by co @-@ executive producer David Fury and directed by Jeff Hunt . The episode marked the beginning of a four @-@ week break for the series , though the producers initially thought the gap would start with the following episode , " A Short Story About Love " . Executive producer Jeff Pinkner called it a " game @-@ changer " that would " peel back some layers " surrounding the Observer 's background . 
 " The End of All Things " first aired on February 24 , 2012 in the United States on the Fox network to an estimated 3 @.@ 1 million viewers , an increase from the previous week . It received generally positive reviews from critics , with many praising Harris ' performance and the unveiling of more of the series ' mythology . In 2013 , following the conclusion of the final season , IGN ranked the episode the fourth best of the entire series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) has been taken to a disused medical facility by David Robert Jones ( Jared Harris ) and his agents . She is placed in the same room along with Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) , also secured to a chair , revealing she was also abducted by Jones the night before . Jones arrives and asserts that Olivia has great abilities due to her Cortexiphan doping but he must coax them out of Olivia . He presents a light box test that Olivia should be able to activate with her mind , torturing Nina to create the emotional driver , but Olivia admits she can 't do it without rest . During this period , Olivia , her memories a mix of her own and that of Olivia from Peter Bishop 's ( Joshua Jackson ) timeline , asks Nina to help her make an emotional connection , but she recognizes that this Nina is not the real one but instead the one from the parallel universe . Olivia continues to play along , explaining to Nina that her Cortexiphan abilities could only be induced by being near Peter ; Nina fakes illness to be extracted from the room , where she explains to a complicit Jones that they need to abduct Peter . 
 Following Olivia 's disappearance , Peter discovers a surveillance camera in her apartment . He takes its memory device , which has been overwritten numerous times like a palimpsest , to Walter Bishop 's ( John Noble ) laboratory , using forensic tools to examine previous images on the disc . Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) and Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) take Nina into custody , learning that someone with Nina 's bio @-@ metric signature had accessed the Massive Dynamic supply of Cortexiphan over the last few months ; Nina is surprised by this but refuses to talk . As they work , Walter accuses Peter of taking advantage of Olivia 's state , even if unintentionally , imprinting his memories of Olivia of the original timeline onto her . They identify a face belonging to Leland Spivey ( Monte Markham ) , a man with ties to Jones and Nina , and Peter suspects that they are dosing Olivia with Cortexiphan for nefarious purposes . Their work is disrupted by the sudden appearance of the Observer September ( Michael Cerveris ) , bleeding from a chest wound . 
 With September nearly dead , Peter decides to use Walter 's equipment to enter the Observer 's mind to try to learn of Olivia 's location . Within September 's consciousness , Peter learns the Observers are a team of scientists from one possible future of humanity , having used technology to travel to the past to witness their own creation . September , however , disrupted events by attempting to observe the point where Peter 's cure was discovered , and his disruption has since caused several unintended changes within the timeline , including the war between the two universes . Ultimately , this would lead to the birth of Henry , Peter 's child with the parallel universe 's Olivia , which September claimed never should have happened and will be a catalyst for disruption of future events . By Peter entering the Machine and altering the timeline , Henry also ceased to exist . September explains that Peter 's reappearance may be a means to set things right , and insists he find a way to reunite his romance with his original Olivia . As the reality of September 's mind breaks down and he claims " they are coming " , the Observer tells Peter to " go home " . Peter is suddenly woken up in the lab , September 's body goes into convulsions and vanishes . 
 Peter realizes that September 's message was literal , and returns to his home , where he is knocked out by Jones ' men . He is brought to the same facility as Olivia and tied up . As they prepare to torture him , Olivia begins to use her powers to activate the lights , not only on the box but within the facility , creating electrical sparks that kill one of Jones ' men . As Jones and Nina retreat , Olivia frees Peter and they give chase , though Olivia suffers from a seizure , following excessive use of her powers . They catch up to Jones and Nina as they are crossing back to the parallel universe , but the two are able to escape . Peter contacts the authorities to bring medical help for Olivia . As they are waiting , Peter admits to Olivia that he fears what he has done to her memories , and has seen his original Olivia through the Observer 's mind . He leaves her , believing that staying away from this Olivia would be for the best . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The End of All Things " was written by co @-@ executive producer David Fury , while being directed by CSI : Crime Scene Investigation veteran , Jeff Hunt . It was Hunt 's third series credit ( his other two being " The Man from the Other Side " and " The Box " ) . Leading up to the episode 's broadcast , executive producer Jeff Pinkner remarked in a conference call with journalists that it was a " game @-@ changer " because " our characters learn a lot more and the audience is going to learn a lot more about the über @-@ plot of the season ’ s bad guy , David Robert Jones . " Referring to the Observer September , Pinker added that the episode would also peel " back some layers about what his agenda has been and use that as an opportunity to revisit the things on the show we ’ ve seen before . " Fellow executive producer J.H. Wyman elaborated " We always said you would find out about the Observers this season and we were going to investigate them a lot more . We ’ re excited about it all . That ’ s a highlight – the Observers are a highlight . For us to constantly break what you know and reset and have people go , ' Wow , I didn ’ t see that coming ! ' That ’ s why we get up in the morning is to take people along for the ride . We ’ re excited about what ’ s coming up , too . " 
 " The End of All Things " began a four @-@ week break for the series , though the producers initially thought this gap would commence with the following episode . They were pleased that the switch did not cause issues , with Pinkner noting that " we ’ re sort of in a zone of episodes where each one is amazing and each one either turns the story or resolves something important or there ’ s a cliffhanger – several episodes where each one is pretty awesome in itself and is also important to the overall patchwork of the season . We were very happy this ended up being one before we went on a little break . I think the fans are going to be well satisfied to come back and watch the next one as well . " 
 The episode was the first time that the characters of Nina Sharp and David Robert Jones had common scenes within the show , but both Blair Brown and Jared Harris had previously acted together as mother and son in an off @-@ Broadway production of the play Humble Boy . During the scene in which Nina was tortured to taunt Olivia into using her powers , Brown actually injured herself on the rusty <unk> used as the prop for the show . Brown referred to the alternative version of her character as " <unk> " due to her seemingly " mean " personality , and speculated that Nina may have become this way because without William Bell , " she wasn ’ t at the party with all of the boys , the science boys " and thus developed an " outsider " perspective . She said of the role , " It ’ s a really interesting thing to play . I love the fact that they look exactly the same , at least for a while . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The End of All Things " first aired on February 24 , 2012 in the United States . The last episode before a four @-@ week hiatus , it was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 1 million viewers , with a ratings share of 1 @.@ 2 , an improvement from the previous episode , " A Better Human Being " . Fringe and its lead @-@ in Kitchen Nightmares helped its network , Fox , tie for third place with NBC for the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics . Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times remarked , " Great acting , a decent twist and the truth behind one of the most enigmatic characters in television history . Why can ’ t more Fringe episodes be like this ? Why can ’ t more television be like ' Fringe ? ' " . Hanson also lauded Jared Harris ' performance , calling him " a fantastic villain . Arrogant and superior , with hints of insecurity . Jones ’ speech about all living creatures needing incentive might have been goofy coming from any other actor , but from Harris , it is creepy beyond belief . So glad Fringe found a way to bring David Robert Jones back . " IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated it 9 @.@ 0 / 10 for being a " fast @-@ paced story " that was " the best episode of the season so far " . He continued " Olivia 's great escape from Jones and Bad Nina was fantastic television and some clever writing . " Isler did find some of the Observer revelations " a bit of a let @-@ down " however , as he felt he had already been made aware of them ; this was not enough to make him critical of the episode . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , columnist Noel Murray graded the episode with an A- , and praised September 's stumbling entrance into the lab as " yet another rich and remarkable scene " . Entertainment Weekly writer Jeff Jensen had a more negative opinion , and commented that the episode " failed to make my <unk> hum , " which he attributed to high expectations set by fellow staff writer and former Fringe reviewer Ken Tucker . Jensen continued , " It was , to my eyes , ' just okay . ' Certainly not the equal of the past two episodes . And not the strongest possible kicker to a strong second act for Fringe 's fourth season , which now takes a four @-@ week snooze before rising anew on March 23 for the first of eight consecutive episodes – a sweep of story that might represent the very end of all things Fringe . Damn , I ’ m such a downer this week , aren ’ t I ? Ah , but so was this episode . " In January 2013 , IGN ranked the episode as the fourth best episode of the series , explaining that " when Season 4 needed a boost of excitement , this episode delivered it in a timely fashion . It had a thrilling pace and offered answers to some questions that have lingering since the series began . " 
 = Clan MacIntyre = 
 Clan MacIntyre is a Highland Scottish clan . The name MacIntyre ( from Scottish Gaelic Mac an t @-@ Saoir ) , means " son of the carpenter or mason . " Although no documented history of the clan exists , it is most commonly said to descend from Maurice Mac Neil a nephew of Somerled , the great 12th century leader of the Scottish Gaels . Through an ingenious strategy , Maurice secured the marriage of Somerled to the daughter of the King of Mann and the Isles , thus greatly increasing Somerled ’ s territories . At an unknown date the clan journeyed from the Hebrides to the Scottish mainland where the chiefs established their home at Glen Noe on Loch Etive . 
 The earliest recorded clan chiefs do not emerge until the 17th century . According to tradition , they had held the land at Glen Noe for centuries , although subject to a feudal tenure converted to money rent in later years . In 1806 , however , the chief was forced to relinquish the tenancy of Glen Noe due to inability to meet the payments . He and his family subsequently emigrated to the United States . 
 MacIntyres participated in military campaigns during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the Jacobite rising of 1745 – 46 but they did not operate as an independent body . Clan members served as hereditary foresters to the Lords of Lorne and as hereditary pipers to the chiefs of Clan Menzies and the MacDonalds of Clanranald . Perhaps the clan 's most illustrious member , Duncan Ban MacIntyre is regarded as one of the finest Gaelic poets . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The name MacIntyre ( Scottish Gaelic : Mac an t @-@ Saoir ) , means " son of the carpenter " , or " son of the craftsman " . Iain Moncreiffe notes that some consider the name to be a trade name , equivalent to the names Gow ( smith ) or MacNair ( " son of the heir " ) and attribute the existence of the surname in various parts of Scotland to the fact that the name signifies descent from various individuals who were wood workers . In 1990 , Scotland 's heraldic authority , the Lord Lyon King of Arms , recognised MacIntyre of Glenoe as Chief of the Name and Arms of the name MacIntyre . Although several works mention a " Black Book of Glen Noe , " now lost , said to have contained the history of Clan MacIntyre , no documented record of the clan ’ s origins has ever been discovered . There are , however , several accounts that purport to identify its founder and explain its name . The most frequently repeated story ties the MacIntyres to Somerled , who lived in the 12th century and who has been described as “ one of the greatest warrior kings born to the Gaels of Alba ( Scotland ) . ” An ambitious figure almost from the outset , Somerled sought the hand of <unk> , daughter of King Olav the Red , Norse King of Man and the Isles . The story of how , after being initially rebuffed by that island magnate , Somerled would ultimately succeed through the stealth of one of his kinsmen , is recorded in the history of MacDonald of Sleat . 
 According to this account , Somerled agreed to join Olav in an expedition to raid Skye . The night before sailing , however , a ship wright or carpenter known as Maurice Mac Neil ( the second name sometimes given as <unk> or <unk> ) , by some accounts Somerled 's nephew , secretly bored holes in the hull of Olav ’ s ship using tallow and butter to temporarily seal them . On entering the open seas the tallow was washed away by the action of the waves and the king ’ s ship began rapidly taking on water . Olav ’ s urgent appeal for help was spurned by Somerled , until he consented to the previously sought marriage . Maurice then boarded the King ’ s ship and filled the holes with wooden plugs he had previously prepared for the purpose . From that time the descendants of Maurice were called “ MacIntyres , ” “ carpenters ( or shipwrights ) sons ” . ” , 
 The sought @-@ after marriage would take place in 1140 . One line of Somerled ’ s MacDonald descendants would become known as Kings and Lords of the Isles and over several centuries would contend with the Scottish monarchy for control of a large portion of northwestern Scotland . 
 Another account , involving seafaring , holds that the name arose from the misfortune of a mariner afloat . In this version the clan ’ s founder , sometimes identified as son of one of the Lords of the Isles , cuts off his thumb in order to plug a leak in his sinking vessel . 
 The original home of Clan MacIntyre is likewise the subject of conjecture . There is general agreement that the clan arose in the Hebrides , the islands west of the Scottish mainland . Some accounts , however , identify Skye as the ancestral home , while another tradition holds Islay to have been the locale . The story of how the clan made its way to the mainland and settled along the shore of Loch Etive in the vicinity of Ben Cruachan is again shrouded in myth and magic . It is said that seeking fresh pastures for their cattle they were initially obstructed by a mountain spirit . After testing their perseverance and courage the spirit instructed them to make their new home where the white cow in their herd should first lie down to rest . This site became known as Glen Noe . G 
 = = History = = 
 Many accounts relate that at some point in the 13th century the MacIntyres became foresters to the Lords of Lorne , a hereditary post in which they continued as the territory subsequently passed from the MacDougalls to the control of the Stewarts and finally to the Campbells . 
 After settling at Glen Noe , the chiefs are said to have held the land for centuries . While presumably owning the property outright originally , it is generally agreed that at some , uncertain date , they acquired a feudal obligation to the Campbells of Breadalbane . Initially , this entailed only a symbolic payment . Tradition identifies this as a snowball supplied at midsummer and a white calf surrendered but then killed and shared by landlord and tenant as a token of mutual esteem . 
 The earliest recorded clan chiefs do not emerge until the 17th century . The earliest chief is Duncan , who married Mary , daughter of Patrick Campbell of <unk> . He died in 1695 and is buried at Ardchattan Priory . 
 From this era comes a traditional account that the home of the MacIntyre chief was saved by the clan ’ s ties to the MacDonalds . At the time of the civil war in Scotland the forces of James Graham , 1st Marquess of Montrose , had sacked Inveraray and marched north to the area of Glen Noe . As a tenant of the Campbells , the chief was deemed an opponent of the Royalist faction , which Montrose served . The chief , expecting no mercy , fled . As part of their campaign , the Royalist troops were under orders to destroy all houses in the neighbourhood and began to set fire to the chief 's house . The commander of Montrose ’ s men , Sir Alexander MacDonald , extinguished the blaze before it became widespread and sent word to the chief that his property had been spared in recognition of the services the clan ’ s founder had performed in contriving the marriage of Somerled , ancestor of the MacDonalds to <unk> half a millennium earlier . , 
 Many MacIntyres subsequently joined MacDonald 's army including the chief 's piper . The chief , however , was with Campbell of Argyll at the battle of Inverlochy in February 1645 when the Campbells were surprised by Montrose 's forces and routed . 
 It is said that the MacIntyre chief at the time of the Jacobite rising of 1745 , James ( born c . 1727 ) , would have joined the clans rallying to Prince Charles Edward Stuart but was dissuaded from doing so by his wife , who was a Campbell , and his neighbors . His loyalties to the Campbells were further deepened by the fact that his legal studies had been sponsored by the Campbell Earl of Breadalbane . Nonetheless , many MacIntyres were in the clan regiment of Stewart of Appin in the campaign of 1745 – 46 , but they did not serve as an independent body . 
 At some unknown date the symbolic snowball and calf tokens owed to the Campbells were commuted to payment of money rent which increased over the years . In 1806 , the chief was forced to relinquish the tenancy of Glen Noe due to inability to meet the payments . The chief and his family emigrated to the United States , where the family continues to reside . Although the identities of the chiefs were always known to interested clan members , the chiefship of the clan was not officially recognized by Scottish authorities until 1991 , when the coat of arms of James Wallace MacIntyre of Glenoe was confirmed by the Lord Lyon , King of Arms . The current chief of the clan is Donald Russell MacIntyre of Glenoe . The MacIntyre chiefs hold membership in the Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs . 
 = = Tartan = = 
 = = Pipers , poets and bards = = 
 The MacIntyres of Rannoch , were hereditary pipers to the chiefs of Clan Menzies and composed some of that clan ’ s music . They supplied hereditary pipers to the MacDonalds of Clanranald , and a noted pibroch commemorating the battle of Sheriffmuir is attributed to one of these MacIntyres . 
 In the 18th century two members of the clan earned considerable regard for their Gaelic poetry . James , the poet @-@ chief , ( 1727 – 1799 ) is best remembered for a biting satire he composed in Gaelic in response to Samuel Johnson , the English encyclopedist , who had made derogatory comments about the Scots in his famous trip to the Hebrides . 
 The poet @-@ chief would find himself eclipsed by one of his own kinsmen , however . Born on 20 March 1724 , in <unk> , Glenorchy , Argyllshire , Duncan Ban MacIntyre would become known to his countrymen as “ Fair Duncan of the Songs . ” One historian has described him as " one of the twin peaks of the century 's Gaelic verse " and some have even called him the “ Burns of the Highlands . ” His work was described as possessing “ an unrivaled originality of conception , with the most mellifluous flow of language . ” Yet his biographers agree that he was wholly illiterate . 
 His most critically acclaimed work is “ The Praise of Ben <unk> , ” but he is well known for his poetic commentaries on contemporary events . In the Jacobite rising of 1745 which attempted to return the House of Stuart to the throne of Scotland and England , Duncan fought on the Hanoverian side and composed a humorous song after losing his borrowed sword at the battle of Falkirk in January 1746 . Following that uprising , however , he composed a best selling poem attacking the portion of the Act of <unk> outlawing the wearing of highland dress and was briefly imprisoned . , When the ban against the wearing of the kilt was repealed , he celebrated with another poem , entitled <unk> na <unk> or “ Song of the Breeches . ” 
 He was named bard to the Highland Society of London and was so esteemed that in his later years schoolchildren were allowed out of class to see him when he traveled to their community . He died on 6 October 1812 . In 1859 , a monument to the memory of Duncan Ban MacIntyre ( described in contemporary press accounts as " in the druid style of architecture " ) was erected near Dalmally at the head of Loch Awe . 
 = = Other MacIntyre families and groups = = 
 Camus @-@ na @-@ h @-@ erie : In 1955 Alastair MacIntyre of Camus @-@ na @-@ h @-@ erie recorded arms in the Lyon Court as a cadet of the chiefly house of MacIntyre , although with a shield significantly different from that subsequently granted to the clan chief in 1991 . 
 This branch of the family claims descent from Patrick , a son of a chief of Glenoe . The family established themselves on the shores of the Inverness @-@ shire Loch Leven at Camus @-@ na @-@ h @-@ erie . John Macintyre of Camus @-@ na @-@ h @-@ erie , 10th of his line , fought on the Jacobite side in the 1745 and was wounded at the battle of Falkirk . It is reported that nine members of MacIntyre of Camus @-@ na @-@ h @-@ erie were taken prisoners in the 1745 rising . In the early 19th century , the family was represented by the Rev. John MacIntyre , D.D. of <unk> . 
 Badenoch : The MacIntyres of Badenoch are said to have been descended from a bard taken under the protection of the Clan Mackintosh chief at the end of the 15th century . The Badenoch MacIntyres were a constituent group of Clan Chattan , an alliance of clans headed by the Mackintosh chief which fought on the Jacobite side in the risings of 1715 and 1745 . 
 <unk> : The little hamlet of <unk> above Loch Awe near the road to Inveraray was a center of weaving and almost all of the inhabitants were MacIntyres . A specialty of the industry were men 's hose and garters , which were prized at that time for wearing with the highland costume . 
 = = Irish MacIntyres = = 
 The relationship of MacIntyres in Scotland to those in Ireland is not entirely clear . Given the proximity of the two countries and the similarity of their languages , some Scottish MacIntyres undoubtedly settled in Ireland , mainly in Ulster . 
 Dr. Edward <unk> , authority on Irish genealogy , does not include MacIntyre as a separate entry in his two works on Irish families . Rather , he lists MacIntyre , along with Carpenter , Freeman , O ’ Seery , and <unk> in his entry on the name “ <unk> . ” He likewise specifies that in Ireland MacIntyres are found chiefly in Ulster , and in County Sligo . It would appear , in Dr. <unk> 's view , that those MacIntyres who are of native Irish ancestry originally were <unk> who changed their names . , 
 It is believed that some Irish MacIntyres descend from native Irish stock whose ancestors were living in the same areas in which Scottish MacIntyres settled and who assumed the Scottish surname , rather than <unk> , as an <unk> of the Irish name Mac an <unk> . 
 = = Septs = = 
 Septs are family names associated with a particular clan . In the case of MacIntyre , the surname Wright , when of Scottish origin , is considered an anglicized form of the name . Other family names associated with the clan include Glenoe , <unk> , <unk> ( also Tyree ) and <unk> . 
 = = Clan profile = = 
 Chief : Donald Russell MacIntyre of Glenoe Chief of the Name and Arms of MacIntyre , 
 Arms : A coat of arms consisting of a shield divided into quarters . In the upper left and lower right quarter , a red eagle , its wings outstretched . The upper right quarter shows a ship with furled sails , while in the lower left quarter a red hand grasps a blue cross . A cow , standing on two hooves , appears on either side of the shield . The shield is surmounted by a silver helmet above which there is a hand grasping a dagger . | Coat of arms of the chief of Clan MacIntyre . 
 Motto : Per <unk> ( Through hardship or difficulty ) . 
 War Cry : " Cruachan " ( A mountain , Ben Cruachan , near Loch Awe ) . , 
 Pipe Music : " We Will Take The Good Old Way " ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> Sinn An <unk> Mór ) . 
 Plant Badge : White Heather . , 
 = MIND MGMT = 
 MIND MGMT is an ongoing American comic book series created by Matt Kindt and published through Dark Horse Comics . The first issue was released on May 23 , 2012 to positive reviews and received a second printing in April 2013 . The series continued to receive positive coverage during its run , but Kindt 's art style was a common point of criticism . The series concluded with issue 36 in August 2015 . The story has been collected into six hardcovers . 
 The story is about Meru , a true crime writer who searches for the truth behind a mysterious airline flight and discovers a secret government agency of super spies , espionage , and psychic abilities . Henry Lyme , the former top agent , has gone rogue and is working to dismantle the organization . 
 The film rights were optioned by 20th Century Fox in December 2012 . Producer Ridley Scott and screenwriter David J. Kelly began pre @-@ production in January 2013 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The idea for MIND MGMT came from the title , which one of Kindt 's friends gave to him . He worked on the concept for over a year , and the plot was outlined in a twelve @-@ page synopsis . 
 After partnering for one of Kindt 's previous works , 3 Story : The Secret History of the Giant Man , Dark Horse Publisher Mike Richardson asked Kindt to pitch another book . Kindt sent the proposal for MIND MGMT and was happy when it was accepted because Dark Horse was " the only publisher able to pay me a living wage and also let me do exactly what I wanted no matter what . " The series was initially approved for over 50 issues , but Kindt pruned away excess material and reduced the run to 36 issues . Despite the reduction in length , the final product is still almost identical to the original pitch . Diana Schutz , editor of 3 Story , was originally slated to work with Kindt again , but the project was handed to newly promoted editor Brendan Wright very early in production . Kindt described their input as " invaluable " and considers Wright to be a collaborator . 
 Although Dark Horse had approved 36 issues , there was still a chance the book could sell poorly and receive an early cancellation . The decision would be made after receiving the final sales number for the third issue , meaning Kindt was only guaranteed six issues . Not wanting to risk the series being cut off in the middle of a story , he designed the first six issues to stand alone if necessary . Kindt pencilled two endings for the last page of issue six so he would be prepared either way . 
 Kindt took on additional comic scripting work while making MIND MGMT , but MIND MGMT was always his top priority . He scripted six issues at a time , then worked on the art during the hours his daughter was at school . At any given time , he would have one issue completed and ready to print . 
 Kindt said naming characters was the hardest part during the story 's creation . Meru Marlow , the main character , is named after a Webster University student who attended a class taught by Kindt . Henry Lyme , another main character , is a reference to " Harry Lime " from the Orson Welles film " The Third Man " and is visually based on Zach Galifianakis in " The Hangover " . Other supporting cast get their names from a mix of real people , film references , and even everyday objects , like Perrier mineral water . 
 MIND MGMT was Kindt 's first solo monthly series . After creating several original graphic novels , Kindt felt the format was becoming too " easy " from a creative standpoint . He wanted to create a monthly series partly out of nostalgia , and to create a dialogue between readers and himself during publication . As an incentive to draw in readers who would otherwise wait for the collected edition , each issue included material which was not reprinted in the collected editions . Kindt stated he was enjoyed the experience and the increased interaction with fans , even to the point of saying he may never do another graphic novel . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 A six @-@ page preview of the first issue was included with 3 Story : Secret files of the Giant Man , a one @-@ issue continuation of another work by Kindt , in April 2012 . The same month , three short stories were released online for free to promote the series . They were later printed as issue # 0 in November 2012 . 
 The first issue was published May 23 , 2012 , and the series ran monthly through November 2012 . In December , a short chapter appeared in Dark Horse Presents vol 2 # 19 as a prologue to the second story arc . The series returned to a monthly schedule in January 2013 . The first issue was reprinted at a discount price in April 2013 . Additional short chapters appeared in Dark Horse Presents vol 2 # 31 ( December 2013 ) and Dark Horse Presents vol 3 # 5 ( February 2015 ) and acted as introductions to the fourth and sixth arcs respectively . A one page bonus strip written by Alex di Campi and drawn by Kindt was included in the third issue of Archie vs. Predator , published jointly by Dark Horse and Archie Comics in June 2015 . The final issue was published as NEW MGMT # 1 on August 26 , 2015 . 
 A 200 @-@ page hardcover collecting issues # 0 @-@ 6 , collectively titled " The Manager , " was released April 3 , 2013 . It was followed by " The Futurist " ( collecting issues 7 @-@ 12 , Dark Horse Presents # 19 short , and five strips originally published as webcomics on i09 ) , " The Homemaker " ( collecting issues 13 @-@ 18 ) , " The Magician " ( collecting issues 19 @-@ 24 and the Dark Horse Presents vol 2 # 31 short ) , and " The Eraser " ( collecting issues 25 @-@ 30 ) A final hardcover titled " The Immortals " will collect issues 31 @-@ 35 , New MGMT # 1 , and the short story from Dark Horse Presents vol 3 # 5 . 
 Kindt has mentioned the possibility of MIND MGMT annuals or additional mini @-@ series exploring the history of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = The Manager = = = 
 MIND MGMT is a government agency of spies , formed during or after World War I , who have psychic abilities . Henry Lyme is recruited as a child , and becomes their greatest agent . The work exhausts him , and Lyme is retired to Zanzibar . While there , he has a breakdown and loses control of his abilities , causing the city 's inhabitants to murder one another . Lyme decides MIND MGMT is too dangerous to exist , and flees . In an effort to cover his escape , he accidentally causes everyone aboard a plane with him to develop amnesia . 
 Meru , a true – crime writer , investigates the amnesia flight two years later . She finds a lead in Mexico , where she meets a CIA agent named Bill . They are attacked by two former MIND MGMT agents , but escape . Meru eventually locates Lyme , who tells her his story . Meru learns she was a child in Zanzibar during the massacre and was saved by Lyme . He erased her memory of the event and arranged a foster family for her . During her investigative career she has located Lyme several times , but he continuously causes her to forget . She leaves determined to expose the truth about MIND MGMT , but falls asleep instead . Waking in her apartment , she decides to uncover the truth behind the amnesia flight . 
 = = = The Futurist = = = 
 When former MIND MGMT agent The Eraser tries to reform the agency , she tries to have Meru assassinated . Lyme recruits Meru and fellow former agents Perrier and Dusty to stop the Eraser . At Perrier 's insistence , they also team with Duncan " The Futurist " Jones , an agent who can see his own future . Duncan is aware of Lyme 's manipulation of Meru , and insists he will not go along if Lyme continues to lie to her . Lyme agrees , but does not confess the truth to Meru . Believing the best way to stop the Eraser is to prevent her from contacting other former agents , the quintet travel to the MIND MGMT headquarters , Shangri @-@ la , for a master list of all MIND MGMT personnel . There , Meru finds a library which contains the history of the world and reads the book containing her life . Meanwhile , three of the Eraser 's allies engage Lyme and the others . Now aware of how Lyme has manipulated her , Meru helps stop the Eraser 's crew but chooses not to remain with Lyme . She instead leaves with Bill , the CIA agent who is revealed to have been a MIND MGMT sleeper agent with whom she was previously romantically involved . 
 = = = The Homemaker = = = 
 After the events at Shangri @-@ la , all parties know the present whereabouts of the sleeper agent Megan , code named " The Homemaker . " However , they are unaware she was originally a mole for the Russian MIND MGMT counterpart known as Zero . When Lyme and Duncan try to activate her , they also awaken her Zero training and Megan begins to orchestrate the <unk> of her subdivision through subterfuge . As the groups prepare to recruit Megan for their various agendas , Lyme , Eraser , and Meru reflect on how they arrived at their present position . Lyme regrets his multiple manipulations of Meru , and is currently on a mission of atonement . Meru is still adjusting to her recently awakened memories of her own training as a MIND MGMT agent . The Eraser dreams of her dead husband , a former MIND MGMT agent , and the night she was framed for his murder . As the Homemaker 's plan climaxes in a massacre , Eraser , Lyme , and Meru all arrive at the same time . Megan joins the Eraser in order to take revenge on MIND MGMT for leaving her in her undercover status after the agency was dismantled . Meru and Bill reunite with Lyme , Duncan , Perrier , and Dusty . While she is unable to forgive Lyme 's previous actions , Meru decides he is the lesser evil in the present situation . 
 = = = The Magician = = = 
 Meru , Lyme , and their allies travel to Germany to find the Magician , another former agent . They arrive during one of the Magician 's acts and Meru unintentionally negates the her abilities , ruining the performance . This angers the Magician , who decides to ally herself with the Eraser out of spite . The Eraser 's recruits use the Magician 's help to set a trap for Lyme , Duncan , and Perrier . Lyme is beaten into a coma and left for dead , although he is found by passersby and taken to a hospital . Duncan and Perrier escape , but are now disconnected from Meru and the others . Meanwhile , Meru , Bill , and Dusty follow up a different lead in Hong Kong . They too are attacked by the Eraser , resulting in Dusty and Bill 's deaths . Meru escapes , and is now more resolved than ever to stop the Eraser . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The series debuted with positive reviews , and the first issue sold 7535 copies in May 2012 , making it the 236th best selling issue by units for the month . <unk> caused the first two issues to sell out at the distribution level . Reviewing for Comic Book Resources , Kelly Thompson gave the first issue 4 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , and described the quality as " simply sublime . " 
 Kindt 's art style is a common area of criticism for the book . Writing for iFanboy , Paul Montgomery said " “ Kindt ’ s aesthetic won ’ t win over every reader , [ but ] his watercolors lend perfectly to the story ’ s themes and tone ” . Reviewer Colin Smith initially felt the art was a weak point the good story could not overcome , but changed his mind after subsequent issues . Later issues continued to receive praise ; however , sales for later issues fell until bottoming out with <unk> orders for issue seven . Sales then began to increase , with <unk> orders for issue ten . The final issue had estimated sales slightly over 6 @,@ 000 . 
 When the first hardcover collection was released , it was on the New York Times bestseller list for two weeks . Seth <unk> of the <unk> blog praised the first storyline , describing the series as " one of the most underappreciated , innovative monthly comics on the stands today " . In January 2014 , the Young Adult Library Services Association included the first hardcover of MIND MGMT on their top ten list of great graphic novels from 2013 . The following month , it was at the top of the New York Times list of comic books that should be adapted to television . 
 The series appeared on numerous comic media " Best of " lists in 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 . 
 = = Film = = 
 Talks with 20th Century Fox for a film adaptation began in December 2012 , and the project was optioned for one year in early 2013 . In late January 2013 , Ridley Scott was announced as producer for the film with Mike Richardson and Keith Goldberg . Kindt is acting as a consultant for the film and has shared the complete outline for the story with Scott and David J. Kelly , the screenwriter . He believes Scott has " a good take on it " and will not mind if it is not a faithful adaption . The option has been renewed twice to give the screenwriter more time to work . 
 = Robert de Chesney = 
 Robert de Chesney ( died December 1166 ) was a medieval English Bishop of Lincoln . He was the brother of an important royal official , William de Chesney , and the uncle of Gilbert Foliot , successively Bishop of Hereford and Bishop of London . Educated at Oxford or Paris , Chesney was Archdeacon of Leicester before his election as bishop in December 1148 . 
 Chesney served as a royal justice in Lincolnshire during his bishopric , and maintained a close relationship with his nephew , Foliot . He was also an early patron of Thomas Becket , and gave the young cleric an office in his diocese early in Becket 's career . Although shown favour by King Stephen of England , including the right to a mint , Chesney was present at the coronation of King Henry II of England in 1154 and went on to serve Henry as a royal justice . Around 1160 , Chesney became embroiled in a dispute with St Albans Abbey in the diocese of Lincoln , over his right as bishop to supervise the abbey . The dispute was eventually settled when the abbey granted Chesney land in return for his relinquishing any right to oversee St Albans . 
 Chesney was active in his diocese ; more than 240 documents relating to his episcopal career survive . They show him mediating disputes between religious houses and granting exemptions and rights in his diocese . Chesney bought a house in London to serve as an episcopal residence , constructed an episcopal palace in Lincoln , and founded a religious house outside the city . He died in December 1166 , probably on the 27th , and was buried in Lincoln Cathedral . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 After Henry I 's death in 1135 , the succession was disputed as the king 's only legitimate son , William , had died in 1120 . The main contenders were the king 's nephews , Stephen , Count of Boulogne and his elder brother Theobald II , Count of Champagne , and his surviving legitimate daughter , Matilda , usually known as the Empress Matilda because of her first marriage to the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry V. After Matilda was widowed in 1125 , she returned to her father in England , who then secured her marriage to Geoffrey , Count of Anjou . All the magnates of England and Normandy were required to declare fealty to Matilda as Henry 's heir , but after Henry I 's death in 1135 Stephen rushed to England and had himself crowned , before Theobald or Matilda could react . The Norman barons accepted Stephen as Duke of Normandy , and Theobald contented himself with his possessions in France . But Matilda was less patient : she secured the support of the king of Scotland , David I , her maternal uncle , and the support of her half @-@ brother Robert , Earl of Gloucester , an illegitimate son of Henry I , in 1138 . 
 Stephen was initially secure on his throne but , by 1139 , stresses had appeared . David I invaded England in 1138 , and some of the English nobles rebelled , but Stephen had dealt with both threats by April 1139 . Later that year , he arrested Roger , the Bishop of Salisbury , and his nephews Nigel , the Bishop of Ely and Alexander , the Bishop of Lincoln , who were not only powerful ecclesiastics but important royal administrators . In September 1139 , Matilda landed in England to contest the throne , supported by her half @-@ brother Robert . Stephen himself was captured in February 1141 by Matilda 's forces , but Robert 's subsequent capture by forces loyal to Stephen later that year allowed his exchange for Stephen in November 1141 . The result was an effective stalemate , with Stephen controlling parts of the country and others under the control of Matilda 's supporters . During the 1140s , Matilda 's husband , Geoffrey of Anjou , wrested Normandy from Stephen . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chesney 's family originated from Quesnay @-@ <unk> in the Calvados region of Normandy near Bayeux in France , but they had settled in the Midlands of England and held lands there , particularly in Oxfordshire . His parents were Roger de Chesney and Alice de Langetot . His brother William de Chesney remained a layman , and became one of Oxfordshire 's leading landowners . Another brother , Reginald , was the abbot of Evesham Abbey . Chesney 's sister Agnes was married to Robert Foliot , steward to the Earl of Huntingdon . Agnes and Robert were probably the parents of Gilbert Foliot , later Bishop of Hereford and Bishop of London . Although it is a surmise that Foliot 's mother was a sibling of Chesney , it is certain that Chesney was Gilbert 's uncle . 
 Chesney probably attended schools in either Oxford or Paris , as later in life he was referred to with the title of magister , signifying that he was educated . He was Archdeacon of Leicester by about 1146 , and held the prebend of Stow . He was also a canon of the chapel of St. George at Oxford Castle . 
 = = Election = = 
 Chesney was elected to the See of Lincoln on 13 December 1148 , by his cathedral chapter , apparently without outside interference . He was consecrated by Theobald of Bec at Canterbury Cathedral on 19 December , the day after his ordination as a priest . 
 Gilbert Foliot 's letters provide some background to Chesney 's election , showing that King Stephen of England and Stephen 's brother Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , attempted to secure Lincoln for one of their relatives : the royal candidates were the abbots of Fécamp , Westminster , and St Benet 's of Hulme . They were rejected by Pope Eugene III , paving the way for the chapter to elect Chesney . Foliot relates that the electors from the chapter travelled to London , where they proceeded to elect Chesney in front of Foliot , Theobald , and some other bishops . That account is contradicted by Chesney 's profession of obedience to Theobald , which claims that the election took place on 13 December 1148 at Westminster . Henry of Huntingdon and Ralph de Diceto , both medieval chroniclers , approved of the election and mentioned the unanimous nature of Chesney 's selection . That Chesney 's brother William was a firm supporter of Stephen 's probably helped reconcile Stephen and his brother to Chesney 's election . 
 Chesney returned to Lincoln on 6 January 1149 , where he received a letter from Arnulf , the Bishop of Lisieux in Normandy , congratulating him on his appointment . Arnulf also asked Chesney to help the cause of Henry fitzEmpress , Empress Matilda 's eldest son and a contender for the English throne . 
 = = Bishop under Stephen = = 
 Correspondence between Chesney and his nephew Gilbert Foliot suggests their relationship was quite close . Foliot strongly supported his uncle 's candidacy for Lincoln , writing to Pope Eugene III to encourage papal approval of the election . Foliot later ordered a copy of the Digest for his uncle , which demonstrates Chesney 's interest in Roman law . Some of Archbishop Theobald 's letters , written to Chesney and recorded in John of Salisbury 's collection of letters , contain the earliest recorded quotations from Gratian 's Decretum in an English source . They were part of a letter sent by Theobald to Chesney discussing difficult legal cases , and giving advice on how to resolve them . 
 Shortly after his consecration , Chesney was presented with a copy of the newly updated version of Henry of Huntingdon 's Historia Anglorum ; Huntingdon had been a fellow archdeacon . Chesney was present at several of King Stephen 's courts , and the king named the bishop as the local justice for Lincolnshire . 
 At the height of the civil war during Stephen 's reign , and shortly after Chesney 's consecration , the bishop acted as a guarantor for the treaty between Ranulf de Gernon , the Earl of Chester , and Robert de Beaumont , the Earl of Leicester , drawn up to limit the fighting between the two earls during the civil war . Chesney was present at the legatine council held by Theobald in March 1151 , and was one of the judges , along with Theobald and Hilary of Chichester , the Bishop of Chichester , in a dispute between the monks of Belvoir Priory and a secular clerk over the right of the clerk to a church . Chesney appointed the future Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Becket , to a prebend in his cathedral chapter during the latter part of Stephen 's reign . 
 The civil war ended with the Treaty of Winchester , late in 1153 , which provided that Matilda 's son Henry would succeed Stephen after his death . When Stephen died the next year , this became a lasting peace . In the last year of Stephen 's reign , in mid @-@ 1154 , Chesney acquired the right to operate a mint in the town of Newark , granted in perpetuity . But as there are no surviving coins , it seems that the mint was not in operation for long . Chesney also acquired the right of justice in the city of Lincoln , and was involved in the commercial life of his diocese , establishing a fair in the town of Banbury in 1154 . 
 = = Bishop under Henry II = = 
 Chesney witnessed a charter of Henry fitzEmpress ' before Henry 's succession to the throne as Henry II , and was present at the consecration of Roger de Pont L 'Évêque as Archbishop of York on 10 October 1154 . The bishop then was present at Henry II 's coronation on 19 December 1154 , and appears to have continued to act as a royal justice in Lincolnshire during the early part of King Henry II 's reign ; the 1156 Pipe Roll has the sheriff of the county accounting for 10 marks arising from the pleas of the bishop in the county . Chesney was often with the royal court , as he attested a number of Henry II 's charters during the early part of the king 's reign , and accompanied him to northern England in 1158 and to Normandy in 1160 . 
 The bishop served as the judge in a dispute in 1158 between a dean from the diocese of York and a citizen of Scarborough , in which the layman alleged that the dean had extorted large sums of money from him by repeatedly charging his wife with adultery and fining her . The dean 's actions were contrary to a royal decree , but although he appeared before a royal court he escaped secular penalties because he was a clerk . The result of the case , a precursor to the later Becket dispute , aroused King Henry 's anger , but the death of the king 's brother Geoffrey and the king 's subsequent travel to the Continent to deal with that issue meant that the matter was eventually dropped . 
 In 1161 Chesney became embroiled in a dispute with St Albans Abbey , resulting from his efforts to enforce his right , as bishop , to supervise religious houses within his diocese . Although Pope Alexander III sent a papal bull to England ordering the case to be heard by a panel of two bishops , King Henry II felt that the papal order infringed on his royal rights and had the case decided at the royal court instead . In 1155 – 1156 St Albans had secured papal privileges from the English Pope Adrian IV , who had previously been a monk there , that exempted the abbey from diocesan supervision , and it was these privileges that Chesney challenged . Chesney secured not only the papal bull but a royal commission to investigate the rights of the abbey as they were in the time of King Henry I. The final disposition of the case took place in 1163 , at a royal council at Westminster , where the abbey produced both the papal privileges and a forged charter of Offa of Mercia in support of their case . As Chesney was unable to produce any documents in support of his own position , the king and council told the bishop that they favoured the abbey 's cause . The king also ruled that the abbey was a royal proprietary church , and thus had special exemptions . In the end , a compromise was reached , whereby the abbey compensated the bishopric with some land in return for the bishop renouncing his claims . 
 Early in 1162 Chesney was summoned to Normandy by the king , along with Roger , the Archbishop of York , Hugh de Puiset , the Bishop of Durham , and Hilary of Chichester , in order to lend their support to the election of Thomas Becket to the see of Canterbury . In July 1163 , Chesney was present at the royal court held at Woodstock Palace , which included the Welsh prince Rhys ap Gruffydd , the prince of Northern Wales Owain Gwynedd , and King Malcolm IV of Scotland . The two Welsh princes and the Scots ' king did homage to Henry II while at this court . In 1163 Chesney was excused from attending a papal council at Tours because of his health , but he attended the royal councils of Clarendon and Northampton in 1164 , which dealt with the growing dispute , now known as the Becket controversy , between the king and Becket . At those councils Chesney attempted to persuade Becket to compromise , but was unsuccessful . The king subsequently sent Chesney to northern England as an itinerant justice in 1166 . 
 Chesney 's contributions to the king 's military campaigns on the continent caused him financial difficulties ; at the time of his death he was in debt to a moneylender . 
 = = Diocesan affairs = = 
 Chesney 's acta , or documents , contain many examples of him settling judicial disputes , demonstrating how active he was in his diocese . More than 240 of his acta have survived , many of them concerning the religious houses within his jurisdiction . Chesney was appointed a papal judge @-@ delegate at least once , and it was in his court that the case of Philip de <unk> , a canon in Bedfordshire accused of murdering a knight , was heard . The case was one of those that contributed to King Henry 's determination that <unk> clerks should be subject to royal justice , not just ecclesiastical justice . 
 In addition to judicial affairs , Chesney worked to ensure good relations with his cathedral chapter , and allowed them exemptions from episcopal jurisdiction . He also permitted the clergy of his diocese to remit the payment of chrism money and forwent the traditional annual payment from the archdeacons of the diocese to the bishop . He suppressed unlicensed schools in Huntingdon and employed a number of educated clerks ; his acta almost always include one witness entitled magister , and often as many as six . 
 Chesney was a builder in his diocese , where he ordered the construction of the episcopal palace . He also founded a Gilbertine house of canons just outside the city of Lincoln , the priory of St Catherine , shortly after the order was recognised by the papacy in 1148 . Unusually for its time it was only founded for men , although Gilbertine monastic houses typically accommodated both men and women . In 1161 he bought the Old Temple in London as a house for himself . These expenditures contributed to his financial difficulties , along with royal demands , which led to complaints about Chesney 's spending . Another cause for complaint was that he gave away some of his estates as marriage portions for his nieces . Chesney also was a benefactor to the town of Banbury , to which he granted the right to hold a fair some time before 1154 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 The exact date of Chesney 's death is uncertain . It may have been 27 December 1166 ; the event is commemorated on both 26 and 27 December . He was buried in the eastern cross aisle of Lincoln Cathedral , along the north side . The modern historian David Knowles wrote that Chesney was " not a man of strong character or decided opinions " . 
 Chesney left at least ten books to Lincoln Cathedral , of which seven survive . Five of the seven show a uniformity of handwriting , leading to speculation that there may have been a scriptorium at Lincoln Cathedral during Chesney 's tenure , but other surviving books that were in the cathedral library at the same time do not share any handwriting or other characteristics ; Chesney may simply have commissioned the books at the same time from the same scribes . 
 In addition to Foliot , the brothers Gerard , a canon of Lincoln , and Martin , treasurer of Lincoln , were also Chesney 's nephews . He may also have been related to Fulk de Chesney , another canon at Lincoln . Chesney helped to further the career of Richard Barre , who became a writer and a royal judge and first appears in the record as a witness to some of Chesney 's documents during 1160 – 1164 . Geoffrey of Monmouth 's last work , the Vita <unk> , was dedicated to Chesney . Foliot owned a copy of the Digest , part of the Corpus iuris <unk> , that had originally been glossed for Chesney . 
 Traditionally , Chesney 's predecessor Alexander has been credited with commissioning the baptismal font in Lincoln Cathedral , made of Tournai marble . Recent scholarship has cast doubt upon this idea , and suggests that the font was instead carved on Chesney 's orders , and commissioned after 1150 . 
 = Charlie and the Chocolate Factory ( film ) = 
 Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is a 2005 British @-@ American musical fantasy film directed by Tim Burton . The screenplay by John August is the second adaptation of the 1964 British book of the same name by Roald Dahl . The film stars Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka and Freddie Highmore as Charlie Bucket . The storyline concerns Charlie , who takes a tour he has won , led by Wonka , through the most magnificent chocolate factory in the world . 
 Development for another adaptation of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , filmed previously as Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , began in 1991 , 20 years after the first film version , which resulted in Warner Bros. providing the Dahl Estate with total artistic control . Prior to Burton 's involvement , directors such as Gary Ross , Rob Minkoff , Martin Scorsese and Tom Shadyac had been involved , while Warner Bros. either considered or discussed the role of Willy Wonka with Bill Murray , Nicolas Cage , Jim Carrey , Michael Keaton , Brad Pitt , Will Smith , Adam Sandler , and many others . 
 Burton immediately brought regular collaborators Depp and Danny Elfman aboard . Charlie and the Chocolate Factory represents the first time since The Nightmare Before Christmas that Elfman contributed to the film score using written songs and his vocals . Filming took place from June to December 2004 at Pinewood Studios in the United Kingdom , where Burton avoided using digital effects as much as possible . Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was released to critical praise and was a box office success , grossing approximately $ 475 million worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Charlie Bucket ( Freddie Highmore ) is a kind and loving boy living in poverty with his parents ( Noah Taylor and Helena Bonham Carter ) and four bedridden grandparents . They all rely on his father for income , employed at a toothpaste factory , responsible for putting the caps on the tubes . Down the street is Willy Wonka 's ( Johnny Depp ) chocolate factory , which reopened after industrial espionage forced him into seclusion and sacking his employees . Charlie 's Grandpa Joe ( David Kelly ) worked for Wonka before the termination . 
 Wonka announces a contest whereby children that find five Golden Tickets hidden in Wonka bars will be given a tour of the factory and one a chance to be presented with an unknown grand prize . Four tickets are quickly found : the greedy and gluttonous Augustus Gloop ( Philip <unk> ) from Düsseldorf ; the spoiled and rotten Veruca Salt ( Julia Winter ) from Buckinghamshire ; the competitive and boastful Violet Beauregarde ( AnnaSophia Robb ) from Atlanta ; and the arrogant and aggressive Mike Teavee ( Jordan Fry ) from Denver . Charlie hopes to find a ticket but chances are small as money is tight so the best has to be made of his annual birthday present of one Wonka bar and a bar bought by Grandpa Joe 's money . All hope is crushed when the last ticket is claimed in Russia . Charlie , on finding some money in the street , just intends to enjoy one chocolate bar when news breaks that the last ticket was fake . Charlie finds the bar he just bought has the last Golden Ticket . Bystanders attempt to separate him from it , only for the shopkeeper ( Oscar James ) to see that he keeps the ticket and gets back home with it . 
 Grandpa Joe offers to accompany Charlie on the tour , but Charlie explains how he was offered money for the ticket and intends to sell it . Grandpa George ( David Morris ) reminds Charlie that money is far more common than the tickets , and convinces Charlie to keep it . The visitors find Wonka to be peculiar , lonely and acting odd at the mention of " parents " . The tour shows how fantastical the factory operates under the efforts of the short humans called Oompa @-@ Loompas . The other four children succumb to temptation , and end up being caught in the factory workings and have to be safely recovered by the Oompa @-@ Loompas , albeit in worse shape than at the start of the tour : Augustus falls into a river of chocolate and has been sucked up by a pipe before being rescued from the fudge processing center ; Violet expands into an oversized blueberry when she tries an experimental piece of chewing gum ; Veruca is thrown away as a " bad nut " by trained squirrels ; and Mike is shrunk down to a few inches in height after being the first person transported by Wonka 's new television advertising invention . 
 Charlie is congratulated as the only remaining child and the winner of the grand prize , Wonka 's heir to the factory . Unfortunately , Wonka stipulates that Charlie 's family has to stay behind ; therefore , Charlie rejects the offer . Charlie learns that Wonka had a troubled past with his father , Wilbur Wonka ( Christopher Lee ) , a dentist . Willy was forbidden from eating candy of any type or quantity and had torture device @-@ like braces affixed to his teeth . But once Willy got a taste , he wanted to become a confectioner , against his father 's wishes and he left home to follow his dream . Wonka later returned to find his father and home completely gone . Wonka 's candies are selling poorly and he comes to associate his unhappiness with the sorry financial state of his company , so he makes an effort to find Charlie who helps him locate Wilbur . When they visit , it appears that despite his strict avoidance of candy , the dentist has followed Willy 's success and they reconcile . Wonka allows Charlie 's family to move into the factory while he and Charlie plan new product lines to produce . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Nitin Ganatra as Prince Pondicherry 
 Shelley Conn as Princess Pondicherry 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Author Roald Dahl disapproved of the 1971 film adaptation and declined the film rights to produce the sequel , Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator . Warner Bros. and Brillstein @-@ Grey Entertainment entered discussions with the Dahl estate in 1991 , hoping to purchase the rights to produce another film version of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory . The purchase was finalized in 1998 , with Dahl 's widow , Felicity ( " Liccy " ) , and daughter , Lucy , receiving total artistic control and final privilege on the choices of actors , directors and writers . The Dahl Estate 's subsequent protection of the source material was the main reason that Charlie and the Chocolate Factory had languished in development hell since the 1990s . 
 Scott Frank was hired to write the screenplay in February 1999 , after approaching Warner Bros. for the job . Frank , a recent Oscar nominee for the R @-@ rated crime film Out of Sight , wanted to work on a film that his children could enjoy . As an enthusiastic fan of the book , he intended to remain more truthful to Dahl 's vision than the 1971 film had been . Nicolas Cage was under discussions for Willy Wonka , but lost interest . Gary Ross signed to direct in February 2000 , which resulted in Frank completing two drafts of the screenplay before leaving with Ross in September 2001 . Both Warner Bros. and the Dahl Estate wanted Frank to stay on the project , but he faced scheduling conflicts and contractual obligations with Minority Report ( 2002 ) and The Lookout ( 2007 ) . 
 Rob Minkoff entered negotiations to take the director 's position in October 2001 , and Gwyn Lurie was hired to start from scratch on a new script in February 2002 . Lurie said she would adapt the original book and ignore the 1971 film adaptation . Dahl 's estate championed Lurie after being impressed with her work on another Dahl adaptation , a live @-@ action adaptation of The BFG , for Paramount Pictures , which was never made ( Paramount distributed the earlier 1971 film version of Charlie , and later sold the rights to WB ) . In April 2002 , Martin Scorsese was involved with the film , albeit briefly , but opted to direct The Aviator instead . Warner Bros. president Alan F. Horn wanted Tom Shadyac to direct Jim Carrey as Willy Wonka , believing the duo could make Charlie and the Chocolate Factory relevant to mainstream audiences , but Liccy Dahl opposed this . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 After receiving enthusiastic approval from the Dahl Estate , Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct in May 2003 . Burton compared the project 's languishing development to Batman ( 1989 ) , which he directed , in how there had been varied creative efforts with both films . He said , " Scott Frank 's version was the best , probably the clearest , and the most interesting , but they had abandoned that . " Liccy Dahl commented that Burton was the first and only director the estate was happy with . He had previously produced another of the author 's adaptations with James and the Giant Peach ( 1996 ) , and , like Roald and Liccy , disliked the 1971 film because it strayed from the book 's storyline . 
 During pre @-@ production Burton visited Dahl 's former home in the Buckinghamshire village of Great Missenden . Liccy Dahl remembers Burton entering Dahl 's famed writing shed and saying , " This is the Buckets ' house ! " and thinking to herself , " Thank God , somebody gets it . " Liccy also showed Burton the original handwritten manuscripts , which Burton discovered were more politically incorrect than the published book . The manuscripts included a child named Herpes after the sexually transmitted disease . Burton immediately thought of Johnny Depp for the role of Willy Wonka , who joined the following August for his fourth collaboration with the director . 
 Lurie 's script received a rewrite by Pamela <unk> , who worked with Burton on Corpse Bride , but the director hired Big Fish screenwriter John August in December 2003 to start from scratch . Both August and Burton were fans of the book since their childhoods . August first read Charlie and the Chocolate Factory when he was eight years old , and subsequently sent Dahl a fan letter . He did not see the 1971 film prior to his hiring , which Burton believed would be fundamental in having August stay closer to the book . The writer updated the Mike Teavee character into an obsessive video game player , as compared to the novel , in which he fantasized about violent crime films . The characters Arthur <unk> and <unk> were reduced to brief cameo appearances , while Mr. Beauregarde was entirely omitted . 
 Burton and August also worked together in creating Wilbur Wonka , Willy 's domineering dentist father . Burton thought the paternal character would help explain Willy Wonka himself and that otherwise he would be " just a weird guy " . The element of an estranged father @-@ son relationship had previously appeared in Big Fish , similarly directed by Burton and written by August . Warner Bros. and the director held differences over the characterizations of Charlie Bucket and Willy Wonka . The studio wanted to entirely delete Mr. Bucket and make Willy Wonka the idyllic father figure Charlie had longed for his entire life . Burton believed that Wonka would not be a good father , finding the character similar to a recluse . Burton said , " In some ways , he 's more screwed up than the kids . " Warner Bros. also wanted Charlie to be a whiz kid , but Burton resisted the characterization . He wanted Charlie to be an average child who would be in the background and not get in trouble . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Prior to Burton 's involvement , Warner Bros. considered or discussed Willy Wonka with Bill Murray , Christopher Walken , Steve Martin , Robin Williams , Nicolas Cage , Jim Carrey , Michael Keaton , Robert De Niro , Brad Pitt , Will Smith , Mike Myers , Ben Stiller , Leslie Nielsen , John Cleese , Eric Idle , Michael Palin , Patrick Stewart , and Adam Sandler . Dustin Hoffman and Marilyn Manson reportedly wanted the role as well . Pitt 's production company , Plan B Entertainment , however , stayed on to co @-@ finance the film with Warner Bros. Coincidentally , Cleese , Idle and Palin ( as well as the other three Monty Python members ) had all previously expressed interest in playing Wonka in the 1971 film adaptation . Johnny Depp was the only actor Burton considered for the role , although Dwayne Johnson was Burton 's second choice in case Depp was unavailable . Depp signed on without reading the script under the intention of going with a completely different approach than what Gene Wilder did in the 1971 film adaptation . Depp said regardless of the original film , Gene Wilder 's characterization of Willy Wonka stood out as a unique portrayal . 
 Depp and Burton derived their Willy Wonka from children 's television show hosts such as Bob Keeshan ( Captain Kangaroo ) , Fred Rogers , and Al Lewis from The Uncle Al Show , and Depp also took inspiration from various game show hosts . Burton recalled from his childhood that the characters were bizarre but left lasting impressions . He said , " It was kind of a strange amalgamation of these weird children 's TV show hosts . " Depp based Wonka 's look ( over @-@ exaggerated bob cut and sunglasses ) on Vogue magazine editor Anna Wintour . 
 Comparisons were drawn between Willy Wonka and Michael Jackson . Burton disagreed with the comparisons and said Jackson , unlike Wonka , liked children . Depp said the similarities with Jackson never occurred to him . Instead , he compared Wonka to Howard Hughes in his " reclusive , <unk> , controlling " manner . Burton agreed with the similarity to Hughes . He also compared Wonka to Charles Foster Kane in Citizen Kane as inspiration : " somebody who was brilliant but then was traumatized and then retreats into their own world " . Depp wanted to sport prosthetic makeup for the part and have a long , elongated nose , but Burton believed it would be too outrageous . During production , Gene Wilder , in an interview with The Daily Telegraph , accused the filmmakers of only remaking the 1971 film for the purpose of money . Depp said he was disappointed by Wilder 's comment , and responded that the film was not a remake , but a new adaptation of Dahl 's 1964 book . 
 The casting calls for Charlie Bucket , Violet Beauregarde , Veruca Salt , and Mike Teavee took place in the United States and United Kingdom , while Augustus Gloop 's casting took place in Germany . Burton said he sought actors " who had something of the character in them " and found Mike Teavee the hardest character to cast . Burton was finding trouble casting Charlie , until Depp , who worked with Freddie Highmore on Finding Neverland , suggested Highmore for the part . Highmore had already read the book before , but decided to read it once more prior to auditioning . The actor did not see the original film adaptation and chose not to see it until after Burton 's production so his portrayal would not be influenced . 
 Before Adam Godley was officially cast as Mr. Teavee , Dan Castellaneta , Tim Allen , Ed O 'Neill , Bob Saget , and Ray Romano were all considered for the role . 
 It has been rumored that Gregory Peck was considered for the role of Grandpa Joe . Other actors that were considered for Grandpa Joe included Richard Attenborough , Kirk Douglas , Albert Finney , Anthony Hopkins , Paul Newman , Max von Sydow , David Warner , Christopher Lloyd and Peter Ustinov . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory started on June 21 , 2004 at Pinewood Studios in England . Director Tim Burton and composer Danny Elfman found filming somewhat difficult because they were simultaneously working on Corpse Bride . The Wonka Factory exterior was coincidentally constructed on the same backlot Burton had used for Gotham City in Batman ( 1989 ) . The ceremonial scene required 500 local extras . The Chocolate Room / River setpiece filled Pinewood 's 007 Stage . As a consequence of British Equity rules , which state that children can only work four and a half hours a day , filming for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory languished for six months and ended in December 2004 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The architecture of the Bucket family home was influenced by Burton 's visit to Roald Dahl 's writing hut . Like the book , the film has a " timeless " setting and is not set in a specific country . " We 've tried not to pinpoint it to any place , " production designer Alex McDowell explained . " The cars , in fact , drive down the middle of the road . " The town , whose design was shaped by the black and white urban photography of Bill Brandt , Pittsburgh and Northern England , is arranged like a medieval village , with Wonka 's estate on top and the Bucket shack below . The filmmakers also used fascist architecture for Wonka 's factory exterior , and designed most of the sets on 360 ° sound stages , similar to cycloramas . Burton biographer Mark Salisbury wrote that Charlie and the Chocolate Factory " melds 1950s and ' 70s visuals with a futuristic sensibility that seems straight out of a 1960s sense of the future . " The " TV Room " was patterned after photographs from 2001 : A Space Odyssey , Danger : Diabolik and THX 1138 . Danger Diabolik also served as inspiration for the Nut Room and Inventing Room . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Tim Burton avoided using too many digital effects because he wanted the younger actors to feel as if they were working in a realistic environment . As a result , forced perspective techniques , oversized props and scale models were used to avoid computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . Deep Roy was cast to play the Oompa @-@ Loompas based on his previous collaborations with Burton on Planet of the Apes and Big Fish . The actor was able to play various Oompa @-@ Loompas using split screen photography , digital and front projection effects . " Tim told me that the Oompa @-@ Loompas were strictly programmed , like robots — all they do is work , work , work , " Roy commented . " So when it comes time to dance , they 're like a regiment ; they do the same steps . " 
 A practical method was considered for the scene in which Violet Beauregarde turns blue and swells up into a giant 10 @-@ foot blueberry . A suit with an air hose was considered at one point for the beginnings of the swelling scene , before the decision was made to do the entire transformation in CGI . The visual effects house Cinesite was recruited for this assignment . In some shots of AnnaSophia Robb 's head , a facial prosthetic was worn to give the impression that her cheeks had swelled up as well . Because this decision was made late in the film 's production , any traces of Violet 's blueberry scene were omitted from trailers or promotional material . 
 Rather than rely on CGI , Burton wanted the 40 squirrels in the Nut Room to be real . The animals were trained every day for 10 weeks before filming commenced . They began their coaching while newborns , fed by bottles to form relationships with human trainers . The squirrels were each taught how to sit upon a little blue bar stool , tap and then open a walnut , and deposit its meat onto a conveyor belt . " Ultimately , the scene was supplemented by CGI and animatronics , " Burton said , " but for the close @-@ ups and the main action , they 're the real thing . " Wonka 's Viking boat for the Chocolate River sequence floats down a realistic river filled with 192 @,@ 000 gallons of faux melted chocolate . " Having seen the first film , we wanted to make the chocolate river look edible , " McDowell says . " In the first film , it 's so distasteful . " The production first considered a CGI river , but Burton was impressed with the artificial substance when he saw how it clung to the boat 's oars . Nine shades of chocolate were tested before Burton settled on the proper hue . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original music score was written by Danny Elfman , a frequent collaborator with director Tim Burton . Elfman 's score is based around three primary themes : a gentle family theme for the Buckets , generally set in upper woodwinds ; a mystical , string @-@ driven waltz for Willy Wonka ; and a hyper @-@ upbeat factory theme for full orchestra , Elfman 's homemade synthesizer samples and the diminutive chanting voices of the Oompa @-@ Loompas . 
 Elfman also wrote and performed the vocals for four songs , with pitch changes and modulations to represent different singers . The lyrics to the Oompa @-@ Loompa songs are adapted from the original book , and are thus credited to Roald Dahl . Following Burton 's suggestion , each song in the score is designed to reflect a different archetype . " Wonka 's Welcome Song " is a maddeningly cheerful theme park ditty , " Augustus Gloop " a Bollywood spectacle ( per Deep Roy 's suggestion ) , " Violet Beauregarde " is 1970s funk , " Veruca Salt " is 1960s bubblegum pop / psychedelic pop , and " Mike Teavee " is a tribute to late 1970s hard rock ( such as Queen ) / early 1980s hair bands . 
 The original motion picture soundtrack was released on July 12 , 2005 on Warner Bros. Records . 
 = = Release = = 
 Charlie and the Chocolate Factory had its premiere at the Grauman 's Chinese Theatre , on July 10 , 2005 , where money for the Make @-@ a @-@ Wish Foundation was raised . The film was released in the United States on July 15 , 2005 in 3 @,@ 770 theaters ( including IMAX theaters ) . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Early in the development of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory in February 2000 , Warner Bros. announced their intention of marketing the film with a Broadway theatre musical after release . The studio reiterated their interest in May 2003 , however , the idea was postponed by the time filming began in June 2004 . The main tie @-@ in for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory focused on The Willy Wonka Candy Company , a division of Nestlé . A small range of Wonka Bars were launched , utilizing their prominence in the film . The release of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory also rekindled public interest in Roald Dahl 's 1964 book , where it remained on the New York Times Best Seller list from July 3 to October 23 , 2005 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Charlie and the Chocolate Factory earned $ 56 @,@ 178 @,@ 450 in its opening weekend , the fifth @-@ highest opening weekend gross for 2005 and stayed at # 1 for two weeks . The film eventually grossed $ 206 @,@ 459 @,@ 076 in US totals and $ 268 @,@ 509 @,@ 687 in foreign countries , coming to a worldwide total of $ 474 @,@ 968 @,@ 763 . It was the fifty @-@ eighth highest @-@ grossing film of all time when released , as well as seventh @-@ highest for the US and eighth @-@ highest worldwide for the year of 2005 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Charlie and the Chocolate Factory received positive reviews . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 83 % , based on 221 reviews , with an average rating 7 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Closer to the source material than 1971 's Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is for people who like their Chocolate visually appealing and dark . " By comparison , Metacritic calculated an average score of 72 out of 100 , based on 40 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , writing " Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka may be a stone freak , but he is also one of Burton 's classic crackpot conjurers , like Beetlejuice or Ed Wood . " Roger Ebert gave an overall positive review and enjoyed the film . He was primarily impressed by Tim Burton 's direction of the younger cast members , but was disappointed with Depp 's performance : " What was Depp thinking of ? In Pirates of the Caribbean he was famously channeling Keith Richards , which may have primed us to look for possible inspirations for this performance . " Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle found Charlie and the Chocolate Factory Burton 's " best work in years . If all the laughs come from Depp , who gives Willy the mannerisms of a classic Hollywood diva , the film 's heart comes from Highmore , a gifted young performer whose performance is sincere , deep and unforced in a way that 's rare in a child actor . " Peter Travers wrote in Rolling Stone magazine that " Depp 's deliciously demented take on Willy Wonka demands to be seen . Depp goes deeper to find the bruises on Wonka 's secret heart than what Gene Wilder did . Depp and Burton may fly too high on the vapors of pure imagination , but it 's hard to not get hooked on something this tasty . And how about that army of Oompa @-@ Loompas , all played by Deep Roy , in musical numbers that appear to have been choreographed by Busby Berkeley on crack . " 
 Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post criticized Depp 's acting . " The cumulative effect isn 't pretty . Nor is it kooky , funny , eccentric or even mildly interesting . Indeed , throughout his fey , simpering performance , Depp seems to be straining so hard for weirdness that the entire enterprise begins to feel like those excruciating occasions when your parents tried to be hip . Aside from Burton 's usual eye @-@ popping direction , the film 's strenuous efforts at becoming a camp classic eventually begin to wear thin . " 
 In 2007 , Gene Wilder said he chose not to see the film . " The thing that put me off ... I like Johnny Depp , I like him , as an actor I like him very much ... but when I saw little pieces in the promotion of what he was doing , I said I don 't want to see the film , because I don 't want to be disappointed in him . " In 2013 , Wilder called the film " an insult " . He also criticized the choices that Burton made as a director , saying " I don 't care for that director . He 's a talented man , but I don 't care for him doing stuff like he did . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Costume designer Gabriella Pescucci received an Academy Award nomination , but lost to Colleen Atwood on Memoirs of a Geisha . Johnny Depp lost the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy to Joaquin Phoenix in Walk the Line . More nominations followed from the British Academy Film Awards for Visual Effects , Costume Design ( Pescucci ) , Makeup & Hair ( Peter Owen and Ivana Primorac ) and Production Design ( Alex McDowell ) . Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , as well as Performance by a Younger Actor ( Freddie Highmore ) , Music ( Danny Elfman ) and Costume ( Pescucci ) . Elfman and screenwriter John August were nominated for a Grammy Award with " Wonka 's Welcome Song " . 
 = Newport News , Virginia = 
 Newport News is an independent city located in the U.S. state of Virginia . As of the 2010 census , the population was 180 @,@ 719 . In 2013 , the population was estimated to be 183 @,@ 412 , making it the fifth @-@ most populous city in Virginia . 
 Newport News is included in the Hampton Roads metropolitan area . It is at the southeastern end of the Virginia Peninsula , on the northern shore of the James River extending southeast from Skiffe 's Creek along many miles of waterfront to the river 's mouth at Newport News Point on the harbor of Hampton Roads . The area now known as Newport News was once a part of Warwick County . Warwick County was one of the eight original shires of Virginia , formed by the House of Burgesses in the British Colony of Virginia by order of King Charles I , in 1634 . The county was largely composed of farms and undeveloped land until almost 250 years later . 
 In 1881 , 15 years of explosive development began under the leadership of Collis P. Huntington , whose new Peninsula Extension of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway from Richmond opened up transportation along the Peninsula and provided a new pathway for the railroad to bring West Virginia bituminous coal to port for coastal shipping and worldwide export . With the new railroad came a terminal and coal piers where the colliers were loaded . Within a few years , Huntington and his associates also built a large shipyard . In 1896 , the new incorporated town of Newport News , which had briefly replaced Denbigh as the county seat of Warwick County , had a population of 9 @,@ 000 . In 1958 , by mutual consent by referendum , Newport News was consolidated with the former Warwick County ( itself a separate city from 1952 to 1958 ) , rejoining the two localities to approximately their pre @-@ 1896 geographic size . The more widely known name of Newport News was selected as they formed what was then Virginia 's third largest independent city in population . 
 With many residents employed at the expansive Newport News Shipbuilding , the joint U.S. Air Force @-@ U.S. Army installation at Joint Base Langley – Eustis , and other military bases and suppliers , the city 's economy is very connected to the military . The location on the harbor and along the James River facilitates a large boating industry which can take advantage of its many miles of waterfront . Newport News also serves as a junction between the rails and the sea with the Newport News Marine Terminals located at the East End of the city . Served by major east @-@ west Interstate Highway 64 , it is linked to others of the cities of Hampton Roads by the circumferential Hampton Roads Beltway , which crosses the harbor on two bridge @-@ tunnels . Part of the Newport News / Williamsburg International Airport is in the city limits . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The original area near the mouth of the James River was first referred to as <unk> Newes as early as 1621 . 
 The source of the name " Newport News " is not known with certainty . Several versions are recorded , and it is the subject of popular speculation locally . Probably the best @-@ known explanation holds that when an early group of Jamestown colonists left to return to England after the Starving Time during the winter of 1609 – 1610 aboard a ship of Captain Christopher Newport , they encountered another fleet of supply ships under the new Governor Thomas West , 3rd Baron De La Warr in the James River off Mulberry Island with reinforcements of men and supplies . The new governor ordered them to turn around , and return to Jamestown . Under this theory , the community was named for Newport 's " good news " . Another possibility is that the community may have derived its name from an old English word " news " meaning " new town " . At least one source claims that the " New " arose from the original settlement 's being rebuilt after a fire . 
 Another source gave the original name as New Port Newce , named for a person with the name Newce and the town 's place as a new seaport . The namesake , Sir William Newce , was an English soldier and originally settled in Ireland . There he had established <unk> near Bandon , County Cork . He sailed to Virginia with Sir Francis Wyatt in October 1621 and was granted 2 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 012 ha ) of land . He died two days later . His brother , Capt. Thomas Newce , was given " 600 acres at <unk> , now called Elizabeth Cittie . " A partner Daniel <unk> completed founding the settlement . 
 Fiske writes : 
 ... several old maps where the name is given as Newport Ness , being the mariner 's way of saying Newport Point . 
 The fact that the name formerly appeared as " Newport 's News " is verified by numerous early documents and maps , and by local tradition . The change to Newport News came about through usage , for by 1851 the Post Office Department sanctioned " New Port News " ( three words ) as the name of the first post office . In 1866 it approved the name as " Newport News " , the current form . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = European settlement = = = 
 During the 17th century , shortly after founding of Jamestown , Virginia in 1607 , English settlers explored and began settling the areas adjacent to Hampton Roads . In 1610 , Sir Thomas Gates " took possession " of a nearby Native American village , which became known as <unk> . At that time , settlers began clearing land along the James River ( the navigable part of which was called Hampton Roads ) for plantations , including the present area of Newport News . 
 In 1619 , the area of Newport News was included in one of four huge corporations of the Virginia Company of London . It became known as Elizabeth Cittie and extended west all the way to Skiffe 's Creek ( currently the border between Newport News and James City County ) . Elizabeth Cittie included all of present @-@ day South Hampton Roads . 
 By 1634 , the English colony of Virginia consisted of a population of approximately 5 @,@ 000 inhabitants . It was divided into eight shires of Virginia , which were renamed as counties shortly thereafter . The area of Newport News became part of Warwick River Shire , which became Warwick County in 1637 . By 1810 , the county seat was at Denbigh . For a short time in the mid @-@ 19th century , the county seat was moved to Newport News . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Newport News was a rural area of plantations and a small fishing village until after the American Civil War . Construction of the railroad and establishment of the great shipyard brought thousands of workers and associated development . It was one of only a few cities in Virginia to be newly established without earlier incorporation as a town . ( Virginia has had an independent city political subdivision since 1871 . ) Walter A. Post served as the city 's first mayor . 
 The area that formed the present @-@ day southern end of Newport News had long been established as an unincorporated town . During Reconstruction , the period after the American Civil War , the new City of Newport News was essentially founded by California merchant Collis P. Huntington . Huntington , one of the Big Four associated with the Central Pacific Railroad , in California , formed the western part of the country 's First Transcontinental Railroad . He was recruited by former Confederate General Williams Carter Wickham to become a major investor and guiding light for a southern railroad . He helped complete the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway to the Ohio River in 1873 . 
 Huntington knew the railroad could transport coal eastbound from West Virginia 's untapped natural resources . His agents began acquiring land in Warwick County in 1865 . In the 1880s , he oversaw extension of the C & O 's new Peninsula Subdivision , which extended from the Church Hill Tunnel in Richmond southeast down the peninsula through Williamsburg to Newport News , where the company developed coal piers on the harbor of Hampton Roads . 
 His next project was to develop Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company , which became the world 's largest shipyard . Opened as Chesapeake Dry Dock & Construction Company , the shipbuilding was intended to build boats to transition goods from the rails to the seas . With president Theodore Roosevelt 's declaration to create a Great White Fleet , the company entered the warship business by building seven of the first sixteen warships . Today , the shipyard holds a dominant position in the American warship construction business . 
 = = = 1900s = = = 
 In addition to Collis , other members of the Huntington family played major roles in Newport News . From 1912 to 1914 , his nephew , Henry E. Huntington , assumed leadership of the shipyard . Huntington Park , developed after World War I near the northern terminus of the James River Bridge , is named for him . 
 Collis Huntington 's son , Archer M. Huntington and his wife , sculptor Anna Hyatt Huntington , developed the Mariners ' Museum beginning in 1932 . They created a natural park and the community 's Lake Maury in the process . A major feature of Newport News , the Mariners ' Museum has grown to become one of the largest and finest maritime museums in the world . 
 In 1958 , the citizenry of the cities of Warwick and Newport News voted by referendum to consolidate the two cities , choosing to assume the better @-@ known name of Newport News . The merger created the third largest city by population in Virginia , with a 65 square miles ( 168 km2 ) area . The boundaries of the City of Newport News today are essentially the boundaries of the original Warwick River Shire and the traditional one of Warwick County , with the exception of minor border adjustments with neighbors . 
 The city 's original downtown area , on the James River waterfront , changed rapidly from a farm trading town to a new city in the last quarter of the 19th century . Development of the railroad terminal , with its coal piers , other harbor @-@ related facilities , and the shipyard , brought new jobs and workers to the area . Although fashionable housing and businesses developed in downtown , the increase in industry and the development of new suburbs pushed and pulled retail and residential development to the west and north after World War II . Such suburban development was aided by national subsidization of highway construction and was part of a national trend to newer housing . 
 In July 1989 the United States Navy commissioned the third naval vessel named after the city with the entry of the Los Angeles @-@ class nuclear submarine USS <unk> NEWS ( SSN @-@ 750 ) , built at Newport News Shipbuilding , into active service . 
 The ship was initially commanded by CDR . Mark B. Keef ; the city held a public celebration of the event , which was attended by Vice President of the United States Dan Quayle . In conjunction with this milestone , a song was written by a city native and formally adopted by Newport News City Council in July 1989 . The lyrics appear with permission from the author : 
 ( First verse ) : Harbor of a thousand ships / Forger of a nation 's fleet / Gateway to the New World / Where ocean and river meet 
 ( Chorus ) : Strength wrought from steel / And a people 's fortitude / Such is the timeless legacy / Of a place called Newport News 
 ( Second verse ) : Nestled in a blessed land / Gifted with a special view / Forever home for ev 'ry man / With a spirit proud and true 
 ( repeat chorus to fade ) 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Despite city efforts at large @-@ scale revitalization , by the beginning of the 21st century the downtown area consisted largely of the coal export facilities , the shipyard , and municipal offices . It is bordered by some harbor @-@ related smaller businesses and lower income housing . 
 Newport News grew in population from the 1960s through the 1990s . The city began to explore New Urbanism as a way to develop areas midtown . City Center at Oyster Point was developed out of a small portion of the Oyster Point Business Park . It opened in phases from 2003 through 2005 . The city invested $ 82 million of public funding in the project . Closely following Oyster Point , Port Warwick opened as an urban residential community in the new midtown business district . Fifteen hundred people now reside in the Port Warwick area . It includes a 3 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) city square where festivals and events take place . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Newport News is located at 37 ° 4 ′ 15 ″ N 76 ° 29 ′ 4 ″ W ( 37 @.@ <unk> , − 76 @.@ <unk> ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 120 square miles ( 310 km2 ) , of which 69 square miles ( 180 km2 ) is land and 51 square miles ( 130 km2 ) ( 42 @.@ 4 % ) is water . 
 The city is located at the Peninsula side of Hampton Roads in the Tidewater region of Virginia , bordering the Atlantic Ocean . The Hampton Roads Metropolitan Statistical Area ( officially known as the Virginia Beach @-@ Norfolk @-@ Newport News , VA @-@ NC MSA ) is the 37th largest in the nation with a 2014 population estimate of 1 @,@ 716 @,@ 624 . The area includes the Virginia cities of Norfolk , Virginia Beach , Chesapeake , Hampton , Newport News , Poquoson , Portsmouth , Suffolk , Williamsburg , and the counties of Gloucester , Isle of Wight , James City , Mathews , Surry , and York , as well as the North Carolina counties of Currituck and Gates . Newport News serves as one of the business centers on the Peninsula . The city of Norfolk is recognized as the central business district , while the Virginia Beach oceanside resort district and Williamsburg are primarily centers of tourism . 
 Newport News shares land borders with James City County on the northwest , York County on the north and northeast , and Hampton on the east . Newport News shares water borders with Portsmouth on the southeast and Suffolk on the south across Hampton Roads , and Isle of Wight County on the southwest and west and Surry County on the northwest across the James River . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 The city 's downtown area was part of the earliest developed area which was initially incorporated as an independent city in 1896 . The earlier city portions also included the " Southeast " community , which was predominantly African @-@ American , the " North End " and the shipyard and coal piers . After World War II , public housing projects and lower income housing were built to improve housing in what came to be known as the East End or " The Bottom " by locals . The city expanded primarily westward where land was available and highways were built . While the shipyard and coal facilities , and other smaller harbor @-@ oriented businesses have remained vibrant , the downtown area went into substantial decline . Crime problems have plagued the nearby lower @-@ income residential areas . 
 West of the traditional downtown area , another early portion of the city was developed as Huntington Heights . In modern times been called the North End . Developed primarily between 1900 and 1935 , North End features a wealth of architectural styles and eclectic vernacular building designs . Extending along west to the James River Bridge approaches , it includes scenic views of the river . A well @-@ preserved community , the North End is an historic district listed on the National Register of Historic Places and the Virginia Landmarks Register . 
 The 1958 merger by mutual agreement with the City of Warwick removed the political boundary , which was adjacent to Mercury Boulevard . This major north @-@ south roadway carries U.S. Route 258 between the James River Bridge and the Coliseum @-@ Central area of adjacent Hampton . At the time , the county was mostly rural , although along Warwick Boulevard north of the Mercury Boulevard , Hilton Village was developed during World War I as a planned community . Beyond this point to the west , much of the city takes on a suburban nature . Many neighborhoods have been developed , some around a number of former small towns . Miles of waterfront along the James River , and tributaries such as Deep Creek and Lucas Creek , are occupied by higher @-@ end single family homes . In many sections , wooded land and farms gave way to subdivisions . Even at the northwestern reaches , furthest from the traditional downtown area , some residential development has occurred . Much land has been set aside for natural protection , with recreational and historical considerations . Along with some newer residential areas , major features of the northwestern end include the reservoirs of the Newport News Water System ( which include much of the Warwick River ) , the expansive Newport News Park , a number of public schools , and the military installations of Fort Eustis and a small portion of the Naval Weapons Station Yorktown . 
 At the extreme northwestern edge adjacent to Skiffe 's Creek and the border with James City County is the Lee Hall community , which retains historical features including the former Chesapeake and Ohio Railway station which served tens of thousands of soldiers based at what became nearby Fort Eustis during World War I and World War II . The larger @-@ than @-@ normal rural two @-@ story frame depot is highly valued by rail fans and rail preservationists . 
