 And yet this act wherefore I die , was not altogether of me ( as it is thought ) but I was procured and induced thereunto by other [ s ] . I was I say induced thereunto by other [ s ] , <unk> , God forbid that I should name any man unto you , I will name no man unto you , and therefore I beseech you look not for it . ... And one thing more good people I have to say unto you ... and that is to warn you and exhort you to beware of these seditious preachers , and teachers of new doctrine , which pretend to preach God 's word , but in very deed they preach their own fancies , ... they know not today what they would have tomorrow , ... they open the book , but they cannot shut it again . ... I could good people rehearse much more ... but you know I have another thing to do , whereunto I must prepare me , for the time <unk> away . ... And after he had thus spoken he kneeled down ... and bowing toward the block he said , I have deserved a thousand deaths , and thereupon he made a cross upon the straw , and kissed it , and laid his head upon the block , and so died . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Historical reputation = = = 
 A black legend about the Duke of Northumberland was already in the making when he was still in power , the more after his fall . From the last days of Henry VIII he was to have planned , years in advance , the destruction of both King Edward 's Seymour uncles — Lord Thomas and the Protector — as well as Edward himself . He also served as an indispensable scapegoat : It was the most practical thing for Queen Mary to believe that Dudley had been acting all alone and it was in nobody 's interest to doubt it . Further questions were unwelcome , as Charles V 's ambassadors found out : " it was thought best not to inquire too closely into what had happened , so as to make no discoveries that might prejudice those [ who tried the duke ] " . By renouncing the Protestantism he had so conspicuously stood for , Northumberland lost every respect and became ineligible for rehabilitation in a world dominated by thinking along sectarian lines . Protestant writers like John Foxe and John Ponet concentrated on the pious King Edward 's achievements and reinvented Somerset as the " good Duke " — it followed that there had also to be a " wicked Duke " . This interpretation was enhanced by the High and Late Victorian historians , James Anthony Froude and A. F. Pollard , who saw Somerset as a champion of political liberty whose desire " to do good " was thwarted by , in Pollard 's phrase , " the subtlest intriguer in English History " . 
 As late as 1968 / 1970 , W.K. Jordan embraced this good duke / bad duke dichotomy in a two @-@ volume study of Edward VI 's reign . However , he saw the King on the verge of assuming full authority at the beginning of 1553 ( with Dudley contemplating retirement ) and ascribed the succession alteration to Edward 's resolution , Northumberland playing the part of the loyal and tragic enforcer instead of the original instigator . Many historians have since seen the " devise " as Edward 's very own project . Others , while remarking upon the plan 's sloppy implementation , have seen Northumberland as behind the scheme , yet in concord with Edward 's convictions ; the Duke acting out of despair for his own survival , or to rescue political and religious reform and save England from Habsburg domination . 
 Since the 1970s , critical reassessments of the Duke of Somerset 's policies and government style led to acknowledgment that Northumberland revitalised and reformed the Privy Council as a central part of the administration , and that he " took the necessary but unpopular steps to hold the minority regime together " . Stability and reconstruction have been made out as the mark of most of his policies ; the scale of his motivation ranging from " determined ambition " with Geoffrey Rudolph Elton in 1977 to " idealism of a sort " with Diarmaid MacCulloch in 1999 . Dale Hoak concluded in 1980 : " given the circumstances which he inherited in 1549 , the duke of Northumberland appears to have been one of the most remarkably able governors of any European state during the sixteenth century . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 John Dudley 's recantation of his Protestant faith before his execution delighted Queen Mary and enraged Lady Jane Grey . The general opinion , especially among Protestants , was that he tried to seek a pardon by this move . Historians have often believed that he had no faith whatsoever , being a mere cynic . Further explanations — both contemporary and modern — have been that Northumberland sought to rescue his family from the axe , that , in the face of catastrophe , he found a spiritual home in the church of his childhood , or that he saw the hand of God in Mary 's success . Although he endorsed the Reformation from at least the mid @-@ 1530s , Dudley may not have understood theological subtleties , being a " simple man in such matters " . The Duke was stung by an outspoken letter he received from John Knox , whom he had invited to preach before the King and in vain had offered a bishopric . William Cecil was informed : 
 I love not to have to do with men which be neither grateful nor <unk> . I assure you I mind to have no more to do with him but to wish him well ... he cannot tell whether I be a <unk> in religion or not ... for my own part , if I should have passed more upon the speech of the people than upon the service of my master ... I needed not to have had so much obloquy of some kind of men ; but the living God , that knoweth the hearts of all men , shall be my judge at the last day with what zeal , faith , and truth I serve my master . 
 Northumberland was not an old @-@ style peer , despite his aristocratic ancestry and existence as a great lord . He acquired , sold , and exchanged lands , but never strove to build himself a territorial power base or a large armed force of retainers ( which proved fatal in the end ) . His maximum income of £ 4 @,@ 300 p.a. from land and a £ 2 @,@ 000 p.a. from annuities and fees , was appropriate to his rank and figured well below the annuity of £ 5 @,@ 333 p.a. the Duke of Somerset had granted himself , thus reaching an income of over £ 10 @,@ 000 p.a. while in office . John Dudley was a typical Tudor Crown servant , self @-@ interested but absolutely loyal to the incumbent sovereign : The monarch 's every wish was law . This uncritical stance may have played a decisive role in Northumberland 's decision to implement Edward 's succession device , as it did in his attitude towards Mary when she had become Queen . The fear his services could be inadequate or go unacknowledged by the monarch was constant in Dudley , who also was very sensitive on what he called " estimation " , meaning status . Edmund Dudley was unforgotten : " my poor father 's fate who , after his master was gone , suffered death for doing his master 's commandments " , the Duke wrote to Cecil nine months before his own end . 
 John Dudley was an imposing figure with a strong temperament who could also charm people with his courtesy and a graceful presence . He was a family man , an understanding father and husband who was passionately loved by his wife . Frequent phases of illness , partly due to a stomach ailment , occasioned long absences from court but did not reduce his high output of paperwork , and may have had an element of hypochondria in them . The English diplomat Richard Morrison wrote of his onetime superior : " This Earl had such a head that he seldom went about anything but he had three or four purposes beforehand . " A French eyewitness of 1553 described him as " an intelligent man who could explain his ideas and who displayed an impressive dignity . Others , who did not know him , would have considered him worthy of a kingdom . " 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = A Little More Personal ( Raw ) = 
 A Little More Personal ( Raw ) is the second studio album by American singer and actress Lindsay Lohan , released on December 5 , 2005 by Casablanca Records . Initially titled There 's Only One Angel In Heaven , the album , produced by Kara DioGuardi , Greg Wells , Ben Moody and Butch Walker , features darker material than Lohan 's previous album , Speak ( 2004 ) . Recording sessions took place in several locations , including at Lohan 's trailer during the shoot of Herbie : Fully Loaded , where she recorded the first and only single of the album , " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " . 
 A Little More Personal ( Raw ) received mixed reviews from music critics , who praised Lohan 's ambition , despite considering it a weak album . The album charted mildly compared to Speak , debuting ( and also peaking ) at number twenty on United States ' Billboard 200 with first week sales of 82 @,@ 000 copies , and also peaking at the same position on the Digital Albums chart . However , A Little More Personal ( Raw ) was certified Gold in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . It was also certified Gold in Taiwan . Lohan promoted the album with a few television appearances , including at MTV 's Total Request Live , The Ellen DeGeneres Show and the 2005 American Music Awards . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 During the shoot of the music video for " First " ( 2005 ) , Lohan revealed in an interview with MTV that she was preparing her sophomore studio album . " When you get into the studio , everything just comes out , " she said . " All your creative juices are there . I don 't [ want to ] leave . I 'll still be in there until all hours , and it 's nice to be able to do that . " Lohan began writing lyrics for the album in June 2005 , after the last single from her previous album had been released . " I 've been writing a lot , almost every night , " she said . " There 's been a lot going on [ in my life lately ] , and I think people can find that escape in hobbies that they do . I don 't do yoga or anything , but some people use that . Everyone has their own thing , and I use writing . " Initially titled There 's Only One Angel In Heaven , the pop rock album features a darker theme when compared to Lohan 's previous album , Speak ( 2004 ) . 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " , the lead single and first track of the album , was mainly written by Lohan as a letter to her father , Michael Lohan , who was incarcerated in June 2005 after surviving a car crash for which he was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol . Additional writing and song production was done by Greg Wells and Kara DioGuardi , who revealed , " If you solo the vocals you 'll hear race cars , because we brought the studio to [ Lindsay 's ] trailer on Herbie : Fully Loaded . I 'm not kidding ! She had no time to do the record , so she would be on her lunch break , and I 'd be like , ' Throw that thing down your throat and get over here , ' cause we got to finish these vocals ! ' So I sat for 14 hours on the set and would grab her for , like , 10 minutes at a time . The poor girl . That 's the reality of young Hollywood . When they 're hot , they 're worked to death . It was 18 / 20 @-@ hour days . ... And I swear : ' Vroom ! Vroom ! ' You can hear it in the back . " " My Innocence " is also about the singer 's father . Lohan also covered " I Want You to Want Me " by Cheap Trick and " Edge of Seventeen " by Stevie Nicks for the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 A Little More Personal ( Raw ) received mixed reviews from critics . The album holds a score of 50 out of 100 based on 9 critical reviews , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the album three stars out of five , saying , " Lindsay Lohan clearly spells out her ambition in the title to her second album , A Little More Personal ( Raw ) -- she 's going to shed the glitzy trappings of her debut , Speak , and dig down deep in her heart , letting feelings flood onto the page " . Erlewine also stated that the album " is far from being totally successful , it is an intriguing mash @-@ up of heart and commerce . And it does suggest one thing that Speak never did : Lindsay Lohan may have an artistic vision as a recording artist , which is indeed a huge step forward " . Entertainment Weekly ' s Leah Greenblatt said , " like so many pop records today , Personal has more than its share of filler , and like all teenagers , Lohan contradicts herself . [ ... ] Perhaps Personal ' s vulnerability is calculated , and its rawness a misnomer , or maybe she 's really opening up . We 'll probably never know . Lindsay may no longer be on the edge of 17 , but being 19 , troubled , and ridiculously famous can cut pretty deep , so props to her for letting us see her bleed — just a little " . 
 Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone said Lohan " makes a fatal mistake on her second album : She tries to , like , express herself " , while a Los Angeles Times critic also gave the album a negative review , claiming that , " for most of the album , [ Lohan ] sounds like any other self @-@ absorbed teen , yearning to be Alanis , Gwen and even Stevie Nicks . " Whitney Strub of PopMatters stated , " what can one expect from an album that promises to get more personal but includes lyrics declaring , “ no one knows how I feel inside / And I ’ m keeping it that way ” ( from “ Fastlane ” ) ? " , and commenting that " with A Little More Personal , Lindsay Lohan reminds us that , despite such blossoms , pop still has the potential to climb the charts while combining blandness , banality and <unk> " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine considered A Little More Personal ( Raw ) " more consistent than its predecessor , and it 's not a bad listen by any means , but for all the so @-@ called weighty subject matter , there 's not much meat on these bones " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 A Little More Personal ( Raw ) debuted at number twenty on the Billboard 200 on the week of December 24 , 2005 with first week sales of 82 @,@ 000 copies , and stayed on the chart for seven weeks . The album debuted in the same week at the same position on the Billboard Digital Albums chart , dropping off the chart on the following week . A Little More Personal ( Raw ) was certified Gold in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling over 500 @,@ 000 copies . It was also certified Gold in Taiwan . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Following the album 's release , it was reported that A Little More Personal ( Raw ) was certified Gold in Taiwan , and that Lohan was going on tour with the album in the country . " I just found this out today - my album went gold there . It was a great feeling because it was very unexpected " , the singer revealed . " I would love to ( tour Taiwan ) . I haven 't toured at all at this point , but I would really love to do that . It 's a great feeling to know that people in other places and other countries are aware of my music and what I do " . The tour , however , didn 't happen for unknown reasons . Lohan promoted the album in a few television appearances , including at MTV 's Total Request Live on the day of the album 's release , and at The Ellen DeGeneres Show on December 14 , 2005 . The singer performed " Confessions of a Broken Heart " and her cover of " Edge of Seventeen " in the 2005 American Music Awards . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " was previewed before the album 's release at AOL Music 's First Listen on September 30 , 2005 , . It was made available for purchase as a digital download and was sent to U.S. radio in October 2005 . A music video for the song , directed by Lohan herself , references her father Michael 's drunkenness and alleged domestic abuse , and was released on October 25 , 2005 . As a response to the music video , Michael Lohan wrote a letter to the New York Daily News , saying , " while I always considered and expressed how truly blessed Lindsay , as well as my other children are , I never realized how blessed I am to have a daughter as amazing as Lindsay . Hold onto my shirt honey , soon enough you 'll be able to hold on to me ! " " Confessions of a Broken Heart ( Daughter to Father ) " achieved moderate success , reaching number seven in Australia on the week of its debut on chart . The song spent thirteen weeks on the chart , peaking at number forty @-@ five on the last . In Austria , the song reached number seventy @-@ four on the week of March 24 , 2006 , dropping the chart in the following . In the United States , the song peaked at number fourteen on Hot Digital Songs on the week of December 3 , 2005 , while reaching number fifty @-@ seven on Billboard Hot 100 on the week of December 24 , 2005 . The song was Lohan 's first and only entry on the official Hot 100 . 
 " I Live for the Day " was planned as the second single , and a promotional CD was issued to radio stations in 2005 ; however , the plans were scrapped . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Performance credits 
 Technical credits 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Olympic Games ceremony = 
 Olympic Games ceremonies of the Ancient Olympic Games were an integral part of these Games ; the modern Olympic games have opening , closing and medal ceremonies . Some of the elements of the modern ceremonies harken back to the Ancient Games from which the Modern Olympics draw their ancestry . An example of this is the prominence of Greece in both the opening and closing ceremonies . During the 2004 Games , the medal winners received a crown of olive branches , which was a direct reference to the Ancient Games , in which the victor 's prize was an olive wreath . The various elements of the ceremonies are mandated by the Olympic Charter and cannot be changed by the host nation . Even the artistic portion of the opening and closing ceremonies must meet the approval of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) . 
 The ceremonies have evolved over the centuries . Ancient Games incorporated ceremonies to mark the beginning and ending of each successive game . There are both similarities and differences between the ancient Olympic ceremonies and their modern counterparts . While the presentation of the Games has evolved with improvements in technology and the desire of the host nations to showcase their own artistic expression , the basic events of each ceremony have remained unchanged . The presentation of the Opening and Closing Ceremonies continue to increase in scope , scale and expense with each successive celebration of the Games , but they are still steeped in tradition . 
 = = Ancient forerunners = = 
 The Ancient Games , held in Greece from ca . 776 BC to ca . 393 AD , provide the first examples of Olympic ceremonies . The victory celebration , elements of which are in evidence in the modern @-@ day medal and closing ceremonies , often involved elaborate feasts , drinking , singing , and the recitation of poetry . The wealthier the victor the more extravagant the celebration . The victors were presented with an olive wreath or crown harvested from a special tree in Olympia by a boy , specially selected for this purpose , using a golden sickle . The festival would conclude with the victors making solemn vows and performing ritual sacrifices to the various gods to which they were beholden . 
 There is evidence of dramatic changes in the format of the Ancient Games over the nearly 12 centuries that they were celebrated . Eventually , by roughly the 77th Olympiad , a standard 18 @-@ event program was established . In order to open a Games in ancient Greece the organizers would hold an Inauguration Festival . This was followed by a ceremony in which athletes took an oath of sportsmanship . The first competition , an artistic competition of trumpeters and heralds , concluded the opening festivities . 
 = = Opening = = 
 The Olympic opening ceremonies represent the official commencement of an Olympic Games . In recent Olympics , athletic competition began prior to the opening ceremonies . For example , the football competitions for both men and women at the 2008 Summer Olympics began two days prior ( August 6 ) to the opening ceremonies . As mandated by the Olympic Charter , various elements frame the Opening Ceremonies of a celebration of the Olympic Games . Most of these rituals were canonized at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp , Belgium . 
 = = = Artistic program = = = 
 The artistic program is what creates the idiosyncratic element of each ceremony . Coubertin 's initial vision of the Modern Olympics featured both athletic competitions and artistic achievements . As the modern Olympics have evolved into a celebration of sport , it is in the opening ceremonies that one can see the most of Coubertin 's ideal . The opening ceremonies are an important ritual of the Olympic games . They represent a wide variety of features such as similar qualities and messages that link together local and global issues , as well as cultural similarities at the same scopes . The artistic program of the ceremonies allows the host country to showcase its past and future in a comprehensive way . The ceremonies typically start with the raising of the host country 's flag and a performance of its national anthem . The host nation then presents artistic displays of music , singing , dance , and theater representative of its culture , history , and the current Olympic game motto . Since the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow , the artistic presentations have continued to grow in scale and complexity . The opening ceremony at the Beijing Games , for example , reportedly cost US $ 100 million , with much of the cost incurring in the artistic portion of the ceremony . 
 = = = Parade of Nations = = = 
 The traditional part of the ceremonies starts with a " Parade of Nations " , during which most participating athletes march into the stadium , country by country . It is not compulsory for athletes to participate in the opening ceremonies . Due to the short time interval between the ceremonies and the first events of the Games , many athletes competing in these early events elect not to participate . It is most common for swimmers to forgo the Opening Ceremony because their events are early on the first day of competition . 
 For every Opening Ceremony , each host country has a theme . During the " Parade of Nations " , the host country ’ s goal is to represent their cultural identity and to show the world their place in society . For example , in the 2008 Beijing Olympics the theme was “ unity ” . On May 12 , 2008 , a devastating earthquake erupted in Sichuan . As the host country , China wanted to remember this tragic event by having Yao Ming , a Chinese basketball legend , walk hand @-@ in @-@ hand with Lin Hao , a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy who saved some of his classmates during the earthquake . 
 Each country 's delegation is led by a sign with the name of their country and by their nation 's flag . Traditionally ( starting at the 1928 Summer Olympics ) , Greece enters first , because of its historical status as the progenitor of the Olympics , while the host nation marches last . In the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , the Greek flag led the parade , while the Greek team marched in last , as the host nation . 
 All other participating teams march after Greece and before the host nation , in order according to a language selected by the organizing committee for those games , which is usually the dominant language in the area of the host city . Announcers announce each country 's name in English and French , as they both are the official languages of the Olympics , and the dominant language of the area of the host city , if neither English nor French are the dominant languages . 
 In the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona , both Spanish and Catalan were official languages of the games , but due to the political sensitivity surrounding the use of Catalan , the nations entered in French alphabetical order . For unknown reasons , both the 1964 Summer Olympics ( held in Tokyo ) and the 1998 Winter Olympics ( held in Nagano ) had the nations enter in English alphabetical order instead of Japanese characters . In the 2008 Summer Olympics , teams were ordered by the number of strokes in the Chinese translation of the team name . In the 2010 Winter Olympics , teams entered in English alphabetical order , although the languages of the Olympics are also the languages of the host country , Canada , because English is the more dominant of the two in Vancouver and in the host province of British Columbia . In the 1980 Summer Olympics and the 2014 Winter Olympics , the countries entered in the Cyrillic alphabetical order , which is the Russian language 's official script . 
 = = = Traditional events = = = 
 After all nations have entered , the President of the Organizing Committee makes a speech , followed by the IOC president . At the end of his speech , he introduces the representative of the host country who officially declares the opening of the Games . Despite the Games having been awarded to a particular city and not to the country in general , the Olympic Charter presently requires the opener to be the host country 's head of state . However , there have been many cases where someone other than the host country 's head of state opened the Games . The first example was at the Games of the II Olympiad in Paris in 1900 , which had no opening ceremony before as part of the 1900 World 's Fair . There are five examples from the United States alone in which the Games were not opened by the head of state . 
 The Olympic Charter provides that the person designated to open the Games should do so by reciting whichever of the following lines is appropriate : 
 If at the Games of the Olympiad ( Summer Olympics ) : I declare open the Games of [ name of the host city ] celebrating the [ ordinal number of the Olympiad ] Olympiad of the modern era . 
 If at the Winter Games : I declare open the [ ordinal number ] Olympic Winter Games of [ name of the host city ] . 
 Before 1936 , the opening official would often make a short welcoming speech before declaring the Games open . However , since 1936 , when Adolf Hitler opened both the Garmisch Partenkirchen Winter Olympics and the Berlin Summer Olympics , the openers have used the standard formula . Recent editions of the Winter Games have seen a trend of using the first version instead of the second , which happened in both the 2002 and 2010 Winter Games . There have been four further exceptions to the rule : 
 In 1976 , Elizabeth II , as Queen of Canada , opened the Montreal Olympics ( first in French followed by the English ) with : 
 I declare open the Olympic Games of 1976 , celebrating the XXI Olympiad of the modern era . 
 In 1984 , U.S. President Ronald Reagan opened the Los Angeles Summer Olympics with : 
 Celebrating the XXIII Olympiad of the modern era , I declare open the Olympic Games of Los Angeles . 
 In 2002 , U.S. President George W. Bush opened the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , which took place five months after the September 11 attacks , with : 
 On behalf of a proud , determined and grateful nation ... , then the standard opening formula followed . 
 In 2012 , Elizabeth II , as Queen of the United Kingdom , opened the London Summer Olympics with the same fashion in English , making it the second time that she opened the Games . 
 Next , the Olympic flag is carried horizontally ( since the 1960 Summer Olympics ) into the stadium and hoisted as the Olympic Hymn is played . The Olympic Charter states that the Olympic flag must " fly for the entire duration of the Olympic Games from a flagpole placed in a prominent position in the main stadium " . At most games , the flag has been carried into the stadium by prominent athletes of the host nation , but in 2012 , it was carried by an international group of athletes and non @-@ athletes famous for promoting Olympic values , including Muhammad Ali as a symbolic flag @-@ bearer . 
 The flag bearers of all countries then circle a rostrum , where one athlete of the host nation ( since the 1920 Summer Olympics ) , and one judge of the host nation ( since the 1972 Summer Olympics ) speak the Olympic Oath , declaring they will compete and judge according to the rules of their respective sport . Starting with the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , and continuing with the tradition started at the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics a coach from the host nation also speaks the Olympic Oath . 
 = = = Olympic flame = = = 
 Finally , the Torch is brought into the stadium , passed from athlete to athlete during the torch relay , until it reaches the last carrier ; often a well @-@ known athlete from the host nation , who lights the fire in the stadium 's cauldron . Under IOC rules , the lighting of the Olympic cauldron must be witnessed by those attending the opening ceremony , implying that it must be lit at the location where the ceremony is taking place . Another IOC rule states that the cauldron should be witnessed outside by the entire residents of the entire host city . This was made evident during the opening ceremony for the 2010 Games in Vancouver . The venue chosen as the Olympic Stadium was BC Place , which at the time was an air @-@ supported domed stadium . Since there was no way the cauldron could be displayed outside and also be seen at the stadium , two cauldrons were used . For the first torch lighting inside the stadium the organizers chose three @-@ time speed skating medalist Catriona Le May Doan , Canadian Senator Nancy Greene , who won two medals for Canada at the 1968 Games , NBA star Steve Nash , a native of nearby Victoria , and hockey legend Wayne Gretzky , to each light one of four arms of the torch . Notably , Le May Doan 's arm refused to light ; this was later rectified during the closing ceremony when she got a second chance to light her part of the torch and succeeded . 
 After the official conclusion of the Opening Ceremony , Gretzky was whisked away to a waiting car which took him to the secondary cauldron . Once there , he lit it to correspond with the tradition of Olympics past . 
 During the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , the cauldron located inside Olympic Stadium ( London ) was not visible from outside of the stadium . The image of the lit cauldron was projected on the stadiums rooftop screens during the first week of competition , and live footage was available to all broadcast right holders . See List of 2012 Summer Olympics broadcasters . 
 = = = Doves = = = 
 Beginning at the post – World War I 1920 Summer Olympics , the lighting of the Olympic Flame was followed by the release of doves , symbolizing peace . ( Experienced athletes brought newspapers to cover themselves because of the birds ' droppings . ) The release was discontinued after several doves were burned alive in the Olympic Flame during the opening ceremony of the 1988 Summer Olympics . It was later replaced with a symbolic release of doves after the flame has been lit . 
 In the 2000 ceremony , a dove image was projected on an enormous white cloth held by the athletes on the stadium floor . In 2004 , an LED screen was used . In 2006 , acrobats formed the shape of a dove . The 2008 ceremony had fireworks representing doves . In 2010 , dove figures were projected on the stage floor . The 2012 ceremony had bicyclists with dove @-@ wings , lit by LEDs . In the 2014 ceremony several dancers , holding strands of blue LED lights , danced on the shape of a dove projected on the stadium floor . 
 = = Medal presentation = = 
 After each Olympic event is completed , a medal ceremony is held . The Summer Games would usually conduct the ceremonies immediately after the event at the respective venues , whereas the Winter editions would present the medals at a nightly victory ceremony held at a medal plaza , excluding the curling , figure skating , speed skating ( starting in 1994 ) , short track speed skating , and ice hockey events , in which medals are presented immediately after those events . A three – tiered rostrum is used for the three medal winners , with the gold medal winner ascending to the highest platform . The medals are awarded by a member of the IOC . The IOC member is usually accompanied by a person from sports federation governing the sport ( such as IAAF in athletics or FINA in swimming ) , who presents each athlete with a small bouquet of flowers . When the Games were held in Athens in 2004 , the medal winners also received olive wreaths in honor of the tradition at the Ancient Olympics . After medals are distributed , the flags of the nations of the three medalists are raised . The flag of the gold medalist 's country is in the center and raised the highest while the flag of the silver medalist 's country is on the left facing the flags and the flag of the bronze medalist 's country is on the right , both at lower elevations than the gold medalist 's country 's flag . The flags are raised while the national anthem of the gold medalist 's country plays . Citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies . They aid the officials who present the medals and act as flag bearers . 
 Strict rules govern the conduct of athletes during the medal ceremony . For example , they are required to wear only pre @-@ approved outfits that are standard for the athlete 's national Olympic team . They are not allowed to display any political affiliation or make a political statement while on the medal stand . The most famous violation of this rule was the Black Power salute of Tommie Smith and John Carlos at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City . For their actions , IOC president Avery Brundage demanded their expulsion from the Olympics . If the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) did not comply , then Brundage demanded the removal of the entire track and field team of the United States . The USOC complied with his demands and Smith and Carlos were expelled . 
 As is customary , the men 's marathon medals ( at the Summer Olympics ) or the men 's 50 km cross @-@ country skiing medals ( at the Winter Olympics ) are presented as part of the Closing Ceremony , which take place later that day , in the Olympic Stadium , and are thus the last medal presentation of the Games . 
 = = Closing = = 
 In contrast to the opening ceremonies , many elements of the Olympic closing ceremonies gradually developed more by tradition than official mandate . 
 Like the opening ceremonies , the closing ceremonies begins with the raising of the host country 's flag and a performance of its national anthem . The traditional part of the closing ceremonies starts with the " Parade of Flags " , where flag bearers from each participating country enter the stadium in single file . Behind them march all of the athletes without any distinction or grouping by nationality . This " Parade of Athletes " , the blending of all the athletes , is a tradition that began during the 1956 Summer Olympics at the suggestion of Melbourne schoolboy John Ian Wing , who thought it would be a way of bringing the athletes of the world together as " one nation . " Prior to the 1956 Games , no Olympic Team had ever marched in the closing ceremony of the Modern or the Ancient Games . It was the very first International Peace March ever to be staged . ( In 2006 , the athletes marched in with their countrymen , then dispersed and mingled as the ceremonies went on . ) 
 After all the athletes enter the stadium , the final medals ceremony of the Games is held . The organizing committee of the respective host city , after consulting with the IOC , determines which event will have its medals presented . During the Summer Olympics , this is usually the men 's marathon . Traditionally , the men 's marathon is held in the last hours of competition on the last day of the Olympics , and the race is won just before the start of the closing ceremony . However , recent Summer Olympiads in Atlanta , Beijing , and London staged the marathon in the early morning due to heat problems in the host city . Since the 2006 Winter Olympics , the medals for the men 's 50 km cross @-@ country skiing event were presented at the closing ceremony . The medallist 's national flags are then hoisted and the national anthem of the gold medallist 's country is played . 
 Next , two other national flags are hoisted on flagpoles one at a time while the corresponding national anthems are played : the flag of Greece to honor the birthplace of the Olympic Games , and the flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Olympic Games . In Moscow during the 1980 Summer Olympics boycott , the flag raised to represent the next games host was that of the City of Los Angeles instead of the flag of the boycotting @-@ United States . In Sydney and Athens , two Greek flags were raised because Greece was the next games host ( in 2000 ) and in 2004 , because Greece was hosting the games . Then , while the Olympic Hymn is played , the Olympic Flag that was hoisted during the opening ceremonies is lowered from the flagpole and carried from the stadium . 
 In what is known as the Antwerp Ceremony ( because the tradition began at the Antwerp Games ) , the mayor of the city that organized the Games transfers a special Olympic Flag to the president of the IOC , who then passes it on to the mayor of the city hosting the next Olympic Games . The receiving mayor then waves the flag eight times . There are three such flags : 
 The Antwerp flag was presented to the IOC at the 1920 Summer Olympics by the city of Antwerp , Belgium , and was passed on to the next organising city of the Summer Olympics until the 1988 Games in Seoul . 
 The Oslo flag was presented to the IOC at the 1952 Winter Olympics by the city of Oslo , Norway , and is passed on to the next organising city of the Winter Olympics . 
 The Seoul flag was presented to the IOC at the 1988 Summer Olympics by the city of Seoul , South Korea as a replacement for the Antwerp flag . This flag is passed on to the next organizing city of the Summer Olympics . 
 This tradition posed a particular challenge at the 2006 Winter Games in Turin , Italy . The flag was passed from Sergio <unk> , the mayor of Turin , to Sam Sullivan , the mayor of Vancouver , Canada . Mayor Sullivan , who is a quadriplegic , waved the flag by holding it in one hand and swinging his motorized wheelchair back and forth eight times . 
 The next host nation then introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theater representative of that country or city . This tradition began with the 1976 Games . 
 Afterwards , the president of the Organizing Committee makes a speech . The IOC president then makes a speech before closing the Olympics by saying : 
 And now , in accordance with tradition , I declare the Games of the [ ordinal number of Summer Olympics ] Olympiad / [ ordinal number of Winter Olympics ] Olympic Winter Games closed , and I call upon the youth of the world to assemble four years from now in [ name of next host city ] to celebrate the Games of the [ subsequent ordinal number of Summer Olympics ] Olympiad / [ subsequent ordinal number of Winter Olympics ] Olympic Winter Games . 
 Finally , the Olympic Flame is extinguished , marking the end of the Games . 
 = Forest Park ( Portland , Oregon ) = 
 Forest Park is a public municipal park in the Tualatin Mountains west of downtown Portland , Oregon , United States . Stretching for more than 8 miles ( 13 km ) on hillsides overlooking the Willamette River , it is one of the country 's largest urban forest reserves . The park , a major component of a regional system of parks and trails , covers more than 5 @,@ 100 acres ( 2 @,@ 064 ha ) of mostly second @-@ growth forest with a few patches of old growth . About 70 miles ( 110 km ) of recreational trails , including the Wildwood Trail segment of the city 's 40 Mile Loop system , crisscross the park . 
 As early as the 1860s , civic leaders sought to create a natural preserve in the woods near Portland . Their efforts led to the creation of a municipal park commission that in 1903 hired the Olmsted Brothers landscape architectural firm to develop a plan for Portland 's parks . Acquiring land through donations , transfers from Multnomah County , and delinquent tax foreclosures , the city eventually acted on a proposal by the City Club of Portland and combined parcels totaling about 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) to create the reserve . Formally dedicated in 1948 , it ranks 19th in size among parks within U.S. cities , according to The Trust for Public Land . 
 More than 112 bird species and 62 mammal species frequent the park and its wide variety of trees and shade @-@ loving plants . About 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) of rain falls on the forest each year . Many small tributaries of the Willamette River flow northeast through the woods to pipes or culverts under U.S. Route 30 at the edge of the park . One of them , Balch Creek , has a resident trout population , and another , Miller Creek , supports sea @-@ run species , including salmon . 
 Threats to the park include overuse , urban traffic , encroaching development , invasive flora , and lack of maintenance money . Occasional serious crimes and more frequent minor crimes occur in the park . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 Solidified lava from Grande Ronde members of the Columbia River Basalt Group underlie Forest Park . About 16 million years ago during the Middle Miocene , the Columbia River ran through a lowland south of its modern channel . Eruptions from linear vents in eastern Oregon and Washington flowed down this channel through what later became the Willamette Valley . These flows , some of which reached the Pacific Ocean , recurred at intervals between 16 @.@ 5 and 15 @.@ 6 million years ago and covered almost 60 @,@ 000 square miles ( 160 @,@ 000 km2 ) . About eight separate Grande Ronde Basalt flows have been mapped in the Tualatin Mountains ( West Hills ) , where they underlie the steepest slopes of Forest Park and form the columned rocks visible along Balch Creek Canyon and Northwest Cornell Road . The West Hills were later covered by wind @-@ deposited silts that become unstable when saturated with water . Stream bank instability and siltation are common , and landslides deter urban development at higher elevations . 
 Roughly 8 miles ( 13 km ) long , the park is less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide near downtown Portland and about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide at its northwestern end . It extends along the West Hills from West Burnside Street near downtown Portland to where the Willamette River divides to flow around Sauvie Island . Covering most of the east face of the ridge above the Willamette River , it is bounded by West Burnside Street on the south , Northwest Skyline Boulevard on the west , Northwest Newberry Road on the north , and Northwest St. Helens Road ( U.S. Route 30 ) on the east . Elevations above sea level vary from 50 feet ( 15 m ) near U.S. Route 30 at the base of the ridge to about 1 @,@ 100 feet ( 340 m ) near the crest of the ridge along Northwest Skyline Boulevard . 
 In 2008 Forest Park ranked 19th in size among the largest city parks in the United States , according to The Trust for Public Land . The trust 's list included state parks , national parks , county parks , regional parks , and national wildlife refuges , as well as municipally owned parks located within cities . Chugach State Park in Anchorage , Alaska , was in first place with 490 @,@ 125 acres ( 1 @,@ 983 km2 ) . 
 Portland author Marcy Houle says that the park " captures the essence of what is natural and wild and beautiful about the Northwest ... From this forest sanctuary , panoramic views of the city of Portland , the Willamette and Columbia rivers , and five major peaks of the Cascade Range ... can be seen through the tall fir trees . From its inception ... , Forest Park has been a refuge for both people and wildlife , and an integral part of the environment of Portland . " 
 = = History = = 
 Before settlers arrived , the land that became known as Forest Park was covered by a Douglas @-@ fir forest . By 1851 , its acreage had been divided into donation land claims filed by settlers with plans to clear the forest and build upon the property . After logging , the steep slopes and unstable silt loosened by heavy rains caused landslides that defeated construction plans , and claims were defaulted or donated to the city . 
 Civic leaders beginning with the Reverend Thomas Lamb Eliot , a minister who moved to Portland in 1867 , sought to create a natural preserve in the woods that eventually became Forest Park . By 1899 , Eliot 's efforts led to the formation of the Municipal Park Commission of Portland , which in 1903 hired the highly regarded landscape architecture firm , the Olmsted Brothers of Brookline , Massachusetts , to study the city 's park system and recommend a plan . John Charles Olmsted , the stepson of Frederick Law Olmsted , spent May 1903 in Portland . The Olmsted Report , received in December , emphasized creation of a system of parks and linking parkways that would take advantage of natural scenery . It proposed a formal square for Union Station , squares along the downtown waterfront , and parks in places later known as Forest Park , Sellwood Park , Mount Tabor Park , Rocky Butte , and Ross Island , as well as Terwilliger Parkway , the 40 Mile Loop , and other connecting parkways . Proposed parks for Swan Island , in the Willamette River , and other places in Portland did not develop . Others like Forest Park came into being only many years later . 
 The city acquired land for Forest Park bit by bit over several decades . In 1897 , Donald Macleay , a Portland merchant and real @-@ estate developer , deeded a 108 @-@ acre ( 44 ha ) tract of land along Balch Creek to the city to provide an outdoor space for patients from nearby hospitals . In the 1890s , Frederick Van Voorhies Holman , a Portland lawyer and a president of the Oregon Historical Society , proposed a gift of 52 acres ( 21 ha ) of nearby land that was added to the city 's holdings in 1939 when his siblings , George F. and Mary Holman , completed the donation . Clark and Wilson Timber Company donated 17 acres ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) in 1927 to create a Western Oregon timber park near Northwest Germantown Road . Nine years later , the estate of Aaron Meier , one of the founders of the Meier & Frank chain of department stores , donated land for Linnton Park near Portland 's Linnton neighborhood along Highway 30 . These smaller parks became part of the larger park when it was finally created . Some of them , such as Macleay Park , are still referred to by their original names even though they are part of Forest Park . 
 Other parcels were acquired through government action . In 1928 , the City Council 's Delinquent Tax Committee transferred land to the Parks Bureau for a wildflower garden along Balch Creek . Multnomah County in that year gave the bureau perpetual use of about 145 acres ( 59 ha ) of land north of Washington Park . Encouraged by the City Club of Portland , which conducted a park feasibility study in 1945 , civic leaders supported the Forest Park project . In 1948 , Multnomah County transferred to the city another 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 ha ) acquired through delinquent tax foreclosures . On September 23 , 1948 , the city formally dedicated 4 @,@ 200 acres ( 17 km2 ) of land as Forest Park , which as of 2009 covered more than 5 @,@ 100 acres ( 21 km2 ) . It is one of the largest urban forest reserves in the U.S , though its exact ranking has been questioned . The city 's Parks and Recreation Department claims it is the " largest forested natural area within city limits in the United States " . However , an article in the Portland Tribune said Forest Park ranked no higher than third among U.S. urban forests in 2006 . 
 In 1991 , Metro , the regional governmental agency for the Oregon portion of the Portland metropolitan area , began budgeting for what became its Natural Areas Program aimed at protecting these areas in Multnomah , Washington , and Clackamas counties . By 1995 , the program had targeted 320 acres ( 130 ha ) next to or within Forest Park for acquisition . A 2006 bond measure allowed for the purchase of more land to expand the park , to protect its creeks ' headwaters and those of nearby streams in Washington County , and to link Forest Park to other public lands to the northwest . 
 = = Recreational network = = 
 Forest Park is a major component of a regional network of parks , trails , and natural areas managed by Metro . At the southeastern end of the park , Wildwood Trail , the centerpiece of the Forest Park trail system , passes through Macleay Park . This part of the larger park , which includes the Forest Park field headquarters , is heavily used by pedestrians entering Balch Creek Canyon from nearby city streets . Further southeast , Wildwood Trail , while still in Forest Park , passes Pittock Mansion and its panoramic views of Portland and five volcanic peaks : Mounts Rainier , Adams , St. Helens , Hood , and Jefferson . Shortly thereafter , the trail connects to adjoining Washington Park and attractions such as the Oregon Zoo . From this point and from more remote Forest Park trailheads near the St. Johns Bridge , other components of the 40 Mile Loop system of trails encircle the city . They follow the Willamette and Columbia rivers , the Columbia Slough and the Springwater Corridor along Johnson Creek and extend to the eastern suburbs of Fairview , Gresham and Boring . This trail network links more than 30 separate parks that offer diverse recreational opportunities , such as horse @-@ back riding , in @-@ line skating , canoeing , and viewing of wetland wildlife , in addition to hiking and biking . It connects to other trail systems such as Discovery Trail in Clark County , Washington , and the Terwilliger Trail running through Tryon Creek State Natural Area to Lake Oswego . 
 As of 2015 , this network of parks and trails is still expanding . Metro , the regional government , plans to link the 40 Mile Loop to trails along the Willamette River to Wilsonville , south of Lake Oswego . The regional government has also proposed connecting Wildwood Trail to the partly completed Westside Trail running north – south through Washington County to the Tualatin River . Another planned trail would extend the Springwater Corridor along a proposed Cazadero Trail to Barton on the Clackamas River . Longer @-@ term goals include trail links to the Sandy River Gorge Trail east of Gresham and the Pacific Crest Trail , which runs from Mexico to Canada and follows the Cascade Range through Oregon . 
 = = = Wildwood Trail = = = 
 More than 70 miles ( 110 km ) of trails and firelanes cut through the park . The longest trail in the park is the Wildwood Trail , of which about 27 miles ( 43 km ) is in Forest Park and about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) in Washington Park . It is also the longest section of the 40 Mile Loop , a trail network of roughly 150 miles ( 240 km ) reaching many parts of the Portland metropolitan area . The trail runs southeast to northwest from trail marker 0 in Washington Park to Northwest Newberry Road , just beyond trail marker 30 on the ridge above the southeastern end of Sauvie Island . The straight @-@ line distance from beginning to end is about 9 miles ( 14 km ) , but because the trail includes many switchbacks and hairpin turns , it is 30 @.@ 2 miles ( 48 @.@ 6 km ) long . 
 Wildwood Trail begins in Washington Park near the Oregon Zoo , a light rail stop , the Oregon Vietnam Veterans Memorial , the World Forestry Center and the Hoyt Arboretum . Blue diamonds placed about 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above the ground appear on trees along the trail every 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) . The diamonds and the mileage markers above them are visible to hikers traveling in either direction on the path . In its first 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , the trail passes near the Portland Japanese Garden , Pittock Mansion , the Audubon Society of Portland wildlife sanctuary , and the Stone House in Balch Creek Canyon . From this point west , Wildwood Trail runs through forest generally uninterrupted by buildings but crisscrossed by shorter trails , small streams , roads , and firelanes . 
 = = = Other paths , streets , easements = = = 
 Many shorter Forest Park trails , roads , and firelanes intersect the Wildwood Trail . Most of the trails are open only to hikers and runners , but several roads and firelanes are open to bicycles or horses or both . Leif Erickson Drive , a road closed to motorized traffic , runs at lower elevation than and roughly parallel to the Wildwood Trail for about 11 miles ( 18 km ) from the end of Northwest Thurman Street to Northwest Germantown Road . Originally called Hillside Drive , it was renamed in 1933 at the request of the Sons of Norway , a fraternal organization . <unk> for an oil line , a gas line , and electric transmission lines for the Bonneville Power Administration ( BPA ) cross the park . Paved roads surround the park , which is crossed or entered by other roads including Northwest Pittock Drive , Northwest Cornell Road , Northwest 53rd Drive , Northwest Saltzman Road , Northwest Springville Road , Northwest Germantown Road , Northwest Newton Road , and BPA Road . 
 = = Vegetation = = 
 Forest Park lies in the Coast Range ecoregion designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) . In its natural state , the forest consists mainly of three tree species , Douglas @-@ fir , western hemlock , and western red cedar , and smaller numbers of grand fir , black cottonwood , red alder , bigleaf maple , madrone , and western yew . Much of the forest that existed here before 1850 was gone by 1940 . The stage of re @-@ growth in the forest depends on when it was last logged or burned . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , about one percent of the total vegetation in the park consisted of grasses , bracken , thistle , and fireweed in sections of the forest cleared two to five years earlier . Another two percent had reached the shrub stage , between three and thirty years old , with small trees dominated by such plants as thimbleberry , salmonberry , and blackberry . Forest areas 10 to 30 years old that contained tall alder and maple trees and smaller conifers accounted for about 20 percent of the park . 
 Larger areas were occupied by forests in which conifers had grown taller than the alders and maples . About 50 percent of Forest Park consists of these areas , which are between 30 and 80 years old and in which Douglas @-@ firs have begun to dominate . Another 25 percent of the park contains forests dominated by middle @-@ aged conifers , 80 to 250 years old . In these areas , red alders , which live for about 100 years , have begun to die , and the Douglas @-@ firs , which can live for 750 years , attain heights up to about 240 feet ( 73 m ) . Under the big trees are shade @-@ tolerant trees such as western red cedar , western hemlock , and grand fir and smaller plants such as Oregon @-@ grape , vine maple , and salal . 
 The last forest stage , old growth , is reached after 250 years and includes many snags , downed and dead trees , and fallen logs . Timber @-@ cutting and fires reduced old growth in Forest Park to " almost nothing " by 1940 , and most of the forest has not yet attained this stage . Patches exist near Macleay Park and further west near Germantown Road and Newton Road . The largest tree in Forest Park is a Douglas @-@ fir near the Stone House , the remains of a former public restroom near Balch Creek . It is 242 feet ( 74 m ) high , and the trunk is 18 @.@ 6 feet ( 5 @.@ 7 m ) in circumference . 
 Among the prominent wildflowers are Hooker 's fairy bells , vanilla leaf , evergreen violet , and trillium . Invasive species include English ivy , European holly , clematis , morning glory , and Himalayan blackberry . Citizen groups such as the No Ivy <unk> and The Forest Park Conservancy engage in projects to remove ivy , maintain trails , and plant native species . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Wildlife in Forest Park is strongly affected by contiguous tracts of nearby habitat that make the park accessible to birds and animals from the Tualatin River valley , the Oregon Coast Range , the Willamette River , Sauvie Island , the Columbia River , and the Vancouver , Washington , lowlands . Sixty @-@ two mammal species , including the northern flying squirrel , black @-@ tailed deer , creeping vole , bobcat , coyote , Mazama pocket gopher , little brown bat , Roosevelt elk , and Pacific jumping mouse frequent Forest Park . Blue grouse , great horned owl , hairy woodpecker , Bewick 's wren , orange @-@ crowned warbler , osprey , northern pygmy @-@ owl , and hermit thrush are among the more than 112 species of birds that have been observed in the park . In Balch Creek Canyon adjacent to Forest Park , the Audubon Society of Portland maintains a wildlife sanctuary with more than 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of trails , a wildlife care center , and avian exhibits . Amphibian species frequenting the Audubon Society pond include rough @-@ skinned newts , Pacific tree frogs , and salamanders . 
 Pressure from habitat loss , pollution , hunting , and urban development has reduced or eliminated the presence of wolves , bears , and wild cats and has led to increased numbers of weasels , raccoons , and other small predators . Invasive plant species such as English ivy have made the habitat simpler and less supportive of native insects and the salamanders and other amphibians that feed on them . Roads in the area severely hamper the movement of large animals . Multnomah County has designated Northwest Cornell Road and Northwest Germantown Road as " rural collector " streets , carrying traffic of less than 3 @,@ 000 vehicles per day but more than streets designated as " local roads " . Dogs allowed to run ( illegally ) off @-@ leash in the park pose threats to birds , fish , and other wildlife . 
 = = Creeks = = 
 About 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) of rain falls on Forest Park each year . Many small creeks , only a few of which are named , flow northeast through the park from the ridge at the top of the West Hills to the base of the hills near U.S. Route 30 . The five named streams from east to west are Balch Creek , Rocking Chair Creek , Saltzman Creek , Doane Creek , and Miller Creek . Rocking Chair Creek is a tributary of Saltzman Creek . After leaving the park , the streams pass through culverts and other conduits before reaching the Willamette River . These conduits block fish migration to and from the Willamette River except on Miller Creek , where the conduits are short and have been modified to assist the fish . 
 Near the east end of the park , the free @-@ flowing reaches of Balch Creek support a population of resident cutthroat trout . Near the west end , furthest from the city center , Miller Creek retains much of its historic nature and supports a greater diversity of aquatic organisms than other Forest Park streams . Biological field surveys of Miller Creek in 1990 noted sea @-@ run cutthroat trout , coho salmon , and short @-@ head <unk> , as well as abundant macroinvertebrate species including stoneflies , mayflies , caddisflies , water striders , and crayfish . 
 = = Crime and other trouble = = 
 Multiple crimes have occurred in Forest Park , including two murders . In 2001 , a man who preyed on heroin addicts and prostitutes pleaded guilty to the 1999 murder of three women whose bodies were found in Forest Park near Northwest Saltzman Road , though forensic analysis showed the murders took place elsewhere and the bodies were brought to Forest Park . In 2003 , jurors convicted another man of the 1996 murder of his ex @-@ girlfriend on a Forest Park trail . Less serious crimes have included assault ( rarely ) , car break @-@ ins and petty theft ( frequently at trail heads ) , rare arsons , rare indecent exposure , and marijuana cultivation . Multnomah County Sheriff 's deputies in 2007 seized 114 mature marijuana plants found growing in the park on a hillside near Portland 's Linnton neighborhood . Deputies had seized another small grow operation in the park in 2005 . More common has been illegal camping by homeless transients and others . An illegal bicycling trail , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long , was discovered in a remote part of the park in February 2010 . In 2014 , hikers found a booby trap meant to fire a shotgun shell across a path leading to the park . Portland police removed the device . 
 In 2004 , authorities found a 53 @-@ year @-@ old man and his 12 @-@ year @-@ old daughter living in the park in a tarp @-@ covered structure stocked with encyclopedias for homeschooling . They told police they had been living in the park for four years . My Abandonment , a novel by Peter Rock , tells a story built around the incident . 
 In 1951 , a drought @-@ related blaze started by a campfire burned 1 @,@ 600 acres ( 650 ha ) near the western end of the park . In 2005 , a reporter for The Oregonian newspaper interviewed biologists , conservationists , Parks and Recreation officials , and others about the health of Forest Park and its future prospects . Collectively they identified threats to the park : urban development that restricts the movement of wild animals and birds ; overuse ; invasive plants ; loose dogs ; fire risk ; increasing rates of tree death ; lack of rule enforcement , and lack of money . In 2010 , the city hired a full @-@ time ranger assigned to Forest Park . 
 = Orangutan = 
 The orangutans ( also spelled orang @-@ utan , <unk> , or orang @-@ <unk> ) are the two exclusively Asian species of extant great apes . Native to Indonesia and Malaysia , orangutans are currently found in only the rainforests of Borneo and Sumatra . Classified in the genus Pongo , orangutans were considered to be one species . Since 1996 , they have been divided into two species : the Bornean orangutan ( P. pygmaeus ) and the Sumatran orangutan ( P. abelii ) . In addition , the Bornean species is divided into three subspecies . 
 Based on genome sequencing , the two extant orangutan species evidently diverged around 400 @,@ 000 years ago . The orangutans are also the only surviving species of the subfamily Ponginae , which also included several other species , such as the three extinct species of the genus Gigantopithecus , including the largest known primate Gigantopithecus <unk> . The ancestors of the Ponginae subfamily split from the main ape line in Africa 16 to 19 million years ago ( mya ) and spread into Asia . 
 Orangutans are the most arboreal of the great apes and spend most of their time in trees . Their hair is typically reddish @-@ brown , instead of the brown or black hair typical of chimpanzees and gorillas . Males and females differ in size and appearance . Dominant adult males have distinctive cheek pads and produce long calls that attract females and intimidate rivals . Younger males do not have these characteristics and resemble adult females . Orangutans are the most solitary of the great apes , with social bonds occurring primarily between mothers and their dependent offspring , who stay together for the first two years . Fruit is the most important component of an orangutan 's diet ; however , the apes will also eat vegetation , bark , honey , insects and even bird eggs . They can live over 30 years in both the wild and captivity . 
 Orangutans are among the most intelligent primates ; they use a variety of sophisticated tools and construct elaborate sleeping nests each night from branches and foliage . The apes have been extensively studied for their learning abilities . There may even be distinctive cultures within populations . Field studies of the apes were pioneered by primatologist Birutė Galdikas . Both orangutan species are considered to be endangered , with the Sumatran orangutan being critically endangered . Human activities have caused severe declines in the populations and ranges of both species . Threats to wild orangutan populations include poaching , habitat destruction , and the illegal pet trade . Several conservation and rehabilitation organisations are dedicated to the survival of orangutans in the wild . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " orangutan " ( also written orang @-@ utan , orang utan , <unk> , and <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is derived from the Malay and Indonesian words orang meaning " person " and <unk> meaning " forest " , thus " person of the forest " . Orang <unk> was originally not used to refer to apes , but to forest @-@ dwelling humans . 
 The Malay words used to refer specifically to the ape are <unk> and <unk> , but it is unclear if those words refer to just orangutans , or to all apes in general . The first attestation of the word to name the Asian ape is in Dutch physician Jacobus Bontius ' 1631 Historiae naturalis et <unk> <unk> orientalis – he reported that Malays had informed him the ape was able to talk , but preferred not to " lest he be compelled to labour " . The word appeared in several German @-@ language descriptions of Indonesian zoology in the 17th century . The likely origin of the word comes specifically from the <unk> variety of Malay . 
 Cribb et al . ( 2014 ) suggest that Bontius ' account referred not to apes ( which were not known from Java ) but rather to humans suffering some serious medical condition ( most likely endemic cretinism ) and that his use of the word was misunderstood by Nicolaes Tulp , who was the first to use the term in a publication . 
 The word was first attested in English in 1691 in the form orang @-@ <unk> , and variants with -ng instead of -n as in the Malay original are found in many languages . This spelling ( and pronunciation ) has remained in use in English up to the present , but has come to be regarded as incorrect . The loss of " h " in Utan and the shift from n to -ng has been taken to suggest that the term entered English through Portuguese . In 1869 , British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace , co @-@ creator of modern evolutionary theory , published his account of Malaysia 's wildlife : The Malay Archipelago : The Land of the Orang @-@ Utan and the Bird of Paradise . 
 The name of the genus , Pongo , comes from a 16th @-@ century account by Andrew Battell , an English sailor held prisoner by the Portuguese in Angola , which describes two anthropoid " monsters " named Pongo and <unk> . He is now believed to have been describing gorillas , but in the 18th century , the terms orangutan and <unk> were used for all great apes . Lacépède used the term Pongo for the genus following the German botanist Friedrich von Wurmb who sent a skeleton from the Indies to Europe . 
 = = Taxonomy , phylogeny and genetics = = 
 The two orangutan species are the only extant members of the subfamily Ponginae . This subfamily also included the extinct genera <unk> , which lived in southern China and Thailand 2 – 8 mya , and <unk> , which lived India and Pakistan from 12 @.@ 5 mya until 8 @.@ 5 mya . These apes likely lived in drier and cooler environments than orangutans do today . <unk> <unk> , which lived in Thailand 5 – 7 mya , is believed to have been the closest known relative of the orangutans . The largest known primate , Gigantopithecus , was also a member of Ponginae and lived in China , India and Vietnam from 5 mya to 100 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Within apes ( superfamily Hominoidea ) , the gibbons diverged during the early Miocene ( between 19 @.@ 7 and 24 @.@ 1 mya , according to molecular evidence ) and the orangutans split from the African great ape lineage between 15 @.@ 7 and 19 @.@ 3 mya . 
 = = = History of orangutan taxonomy = = = 
 The orangutan was first described scientifically in the Systema Naturae of Linnaeus as Simia satyrus . The populations on the two islands were classified as subspecies until 1996 , when they were elevated to full species status , and the three distinct populations on Borneo were elevated to subspecies . The population currently listed as P. p. wurmbii may be closer to the Sumatran orangutan than the other Bornean orangutan subspecies . If confirmed , abelii would be a subspecies of P. wurmbii ( <unk> , 1808 ) . 
 Regardless , the type locality of P. pygmaeus has not been established beyond doubts , and may be from the population currently listed as P. wurmbii ( in which case P. wurmbii would be a junior synonym of P. pygmaeus , while one of the names currently considered a junior synonym of P. pygmaeus would take precedence for the northwest Bornean taxon ) . To further confuse , the name P. morio , as well as some suggested junior synonyms , may be junior synonyms of the P. pygmaeus subspecies , thus leaving the east Bornean populations unnamed . 
 In addition , some fossils described under the name P. <unk> have been found in Vietnam , and multiple fossil subspecies have been described from several parts of southeastern Asia . It is unclear if these belong to P. pygmaeus or P. abelii or , in fact , represent distinct species . 
 = = = Genomics = = = 
 The Sumatran orangutan genome was sequenced in January 2011 . Following humans and chimpanzees , the Sumatran orangutan has become the third species of hominid to have its genome sequenced . Subsequently , the Bornean species would have its genome sequenced . Genetic diversity was found to be lower in Bornean orangutans ( P. pygmaeus ) than in Sumatran ones ( P. abelii ) , despite the fact that Borneo is home to six or seven times as many orangutans as Sumatra . 
 The comparison has shown these two species diverged around 400 @,@ 000 years ago , more recently than was previously thought . Also , the orangutan genome was found to have evolved much more slowly than chimpanzee and human DNA . Previously , the species was estimated to have diverged 2 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 9 mya . The researchers hope these data may help conservationists save the endangered ape , and also prove useful in further understanding of human genetic diseases . 
 Bornean orangutans have 48 diploid chromosomes . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 An orangutan has a large , bulky body , a thick neck , very long , strong arms , short , bowed legs , and no tail . It is mostly covered with long , reddish @-@ brown hair and grey @-@ black skin . Sumatran orangutans have more sparse and lighter @-@ coloured coats . The orangutan has a large head with a prominent mouth area . Though largely hairless , their faces can develop some hair in males , giving them a moustache . 
 Adult males have large cheek flaps to show their dominance to other males . The cheek flaps are made mostly of fatty tissue and are supported by the musculature of the face . Mature males ' throat pouches allow them to make loud calls . The species display significant sexual dimorphism ; females typically stand 115 cm ( 3 ft 9 in ) tall and weigh around 37 kg ( 82 lb ) , while flanged adult males stand 136 cm ( 4 ft 6 in ) tall and weigh 75 kg ( 165 lb ) . A male orangutan has an arm span of about 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 Orangutan hands are similar to human hands ; they have four long fingers and an opposable thumb . However , the joint and tendon arrangement in the orangutans ' hands produces two adaptations that are significant for arboreal locomotion . The resting configuration of the fingers is curved , creating a suspensory hook grip . Additionally , without the use of the thumb , the fingers and hands can grip tightly around objects with a small diameter by resting the tops of the fingers against the inside of the palm , creating a double @-@ locked grip . 
 Their feet have four long toes and an opposable big toe . Orangutans can grasp things with both their hands and their feet . Their fingers and toes are curved , allowing them to get a better grip on branches . Since their hip joints have the same flexibility as their shoulder and arm joints , orangutans have less restriction in the movements of their legs than humans have . Unlike gorillas and chimpanzees , orangutans are not true knuckle @-@ walkers , and are instead fist @-@ walkers . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Orangutans live in primary and old secondary forests , particularly dipterocarp forests and peat swamp forests . Both species can be found in mountainous and lowland swampy areas . Sumatran orangutans live at elevations as high as 1500 m ( 4921 ft ) , while Bornean orangutans live no higher than 1000 m ( <unk> ft ) . Other habitats used by orangutans include grasslands , cultivated fields , gardens , young secondary forest , and shallow lakes . Orangutans are the most arboreal of the great apes , spending nearly all their time in the trees . 
 Most of the day is spent feeding , resting , and travelling . They start the day feeding for 2 – 3 hours in the morning . They rest during midday then travel in the late afternoon . When evening arrives , they begin to prepare their nests for the night . Orangutans do not swim , although they have been recorded wading in water . The main predators of orangutans are tigers . Other predators include clouded leopards , wild dogs and crocodiles . The absence of tigers on Borneo may explain why Bornean orangutans can be found on the ground more often than their Sumatran relatives . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Orangutans are opportunistic foragers , and their diets vary markedly from month to month . Fruit makes up 65 – 90 % of the orangutan diet , and those with sugary or fatty pulp are favoured . Ficus fruits are commonly eaten and are easy to harvest and digest . Lowland dipterocarp forests are preferred by orangutans because of their plentiful fruit . Bornean orangutans consume at least 317 different food items that include young leaves , shoots , bark , insects , honey and bird eggs . 
 A decade @-@ long study of urine and faecal samples at the Gunung <unk> Orangutan Conservation Project in West Kalimantan has shown that orangutans give birth during and after the high fruit season ( though not every year ) , during which they consume various abundant fruits , totalling up to 11 @,@ 000 calories per day . In the low @-@ fruit season , they eat whatever fruit is available in addition to tree bark and leaves , with daily intake at only 2 @,@ 000 calories . Together with a long lactation period , orangutans also have a long birth interval . 
 Orangutans are thought to be the sole fruit disperser for some plant species including the climber species Strychnos <unk> which contains the toxic alkaloid strychnine . It does not appear to have any effect on orangutans except for excessive saliva production . 
 <unk> , the practice of eating soil or rock , has been observed in orangutans . There are three main reasons for this dietary behaviour : for the addition of mineral nutrients to their diet ; for the ingestion of clay minerals that can absorb toxic substances ; or to treat a disorder such as diarrhoea . Orangutans also use plants of the genus Commelina as an anti @-@ inflammatory balm . 
 = = = Social life = = = 
 Orangutans live a more solitary lifestyle than the other great apes . Most social bonds occur between adult females and their dependent and weaned offspring . Adult males and independent adolescents of both sexes tend to live alone . Orangutan societies are made up of resident and transient individuals of both sexes . Resident females live with their offspring in defined home ranges that overlap with those of other adult females , which may be their immediate relatives . One to several resident female home ranges are encompassed within the home range of a resident male , who is their main mating partner . 
 Transient males and females move widely . Orangutans usually travel alone , but they may travel in small groups in their subadult years . However , this behaviour ends at adulthood . The social structure of the orangutan can be best described as solitary but social . Interactions between adult females range from friendly to avoidance to antagonistic . Resident males may have overlapping ranges and interactions between them tend to be hostile . 
 During dispersal , females tend to settle in home ranges that overlap with their mothers . However , they do not seem to have any special social bonds with them . Males disperse much farther from their mothers and enter into a transient phase . This phase lasts until a male can challenge and displace a dominant , resident male from his home range . Adult males dominate sub @-@ adult males . 
 Both resident and transient orangutans aggregate on large fruiting trees to feed . The fruits tend to be abundant , so competition is low and individuals may engage in social interactions . Orangutans will also form travelling groups with members moving between different food sources . These groups tend to be made of only a few individuals . They also tend to be <unk> between an adult male and female . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Orangutans communicate with various sounds . Males will make long calls , both to attract females and advertise themselves to other males . Both sexes will try to intimidate conspecifics with a series of low guttural noises known collectively as the " rolling call " . When annoyed , an orangutan will suck in air through pursed lips , making a kissing sound that is hence known as the " kiss squeak " . Infants make soft hoots when distressed . Orangutans are also known to blow raspberries . 
 = = = Nesting = = = 
 Orangutans build nests specialized for both day or night use . These are carefully constructed ; young orangutans learn from observing their mother 's nest @-@ building behaviour . In fact , nest @-@ building is a leading cause in young orangutans leaving their mother for the first time . From six months of age onwards , orangutans practice nest @-@ building and gain proficiency by the time they are three years old . 
 Construction of a night nest is done by following a sequence of steps . Initially , a suitable tree is located , orangutans being selective about sites though many tree species are used . The nest is then built by pulling together branches under them and joining them at a point . After the foundation has been built , the orangutan bends smaller , leafy branches onto the foundation ; this serves the purpose of and is termed the " mattress " . After this , orangutans stand and braid the tips of branches into the mattress . Doing this increases the stability of the nest and forms the final act of nest @-@ building . In addition , orangutans may add additional features , such as " pillows " , " blankets " , " roofs " and " bunk @-@ beds " to their nests . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 Males mature at around 15 years of age , by which time they have fully descended testicles and can reproduce . However , they exhibit arrested development by not developing the distinctive cheek pads , pronounced throat pouches , long fur , or long @-@ calls until they are between 15 and 20 years old . The development of these characteristics depends largely on the absence of a resident male . 
 Males without them are known as unflanged males in contrast to the more developed flanged males . The transformation from unflanged to flanged can occur very quickly . <unk> and flanged males have two different mating strategies . <unk> males attract oestrous females with their characteristic long calls . Those calls may also suppress development in younger males . <unk> males wander widely in search of oestrous females and upon finding one , will force copulation on her . While both strategies are successful , females prefer to mate with flanged males and seek their company for protection against unflanged males . Resident males may form <unk> with females that can last days , weeks or months after copulation . 
 Female orangutans experience their first ovulatory cycle around 5 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 1 years . These occur earlier in females with more body fat . Like other great apes , female orangutans enter a period of infertility during adolescence which may last for 1 – 4 years . Female orangutans also have a 22 – to 30 @-@ day menstrual cycle . Gestation lasts for 9 months , with females giving birth to their first offspring between the ages of 14 and 15 years . 
 Female orangutans have eight @-@ year intervals between births , the longest interbirth intervals among the great apes . Unlike many other primates , male orangutans do not seem to practice infanticide . This may be because they cannot ensure they will sire a female 's next offspring because she does not immediately begin ovulating again after her infant dies . 
 Male orangutans play almost no role in raising the young . Females do most of the caring and socializing of the young . A female often has an older offspring with her to help in socializing the infant . Infant orangutans are completely dependent on their mothers for the first two years of their lives . The mother will carry the infant during travelling , as well as feed it and sleep with it in the same night nest . For the first four months , the infant is carried on its belly and never relieves physical contact . In the following months , the time an infant spends with its mother decreases . 
 When an orangutan reaches the age of two , its climbing skills improve and it will travel through the canopy holding hands with other orangutans , a behaviour known as " buddy travel " . Orangutans are juveniles from about two to five years of age and will start to temporarily move away from their mothers . Juveniles are usually weaned at about four years of age . Adolescent orangutans will socialize with their peers while still having contact with their mothers . Typically , orangutans live over 30 years in both the wild and captivity . 
 = = Intelligence = = 
 Orangutans are among the most intelligent primates . Experiments suggest they can figure out some invisible displacement problems with a representational strategy . In addition , Zoo Atlanta has a touch @-@ screen computer where their two Sumatran orangutans play games . Scientists hope the data they collect will help researchers learn about socialising patterns , such as whether the apes learn behaviours through trial and error or by mimicry , and point to new conservation strategies . 
 A 2008 study of two orangutans at the Leipzig Zoo showed orangutans can use " calculated reciprocity " , which involves weighing the costs and benefits of gift exchanges and keeping track of these over time . Orangutans are the first nonhuman species documented to do so . Orangutans are very technically adept nest builders , making a new nest each evening in only in 5 to 6 minutes and choosing branches which they know can support their body weight . 
 = = = Tool use and culture = = = 
 Tool use in orangutans was observed by primatologist Birutė Galdikas in ex @-@ captive populations . In addition , evidence of sophisticated tool manufacture and use in the wild was reported from a population of orangutans in Suaq Balimbing ( Pongo abelii ) in 1996 . These orangutans developed a tool kit for use in foraging that consisted of both insect @-@ extraction tools for use in the hollows of trees and seed @-@ extraction tools for harvesting seeds from hard @-@ husked fruit . The orangutans adjusted their tools according to the nature of the task at hand , and preference was given to oral tool use . This preference was also found in an experimental study of captive orangutans ( P. pygmaeus ) . 
 <unk> Carel P. van <unk> and biological anthropologist Cheryl D. Knott further investigated tool use in different wild orangutan populations . They compared geographic variations in tool use related to the processing of <unk> fruit . The orangutans of Suaq Balimbing ( P. abelii ) were found to be avid users of insect and seed @-@ extraction tools when compared to other wild orangutans . The scientists suggested these differences are cultural . The orangutans at Suaq Balimbing live in dense groups and are socially tolerant ; this creates good conditions for social transmission . Further evidence that highly social orangutans are more likely to exhibit cultural behaviours came from a study of leaf @-@ carrying behaviours of ex @-@ captive orangutans that were being rehabilitated on the island of Kaja in Borneo . 
 Wild orangutans ( P. pygmaeus wurmbii ) in <unk> , Borneo , were reported to use tools in acoustic communication . They use leaves to amplify the kiss squeak sounds they produce . The apes may employ this method of amplification to deceive the listener into believing they are larger animals . 
 In 2003 , researchers from six different orangutan field sites who used the same behavioural coding scheme compared the behaviours of the animals from the different sites . They found the different orangutan populations behaved differently . The evidence suggested the differences were cultural : first , the extent of the differences increased with distance , suggesting cultural diffusion was occurring , and second , the size of the orangutans ' cultural repertoire increased according to the amount of social contact present within the group . Social contact facilitates cultural transmission . 
 = = = Possible linguistic capabilities = = = 
 A study of orangutan symbolic capability was conducted from 1973 to 1975 by zoologist Gary L. Shapiro with <unk> , a juvenile female orangutan at the Fresno City Zoo ( now Chaffee Zoo ) in Fresno , California . The study employed the techniques of psychologist David <unk> , who used plastic tokens to teach linguistic skills to the chimpanzee , Sarah . Shapiro continued to examine the linguistic and learning abilities of ex @-@ captive orangutans in Tanjung <unk> National Park , in Indonesian Borneo , between 1978 and 1980 . 
 During that time , Shapiro instructed ex @-@ captive orangutans in the acquisition and use of signs following the techniques of psychologists R. Allen Gardner and Beatrix Gardner , who taught the chimpanzee , Washoe , in the late 1960s . In the only signing study ever conducted in a great ape 's natural environment , Shapiro home @-@ reared Princess , a juvenile female , which learned nearly 40 signs ( according to the criteria of sign acquisition used by psychologist Francine Patterson with Koko , the gorilla ) and trained <unk> , a free @-@ ranging adult female orangutan , which learned nearly 30 signs over a two @-@ year period . For his dissertation study , Shapiro examined the factors influencing sign learning by four juvenile orangutans over a 15 @-@ month period . 
 = = Orangutans and humans = = 
 Orangutans were known to the native people of Sumatra and Borneo for millennia . While some communities hunted them for food and decoration , others placed taboos on such practices . In central Borneo , some traditional folk beliefs consider it bad luck to look in the face of an orangutan . Some folk tales involve orangutans mating with and kidnapping humans . There are even stories of hunters being seduced by female orangutans . 
 Europeans became aware of the existence of the orangutan possibly as early as the 17th century . European explorers in Borneo hunted them extensively during the 19th century . The first accurate description of orangutans was given by Dutch anatomist Petrus Camper , who observed the animals and dissected some specimens . 
 Little was known about their behaviour until the field studies of Birutė Galdikas , who became a leading authority on the apes . When she arrived in Borneo , Galdikas settled into a primitive bark and thatch hut , at a site she dubbed Camp Leakey , near the edge of the Java Sea . Despite numerous hardships , she remained there for over 30 years and became an outspoken advocate for orangutans and the preservation of their rainforest habitat , which is rapidly being devastated by loggers , palm oil plantations , gold miners , and unnatural forest fires . 
 Galdikas 's conservation efforts have extended well beyond advocacy , largely focusing on rehabilitation of the many orphaned orangutans turned over to her for care . Galdikas is considered to be one of Leakey 's Angels , along with Jane Goodall and Dian Fossey . According to the World Wildlife Fund , half of the habitat of the Bornean orangutan has been lost since 1994 . 
 A persistent folktale on Sumatra and Borneo and in popular culture , is that male orangutans display sexual attraction to human women , and may even forcibly copulate with them . The only serious , but anecdotal , report of such an incident taking place , is primatologist Birutė Galdikas ' report that her cook was sexually assaulted by a male orangutan . This orangutan , though , was raised in captivity and may have suffered from a skewed species identity , and forced copulation is a standard mating strategy for low @-@ ranking male orangutans . 
 A female orangutan was rescued from a village brothel in <unk> <unk> village , Central Kalimantan , in 2003 . The orangutan was shaved and chained for sexual purposes . Since being freed , the orangutan , named Pony , has been living with the Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation . She has been re @-@ socialised to live with other orang @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 In December 2014 , Argentina became the first country to recognize a non @-@ human primate as having legal rights when it ruled that an orangutan named Sandra at the Buenos Aires Zoo must be moved to a sanctuary in Brazil in order to provide her " partial or controlled freedom " . Although animal rights groups interpreted the ruling as applicable to all species in captivity , legal specialists considered the ruling only applicable to hominid apes due to their genetic similarities to humans . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 The Sumatran species is critically endangered and the Bornean species is endangered according to the IUCN Red List of mammals , and both are listed on Appendix I of CITES . The Bornean orangutan population declined by 50 % in the past 60 years . Its range has become patchy throughout Borneo , being largely extirpated from various parts of the island , including the southeast . The largest remaining population is found in the forest around the <unk> River , but this environment is at risk . 
 Sumatran orangutan populations declined by 80 % in 75 years . This species is now found only in the northern part of Sumatra , with most of the population inhabiting the Leuser Ecosystem . In late March 2012 , some of the last Sumatran orangutans in northern Sumatra were reported to be threatened with approaching forest fires and might be wiped out entirely within a matter of weeks . 
 Estimates between 2000 and 2003 found 7 @,@ 300 Sumatran orangutans and between 45 @,@ 000 and 69 @,@ 000 Bornean orangutans remain in the wild . A 2007 study by the Government of Indonesia noted a total wild population of 61 @,@ 234 orangutans , 54 @,@ 567 of which were found on the island of Borneo in 2004 . The table below shows a breakdown of the species and subspecies and their estimated populations from the report : 
 During the early 2000s , orangutan habitat has decreased rapidly due to logging and forest fires , as well as fragmentation by roads . A major factor in that period of time has been the conversion of vast areas of tropical forest to palm oil plantations in response to international demand . Palm oil is used for cooking , cosmetics , mechanics , and biodiesel . Hunting is also a major problem as is the illegal pet trade . 
 Orangutans may be killed for the bushmeat trade , crop protection , or for use for traditional medicine . Orangutan bones are secretly traded in souvenir shops in several cities in Kalimantan , Indonesia . Mother orangutans are killed so their infants can be sold as pets , and many of these infants die without the help of their mother . Since 2004 , several pet orangutans were confiscated by local authorities and sent to rehabilitation centres . 
 = = = Conservation centres and organisations = = = 
 A number of organisations are working for the rescue , rehabilitation and reintroduction of orangutans . The largest of these is the Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation , founded by conservationist Willie Smits . It is audited by a multinational auditor company and operates a number of large projects , such as the <unk> Menteng Rehabilitation Program founded by conservationist Lone <unk> Nielsen . 
 Other major conservation centres in Indonesia include those at Tanjung <unk> National Park and <unk> National Park in Central Kalimantan , Kutai in East Kalimantan , Gunung <unk> National Park in West Kalimantan , and Bukit <unk> in the Gunung Leuser National Park on the border of Aceh and North Sumatra . In Malaysia , conservation areas include Semenggoh Wildlife Centre in Sarawak and Matang Wildlife Centre also in Sarawak , and the Sepilok Orang Utan Sanctuary near Sandakan in Sabah . Major conservation centres that are headquartered outside of the orangutan 's home countries ; include Frankfurt Zoological Society , Orangutan Foundation International , which was founded by Birutė Galdikas , and the Australian Orangutan Project . 
 Conservation organisations such as Orangutan Land Trust work with the palm oil industry to improve sustainability and encourages the industry to establish conservation areas for orangutans . It works to bring different stakeholders together to achieve conservation of the species and its habitat . 
 = 1857 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1857 Atlantic hurricane season was the earliest season documented by HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – to feature no major hurricane . A total of four tropical cyclones were observed during the season , three of which strengthened into hurricanes . However , in the absence of modern satellite and other remote @-@ sensing technologies , only storms that affected populated land areas or encountered ships at sea are known , so the actual total could be higher . An undercount bias of zero to six tropical cyclones per year between 1851 and 1885 has been estimated . Additionally , documentation by Jose Fernandez @-@ Partagas and Henry Diaz included a fifth tropical cyclone near Port Isabel , Texas ; this storm has since been removed from HURDAT as it was likely the same system as the fourth tropical cyclone . 
 The first storm was tracked beginning on June 30 offshore North Carolina . It moved eastward and was last noted on the following day . However , no tropical cyclones were reported in the remainder of July or August . Activity resume when another tropical storm was located southeast of the Bahamas on September 6 . It intensified into a hurricane before making landfall in North Carolina and was last noted over the north Atlantic Ocean on September 17 . The SS Central America sank offshore , drowning 424 passengers and crew members . Another hurricane may have existed east of South Carolina between September 22 and October 26 , though little information is available . The final documented tropical cyclone was initially observed east of Lesser Antilles on September 24 . It traversed the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico , striking the Yucatán Peninsula and later Port Isabel , Texas . The storm dissipated on September 30 . In Texas , damage was reported in several towns near the mouth of the Rio Grande River . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 43 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The ship Star of the South experienced heavy gales offshore the East Coast of the United States on June 30 . HURDAT lists the first tropical cyclone of the season beginning at 0000 UTC , while located about 100 miles ( 160 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The storm moved slightly north of due east with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . It was last noted about 265 miles ( 425 km ) north @-@ northwest of Bermuda by the bark Virginia late on July 1 . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed east of the Bahamas on September 6 . It moved slowly northwestward towards the coast of the United States and attained hurricane strength early on September 9 . The cyclone continued travelling northwest along the US coast , becoming a Category 2 hurricane whilst off the coast of Georgia on September 11 . On September 13 the cyclone made landfall near Wilmington , North Carolina , but then quickly weakened to a tropical storm and turned eastward into the Atlantic on September 14 . Throughout September 15 , whilst over water , the storm regained hurricane strength and continued northward before becoming extratropical in the mid @-@ Atlantic on September 17 . 
 The hurricane caused much coastal damage particularly in the Cape Hatteras area during September 9 and September 10 and then to other parts of the North Carolina coast . Flooding was reported at New Bern . Considerable wind damage also occurred . An article from the Wilmington Journal reported that , " It looked as though everything that could be blown down , was down . Fences were prostrated in all directions , and the streets filled with the limbs and bodies of trees up @-@ rooted or twisted off . " . Several ships were caught in rough seas of the East Coast of the United States . The Norfolk was abandoned in pieces ten miles south of Chincoteague early on the morning of September 14 . Further south , on September 11 , the hurricane struck the steamer Central America which sprung a leak and eventually sunk on the night of September 12 with the loss of 424 passengers and crew . Also on board the ship were 30 @,@ 000 pounds of gold , the loss of which contributed to the financial Panic of 1857 . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 Based on reports bark Aeronaut and the schooner Alabama indicating a severe gale , Partagas and Diaz identified a Category 1 hurricane about 405 miles ( 650 km ) east of Charleston , South Carolina between September 22 and September 26 . Sustained wind speeds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) were observed . No evidence was found for a storm track so the hurricane was assigned a stationary position , at latitude 32 @.@ 5 ° N , 3 @.@ 5 ° W. Among the ships which encountered the hurricane was the brig Jerome Knight , which sprung a leak and sunk on the night of September 22 . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The final tropical cyclone was first observed at 0000 UTC on September 24 , while located about 420 miles ( 680 km ) east of Guadeloupe . Initially a tropical storm , it strengthened slightly before crossing the Leeward Islands on September 25 . In Guadeloupe , several ships at the port in Basseterre were swept out to sea . Continuing eastward , the storm soon entered the Caribbean Sea . Early on September 26 , the system strengthened into a hurricane . By September 28 , it was west of the Cayman Islands and had reached Category 2 strength . The storm weakened to a tropical storm after passing Cancun early on September 29 and impacted the Gulf coastline , near the United States – Mexico border , at that strength the next day before dissipating . At Port Isabel , Texas , several hundred homes were swept away , and several towns near the mouth of the Rio Grande also sustained damage . 
 = Bolliger & Mabillard = 
 Bolliger & Mabillard , abbreviated B & M and formally known as Bolliger & Mabillard Consulting Engineers Inc . , is a roller coaster design consultancy based in <unk> , Switzerland . The company was founded in 1988 by Walter Bolliger and Claude Mabillard , with Bolliger as president and Mabillard as vice @-@ president . Since 1988 , B & M has built 100 roller coasters around the world and have pioneered several new ride technologies , most notably the inverted roller coaster . Since 1990 , all coasters designed by B & M that have been built within North America have been manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators which is located in Batavia , Ohio , United States . B & M started with four employees and has since grown ; as of 2012 it employs 37 people , mostly engineers and draftsmen . In 2016 the company completed its 100th coaster . 
 = = History = = 
 Walter Bolliger and Claude Mabillard starting working for Giovanola , a manufacturing company who supplied rides to Intamin , in the 1970s . During their time at Giovanola , they helped design the company 's first stand @-@ up roller coaster , Shockwave at Six Flags Magic Mountain . They also worked on other projects , such as Z @-@ Force at Six Flags Great America . Bolliger & Mabillard left Giovanola , but the company continued to use their track design , so the company 's roller coasters , Goliath at Six Flags Magic Mountain and Titan at Six Flags Over Texas , use a track style very similar to B & M 's . 
 In 1987 , Giovanola underwent a change of management ; Bolliger & Mabillard decided to leave , and founded their own company . At the time , B & M employed four people ; two draftsmen , Bolliger , and Mabillard . When B & M was created , the pair had agreed not to make any more amusement attractions . However , Six Flags contacted the new company and asked it to build a roller coaster . B & M accepted the offer and hired two more draftsmen . But B & M had a problem regarding how and where to manufacture the track pieces for the roller coaster . With the impression of the work done by Clermont Steel Fabricators on Vortex at Kings Island and Shockwave Six Flags Great America , Walter Bolliger went to the steel plant and asked if they would be interested in manufacturing the track . Clermont Steel Fabricators accepted and currently manufactures all Bolliger and Mabillard roller coaster track pieces for all of North America . Now with a company to manufacture the track , B & M built its first roller coaster , a stand @-@ up roller coaster , Iron Wolf , which opened in 1990 at Six Flags Great America . Two years later , Bolliger & Mabillard built another project for Six Flags Great America , Batman : The Ride , the world 's first Inverted Coaster , which brought them to prominence in the industry . 
 Bolliger & Mabillard also invented the Floorless Coaster , and the Dive Coaster . The company also built its first launched roller coaster , the The Incredible Hulk , which is at Universal 's Islands of Adventure . Although The Incredible Hulk uses a launch system , B & M classifies it as a " Sitting Coaster " . In 2010 , B & M unveiled its new Wing Coaster and premiered the prototype model , named Raptor , at Gardaland in 2011 . It has two seats on each side on the car that hang riders over the sides of the track . There are currently only five in operation . In 2015 , B & M constructed Thunderbird at Holiday World & <unk> ' Safari , its first in @-@ house launched coaster . 
 By 2010 , B & M employed twelve engineers , twelve draftsman , and two <unk> . The company has made other contributions to the roller coaster industry . The company built the trains for the <unk> , a now @-@ demolished wooden roller coaster at Six Flags Magic Mountain . The trains were later used on the park 's Colossus wooden roller coaster ( until it was refurbished by Rocky Mountain Construction ) , but were only used during October each year . The trains faced backward and usually raced against trains on the second track , which ran forward . In 2013 , B & M supplied new trains for Steel Dragon 2000 , built by D. H. Morgan Manufacturing in 2000 . As of 2012 , Bolliger & Mabillard has 85 operating roller coasters worldwide , twenty @-@ two of which are listed among the Amusement Today Golden Ticket Awards Top 50 Steel Coasters List for 2012 , and five are in the top 10 . The company has built more roller coasters than any other manufacturer on the list . 
 = = Features = = 
 Bolliger & Mabillard currently manufactures nine different roller coaster styles : Stand @-@ Up Coaster , Inverted Coaster , Floorless Coaster , Flying Coaster , Hyper Coaster , Dive Coaster , Sitting Coaster , Wing Coaster and Family Coaster . Bolliger & Mabillard has been involved in developing new technologies and concepts in roller coasters almost since its inception . It has often worked with engineer Werner Stengel , and with designers and management of client theme parks . 
 = = = Lift hills = = = 
 Many Bolliger & Mabillard coasters feature an element known as a " pre @-@ drop " , a short drop after the top of the lift hill and before the start of the first drop , designed to reduce tension on the lift chain . The flat section between the pre @-@ drop and the first drop serves as a shelf to support the weight of the train , reducing related stresses on the chain . On most coasters without a pre @-@ drop , the weight of the train tends to pull on the lift chain as it begins its descent because the latter half of the train is still being lifted by the chain . Pre @-@ drops have not been used on the company 's Dive or Flying coasters , or on hyper coasters built after 1999 . More recently , the pre @-@ drop is only used on coasters with curved drops , whereas coasters with straight drops – such as Hydra the Revenge at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom and Goliath at Six Flags Over Georgia – do not have pre @-@ drops . <unk> at Parc <unk> was the first B & M inverted roller coaster that does not feature a pre @-@ drop . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Most of Bolliger & Mabillard 's roller coaster trains use four @-@ abreast seating . Each car has one row of four seats , while the train length can vary between coasters . All of the company 's coaster models , except the Dive Coaster and Wing Coaster use this configuration . The Dive Coaster uses six , eight or ten @-@ abreast seating , with two or three rows of seats . For example , Griffon at Busch Gardens Williamsburg , uses ten seats in three rows , while Krake at Heide Park uses six @-@ across seating in three rows . On recent hyper coaster projects , B & M has used a new car design that has two rows of two seats ; the two seats in the rear of the car pushed out from the centerline so that the four seats resemble a V formation . This formation has only been used on Behemoth at Canada 's Wonderland , Diamondback at Kings Island , Intimidator at Carowinds and Shambhala : Expedición al Himalaya at PortAventura . In 2013 , B & M introduced a new car design that has two rows of two seats , however , they are not in a V formation . 
 All B & M hyper coasters use a type of restraint called a " T @-@ bar " restraint , which consists of bar with a cushioned lap bar with two handles for riders to hold on to . This type of restraint generally does not use a seat belt , however seat belts have been added to Behemoth at Canada 's Wonderland , Diamondback at Kings Island , and Intimidator at Carowinds , all of which have the stadium style seating . Bolliger & Mabillard also uses over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints , in that the restraint is placed over the riders ' shoulders and sits and extends to the riders ' laps . This type of restraint is used on Dive , Inverted , Sitting , Flying , Floorless , Stand @-@ up , and Wing Coasters . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 A notable feature of Bolliger & Mabillard roller coasters is the box @-@ section track . The running rails are connected to a box @-@ section spine , instead of the circular spine used by other manufacturers . When a train travels around a box @-@ section track , it creates a distinctive roaring sound , which is unique to this style of track . However , on some Bolliger & Mabillard roller coasters , such as Talon at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom , the track is filled with sand to reduce this noise . 
 Also , depending on the model of the roller coaster , the track size can vary . Models such as the Flying , Wing , and Dive Coaster have heavier trains which require a larger track size while models with lighter trains , such as the Stand @-@ Up and Hyper Coaster , do not and use a smaller sized track . 
 = = = Brakes = = = 
 As of 2016 , Bolliger & Mabillard uses three types of braking system ; friction , magnetic , and water . 
 = = = = Friction brakes = = = = 
 When B & M was first founded , the linear magnetic eddy brake had yet to be developed , so it used friction brakes as its main braking system . On the train , pads are fitted beneath the seating areas . On the brakes , similar pads are connected to steel supports . When the pads on the train come into contact with the brakes , friction is created which slows the train . Beginning with Kumba in 1993 , friction brakes have also been used as trim brakes that regulate the speed of the train while it is still navigating the course . 
 = = = = Magnetic brakes = = = = 
 Magnetic brakes were first used on Nitro at Six Flags Great Adventure in 2001 . Magnetic brakes slow down trains much faster than friction brakes ; most B & M roller coaster built in or after 2001 have at least one set of magnetic brakes . Magnetic brakes do not make contact with the train . Fins that run parallel to the train are fitted beneath the seats . As the fins pass through the brakes , the magnetic field created by the brakes slows the train . Magnetic brakes have also been used as an alternate type of trim brake on B & M roller coasters such as Leviathan at Canada 's Wonderland . 
 = = = = Water brakes = = = = 
 Water brakes were first introduced on SheiKra at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay in 2005 . Water brakes can only be used when a splashdown element , in which a body of water surrounds a section of track , is present within the layout of the roller coaster . When scoops on the last car of each train come in contact with the surrounding water , the train slows down and the water is sprayed several feet into the air behind it . 
 = = List of roller coasters = = 
 Bolliger & Mabillard has built over 100 roller coasters as of 2015 . All are still in operation , except the original Incredible Hulk which was dismantled in 2015 and completely replaced in 2016 . Some have been relocated and renamed . 
 = Stephen Breyer = 
 Stephen Gerald Breyer ( / <unk> / ; born August 15 , 1938 ) is an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . Appointed by President Bill Clinton in 1994 , and known for his pragmatic approach to constitutional law , Breyer is generally associated with the more liberal side of the Court . 
 Following a clerkship with Supreme Court Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg in 1964 , Breyer became well known as a law professor and lecturer at Harvard Law School , starting in 1967 . There he specialized in administrative law , writing a number of influential textbooks that remain in use today . He held other prominent positions before being nominated for the Supreme Court , including special assistant to the United States Assistant Attorney General for Antitrust , assistant special prosecutor on the Watergate Special Prosecution Force in 1973 , and serving on the First Circuit Court of Appeals from 1980 to 1994 . 
 In his 2005 book Active Liberty , Breyer made his first attempt to systematically lay out his views on legal theory , arguing that the judiciary should seek to resolve issues in a manner that encourages popular participation in governmental decisions . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Breyer was born in San Francisco , California , the son of Anne A. ( née Roberts ) and Irving Gerald Breyer , and raised in a middle @-@ class Jewish family . Irving Breyer was legal counsel for the San Francisco Board of Education . Both Breyer and his younger brother , Charles , who is a federal district judge , are Eagle Scouts of San Francisco 's Troop 14 . Breyer 's paternal great @-@ grandfather emigrated from Romania to the United States , settling in Cleveland , where Breyer 's grandfather was born . In 1955 , Breyer graduated from Lowell High School . At Lowell , he was a member of the Lowell Forensic Society and debated regularly in high school tournaments , including against future California governor Jerry Brown and future Harvard Law School professor Laurence Tribe . 
 Breyer received a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy from Stanford University , a Bachelor of Arts from Magdalen College at Oxford University as a Marshall Scholar , and a Bachelor of Laws ( LL.B ) from Harvard Law School . He is also fluent in French . 
 In 1967 , he married the Hon. Joanna Freda Hare , a psychologist and member of the British aristocracy , as the youngest daughter of John Hare , 1st Viscount <unk> . The <unk> have three adult children : Chloe , an Episcopal priest and author of The Close ; Nell , and Michael . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 Breyer served as a law clerk to Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg during the 1964 term ( list ) , and served briefly as a fact @-@ checker for the Warren Commission . He was a special assistant to the United States Assistant Attorney General for Antitrust from 1965 to 1967 and an assistant special prosecutor on the Watergate Special Prosecution Force in 1973 . Breyer was a special counsel to the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary from 1974 to 1975 and served as chief counsel of the committee from 1979 to 1980 . He worked closely with the chairman of the committee , Senator Edward M. Kennedy , to pass the Airline Deregulation Act that closed the Civil Aeronautics Board . 
 Breyer was a lecturer , assistant professor , and law professor at Harvard Law School starting in 1967 . He taught there until 1994 , also serving as a professor at Harvard 's Kennedy School of Government from 1977 to 1980 . At Harvard , Breyer was known as a leading expert on administrative law . While there , he wrote two highly influential books on deregulation : Breaking the Vicious Circle : Toward Effective Risk Regulation and Regulation and Its Reform . In 1970 , Breyer wrote " The Uneasy Case for Copyright " , one of the most widely cited skeptical examinations of copyright . Breyer was a visiting professor at the College of Law in Sydney , Australia , the University of Rome , and the Tulane University Law School . 
 = = Judicial career = = 
 From 1980 to 1994 , Breyer was a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ; he was the court 's Chief Judge from 1990 to 1994 . In the last days of President Jimmy Carter 's administration , on November 13 , 1980 , Carter nominated Breyer to the First Circuit , and the U.S. Senate confirmed him on December 9 , 1980 , by an 80 – 10 vote . He served as a member of the Judicial Conference of the United States between 1990 and 1994 and the United States Sentencing Commission between 1985 and 1989 . On the sentencing commission , Breyer played a key role in reforming federal criminal sentencing procedures , producing the Federal Sentencing Guidelines , which were formulated to increase uniformity in sentencing . 
 In 1993 , President Bill Clinton considered him for the seat vacated by Byron White that ultimately went to Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg . Breyer 's appointment came shortly thereafter , however , following the retirement of Harry Blackmun in 1994 , when Clinton nominated Breyer as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court on May 13 of that year . Breyer was confirmed by the U.S. Senate in an 87 to 9 vote and took his seat August 3 , 1994 . Breyer was the second @-@ longest @-@ serving junior justice in the history of the Court , close to surpassing the record set by Justice Joseph Story of 4 @,@ 228 days ( from February 3 , 1812 , to September 1 , 1823 ) ; Breyer fell 29 days short of tying this record , which he would have reached on March 1 , 2006 , had Justice Samuel Alito not joined the Court on January 31 , 2006 . 
 = = Judicial philosophy = = 
 = = = In general = = = 
 Breyer 's pragmatic approach to the law " will tend to make the law more sensible " ; according to Cass Sunstein , Breyer 's " attack on originalism is powerful and convincing " . In 2006 , Breyer said that in assessing a law 's constitutionality , while some of his colleagues " emphasize language , a more literal reading of the [ Constitution 's ] text , history and tradition " , he looks more closely to the " purpose and consequences " . 
 Breyer has consistently voted in favor of abortion rights , one of the most controversial areas of the Supreme Court 's docket . He has also defended the Supreme Court 's use of foreign law and international law as persuasive ( but not binding ) authority in its decisions . However , Breyer is also recognized to be deferential to the interests of law enforcement and to legislative judgments in the Supreme Court 's First Amendment rulings . Breyer has also demonstrated a consistent pattern of deference to Congress , voting to overturn congressional legislation at a lower rate than any other Supreme Court justice since 1994 . 
 Breyer 's extensive experience in administrative law is accompanied by his staunch defense of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines . Breyer rejects the strict interpretation of the Sixth Amendment espoused by Justice Scalia that all facts necessary to criminal punishment must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt . In many other areas on the Court , too , Breyer 's pragmatism is considered the intellectual counterweight to Scalia 's textualist philosophy . 
 In describing his interpretive philosophy , Breyer has sometimes noted his use of six interpretive tools : text , history , tradition , precedent , the purpose of a statute , and the consequences of competing interpretations . Breyer notes that only the last two differentiate him from textualists on the Supreme Court such as Scalia . Breyer argues that these sources are necessary , however , and in the former case ( purpose ) , can in fact provide greater objectivity in legal interpretation than looking merely at what is often ambiguous statutory text . With the latter ( consequences ) , Breyer argues that considering the impact of legal interpretations is a further way of ensuring consistency with a law 's intended purpose . 
 = = = Active Liberty = = = 
 Breyer expounded on his judicial philosophy in 2005 in Active Liberty : Interpreting Our Democratic Constitution . In it , Breyer urges judges to interpret legal provisions ( of the Constitution or of statutes ) in light of the purpose of the text and how well the consequences of specific rulings will fit those purposes . The book is considered a response to the 1997 book A Matter of Interpretation , in which Antonin Scalia emphasized adherence to the original meaning of the text alone . 
 In Active Liberty , Breyer argues that the Framers of the Constitution sought to establish a democratic government involving the maximum liberty for its citizens . Breyer refers to Isaiah Berlin ’ s Two Concepts of Liberty . The first <unk> concept , being what most people understand by liberty , is " freedom from government coercion " . Berlin termed this " negative liberty " and warned against its diminution ; Breyer calls this " modern liberty " . The second <unk> concept – " positive liberty " – is the " freedom to participate in the government " . In Breyer 's terminology , this is the " active liberty " which the judge should champion . Having established what " active liberty " is , and positing the primary importance ( to the Framers ) of this concept over the competing idea of " negative liberty " , Breyer argues a predominantly utilitarian case for judges making rulings that give effect to the democratic intentions of the Constitution . 
 Both of the books ' historical premises and practical prescriptions have been challenged . For example , according to Peter Berkowitz , the reason that " [ t ] he primarily democratic nature of the Constitution 's governmental structure has not always seemed obvious " , as Breyer puts it , is " because it 's not true , at least in Breyer 's sense that the Constitution elevates active liberty above modern [ negative ] liberty " . Breyer 's position " demonstrates not fidelity to the Constitution " , Berkowitz argues , " but rather a determination to rewrite the Constitution 's priorities " . Berkowitz suggests that Breyer is also inconsistent , in failing to apply this standard to the issue of abortion , instead preferring decisions " that protect women 's modern liberty , which remove controversial issues from democratic discourse " . Failing to answer the textualist charge that the Living <unk> Judge is a law unto himself , Berkowitz argues that Active Liberty " suggests that when necessary , instead of choosing the consequence that serves what he regards as the Constitution ’ s leading purpose , Breyer will determine the Constitution ’ s leading purpose on the basis of the consequence that he prefers to vindicate " . 
 Against the last charge , Cass Sunstein has defended Breyer , noting that of the nine justices on the late Rehnquist Court , Breyer showed the highest percentage of votes to uphold acts of Congress and also to defer to the decision of the executive branch . However , according to Jeffrey Toobin in The New Yorker , " Breyer concedes that a judicial approach based on ' active liberty ' will not yield solutions to every constitutional debate , " and that , in Breyer 's words , " Respecting the democratic process does not mean you abdicate your role of enforcing the limits in the Constitution , whether in the Bill of Rights or in separation of powers . " 
 To his point , and from a discussion at the New York Historical Society in March 2006 , Breyer has noted that " democratic means " did not bring about an end to slavery , or the concept of " one man , one vote " , which allowed corrupt and discriminatory ( but democratically @-@ inspired ) state laws to be overturned in favor of civil rights . 
 = = = Other books = = = 
 In 2010 , Breyer released a second book , Making Our Democracy Work : A Judge 's View ( ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> ) . 
 In 2015 , Breyer released a third book , The Court and the World : American Law and the New Global Realities , examining the interplay between US and international law and how the realities of a globalized world need to be considered in US cases . 
 = = = Other views = = = 
 In an interview on Fox News Sunday on December 12 , 2010 , Breyer stated that based on the values and the historical record , the Founding Fathers of the United States never intended guns to go unregulated and that history supports his and the other dissenters ' views in District of Columbia v. Heller . He summarized : 
 We 're acting as judges . If we 're going to decide everything on the basis of history – by the way , what is the scope of the right to keep and bear arms ? Machine guns ? Torpedoes ? Handguns ? Are you a sportsman ? Do you like to shoot pistols at targets ? Well , get on the subway and go to Maryland . There is no problem , I don 't think , for anyone who really wants to have a gun . 
 In the wake of the controversy over Justice Samuel Alito 's reaction to President Barack Obama 's criticism of the Court 's Citizens United v. FEC ruling in his 2010 State of the Union Address , Breyer said he would continue to attend the address : 
 I think it 's very , very , very important – very important – for us to show up at that State of the Union , because people today are more and more visual . What [ people ] see in front of them at the State of the Union is that federal government . And I would like them to see the judges too , because federal judges are also a part of that government . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 In 2007 , Breyer was honored with the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award by the Boy Scouts of America . 
 = 1949 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1949 Atlantic hurricane season was the last season that tropical cyclones were not publicly named by the United States Weather Bureau . It officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The first storm , Hurricane One , developed north of the Lesser Antilles on August 21 . The final system , Tropical Storm Sixteen , dissipated in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on November 5 . It was a fairly active season , featuring 16 tropical storms and seven hurricanes . Two of these strengthened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Two . It caused up to $ 52 million ( 1949 USD ) and two deaths after making landfall in Florida as a Category 4 hurricane . Another storm inflicting severe impact was Hurricane Ten . Striking Texas as a Category 2 hurricane , this storm brought heavy rainfall , strong winds , and storm surge to the state , with damage reaching about $ 6 @.@ 7 million . In late September , Hurricane Nine caused 15 deaths and over $ 1 million in damage in Puerto Rico and Dominican Republic . The third tropical storm caused seven fatalities from drowning on Barbados . Several other systems brought minor impacts to land . Overall , storms during this season caused about $ 59 @.@ 8 million in damage and 26 fatalities . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1949 . However , tropical cyclogenesis did not begin until August 21 , over two months after the start of the season . Overall , there were 16 tropical storms , seven of which strengthened into hurricanes . Three of these intensified into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) . Four hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season , causing 26 deaths and $ 59 @.@ 8 million in damage . The last storm of the season , Tropical Storm Sixteen , dissipated on November 5 , about 10 days before the official end of the season on November 15 . 
 No activity was observed until the first system was located north of the Lesser Antilles on August 21 . The hurricane later threatened the Outer Banks of North Carolina , where it caused two deaths and about $ 50 @,@ 000 in damage . By August 23 , the Florida hurricane developed near the Lesser Antilles . It later peaked as a low @-@ end Category 4 hurricane on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale and struck South Florida at that intensity . The storm severely impacted the Florida peninsula and left two deaths and approximately $ 52 million in losses . On August 30 , the third system of the season struck the Leeward Islands , causing some impact and seven deaths by drowning on Barbados . A fourth system was first observed near Puerto Rico on September 3 . It peaked as a Category 3 hurricane while passing east on Bermuda . After becoming extratropical , the remnants of this storm struck Newfoundland . Tropical Storm Five also developed on September 3 , in the southern Gulf of Mexico and struck Louisiana on September 4 . It caused minor damage in Mississippi and Louisiana , totaling less than $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Neither the sixth or seventh tropical systems impacted land . The eighth hurricane was initially observed in the Gulf of Mexico on September 20 . It meandered erratically for several days , until eventually making landfall in Veracruz . The system produced above normal tides and locally heavy rains in Texas and Louisiana . Hurricane Nine was initially spotted near the Leeward Islands on September 20 . It struck Dominican Republic on September 22 , shortly before dissipating . The storm left over $ 1 million in damage and 15 deaths in Dominican Republican and Puerto Rico . On September 27 , the tenth hurricane developed in the Pacific Ocean offshore Guatemala . The system eventually reached the Gulf of Mexico and struck Texas as a Category 2 hurricane on October 4 . The adverse effects of this storm resulted in two deaths and $ 6 @.@ 7 million in damage . No impact was reported from the final three storms , the last of which dissipated on November 5 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 98 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed about a few hundred miles north of the Lesser Antilles on August 21 . The storm moved west @-@ northwestward and was upgraded to a hurricane 12 hours later , after various surface vessels reported winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It paralleled The Bahamas and turned northward on August 23 . Further intensification continued until August 24 , with the storm approaching major hurricane status . At 00 : 00 UTC it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . The eye of the cyclone later passed over the Diamond Shoals Lightship , which recorded a minimum central barometric pressure of 977 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) while located offshore of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The cyclone became extratropical on August 25 and dissipated near Iceland on August 30 . 
 In the Hatteras area , sustained winds reached 73 mph ( 117 km / h ) , while rainfall up to 4 in ( 100 mm ) was observed . Thousands of trees were destroyed in Buxton . Damage was estimated at $ 50 @,@ 000 , mostly in the Buxton area . Additionally , the storm was attributed to two fatalities . Later on August 24 , the storm curved east @-@ northeastward and began to slowly weaken . By 00 : 00 UTC on August 26 , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located well south of Newfoundland . It was known as Hurricane Harry in newspapers . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A tropical storm developed east of the northernmost Lesser Antilles on August 23 . It moved west @-@ northwestward and strengthened , becoming a hurricane on August 24 . Moving through the Bahamas , the storm rapidly strengthened over the warm sea surface temperatures of the Gulf Stream . It became a major hurricane on August 26 and then passed just north of Nassau . At 18 : 00 UTC on that day , it peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) . Five hours later , the storm made landfall in Lake Worth , Florida , at the same intensity . On August 27 , the hurricane weakened quickly after moving inland over Lake Okeechobee , but otherwise maintained hurricane intensity as it curved northward into southern Georgia . At 00 : 00 UTC on August 28 , it degenerated into a tropical storm . It later ejected northeastward and tracked rapidly across the Southeastern United States , Mid @-@ Atlantic , and New England . On August 29 , the storm became extratropical over New Hampshire . 
 In Florida , the storm produced strong winds , with highest official observations being sustained winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) at the Palm Beach International Airport and gusts of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) in Palm Beach . The most severe damage in South Florida occurred in Palm Beach , Jupiter , and Stuart ; hundreds of homes , apartment buildings , stores , and warehouse buildings lost roofs and windows . Interior furnishings were blown through broken glass into the streets . Approximately 90 % of homes and buildings were damaged in Stuart , leaving about 500 people homeless . Additionally , heavy rainfall caused water to enter numerous homes in Martin and Palm Beach Counties . Significant damage to crops also occurred , particularly to citrus . In Florida alone , the hurricane caused two deaths and at least $ 52 million in damage , $ 20 million of which was to agriculture . Minor impact was reported in other states , with local flooding and light wind damage in Georgia , The Carolinas , and Maryland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 A tropical depression formed to the east of the Lesser Antilles on August 30 . It moved steadily west @-@ northwestward , passing over Barbados as a weak tropical storm . Seven people drowned on the island and 27 houses were destroyed in Bridgetown . After entering the Caribbean Sea on September 1 , hostile conditions weakened the storm , and the third tropical cyclone of the season degenerated into a tropical wave on September 3 to the south of the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical storm east of Puerto Rico on September 3 . It moved northward and strengthened to a hurricane later that day , but then weakened to a strong tropical storm the next day . At the same time , the system halted its forward motion and began to drift eastward . Early on September 5 , it re @-@ intensified into a hurricane , and it became a major hurricane on September 6 . The storm turned to the north on September 7 and passed about 65 mi ( 105 km ) east of Bermuda on September 8 . The hurricane weakened as it accelerated northeastward over cooler waters , and became extratropical on September 10 near Atlantic Canada . Shortly after becoming extratropical , it passed over Newfoundland , and ultimately dissipated on September 11 near southwestern Greenland . 
 The hurricane produced gale force winds on Bermuda , though overall , no damage was reported . In Newfoundland , the storm brought rainfall up to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) in many areas . The Bayfield was smashed into pieces along the rocky shores , though the all of the crewmen swam to safety . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 Early on September 3 , a tropical storm developed in the south @-@ central Gulf of Mexico . Throughout much of its duration , the storm headed north @-@ northwestward , gradually intensifying into a moderate tropical storm . At around 12 : 00 UTC on September 4 , the storm made landfall near Cocodrie , Louisiana , while at its peak intensity . While moving inland , it passed west of New Orleans and east of Vicksburg , Mississippi . The storm curved northeastward and slowly weakened across the Southern United States . Late on September 5 , it dissipated over Tennessee . Damage was minimal in Louisiana and Mississippi , likely amounting to less than $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 The sixth tropical storm of the season was first observed on September 5 , while located about half @-@ way between the northern Lesser Antilles and the Azores . The storm moved to the northwest and reached its peak intensity early on September 12 . It then became extratropical , turning to the northeast before curving southeastward . It dissipated on September 16 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 An extratropical system developed into a tropical storm offshore The Carolinas on September 11 . The storm moved west @-@ northwestward and strengthened slightly , peaking with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . It then weakened somewhat before making landfall near Wrightsville Beach , North Carolina on September 13 with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . The storm soon weakened to a tropical depression and curved northeastward . It dissipated over southeastern Virginia on September 14 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 A tropical storm developed early on September 13 , while located about 595 miles ( 960 km ) west of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . The storm slowly strengthened while moving north @-@ northeastward across the eastern Atlantic Ocean for much of its duration . Late on September 14 , the system attained its peak intensity . Thereafter , it began to weakened and fell to tropical depression intensity on September 17 . Later that day , the storm dissipated about 475 miles ( 765 km ) south of the central Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Nine = = = 
 A tropical wave entered the Gulf of Mexico on September 18 . It moved northwestward and developed into a tropical storm on September 20 , while offshore Louisiana . The storm continued northwestward , then turned to the southwest , and erratically looped to the south on September 22 . Steadily strengthening as it tracked south @-@ southwestward , the storm intensified into a hurricane on September 24 . After turning to the southwest , it reached its peak intensity on September 25 . The hurricane weakened as it turned to the south @-@ southeast then south and fell to tropical storm intensity shortly before making landfall between Veracruz and Nautla . The system dissipated by September 26 . Operationally , the storm was treated as two separate storms , due to reconnaissance aircraft being unable to report a center of circulation on September 23 . The storm produced 2 to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) higher than normal tides along the coast of Texas and Louisiana , while its outer rainbands produced locally heavy rainfall . 
 = = = Hurricane Ten = = = 
 A strong tropical wave approached the Lesser Antilles on September 20 . Reconnaissance aircraft reports indicated the system initially lacked a circulation . However , based on a ship report of westerly winds , it is estimated the system developed into a tropical storm late on September 20 , while located about 100 miles ( 160 km ) south @-@ southeast of Saint Croix . A small storm , it quickly strengthened as it traversed west @-@ northwestward , and became a hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC on September 21 . After reaching peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) the hurricane weakened , and it made landfall on September 22 on the southeastern Dominican Republic as a tropical storm . The storm rapidly dissipated after moving inland . 
 Strong winds resulted in heavy damage in Saint Croix . In Puerto Rico , where it was known as the San Mateo Hurricane , wind gusts from the hurricane peaked at 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) in Ramey . Gusty winds disrupted electrical and telephone services between Ponce and Mayagüez . In the latter , residents were evacuated inland to Red Cross shelters . The hurricane dropped heavy rainfall of up to 13 @.@ 56 in ( 344 mm ) in San Lorenzo , which caused flooding in several rivers in the northern portion of the island . Damage in Puerto Rico totaled to over $ 1 million , mainly to coffee crops and buildings . In the Dominican Republic , the hurricane killed 15 people , while damage amounted to $ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Hurricane Eleven = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the eastern Pacific Ocean just offshore Guatemala on September 27 . The depression drifted northwestward and made landfall in Guatemala on September 28 . It crossed southeastern Mexico and entered the Gulf of Mexico near Ciudad del Carmen on October 1 . Shortly after entering the Gulf of Mexico , the system strengthened into a tropical storm and became a hurricane on October 2 . It turned more to the north and intensified to a strong Category 2 hurricane on October 3 . Subsequently , the storm made landfall near Freeport , Texas , on October 4 at the same intensity . The hurricane rapidly weakened to a tropical storm as it turned northeastward over land . On October 6 , it weakened to a tropical depression over Missouri and later became extratropical . The storm accelerated northeastward and dissipated near Chicago . 
 The hurricane produced high tides along the Texas coast , peaking at 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) in Velasco . Galveston was temporarily cut off from the mainland when water surpassed the city 's seawall . Several streets were flooded in Galveston and the city pier was damaged . Another pier in Port Aransas was nearly destroyed . Freeport sustained the most damage , totaling about $ 150 @,@ 000 . The hurricane dropped heavy rainfall in Texas , peaking at 14 @.@ 5 inches ( 370 mm ) in Goodrich . A tornado was also spawned in Riceville , which injured two children . Damage totaled approximately $ 6 @.@ 7 million , primarily to crops . The hurricane also caused two deaths , one from electrocution in Port Neches and another due to drowning in Matagorda Bay . Outside of Texas , impact was mainly limited to minor damage to cars in five other states . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twelve = = = 
 Another tropical storm developed northeast of Puerto Rico on October 2 . The system initially moved northward , before curving to the east @-@ northeast on the following day . It slowly strengthened and later peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 007 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . By early on October 6 , the storm began to weaken and became extratropical the next day . Its remnants continued east @-@ northeastward for about 12 hours , before dissipating on October 7 . 
 = = = Hurricane Thirteen = = = 
 Beginning on October 11 , an area of disturbed weather moved through the western Caribbean Sea . Early on October 13 , a tropical depression made landfall in Guantánamo Province , Cuba . Continuing northeastward , the storm emerged into the Atlantic over the Bahamas . While located over the southeastern Bahamas , the system intensified into a tropical storm . Further intensification occurred and it became a hurricane on October 14 , after exiting the Bahamas . Late on the following day , the hurricane reached its peak intensity . Thereafter , the storm began to deteriorate , weakening to a tropical storm on October 17 . It became transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 19 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fourteen = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed about 865 miles ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda . The storm initially moved west @-@ northwestward , until re @-@ curving northwestward on October 14 . It strengthened slowly and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Thereafter , the storm began to weakened and fell to tropical depression intensity on October 17 . Several hours later , it dissipated while located about 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) south of Cape Race , Newfoundland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fifteen = = = 
 A tropical storm developed over the central Atlantic Ocean on November 1 . The system moved southwestward and then west @-@ southwestward , strengthening slowly during this time . On November 2 , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . The storm began to weaken while appearing to threaten the Lesser Antilles , but later curved northwestward . On November 4 , the system turned northward and weakened to a tropical depression . Early the next day , it became extratropical . The remnants continued northward before dissipating on November 6 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sixteen = = = 
 The final storm developed from a persistent low pressure area in the northwestern Caribbean Sea near Swan Island on November 3 . A reconnaissance aircraft reported a well @-@ defined eye feature as the storm reached its peak intensity . The storm drifted south @-@ southwestward and began weakening on November 4 . Later that day , it made landfall over northeastern Honduras as a tropical depression . Shortly after moving inland , the system dissipated . 
 = HMS Neptune ( 1874 ) = 
 HMS Neptune was an ironclad turret ship originally designed and built in Britain for Brazil , but acquired for the Royal Navy in 1878 . Modifications to suit the Royal Navy took three years to complete and the ship did not begin her first commission until 1883 with the Channel Fleet . She was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1885 , but refitted in Portsmouth in 1886 – 87 . Neptune then became the coastguard ship for the 1st Class Reserve at Holyhead until 1893 when she was placed in reserve in Portsmouth . While she was being towed to the breakers in 1903 , Neptune unintentionally rammed HMS Victory , then serving as a training hulk for the Naval Signal School , collided with HMS Hero , and narrowly missed several other ships . She was scrapped in Germany in 1904 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Neptune was designed by Sir Edward Reed for the Brazilian Navy in 1872 as a masted version of HMS Devastation , a larger , sea @-@ going version of the Cerberus @-@ class breastwork monitors , and was given the provisional name Independencia . Adding masts , however , meant adding a forecastle at the bow and a poop deck at the stern to provide the space required for the masts and rigging . These blocked the firing arcs of the gun turrets so that they were deprived of the axial fire which was the original design 's greatest virtue . The ship resembled , instead , an enlarged version of HMS Monarch . 
 During the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 78 tensions dramatically escalated between Russia and Great Britain as the latter feared that the victorious Russian armies would occupy the Turkish capital of Constantinople , something that the British were not prepared to tolerate . They mobilized much of the Royal Navy in case war did break out and purchased a number of ironclads under construction , including Independencia , in 1878 . The Brazilians sold the ship for £ 600 @,@ 000 , nearly twice as much as the £ 370 @,@ 000 paid for Devastation a few years earlier . Another £ 89 @,@ 172 was spent to bring her up to the standards of the Royal Navy . In British service she was deemed " a white elephant , being a thoroughly bad ship in most respects — unlucky , full of inherent faults and small vices , and at times a danger to her own consorts " . 
 Neptune was 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 4 m ) long between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 63 feet ( 19 @.@ 2 m ) and a draft of 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . The ship normally displaced 8 @,@ 964 long tons ( 9 @,@ 108 t ) and 9 @,@ 311 long tons ( 9 @,@ 460 t ) at deep load . 
 Neptune proved a poor <unk> as she was wet , difficult to manoeuvre and a heavy roller . She had a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) skylight over the wardroom , which as a result often flooded while the ship was at sea . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Neptune had one 2 @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine , made by John Penn and Sons , driving a single 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) propeller . Eight rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 32 psi ( 221 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . The engine had a total designed output of 8 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , but produced a total of 8 @,@ 832 ihp ( 6 @,@ 586 kW ) during sea trials in February 1878 which gave Neptune a maximum speed of 14 @.@ 65 knots ( 27 @.@ 13 km / h ; 16 @.@ 86 mph ) . The ship carried 670 long tons ( 680 t ) of coal , enough to steam 1 @,@ 480 nmi ( 2 @,@ 740 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) even though Sir George Tryon described her as " a weak ship in her engines and consuming a coal @-@ mine daily " . 
 Neptune was barque @-@ rigged , but her twin funnels were so close to the mainmast that the sails and rigging rapidly deteriorated in service . The mast was eventually stripped of sails and yards so that the ship only used the fore and mizzen masts ; an unsightly combination described as " like a half @-@ dressed harlot " . During her 1886 refit the ship 's masts and rigging were replaced by simple pole masts with fighting tops at the fore and mizzen positions only . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Brazilians had ordered four Whitworth 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) for the gun turrets and a pair of 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns as chase guns , but these were replaced in British service . HMS Neptune mounted a pair of 12 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 317 mm ) muzzle @-@ loading rifles in each turret and two 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns in the forecastle as chase guns . These guns only traverse 45 ° to the side . The ship also had six 20 @-@ pounder Armstrong guns for use as saluting guns . Two 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes were mounted on the main deck , one on each side , for Whitehead torpedoes . 
 The shell of the 16 @-@ calibre 12 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun weighed 809 pounds ( 367 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 38 long tons ( 39 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 575 ft / s ( 480 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 18 @.@ 4 inches ( 467 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 14 @-@ calibre 9 @-@ inch gun weighed 12 long tons ( 12 t ) and fired a 254 @-@ pound ( 115 @.@ 2 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . It was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 11 @.@ 3 @-@ inch ( 287 mm ) armour . The muzzle blast of the main guns was more than the deck immediately below the muzzles could stand and the full charge for the guns was reduced from 200 to 180 pounds ( 90 @.@ 7 to 81 @.@ 6 kg ) of powder to minimize the damage . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Neptune had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was 12 inches ( 305 mm ) thick amidships and thinned to 10 inches ( 254 mm ) and then to 9 inches ( 229 mm ) in steps at the ends of the ship . The armour extended 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) above the waterline and 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) below it . An armoured citadel 112 feet ( 34 @.@ 1 m ) long protected the bases of the gun turrets , the funnel uptakes and the ventilation shafts for the engines and boilers . The sides of the citadel were 10 inches thick and it was closed off by transverse bulkheads 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick . The chase guns at the bow were protected by a patch of 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) armour . 
 The faces of the turrets were 13 inches ( 330 mm ) thick while the sides were 11 inches ( 279 mm ) thick . They were backed by 13 – 15 inches ( 330 – 381 mm ) of teak . The armoured deck was 2 – 3 inches ( 51 – 76 mm ) outside the citadel and 2 inches thick inside it . Neptune was provided with an conning tower protected by 6 – 8 inches of armour situated right in front of the foremast . It could " be regarded as the first adequately installed conning position installed in a British " ironclad . 
 = = Service = = 
 HMS Neptune was laid down in 1873 for the Brazilian Navy under the name of Independencia by J & W Dudgeon in Cubitt Town , London . The shipyard attempted to launch her on 16 July 1874 , but she stuck fast and did not budge . A second attempt was made on 30 July during which the ship got about one @-@ third down the slipway and stuck , extensively damaging her bottom plating . She was finally launched on 10 September , after she had been lightened , and she was towed to Samuda Brothers for repairs and fitting out . The cost of the accident resulted in the bankruptcy of <unk> in 1875 . 
 Independencia ran her sea trials in December 1877 and purchased by the Royal Navy in March 1878 and renamed Neptune , after the Roman god of the sea . She was then taken to Portsmouth for alterations to her armament and other equipment that took until 3 September 1881 to complete . 
 Neptune was commissioned on 28 March 1883 for service with the Channel Fleet . She was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1885 , but returned to Portsmouth in July 1886 for a refit . The ship was assigned as the guard ship for the 1st Class Reserve at Holyhead in May 1887 . Neptune paid off into reserve in November 1893 in Portsmouth . In April 1902 she was transferred from Fleet reserve to Dockyard Reserve . The ship was sold for £ 18 @,@ 000 on 15 September 1903 for scrap . 
 While under tow by the tug Rowland and another at her side out of Portsmouth on 23 October 1903 , Neptune broke the cables connecting her to the tugs in a storm . With the winds and a strong flood tide pushing her , she was pushed back into the harbour and narrowly missed the training ship for Osborne College , HMS Racer . Neptune struck the training brig Sunflower anchored beside Racer a glancing blow and then hit the port side of HMS Victory , making a hole at her orlop deck . Neptune then was pushed by the tides and winds toward HMS Hero and came to rest against the bow ram of Hero . She was finally broken up in Lemwerder , Germany , in 1904 . 
 = Tropical Storm Dottie = 
 Tropical Storm Dottie was the ninth tropical cyclone and fourth named storm of the 1976 Atlantic hurricane season . The precursor to Dottie formed in the Gulf of Mexico on August 17 and organized into a tropical depression on August 18 . The storm drifted towards the east , and , after peaking as a moderate tropical storm , it accelerated northeastward and made landfall on Florida . Upon re @-@ emerging in the Atlantic , Dottie turned northward and moved ashore near Charleston , South Carolina . Damage from the storm was primarily insignificant and limited to gusty winds , heavy rainfall , and high tides ; however , a fishing boat capsized in the Bahamas , resulting in the deaths of four people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Dottie originated in an area of low pressure that formed on August 17 , about 150 mi ( 240 km ) northwest of Key West , Florida . The center of the disturbance soon began to consolidate while barometric pressure fell 8 mbar in 24 hours ; it was declared a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on August 18 . The depression drifted east and northeastward over the next day , though it began to accelerate on August 19 . The cyclone further intensified to tropical storm status by 1200 UTC . Operationally , however , it was not named until later that day . 
 Having made landfall in southwestern Florida , Dottie quickly proceeded northeastward before re @-@ emerging into the Atlantic Ocean . High pressure building to the north of the storm indicated it would turn more towards the west , but it moved nearly due northward . The cyclone attained its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) at 0600 UTC on August 20 and subsequently began to weaken ; by the time Dottie made landfall in Charleston , South Carolina later that evening , it was barely of tropical storm intensity . It deteriorated into a tropical depression on August 21 and dissipated shortly thereafter . The remnant low pressure system turned southward and once again entered the Atlantic before turning westward and crossing the Florida peninsula . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In response to the storm , gale warnings were issued on August 19 from Jacksonville , Florida to Virginia Beach , Virginia . A hurricane watch was also posted between Savannah , Georgia and Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The hurricane watch was later extended to Jacksonville when conditions appeared more favorable for the storm 's intensification , but was soon discontinued . Flooding rains were anticipated in the Carolinas , though , in contrast , Dottie was compared to a mere thunderstorm by some local officials . 
 Prior to being upgraded to a tropical storm , the depression spawned heavy precipitation and high winds throughout southern Florida and portions of the Bahamas . In Fort Lauderdale , the storm dropped 10 @.@ 68 in ( 271 mm ) of rainfall , and in the Miami area , 24 @-@ hour rainfall totals reached 8 in ( 200 mm ) . The heavy rainfall caused street flooding across the region . The highest recorded wind gusts were 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) in Islamorada , and in the city the winds damaged a roof . The winds downed trees , and left roughly 20 neighborhoods in southern Florida without power during the passage of Dottie . Wind gusts of 40 to 50 mph ( 64 to 80 km / h ) were recorded across the northern Florida Keys and Grand Bahama . Near the latter location , a fishing boat capsized during the storm ; four of its occupants drowned . Along the Southeastern U.S. coast , tides generally ran 1 to 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 61 m ) above normal , peaking at 3 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) in North Carolina . Moderate to heavy rainfall was reported in the Carolinas , causing flooding of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep in New Hanover County , North Carolina . Overall damage was light and primarily limited to coastal beach erosion . In some areas , Dottie helped relieve drought conditions . 
 = Flag of Germany = 
 The flag of Germany is a tricolour consisting of three equal horizontal bands displaying the national colours of Germany : black , red , and gold . The flag was first adopted as the national flag of modern Germany in 1919 , during the Weimar Republic . 
 Germany has two competing traditions of national colours , black @-@ red @-@ gold and black @-@ white @-@ red , which have played an important role in the modern history of Germany . The black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour first appeared in the early 19th century and achieved prominence during the 1848 Revolutions . The short @-@ lived Frankfurt Parliament of 1848 – 1850 proposed the tricolour as a flag for a united and democratic German state . With the formation of the Weimar Republic after World War I , the tricolour was adopted as the national flag of Germany . Following World War II , the tricolour was designated as the flag of both West and East Germany in 1949 . The two flags were identical until 1959 , when the East German flag was augmented with the coat of arms of East Germany . Since reunification on 3 October 1990 , the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour has become the flag of reunified Germany . 
 After the Austro @-@ Prussian War in 1866 , the Prussian @-@ dominated North German Confederation adopted a tricolour of black @-@ white @-@ red as its flag . This flag later became the flag of the German Empire , formed following the unification of Germany in 1871 , and was used until 1918 . Black , white , and red were reintroduced as the German national colours with the establishment of Nazi Germany in 1933 , replacing German republican colours with imperial colours until the end of World War II . 
 The colours of the modern flag are associated with the republican democracy formed after World War I , and represent German unity and freedom . During the Weimar Republic , the black @-@ red @-@ gold colours were the colours of the democratic , centrist , and republican political parties , as seen in the name of Reichsbanner Schwarz @-@ Rot @-@ Gold , formed by members of the Social Democratic , the Centre , and the Democratic parties to defend the republic against extremists on the right and left . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The German association with the colours black , red , and gold surfaced in the radical 1840s , when the black @-@ red @-@ gold flag was used to symbolize the movement against the Conservative European Order that was established after Napoleon 's defeat . 
 The Frankfurt Parliament had declared the black @-@ red @-@ gold as the official colours of the German Confederation , with the red in the tricolour most likely referencing the Hanseatic League , and the gold and black symbolizing Austria as its empire , considered to be " German " , had an influence over ( what would become ) southern Germany . There are many theories in circulation regarding the origins of the colour scheme used in the 1848 flag . It has been proposed that the colours were those of the Jena Student 's League , one of the radically minded Burschenschaften banned by Metternich in the Carlsbad Decrees . Another claim goes back to the uniforms ( mainly black with red facings and gold buttons ) of the Lützow Free Corps , comprising mostly university students and formed during the struggle against the occupying forces of Napoleon . Whatever the true explanation , these colours soon came to be regarded as the national colours of Germany during this brief period , and especially after their reintroduction during the Weimar period , they have become synonymous with liberalism in general . 
 = = Flag variants = = 
 = = = Civil flag = = = 
 The German national flag or <unk> ( federal flag ) , containing only the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour , was introduced as part of the ( West ) German constitution in 1949 . Following the creation of separate government and military flags in later years , the plain tricolour is now used as the German civil flag and civil ensign . This flag is also used by non @-@ federal authorities to show their connection to the federal government , e.g. the authorities of the German states use the German national flag together with their own flag . 
 = = = Government flag = = = 
 The government flag of Germany is officially known as the <unk> der <unk> ( state flag of the federal authorities ) or Bundesdienstflagge for short . Introduced in 1950 , the government flag is the civil flag defaced with the Bundesschild ( " Federal Shield " ) , which overlaps with up to one fifth of the black and gold bands . The Bundesschild is a variant of the coat of arms of Germany , whose main differences are the illustration of the eagle and the shape of the shield : the Bundesschild is rounded at the base , whereas the standard coat of arms is pointed . The government flag may only be used by federal government authorities and its use by others is an offence , punishable with a fine . However , public use of flags similar to the Bundesdienstflagge ( e.g. using the actual coat of arms instead of the Bundesschild ) is tolerated , and such flags are sometimes seen at international sporting events . 
 = = = Vertical flags = = = 
 In addition to the normal horizontal format , many public buildings in Germany use vertical flags . Most town halls fly their town flag together with the national flag in this way ; many town flags in Germany exist only in vertical form . The proportions of these vertical flags are not specified . In 1996 , a layout for the vertical version of the government flag was established : the Bundesschild is displayed in the centre of the flag , overlapping with up to one fifth of the black and gold bands . When hung like a banner or draped , the black band should be on the left , as illustrated . When flown from a vertical flagpole , the black band must face the staff . 
 = = = Military flags = = = 
 Since the German armed forces ( Bundeswehr ) are a federal authority , the Bundesdienstflagge is also used as the German war flag on land . In 1956 , the <unk> der <unk> der Bundeswehr ( Flag of the German Navy ) was introduced : the government flag ending in swallowtail . This naval flag is also used as a navy jack . 
 = = Design = = 
 Article 22 of the German constitution , the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany , states : 
 " The federal flag shall be black , red and gold . " 
 Following specifications set by the ( West ) German government in 1950 , the flag displays three bars of equal width and has a width – length ratio of 3 : 5 ; the tricolour used during the Weimar Republic had a ratio of 2 : 3 . 
 The exact colours used for the German flag were not officially defined at the time of the flag 's adoption and have changed since then . The federal cabinet introduced a corporate design for the German government on 2 June 1999 , which currently uses the following colours : 
 * The value given here is an alternative to the following more @-@ complicated combination : Yellow ( 765 g ) , Red 032 ( 26 g ) , Black ( 11 g ) , <unk> . White ( 198 g ) 
 = = = Colour = = = 
 <unk> rarely distinguishes between gold and yellow ; in heraldry , they are both Or . For the German flag , such a distinction is made : the colour used in the flag is gold , not yellow . 
 When the black – red – gold tricolour was adopted by the Weimar Republic as its flag , it was attacked by conservatives , monarchists , and the far right , who referred to the colours with spiteful nicknames such as Schwarz – Rot – Gelb ( black – red – yellow ) , Schwarz – Rot – <unk> ( black – red – mustard ) or even Schwarz – Rot – Scheiße ( black – red – shit ) . When the Nazis came to power in 1933 , the black – white – red colours of pre @-@ 1918 Imperial Germany were swiftly reintroduced , and their propaganda machine continued to discredit the Schwarz – Rot – Gold , using the same derogatory terms as previously used by the monarchists . 
 On 16 November 1959 , the Federal Court of Justice ( <unk> ) stated that the usage of " black – red – yellow " and the like had " through years of Nazi agitation , attained the significance of a malicious slander against the democratic symbols of the state " and was now an offence . As summarised by heraldist Arnold <unk> in 1968 , " the German colours are black – red – yellow but they are called black – red – gold . " 
 The use of a pure , neutral yellow without the slight orange tint ( RGB # <unk> or similar ) is considered a mistake , although it is common enough on unofficial flags such as those displayed by fans at sporting events . 
 = = Flag days = = 
 Following federal decree on 22 March 2005 , the flag must be flown from public buildings on the following dates . Not all of these days are public holidays . 
 Election days for the Bundestag and the European Parliament are also flag days in some states , in addition to other state @-@ specific flag days . The public display of flags to mark other events , such as the election of the president or the death of a prominent politician ( whereupon flags would be at half @-@ staff ) , can be declared at the discretion of the Federal Ministry of the Interior . When flags are required to be flown at half @-@ staff , vertical flags are not lowered . A black mourning ribbon is instead attached , either atop the staff ( if hung from a pole ) or to each end of the flag 's supporting cross @-@ beams ( if flown like a banner ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Medieval period = = = 
 The Holy Roman Empire ( 10th century – 1806 , known as the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation after 1512 ) did not have a national flag , but black and gold were used as colours of the Holy Roman Emperor and featured in the imperial banner : a black eagle on a golden background . After the late 13th or early 14th century , the claws and beak of the eagle were coloured red . From the early 15th century , a double @-@ headed eagle was used . 
 In 1804 , Napoleon Bonaparte declared the First French Empire . In response to this , Holy Roman Emperor Francis II of the Habsburg dynasty declared his personal domain to be the Austrian Empire and became Francis I of Austria . Taking the colours of the banner of the Holy Roman Emperor , the flag of the Austrian Empire was black and gold . Francis II was the last Holy Roman Emperor , with Napoleon forcing the empire 's dissolution in 1806 . After this point , these colours continued to be used as the flag of Austria until 1918 . 
 The colours red and white were also significant during this period . When the Holy Roman Empire took part in the Crusades , a war flag was flown alongside the black @-@ gold imperial banner . This flag , known as the " Saint George Flag " , was a white cross on a red background : the reverse of the St George 's Cross used as the flag of England , and similar to the flag of Denmark . Red and white were also colours of the Hanseatic League ( 13th – 17th century ) . Hanseatic trading ships were identifiable by their red @-@ white pennants , and most Hanseatic cities adopted red and white as their city colours ( see Hanseatic flags ) . Red and white still feature as the colours of many former Hanseatic cities such as Hamburg or Bremen . 
 In northern Italy , during the Guelph and Ghibelline conflict of the 12th – 14th century , the armies of the Ghibelline ( pro @-@ imperial ) communes adopted the war banner of the Holy Roman Emperor ( white cross on red ) as their own , while the Guelf ( anti @-@ imperial ) communes reversed the colours ( red cross on white ) . These two schemes are prevalent in the modern civic heraldry of northern Italian towns and remains a revealing indicator of their past factional leanings . Traditionally Ghibelline towns like Pavia , Novara , Como , and Asti continue to sport the Ghibelline cross . The Guelf cross can be found on the civic arms of traditionally Guelf towns like Genoa , Milan , Vercelli , Alessandria , Reggio , and Bologna . 
 = = = Napoleonic Wars = = = 
 With the end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 , many of its dukes and princes joined the Confederation of the Rhine , a confederation of Napoleonic client states . These states preferred to use their own flags . The confederation had no flag of its own ; instead it used the blue @-@ white @-@ red flag of France and the Imperial Standard of its protector , Napoleon . 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , the German struggle against the occupying French forces was significantly symbolised by the colours of black , red , and gold , which became popular after their use in the uniforms of the Lützow Free Corps , a volunteer unit of the Prussian Army . This unit had uniforms in black with red facings and gold buttons . The colour choice had pragmatic origins , even though black @-@ red @-@ gold were the former colours used by the Holy Roman Empire . Members of the corps were required to supply their own clothing : in order to present a uniform appearance it was easiest to dye all clothes black . Gold @-@ coloured buttons were widely available , and <unk> used by the lancers in the unit were red and black . At the time , the colours represented : 
 Out of the blackness ( black ) of servitude through bloody ( red ) battles to the golden ( gold ) light of freedom . 
 As the members of this unit came from all over Germany and were mostly university students and academics , the Lützow Free Corps and their colours gained considerable exposure among the German people . 
 = = = German Confederation = = = 
 The 1815 – 16 Congress of Vienna led to the creation of the German Confederation , a loose union of all remaining German states after the Napoleonic Wars . The Confederation was created as a replacement for the now @-@ extinct Holy Roman Empire , with Francis I of Austria — the last Holy Roman Emperor — as its president . The confederation did not have a flag of its own , although the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour is sometimes mistakenly attributed to it . 
 Upon returning from the war , veterans of the Lützow Free Corps founded the Urburschenschaft fraternity in Jena in June 1815 . The Jena Urburschenschaft eventually adopted a flag with three equal horizontal bands of red , black , and red , with gold trim and a golden oak branch across the black band , following the colours of the uniforms of the Free Corps . Since the students who served in the Lützow Free Corps came from various German states , the idea of a unified German state began to gain momentum within the Urburschenschaft and similar Burschenschaften that were subsequently formed throughout the Confederation . On 18 October 1817 , the fourth anniversary of the Battle of Leipzig , hundreds of fraternity members and academics from across the Confederation states met in Wartburg in Saxe @-@ Weimar @-@ Eisenach ( in modern Thuringia ) , calling for a free and unified German nation . 
 The gold @-@ red @-@ black flag of the Jena Urburschenschaft featured prominently at this Wartburg festival and so the colours black , red , and gold eventually became symbolic of this desire for a unified German state . Austria , in its determination to maintain the status quo , enacted the Carlsbad Decrees of 1819 that banned all student organisations , officially putting an end to the Burschenschaften . 
 In May 1832 , around 30 @,@ 000 people demonstrated at the Hambach Festival for freedom , unity , and civil rights . The colours black , red , and gold had become a well established symbol for the liberal , democratic and republican movement within the German states since the Wartburg Festival , and flags in these colours were flown en masse at the Hambach Festival . While contemporary illustrations showed prominent use of a gold @-@ red @-@ black tricolour ( an upside @-@ down version of the modern German flag ) , surviving flags from the event were in black @-@ red @-@ gold . Such an example is the Ur @-@ Fahne , the flag flown from Hambach Castle during the festival : a black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour where the red band contains the inscription Deutschlands <unk> ( Germany 's rebirth ) . This flag is now on permanent display at the castle . 
 = = = Revolution and the Frankfurt Parliament = = = 
 In the Springtime of the Peoples during the Revolutions of 1848 , revolutionaries took to the streets , many flying the tricolour . Liberals took power and , after prolonged deliberation , a national assembly was formulated . This Frankfurt Parliament declared the black @-@ red @-@ gold as the official colours of Germany and passed a law stating its civil ensign was the black @-@ red @-@ yellow tricolour . Also , a naval war ensign used these colours . 
 In 1850 , the Frankfurt Parliament collapsed , and the German Confederation was restored under Austrian presidency , who suppressed the actions of the failed Frankfurt Parliament , including the tricolour . Afterwards , the most pressing issue was whether or not to include Austria in any future German nation , as Austria 's status as a multi @-@ ethnic empire complicated the dream of a united Greater Germany — the <unk> solution . Alternatively , there was the <unk> ( Lesser German ) solution for a Germany that encompassed only German lands and excluded Austria . The Prussian – Austrian duality within the Confederation eventually led to the Austro @-@ Prussian War in 1866 . During the war , the southern states allied with Austria adopted the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour as their flag , and the 8th German Army Corps also wore black @-@ red @-@ gold armbands . The Kingdom of Prussia and its predominately north German allies defeated Austria and made way for the realisation of the Lesser German solution a few years later . 
 = = = North German Confederation and the German Empire ( 1866 – 1918 ) = = = 
 Following the dissolution of the German Confederation , Prussia formed its unofficial successor , the North German Confederation , in 1866 with the signing of the Confederation Treaty in August 1866 and then the ratification of the Constitution of 1867 . This coalition consisted of Prussia , the largest member state , and 21 other north German states . 
 The question regarding what flag should be adopted by the new confederation was first raised by the shipping sector and its desire to have an internationally recognisable identity . Virtually all international shipping that belonged to the confederation originated from either Prussia or the three former Hanseatic city @-@ states of Bremen , Hamburg , and Lübeck . Based on this , Adolf <unk> , secretary of the Hamburg Chamber of Commerce , suggested in the Bremer <unk> on 22 September 1866 that any planned flag should combine the colours of Prussia ( black and white ) with the Hanseatic colours ( red and white ) . In the following year , the constitution of the North German Confederation was enacted , where a horizontal black @-@ white @-@ red tricolour was declared to be both the civil and war ensign . 
 King Wilhelm I of Prussia was satisfied with the colour choice : the red and white were also taken to represent the Margraviate of Brandenburg , the Imperial elector state that was a predecessor of the Kingdom of Prussia . The absence of gold from the flag also made it clear that this German state did not include the " black and gold " monarchy of Austria . Following the Franco @-@ Prussian War , the remaining southern German states allied with the North German Confederation , leading to the unification of Germany and the elevation of the Prussian monarch to Emperor of this new state in 1871 . In its constitution , the German Empire retained black , white , and red as its national colours , with the tricolour previously used by the North German Confederation officially adopted as its flag in 1892 . 
 The black @-@ white @-@ red tricolour remained the flag of Germany until the end of the German Empire in 1918 , in the final days of World War I. 
 = = = Weimar Republic ( 1918 – 33 ) = = = 
 Following the declaration of the German republic in 1918 and the ensuing revolutionary period , the so @-@ called Weimar Republic was founded in August 1919 . To form a continuity between the anti @-@ autocratic movement of the 19th century and the new democratic republic , the old black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour was designated as the national German flag in the Weimar Constitution in 1919 . Only the tiny German principalities of Reuss @-@ Greiz , Reuss @-@ Gera , and Waldeck @-@ Pyrmont and its republican successor had upheld the tradition and had always continued to use the German colours of black , red , and or ( gold ) in their flag . As a civil ensign , the black @-@ white @-@ red tricolour was retained , albeit with the new tricolour in the top left corner . 
 This change was not welcomed by many people in Germany , who saw this new flag as a symbol of humiliation following Germany 's defeat in the First World War . In the Reichswehr , the old colours continued to be used in various forms . Many conservatives wanted the old colours to return , while monarchists and the far right were far more vocal with their objections , referring to the new flag with various derogatory names ( see Gold or yellow ? above ) . As a compromise , the old black @-@ white @-@ red flag was reintroduced in 1922 to represent German diplomatic missions abroad . 
 The symbols of Imperial Germany became symbols of monarchist and nationalist protest and were often used by monarchist and nationalist organisations ( e.g. Stahlhelm , Bund der Frontsoldaten ) . This included the <unk> ( war flag of the Reich ) , which has been revived in the present for similar use . Many nationalist political parties during the Weimar period — such as the German National People 's Party ( see poster ) and the National Socialist German Workers Party ( Nazi Party ) — used the imperial colours , a practice that has continued today with the National Democratic Party of Germany . 
 On 24 February 1924 , the organisation Reichsbanner Schwarz @-@ Rot @-@ Gold was founded in Magdeburg by the member parties of the Weimar Coalition ( Centre , DDP , SPD ) and the trade unions . This organisation was formed to protect the fragile democracy of the Weimar Republic , which was under constant pressure by both the far right and far left . Through this organisation , the black @-@ red @-@ gold flag became not only a symbol of German democracy , but also of resistance to political extremism . This was summarised by the organisation 's first chairman , Otto <unk> , who described their task as a " struggle against the swastika and the Soviet star " . 
 In the face of the increasingly violent conflicts between the communists and Nazis , the growing polarisation of the German population and a multitude of other factors , mainly the drastic economic sinking , extreme hyperinflation and corruption of the republic , the Weimar Republic collapsed in 1933 with the Nazi seizure of power ( Machtergreifung ) and the appointment of Adolf Hitler as German chancellor . 
 = = = Nazi Germany and World War II ( 1933 – 45 ) = = = 
 After the Nazi Party seized power on 30 January 1933 , the black @-@ red @-@ gold flag was swiftly scrapped ; a ruling on 12 March established two legal national flags : the reintroduced black @-@ white @-@ red imperial tricolour and the flag of the Nazi Party . 
 On 15 September 1935 , one year after the death of Reich President Paul von Hindenburg and Hitler 's elevation to the position of Führer , the dual flag arrangement was ended , with the exclusive use of the Nazi flag as the national flag of Germany . One reason may have been the " Bremen incident " of 26 July 1935 , in which a group of demonstrators in New York City boarded the SS Bremen , tore the Nazi Party flag from the <unk> , and tossed it into the Hudson River . When the German ambassador protested , US officials responded that the German national flag had not been harmed , only a political party symbol . The new flag law was announced at the annual party rally in Nuremberg , where Hermann Göring claimed the old black @-@ white @-@ red flag , while honoured , was the symbol of a bygone era and under threat of being used by " reactionaries " . 
 The design of the Nazi flag was introduced by Hitler as the party flag in mid @-@ 1920 : a flag with a red background , a white disk and a black swastika in the middle . In Mein Kampf , Hitler explained the process by which the Nazi flag design was created : It was necessary to use the same colours as Imperial Germany , because in Hitler 's opinion they were " revered colours expressive of our homage to the glorious past and which once brought so much honour to the German nation . " The most important requirement was that " the new flag ... should prove effective as a large poster " because " in hundreds of thousands of cases a really striking emblem may be the first cause of awakening interest in a movement . " Nazi propaganda clarified the symbolism of the flag : the red colour stood for the social , white for the movement 's national thinking and the swastika for the victory of the Aryan peoples over the Jewry . Several designs by a number of different authors were considered , but the one adopted in the end was Hitler 's personal design . Albert Speer stated in his memoirs that " in only two other designs did he ( Adolf Hitler ) execute the same care as he did his Obersalzberg house : that of the Reich War Flag and his own standard of Chief of State " . 
 An off @-@ centred disk version of the swastika flag was used as the civil ensign on German @-@ registered civilian ships and was used as the jack on Kriegsmarine ( the name of the German Navy , 1933 – 45 ) warships . The flags for use on sea had a through and through image , so the " left @-@ facing " and " right @-@ facing " version were each present on one side while the national flag was right @-@ facing on both sides . 
 From 1933 to at least 1938 , the Nazis sometimes " sanctified " swastika flags by touching them with the <unk> ( blood flag ) , the swastika flag used by Nazi paramilitaries during the failed Beer Hall Putsch in 1923 . This ceremony took place at every Nuremberg Rally . It is unknown whether this tradition was continued after the last Nuremberg rally in 1938 . 
 At the end of World War II , the first law enacted by the Allied Control Council abolished all Nazi symbols and repealed all relevant laws . The possession of swastika flags is forbidden in many Western countries since then , with the importation or display of them forbidden particularly in Germany . 
 = = = After World War II ( 1945 – 49 ) = = = 
 After the defeat of Germany in World War II , the country was placed under Allied administration . Although there was no national German government and no German flag , German ships were required by international law to have a national ensign of some kind . As a provisional civil ensign of Germany , the Council designated the international signal pennant Charlie representing the letter C ending in a swallowtail , known as the C @-@ Pennant ( C @-@ <unk> ) . The Council ruled that " no ceremony shall be accorded this flag which shall not be dipped in salute to warships or merchant ships of any nationality " . Similarly , the Japanese civil ensign used immediately following World War II was the signal pennant for the letter E ending in a swallowtail , and the Ryūkyūan civil ensign was a <unk> letter D signal pennant . 
 West of the Oder – Neisse line , the German states were reorganised along the lines of the zones of occupation , and new state governments were established . Within the American zone , the northern halves of the former states of Württemberg and Baden were merged to form Württemberg @-@ Baden in 1946 . As its flag , Württemberg @-@ Baden adopted the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour . The choice of these colours was not based on the historical use of the tricolour , but the simple addition of gold to Württemberg 's colours of red and black . Coincidentally , Baden 's colours were red and yellow , so the colour choice could be mistaken for a combination of the two flags . In 1952 , Württemberg @-@ Baden became part of the modern German state of Baden @-@ Württemberg , whose flag is black and gold . 
 Two other states that were created after the war , Rhineland @-@ Palatinate ( French zone ) and Lower Saxony ( British zone ) , chose to use the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour as their flag , defaced with the state 's coat of arms . These two states were formed from parts of other states , and no colour combinations from these previous states were accepted as a new state flag . This led to the use of the black @-@ red @-@ gold for two reasons : the colours did not relate particularly to any one of the previous states , and using the old flag from the Weimar Republic was intended to be a symbol of the new democracy . 
 = = = Divided Germany ( 1949 – 89 ) = = = 
 With relations deteriorating between the Soviet Union and the United States , the three western Allies met in March 1948 to merge their zones of occupation and allow the formation of what became the Federal Republic of Germany , commonly known as West Germany . Meanwhile , the eastern Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic , commonly known as East Germany . During the preparation of the new constitution for West Germany , discussions regarding its national symbols took place in August 1948 during a meeting at <unk> . Although there were objections to the creation of a national flag before reunification with the east , it was decided to proceed . This decision was primarily motivated by the proposed constitution by the eastern SED in November 1946 , where black @-@ red @-@ gold were suggested as the colours for a future German republic . 
 While there were other suggestions for the new flag for West Germany , the final choice was between two designs , both using black @-@ red @-@ gold . The Social Democrats proposed the re @-@ introduction of the old Weimar flag , while the conservative parties such as the CDU / CSU and the German Party proposed a suggestion by Ernst <unk> , a member of the <unk> Rat ( parliamentary council ) and future advisor of chancellor Konrad Adenauer . <unk> suggested a variant of the 1944 " Resistance " flag ( using the black @-@ red @-@ gold scheme in a Nordic Cross pattern ) designed by his brother and 20 July co @-@ conspirator Josef . The tricolour was ultimately selected , largely to illustrate the continuity between the Weimar Republic and this new German state . With the enactment of the ( West ) German constitution on 23 May 1949 , the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour was adopted as the flag for the Federal Republic of Germany . 
 In 1955 , the inhabitants of the French @-@ administered Saar Protectorate voted to join West Germany . Since its establishment as a separate French protectorate in 1947 , the Saar had a white Nordic cross on a blue and red background as its flag . To demonstrate the commitment of the Saar to be a part of West Germany , a new flag was selected on 9 July 1956 : the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour defaced with the new coat of arms , also proposed on this day . This flag came into force on 1 January 1957 , upon the establishment of the Saarland as a state of West Germany . 
 While the use of black @-@ red @-@ gold had been suggested in the Soviet zone in 1946 , the Second People 's Congress in 1948 decided to adopt the old black @-@ white @-@ red tricolour as a national flag for East Germany . This choice was based on the use of these colours by the National Committee for a Free Germany , a German anti @-@ Nazi organisation that operated in the Soviet Union in the last two years of the war . In 1949 , following a suggestion from Friedrich Ebert , Jr . , the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour was instead selected as the flag of the German Democratic Republic upon the formation of this state on 7 October 1949 . From 1949 to 1959 , the flags of both West and East Germany were identical . On 1 October 1959 , the East German government changed its flag with the addition of its coat of arms . In West Germany , these changes were seen as a deliberate attempt to divide the two Germanys . Displaying this flag in West Germany and West Berlin — where it became known as the <unk> ( divider @-@ flag ) — was seen as a breach of the constitution and subsequently banned until the late 1960s . 
 From 1956 to 1964 , West and East Germany attended the Winter and Summer Olympic Games as a single team , known as the Unified Team of Germany . After the East German national flag was changed in 1959 , neither country accepted the flag of the other . As a compromise , a new flag was used by the Unified Team of Germany from 1960 to 1964 , featuring the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour defaced with white Olympic rings in the red stripe . In 1968 the teams from the two German states entered separately , but both used the same German Olympic flag . From 1972 to 1988 , the separate West and East German teams used their respective national flags . 
 = = = 1989 – present = = = 
 After the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 , many East Germans cut the coat of arms out of their flags , as Hungarians had done in 1956 and as Romanians would soon do during the fall of Ceaușescu . The widespread act of removing the coat of arms from the East German flag implied the plain black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour as symbol for a united and democratic Germany . Finally , on 3 October 1990 , as the area of the German Democratic Republic was absorbed into the Federal Republic of Germany , the black @-@ red @-@ gold tricolour became the flag of a reunified Germany . In 1998 , the Foundation for the <unk> of the SED Dictatorship was formed . The duty of this organisation , directly responsible to the federal government , is to examine the consequences of the former East German regime . As its logo , the foundation used an East German flag with the Communist coat of arms cut out . 
 The old black @-@ white @-@ red tricolour of the German Empire is still used by monarchists and those members of German royalty who long for the peaceful reintroduction of a German democratic monarchy . This use of the old flag is almost completely overshadowed by its prevalent use by the far right ; since the swastika is illegal in Germany , the far right have been forced to forego any Nazi flags and instead use the old tricolour , which the Nazis themselves banned in 1935 . The ban of Nazi symbols in Germany and some other countries is the main reason why many computer games related to World War II released in Germany and some other countries do not feature the Nazi flag , sometimes replacing it with the anachronistic flag of pre @-@ 1933 Weimar Germany or the modern tricolour . 
 In Germany , the use of the flag and other national symbols has been relatively low for most of the time since the Second World War — a reaction against the widespread use of flags by the Nazi Party and against the nationalistic furore of the Nazis in general . The flag is used primarily by official authorities on special occasions or by citizens during international sporting events . In some states ( e.g. Bavaria , Schleswig @-@ Holstein ) or sub @-@ state historical regions ( e.g. Baden , Franconia ) residents may prefer the use of regional flags instead of the national flag . 
 During the 2006 FIFA World Cup , which took place in Germany , public use of the national flag increased dramatically . Although this explosion in the flag 's popularity was initially greeted by many Germans with a mixture of surprise and apprehension , the decades @-@ old fear that German flag @-@ waving and national pride was inextricably associated with its Nazi past was dismissed by the end of the tournament by Germans and non @-@ Germans alike . 
 = = Similar Flags = = 
 = Butterfly ( Mariah Carey album ) = 
 Butterfly is the sixth studio album by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , released on September 16 , 1997 , by Columbia Records . The album contained both hip @-@ hop and urban adult contemporary sounds , as well as some softer and more contemporary melodies . Throughout the project , Carey worked with Walter Afanasieff , with whom she had written and produced most of the material from her previous albums . She also worked with many famed hip @-@ hop producers and rappers , such as Sean " Puffy " Combs , Kamaal Fareed , Missy Elliott and the Trackmasters . With the latter acts producing most of the album , Butterfly deviated from the contemporary sound of Carey 's older work , and was hailed as a defining album of the 1990s and of pop and R & B music . 
 With Butterfly , Carey continued the transition that began with previous album , Daydream ( 1995 ) , which pushed her further into the R & B and hip @-@ hop market and away from the R & B and pop background of her previous work . During her marriage to Tommy Mottola , Carey had little control over the creative and artistic steps she took on her albums ; however , after their divorce mid @-@ way through the album 's conception , she was able to reflect her creative maturity and evolution in the album 's writing and recording . Carey wrote in the booklet of her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) , that she considers Butterfly her magnum opus and a turning point in both her life and career . 
 Upon release , Butterfly garnered critical acclaim from contemporary music critics , many of whom embraced Carey 's musical transition . Reviewers complimented the album for its mature sound and production and commended Carey 's musical direction , calling the work a " transitional album , one that makes her a rarity of the 90s . " Though released during Carey 's heavily publicized conflict with Sony Music , the album became a commercial success , topping the albums chart in many countries , including Australia , Canada , Japan and the Netherlands . On the Billboard 200 , it debuted at number one , spending one week atop the chart . It was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and received the Million Award in Japan . 
 Five singles were released from the album ; two worldwide commercial releases , and three limited promotional singles . " Honey , " the record 's lead single , topped the charts in the US and Canada and reached the top five in New Zealand , Spain and the United Kingdom . The album 's fifth single , " My All , " became a top ten hit throughout Europe and topped the charts in the US . To promote Butterfly , Carey embarked on the Butterfly World Tour , which visited Australia , Japan and Taiwan , with one show in the United States . Butterfly was nominated for three Grammy Awards at the 40th annual ceremony , though it did not win any . 
 = = Background = = 
 Carey began working on Butterfly in January 1997 . During the album 's development in mid @-@ 1997 Carey separated from her husband , music executive Tommy Mottola , who had guided her career since 1988 . Carey 's increasing control over her own career had led to speculation in the press over the future of the couple , and they later divorced . Throughout the development of the album , in a departure from her previous style , Carey worked with various rappers and hip @-@ hop producers , including Sean " Puffy " Combs , Kamaal Fareed , Missy Elliott and Jean Claude Oliver and Samuel Barnes from Trackmasters . Critics saw Carey 's new production team as a form of revenge on Mottola and Sony Music . Carey denied taking a radically new direction , and insisted that the musical style of her new album was of her own choosing . Nevertheless , Carey resented the control that Sony , whose president was Mottola , exercised over her music , preventing her making music about which she was passionate . In contrast , Sony were concerned Carey , their best @-@ selling act , could jeopardize her future success through her actions . 
 The pressure of the separation and constant press attention began to take its toll of Carey . Growing creative differences with producer Walter Afanasieff ended their working relationship , after collaborating on most of Carey 's previous output . The breaking point came after a heated argument during a long recording session , over the album 's musical direction . Carey also faced media criticism over her choice of producers and several newspapers linked Carey romantically to several rappers , suggesting these relationships influenced her decisions . However , Carey denied the allegations , stating she had only slept with her husband . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 With a variety of writers and producers and its new musical direction for Carey , the album was always likely to be a commercial success . Carey and Combs wrote the lead single , " Honey . " Combs believed this to be a good song but was uncertain how successful it would be as a release owing to its heavy hip @-@ hop influence . The remix for " Honey " featured rapping lead vocals from Da Brat , The LOX and Mase , and some verses were rapped by Combs himself . The track was very different from Carey 's previous recordings , and was described by author Chris Nickson as " street Hip @-@ Hop music , with a booming bass . " The song 's melody was driven by Q @-@ Tip 's drum programming and Stevie J 's keyboard notes . Combs 's production gave the song a " light and airy " effect , further distancing it from Carey 's contemporary sound . " Honey " featured musical samples from Treacherous Three 's " The Body Rock , " and " Hey DJ " from the World 's Famous Supreme Team . The track used both hip @-@ hop and R & B with traces of pop music and was described as a " [ song with a ] catchy chorus , combining hip @-@ hop and pop into something that simply wasn 't going to be denied by anyone , and offering a powerful start to a record . " 
 The album 's second single , " Butterfly , " was one of the ballads Carey wrote with Afanasieff . Carey described the song as the " favorite ballad she had ever written " , one that was more personal than her previous work as the emotions conveyed through the song allude at just how meaningful the lyrics are to her . Carey solely wrote the lyrics while Afanasieff , who composed the music with Dan Shea , handled the song 's instrumentals , and added a few personal R & B touches . Another ballad Carey wrote with Afanasieff was " My All " , written as a contrast to the album 's general hip @-@ hop flavor . Carey described the song as having " a lush sound and intense styling " . It featured guitar arpeggios , which were synthetically created using sampling and keyboard notes . " The Roof , " Butterfly 's European single , incorporated fragments from Mobb Deep 's " Shook Ones ( Part II ) " , and was produced by Carey , Poke & Tone and Cory Rooney . 
 " Fourth of July , " one of the album 's slower ballads , was also written solely by Carey and Afanasieff but was not released as a single . The song was perceived to have jazz influences and was compared to some of Carey 's older work such as " Vanishing " and " The Wind . " The next two tracks on the record , " Breakdown " and " Babydoll , " were described as " the album 's backbone , its real declaration of independence " by Nickson . " Breakdown " was written by Carey and Puffy and included rap verses from Wish and Krayzie Bone from Bone Thugs @-@ n @-@ Harmony . Author Chris Nickson wrote that " ' Breakdown ' showed Mariah treading forcefully into territory that was new for her and making it her own . " For " Babydoll , " Carey teamed up with Elliott . The track was recorded in Atlanta , where Elliott resided , and included background vocals from Carey 's long @-@ time friend , Trey Lorenz . " Babydoll " was described as " a vocally driven piece , " with strong jazz harmony provided by Cory Rooney . Other songs that incorporated R & B influence into ballads were " Whenever You Call " and " Close My Eyes , " which were personally important to Carey due to their lyrical content . While both were similar ballads to Carey 's previous work , Nickson said : 
 " While up to the standard of anything Mariah had ever done before , [ they ] suffered in comparison . But even here you could hear the new Mariah in the <unk> of the arrangements and the way it was her voice , rather than any instrument , that controlled the song . She 'd grown to the point where having less behind her really proved to be more , for the song and for her . It was notable , too , that like the other ballads on the record , these two leaned very much towards R & B. " 
 Carey wrote the song " Fly Away ( Butterfly reprise ) " with famed house music producer David Morales . When imagining the concept for " Butterfly , " Carey intended the song to be a house music record , but after writing it , made it into a ballad . Carey expressed a desire to feature her concept both on the house record , in addition to the ballad that would become " Butterfly . " Morales took Carey 's lyrics , concept and melody and added a house beat to it . For the album , Carey recorded a version of Prince 's " The Beautiful Ones " , featuring Dru Hill 's lead singer Sisqó . The song was one of the last recorded tracks and was the only non @-@ original song on Butterfly . The final song on the album was " Outside , " a ballad that was written by Carey , Afanasieff and Rooney , about Carey 's experience being biracial . Richard Harrington from The Washington Post described the album 's subtle inclusion of both pop and R & B genres : 
 " There are two Mariah <unk> on Butterfly . One is the pop @-@ oriented , ballad @-@ leaning traditionalist who works very effectively with her longtime professional partner , composer @-@ producer Walter Afanasieff . The other is a self @-@ styled hip @-@ hop fanatic who worked with Ol ' Dirty Bastard on her last album and teams up here with several of that genre 's movers and shakers , most notably Sean " Puffy " Combs , the godfather of hip @-@ hop soul and the hottest producer in pop music today " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Butterfly garnered critical acclaim from music critics . Nathan Brackett , senior editor of Rolling Stone and author of The Rolling Stone Album Guide , praised the album 's producers and Carey 's " more controlled " vocals . Brackett noticed a connection between much of Carey 's lyrics and her separation from Mottola . Jon Pareles , editor of The New York Times called Butterfly " a new turn " in Carey 's career . He wrote , " Carey has sold tens of millions of albums by being the girl next door with the startling vocal range ... but for most of " Butterfly " Carey turned her voice into an airy whisper , as if she would rather charm listeners " compared to over @-@ powering them . Aside from commenting on its deviance from Carey 's previous work , he noted songs in which Carey alludes to her failed marriage to Mottola , such as " Butterfly " and " Close My Eyes " which were both released on the album following the divorce with lyrics about letting love go and life struggles . Additionally he wrote , " Since Carey writes her own lyrics , fans might expect a glimpse of marital discord or pride in her new @-@ found autonomy . " David Browne from Entertainment Weekly gave Butterfly a B- in his review . Browne wrote : " In Breakdown , [ Carey ] demonstrates she can match the staccato , lite @-@ reggae phrasing of her guests , two members of Bone Thugs @-@ N @-@ Harmony . " He described an increased intimacy in the music but noted the arrangement made it difficult to hear the lyrics Carey was singing . " Butterfly is undeniably pleasant , with little of the all @-@ conquering bombast usually associated with Carey . But it 's also the last thing anyone would have expected from her : blandly self @-@ effacing . " 
 In a retrospective review of the album , Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic appreciated the new direction of Carey 's music , commenting on the increased urban feel of the work . He described the record as " a collection of hit singles surrounded by classy filler " and " while [ the songs ] are all well @-@ crafted , many of them blend together upon initial listening " . However , he noted an increased control in her voice which led him to describe some of the ballads such as ' Butterfly ' and ' Breakdown ' as among her best work . He said Butterfly was one of Carey 's best records and she was " continuing to improve and refine her music , which makes her a rarity among her ' 90s peers . " Rich Juzwiak from Slant Magazine awarded the album a score of four and a half out of five stars , calling it " elegant " and praising Carey 's mature vocals . Juzwiak particularly praised " Breakdown " , which he called one of the album 's best tracks . Of Carey 's vocals , he wrote , " The relatively high and thin register that she sings in when not belting ( and that 's often ) could be the most important of Butterfly 's changes , as it marks the first time that Mariah the vocalist seems consistently real . She 's utterly soulful . " In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave Butterfly a " dud " rating , indicating " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Butterfly sold 236 @,@ 000 copies in the first week after its release and entered the Billboard 200 at number one . It maintained that position for one week and remained in the top twenty for 21 weeks ; it stayed in the chart for 55 weeks , including one re @-@ entry . The album achieved its highest weekly sales in the 14th and 15th weeks of its release , when it was number eight in the chart , peaking at 283 @,@ 000 sales in the 15th week . It also peaked at number three on Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . In the United States , Butterfly was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of five million copies . Nielsen SoundScan estimates the album 's sales at 3 @,@ 807 @,@ 000 copies in the US . In Canada , the album debuted at number one and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies of the album . Butterfly debuted at number one in Australia , and received a double @-@ platinum certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , indicating shipments of 140 @,@ 000 units . 
 In Europe , Butterfly peaked within the top @-@ five in several European countries . It received a platinum certification by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting shipments of well one million copies throughout Europe . In the United Kingdom , Butterfly peaked at number two , and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In France , the album peaked at number six , where it was certified double @-@ gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . Sales of Butterfly in France are estimated at 292 @,@ 000 . 
 As with many of Carey 's previous records , Butterfly became a large success in Asia . In Japan , the record debuted at number one on the album charts . The album was certified the Million Award by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) , denoting shipments of one million copies . In Hong Kong , Butterfly finished as one of the twenty best @-@ selling foreign albums of 1997 , receiving a platinum certification by IFPI . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Five singles were released from Butterfly ; some featured as airplay @-@ only singles , while others were released only in certain territories . " Honey " was released as the album 's first single on August 26 , 1997 . The song became Carey 's twelfth number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the chart in Canada , while reaching the top @-@ five in New Zealand , Spain and the United Kingdom . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of one million units in the United States , and received a gold certification in Australia . " Honey " was well @-@ received , with critics complimenting its catchy sound and clever fusion of pop and R & B <unk> the title track served as the album 's second single , but it was released as an " airplay @-@ only " single due to Carey 's conflict with Sony . Though not being released commercially by her label , " Butterfly " reached number sixteen on the Hot 100 Airplay , as well as the top @-@ twenty in New Zealand . 
 " Breakdown " was the third single released from Butterfly . The song received a limited release throughout certain countries , such as the United States , where it peaked at number four on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . Aside from the US , " Breakdown " achieved a steady peak of number four on the New Zealand singles chart , in addition to entering the top @-@ forty in Australia . While not one of Carey 's best @-@ known hits , " Breakdown " remains one of her most praised songs , receiving acclaim for assisting Carey 's transition into the R & B market . In his review for the album , Rich Juzwiak from Slant magazine wrote the following : 
 " The song of Carey 's career , where the lyrical strokes are as broad and obvious as they are naked . Mariah the chanter flawlessly adapts to their singsong style , largely boxing her multi @-@ octave range into a sly , hypnotic melody so that when she really wails at the end , you really feel it . Carey lunges toward musical maturity by embracing , not shunning hip @-@ hop . This is the height of her elegance and maybe hip @-@ hop @-@ soul 's , too . " 
 While " Breakdown " served as the album 's third single in the United States , New Zealand and Australia , " The Roof " was released in Europe . It performed weakly on the charts , peaking at number 96 in the United Kingdom , and faring only slightly better in the Netherlands , where it peaked at number 63 . While not commercially released in the US , the song 's music video received heavy rotation on MTV and <unk> , due to the record 's popularity . " My All " was chosen as the album 's fifth and final single . The song was the most commercially successful song on Butterfly , becoming Carey 's thirteenth chart topper in the US , and reaching the top @-@ ten throughout Europe . In France , " My All " peaked at number six , and was certified silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . In the United States , the song finished at number seventeen , on the Billboard Year @-@ End chart , remaining Carey 's highest charting single of 1998 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote Butterfly , Carey made many live appearances . On November 12 , 1997 , on The Oprah Winfrey Show , Carey was interviewed about her split from Mottola and sang a live rendition of " Butterfly " and her hit " Hero " . Carey also featured as a musical guest on September 21 , 1997 on Saturday Night Live , performing " Butterfly " again , as well as the Spanish @-@ inspired " My All " . She made two appearances on The Rosie O 'Donnell Show ; she performed " My All " and on her return visit , sang " Close My Eyes " live for the first time . Carey also gave performances at awards shows , singing " My All " at the 1998 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards and " Honey " at the 1998 World Music Awards . In Europe , Carey made several promotional television appearances . In the United Kingdom , Carey performed " My All " and " Honey " on the Des O 'Connor Show and Top of the Pops . In Germany , she sang " Butterfly " on Wetten , dass .. ? and performed on Japanese television . 
 Originally , Carey had not planned to tour , after receiving mixed reviews in the US for her Music Box Tour . However , after the album 's release , many fans requested Carey to tour , especially in Asia and Australia . Therefore , Carey embarked on the Butterfly World Tour ; her third head @-@ lining tour and most extensive to date . The tour included eleven shows , four in Japan 's largest stadium , Tokyo Dome , one in Taiwan , five in Australia and one in the United States . All 200 @,@ 000 tickets for her Japanese shows sold out within one hour ; the other ten shows also sold out . As part of her performance at the 50 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity Aloha Stadium in Hawaii , Carey filmed a concert video , Around the World . The video was a compilation DVD which included parts of Carey 's shows in Japan , Australia and Hawaii . The tour was a critical and commercial success . Both fans and critics praised the quality of the show and Carey 's vocals . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Butterfly , recognised by critics as one of Carey 's best albums at that point in her career , received several awards and was nominated for others . At the Billboard Music Awards , Carey received an honorary award , recognizing her achievement of earning " The Most Number @-@ one Singles Ever by a Female Solo Artist in History " . " Honey " was nominated at the 1998 Grammy Awards for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance and Best R & B Song , while " Butterfly " was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . Butterfly won a Japan Gold Disc Award in the " International Pop Album of the Year " category . For Butterfly , Carey won the American Music Award for Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist in 1998 . Additionally , the album won the BMI Pop Award for " Songwriter of the Year " and the " Songwriter " awards for " Honey , " " Butterfly " and " My All . " At the Soul Train Music Awards in 1998 , Carey won the awards for the Aretha Franklin " Entertainer of the Year " and " Soul Train Lady of Soul " , which were presented to her by Chris Tucker and Patti Labelle . 
 Butterfly was nominated at the 1998 NAACP Image Awards , in the " Outstanding Female Artist " category . At the Blockbuster Entertainment Awards , Carey was named the " Songwriter of the Year , " and received the " Song of the Year " award . At the 1998 World Music Awards , Carey won two of night 's top awards ; the " World 's Best @-@ selling R & B Artist " and the " World 's Best @-@ selling Recording Artist of the ' 90s . " Carey was unhappy not to win any of the Grammy Awards once again , but this was offset by the success of her tour , which was taking place during the awards . According to author Marc Shapiro , " No amount of awards could replace the popular acceptance of Butterfly and the feeling she was now free to live her own life – creatively and personally . " In a recent list compiled by a selection of rock critics , Butterfly was chosen as one of the 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 The album was released with two different covers and in 2007 one of them was listed on Maxim 's Sexiest Album Covers . 
 = = Music video recognition = = 
 The lead single from the album , Honey , was notable for pushing Carey further towards hip @-@ hop and R & B than before . The music video gained further attention , as Carey , for the first time in her career , was provocatively dressed , giving viewers a " taste of the freer Mariah . " The Puerto Rico @-@ filmed video 's concept was created by Carey with Paul Hunter filling in as the director . Featuring a James Bond theme , Carey was a " very sexy agent M , " in the words of Nickson , who escapes a large mansion in which she has been held captive . Carey said of the video : " I don 't really think the video is overtly sexual , but for me — I mean people used to think I was the nineties version of Mary Poppins ! " At the time of the video 's release , Carey and Mottola were in the midst of their divorce . Tabloids and critics were linking the video 's theme to Carey 's marriage , writing how Mottola would lock her in their mansion , although she denied this . In an interview , Carey said that " Tommy loves the video , he says it 's my best video yet . " Carey 's writing partner of six years , Afanasieff , felt the video was undeniably about Mottola . 
 The music video for " The Roof " was ranked 18th on Slant 's " 100 Greatest Music Videos " . Sal Ciquemani , from Slant , gave the video a positive review , complimenting Carey 's pairing the sultry song with a " sophisticated tale of a sexy rooftop encounter . " The video shows Carey reminiscing on a past love and a night they shared together on a rainy roof @-@ top . The video revolves around the settings of a dark limousine , a decrepit NYC apartment , and a rainy roof @-@ top , where according to Slant , " Carey is featured at her most vulnerable , with runny mascara and drenched in the cold rainy night . " In the conclusion of his review of the video , Ciquemani wrote : " When Carey rises through the limo 's sunroof and relishes the warm November rain , she 's not drunk on the bubbly but on the memory of past delights . " The video for " My All " was also one of the more notable videos from Butterfly . The video featured Carey in various places , including a submerged vessel , a lighthouse and a large conch shell floating the shore . In each of the scenes , Carey is shown lamenting her love and yearning to be re @-@ united with him once more . In the video 's climax , Carey meets her love in the lighthouse , where they caress and drift into the " nights abyss . " According to author Chris Nickson , the scenes of Carey on the overturned vessel showed her vulnerability without her loved one , truly emphasizing the yearning featured in the song . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 International edition 
 Latin American edition 
 15 . " Mi Todo " ( Carey , Afanasieff , Manny Benito ) – 3 : 52 
 1 Sampled from the Treacherous Three 's " The Body Rock " & the World Famous Supreme Team 's " Hey DJ " 2 Sampled from Mobb Deep 's " Shook Ones " 3 Sampled from the Jackson 5 's " It 's Great to Be Here " & the World Famous Supreme Team 's " Hey DJ " 
 = = Album credits = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Leccinum rugosiceps = 
 Leccinum rugosiceps , commonly known as the wrinkled Leccinum , is a species of bolete fungus . It is found in Asia , North America , Central America , and South America , where it grows in an ectomycorrhizal association with oak . Fruitbodies have convex , yellowish caps caps up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter . In age , the cap surface becomes wrinkled , often revealing white cracks . The stipe is up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide , with brown scabers on an underlying yellowish surface . It has firm flesh that stains initially pinkish to reddish and then to grayish or blackish when injured . The pore surface on the cap underside is yellowish . Fruitbodies are edible , although opinions vary as to their desirability . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically in 1904 by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck as Boletus rugosiceps . The type collection was made in the woods of Port Jefferson , New York . Rolf Singer transferred it to Leccinum in 1945 . Synonyms include Krombholzia rugosiceps , published by Rolf Singer in 1942 , and Krombholziella rugosiceps , published by Josef Šutara in 1982 . Krombholzia and Krombholziella are now obsolete genera that have since been subsumed into Leccinum . 
 Leccinum rugosiceps is classified in the section <unk> of genus Leccinum , a grouping of species that associated with oak and hornbeam . Others in this section include L. <unk> and L. <unk> . 
 The specific epithet rugosiceps , which is derived from the Latin roots for " rough " and " head " , refers to its wrinkled cap . It is commonly known as the " wrinkled Leccinum " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The convex cap measures 5 – 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) wide . Its color is orange @-@ yellow , aging to yellow @-@ brown . The cap margin has a narrow flap of sterile tissue . The surface of the cap is dry , with wrinkles and pits at maturity . It often becomes cracked in age , and the whitish flesh underneath shows through . The cap tends to undergo significant color changes throughout its development — first bright yellow , then dark brown , then finally pale tan — which may make it difficult to identify in the field . The flesh is white to pale yellow , and it stains reddish to burgundy when cut or bruised . This staining is most prominent at the junction of the cap and the stipe . Further exposure over the course of 20 – 60 minutes results in the flesh becoming grayish to blackish . The flesh has no distinctive door or taste . The pore surface is initially dull yellow , and sometimes ages to dingy olive @-@ brown . Unlike many other boletes , it does not turn blue when bruised , although it may have natural blue @-@ green stains . The pores are circular , measuring less than 1 mm , while the tubes extend to 8 – 14 mm deep . The stipe measures 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . It is nearly equal in length throughout or tapered from the top to base . Its color is pale yellow to brownish underneath the pale brown scabers that darken in age . 
 The spore print color ranges from brown to olive @-@ brown . Spores are spindle shaped , measuring 15 – 19 long by 5 – 6 µm . They have a smooth surface , and are inamyloid ( i.e. , not staining with Melzer 's reagent ) . The cap flesh is bilateral and <unk> . The cystidia on the pores are present as conspicuous <unk> and cheilocystidia . The cap cuticle is present as a <unk> layer . Clamp connections are absent . 
 Several chemical tests can be used to help verify an identification of L. rugosiceps . A drop of ammonium hydroxide solution turns the cap cuticle a reddish color or is unreactive , and yellow or unreactive on the flesh . A drop of dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) turns the cap surface red , and the flesh yellowish to orangish . Application of iron ( II ) sulphate solution produces a gray color on the cap surface , and greenish @-@ gray to olive coloration on the flesh . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The Costa Rican bolete Leccinum <unk> is a closely allied species . It is distinguished from L. rugosiceps by its dark brown to dark reddish @-@ brown color , and flesh that does not stain with injury . L. viscosum , found in Belize , features a similar cap and scaber pigmentation on the stipe , and similar color changes in response to injury in the flesh of the cap and the apex of the stipe ; unlike L. rugosiceps , however , it also stains at the stipe base , and the cap is sticky rather than dry . 
 L. <unk> is a lookalike that is difficult to distinguish from L. rugosiceps . It generally has a darker cap , paler scabers , and somewhat wider spores , although these characteristics are variable . L. nigrescens is also similar to L. rugosiceps , but has a darker brownish cap and stipe , flesh that slowly stains with injury ( reddish , pinkish gray , or purplish black ) . It is usually found in sandy soil . Another Leccinum species that associates with oak is L. <unk> , which also has a wrinkled cap . Unlike L. rugosiceps , its flesh stains pink to reddish . In his original species description , Charles Peck noted that L. rugosiceps grew with L. <unk> , " from which it is easily separated by its dry pileus , smaller tubes and stouter stem . " 
 = = Edibility = = 
 An edible species , Leccinum rugosiceps mushrooms have been described variously as " great " , and " of poor quality " . They have a nutty flavor and firm texture ; older specimens are less firm but retain the flavor . Drying the mushrooms enhances the flavor . The stipe tends to harbor insect larvae and should be cleaned before consumption . The sugar alcohol mannitol is present in the fruitbodies . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Leccinum rugosiceps is an ectomycorrhizal fungus that associates with oak . In eastern North America , pin oak ( Quercus palustris ) is a frequent host . The bolete fruits singly or in groups in forests , shaded lawns , and often found in areas disturbed by human activity , such as <unk> and picnic areas . Fruiting typically occurs from July to September . A Chinese study evaluating the concentrations of heavy metals in boletes found that in L. rugosiceps fruitbodies , the levels of cadmium , zinc , copper , and mercury exceeded that of national safety standards for edible fungi . 
 The bolete is found from eastern Canada south to Florida and Mississippi , west to Michigan in the United States . The distribution extends south to Mexico , Costa Rica , and Colombia . It is one of several boletes that have a north to south clinal trend . In Asia , the species has been reported from India , Korea , China , and Taiwan . Taiwanese specimens tend to have slightly smaller spores ( 10 – 16 by 4 – 5 μm ) than those from mainland China or from America . 
 = Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class battleship = 
 The Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class battleships were two battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the 1880s . They were intended to counter the small armored ships of the other Baltic powers . Construction was very prolonged and the ships were virtually obsolescent when completed . They were optimized for ramming . 
 Imperator Aleksandr II served in the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas before becoming a gunnery training ship in 1904 , but she was inactive during World War I before joining the Bolsheviks in 1917 . She was sold for scrap in 1922 . Imperator Nikolai I served in the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas as well as the Pacific Ocean during the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and the Russo @-@ Japanese War . She surrendered after the Battle of Tsushima in 1905 and was commissioned in the Imperial Japanese Navy before she was sunk as a target in 1915 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class battleships were the first all @-@ steel battleships to be built for the Baltic Fleet and were designed to allow Russia to dominate the Baltic Sea by defeating rival ships like the Danish ironclad Helgoland and the German Sachsen @-@ class ironclads , both of which were built of wrought iron . They were designed according to the tactical theories of the day which emphasized ramming and incorporated a ram bow . In addition their forecastle deck sloped slightly downwards to allow the main guns to fire at the waterline of the enemy at short range as the ship closed to ram . A full transverse armored bulkhead protected the forward 9 in ( 229 mm ) guns from raking fire and no armor was originally provided to protect them from the side . They were given a full sailing rig to allow for deployments to the Mediterranean and other distant locations although it was never actually used . Imperator Nikolai I was originally going to be built to a completely different design , but this was changed at the last minute to a modified version of the Imperator Aleksandr II design , so there were significant differences between the two ships . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Imperator Aleksandr II was 334 feet ( 102 m ) long at the waterline and 346 feet 6 inches ( 105 @.@ 61 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 66 ft 11 in ( 20 @.@ 40 m ) and a draft of 25 feet 9 inches ( 7 @.@ 85 m ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 244 long tons ( 9 @,@ 392 t ) at load , over 800 long tons ( 813 t ) more than her designed displacement of 8 @,@ 440 long tons ( 8 @,@ 575 t ) . Imperator Nikolai I was dimensionally similar to her sister except that her draft was only 24 feet 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 39 m ) . She was also 250 long tons ( 254 t ) heavier than her sister . 
 The hull was subdivided by one centerline longitudinal and ten transverse watertight bulkheads and it had a double bottom extending from frame 12 to frame 74 . It had a metacentric height of 3 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 14 m ) . They were considered to have good seagoing qualities , with a tactical diameter of 570 yards ( 520 m ) and they could complete a full 360 ° circle in seven minutes and 32 seconds . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class ships had two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical compound steam engines driving 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) screw propellers . Twelve cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engines . The engines of the Imperator Aleksandr II were built by Baltic Works and had a total designed output of 8 @,@ 500 ihp ( 6 @,@ 338 kW ) . On trials , the powerplant produced 8 @,@ 289 ihp ( 6 @,@ 181 kW ) , and a top speed of 15 @.@ 27 knots ( 28 @.@ 28 km / h ; 17 @.@ 57 mph ) . She carried 967 long tons ( 983 t ) of coal that provided a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ) at a speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) and 1 @,@ 770 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 280 km ) at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 Imperator Nikolai I 's engines were built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works , but only had a designed output of 8 @,@ 000 ihp ( 5 @,@ 966 kW ) . They were a disappointment on trials , only producing 7 @,@ 842 ihp ( 5 @,@ 848 kW ) , and a top speed of 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) . She carried 967 long tons ( 983 t ) of coal that gave her a range of 2 @,@ 630 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 870 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament of the Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class ships was a pair of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 30 @-@ caliber guns . Those in Imperator Aleksandr II were fitted in a twin barbette mount forward , but Imperator Nikolai I 's guns were fitted in a turret . These guns had a maximum elevation of 15 ° and could depress 2 ° and could traverse 220 ° . 60 rounds per gun were carried . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 870 ft / s ( 570 m / s ) to a range of 5 @,@ 570 yards ( 5 @,@ 090 m ) at an elevation of 6 ° . The rate of fire was one round every four to five minutes . 
 The four 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were on center @-@ pivot mounts in casemates at the corners of the citadel , the hull being recessed to increase their arcs of fire ahead or behind . The forward guns could traverse a total of 125 ° , including targets within about 4 ° of the centerline . The rear guns had an arc of fire of 105 ° and could fire on targets within about 10 ° of the centerline . These guns had a maximum elevation of 15 ° and could depress 5 ° . They were provided with 125 rounds per gun . They fired a ' light ' shell that weighed 277 – 280 lb ( 126 – 127 kg ) or a ' heavy ' shell that weighed 415 lb ( 188 kg ) . The muzzle velocity achieved depended on the shell weight and the type of propellant . A ' light ' shell with brown powder reached 2 @,@ 142 ft / s ( 653 m / s ) while that same shell with smokeless powder achieved 2 @,@ 326 ft / s ( 709 m / s ) . In contrast a ' heavy ' shell with brown powder could only be propelled at a velocity of 1 @,@ 867 ft / s ( 569 m / s ) . A 277 @-@ lb ' light ' shell had a maximum range of 10 @,@ 330 yards ( 9 @,@ 450 m ) when fired at an elevation of 15 ° with smokeless powder . The rate of fire was one round every minute or two . 
 The eight 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts . Four were fitted between the 9 @-@ inch guns and had could traverse a total of 100 ° . The others were mounted at each end of the ship where they could fire directly ahead or astern . Each gun had an arc of fire of 130 ° . The guns could elevate to a maximum of 12 ° and depress 8 ° . They fired a ' heavy ' shell that weighed 119 – 123 @.@ 5 lb ( 54 @.@ 0 – 56 @.@ 0 kg ) at a velocity of 1 @,@ 896 ft / s ( 578 m / s ) or a ' light ' shell that weighed 91 @.@ 5 lb ( 41 @.@ 5 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 329 ft / s ( 710 m / s ) . A ' light ' shell had a maximum range of 8 @,@ 170 yards ( 7 @,@ 470 m ) when fired at an elevation of 12 ° . They could fire one round per minute . 
 The ten 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted in hull embrasures of the ship , between the nine and six @-@ inch guns to defend against torpedo boats . They fired a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 476 ft / s ( 450 m / s ) at a rate of 30 rounds per minute to a range of 2 @,@ 020 yards ( 1 @,@ 850 m ) . Four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted in each fighting top . They fired a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 50 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 450 ft / s ( 440 m / s ) at a rate of 32 rounds per minute to a range of 3 @,@ 038 yards ( 2 @,@ 778 m ) . 
 Imperator Aleksandr II carried five above @-@ water 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes , two in the bow , two broadside tubes that could traverse 70 ° and a tube in the stern . Smaller 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes could be mounted in four of the ship 's cutters . 36 mines could be carried . Imperator Nikolai I had six torpedo tubes were that were arranged differently . Only one was in the bow , four were on the broadside , two forward and aft , and the usual stern tube . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Compound armor was used throughout the Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class ships . The main waterline belt had a maximum thickness of 14 inches ( 356 mm ) abreast the machinery spaces and was 8 ft 6 in ( 2 @.@ 59 m ) high on Imperator Aleksandr II . 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) of this was supposed to extend above the waterline at design displacement , but only 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) was actually above the waterline as actually completed . The belt tapered to 8 inches ( 203 mm ) at the lower edge and thinned in stages . It was 12 inches thick abreast the magazines and thinned down to 3 @.@ 9 inches ( 99 mm ) at the bow and 4 @.@ 9 inches ( 124 mm ) at the stern . It was backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of wood . The configuration of the waterline belt in Imperator Nikolai I differed somewhat from her sister . The belt was only 8 feet ( 2 m ) high with 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above the designed waterline and 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) below . At bow and stern it was six inches thick . The flat protective deck was positioned at the upper edge of the belt on both ships and was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick and consisted of two layers of mild steel . 
 The barbette and turret sides had a thickness of 10 inches while the turret roof was 2 ½ inches thick . Initially the barbette was open @-@ topped , but a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) thick protective hood was added in late 1893 . The transverse bulkheads were six inches thick , but the nine @-@ inch guns were protected by a patch of side armor only three inches thick and the six @-@ inch guns by a patch only 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick . Originally there was no side armor above the main belt , but that was added when the original disappearing main guns mounts and their pear @-@ shaped barbette were deleted and made some weight available . No partitions separated the casemated guns , nor was there any armor between the guns . The conning tower had 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) sides on the Imperator Aleksandr II , but they were only six inches thick on Imperator Nikolai I , but it had a 2 ½ -inch thick roof on both ships . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Imperator Aleksandr II ( Russian : Император Александр II ) was named after the Emperor Alexander II of Russia . She was built by the New Admiralty Yard at Saint Petersburg . Laid down on 12 July 1885 , she was launched on 13 July 1887 , and completed in June 1891 , although her trials lasted until the spring of 1892 . Imperator Nikolai I ( Russian : Император Николай I ) was named after the Emperor Nicholas I of Russia . She was built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works at Saint Petersburg . Construction began on 20 March 1886 ; she was launched on 1 June 1889 , and completed in July 1891 although her trials lasted almost a year afterwards . 
 = = History = = 
 Imperator Aleksandr II served in the Baltic Fleet and represented Russia , along with the cruiser Rurik , at the opening of the Kiel Canal in June 1895 . She ran aground in Vyborg Bay later that year , but suffered little damage . Joining the Mediterranean Squadron in August 1896 , she supported Russian interests during the Cretan Revolt of 1897 . Imperator Aleksandr II returned to Kronstadt in September 1901 . She was reboilered in December 1903 and modified 1904 – 05 to serve as an artillery school ship with her secondary armament replaced by more modern guns . Her crew refused to suppress the mutinous garrison of Fort Konstantin defending Kronstadt in August 1906 . She was assigned to the Artillery Training Detachment in 1907 . During World War I , she was mainly based in Kronstadt where her crew was active in the revolutionary movement . She was renamed Zarya <unk> ( Russian : <unk> <unk> : Dawn of Freedom ) in May 1917 . Turned over to the Kronstadt port authority on 21 April 1921 , Imperator Aleksandr II was sold for scrap on 22 August 1922 . She was towed to Germany during the autumn of 1922 , but was not stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 According to Robert Gardiner in Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships 1860 – 1905 , Imperator Aleksandr II was reconstructed in France between 1902 and 1904 , with her torpedo tubes removed and her six and nine @-@ inch guns exchanged for five 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) 45 @-@ caliber guns and eight six @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns . Her revolver cannon were also exchanged for ten three @-@ pounder guns . V.V. <unk> in <unk> <unk> s <unk> Imperator Aleksandr II confirms that the torpedo tubes were removed and claims that she had her nine @-@ inch guns replaced by five 8 @-@ inch , the fifth being placed at the stern , her old six @-@ inch guns were exchanged for newer , more powerful models , and four 47 mm and four 120 mm guns were added on the upper deck , presumably replacing the old revolver cannon . However , this happened in Russia , not France . 
 Imperator Nikolai I sailed in June 1892 for New York City to participate in the celebration honoring the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America . She was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron upon her return and visited Toulon in October 1893 . Sailing for the Pacific Ocean during the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and arrived at Nagasaki , Japan on 28 April 1895 , she remained in the Pacific until late 1896 , when she returned to the Mediterranean Squadron and supported Russian interests during the Cretan Revolt . After returning to the Baltic in April 1898 , Imperator Nikolai I was extensively refitted in 1899 – 1901 and received new engines and boilers . She returned to the Mediterranean in September 1901 and remained there for the next three years . Refitted in late 1904 during the Russo @-@ Japanese War , she served as the flagship of the Third Pacific Squadron under Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov and departed Liepāja on 15 January 1905 for the Pacific . She was slightly damaged during the Battle of Tsushima , receiving one hit from a 12 @-@ inch gun , two from eight @-@ inch guns and two from six @-@ inch guns , and suffered only 5 killed and 35 men wounded . She was surrendered , along with most of the Third Pacific Squadron , by Admiral Nebogatov the following day and was taken into the Imperial Japanese Navy as the ' Iki . After serving as a gunnery training ship until 1910 , Imperator Nikolai I became a first @-@ class coast defense ship and a training vessel . She was stricken on 1 May 1915 and sunk as a target by the battlecruisers Kongō and Hiei , although Watts and Gordon in The Imperial Japanese Navy claim that she was scrapped in 1922 . 
 = Harold Agnew = 
 Harold Melvin Agnew ( March 28 , 1921 – September 29 , 2013 ) was an American physicist , best known for having flown as a scientific observer on the Hiroshima bombing mission and , later , as the third director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory . 
 Agnew joined the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1942 , and helped build the Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , the world 's first nuclear reactor . In 1943 , he joined the Los Alamos Laboratory , where he worked with the Cockcroft – Walton generator . After the war ended , he returned to the University of Chicago , where he completed his graduate work under Enrico Fermi . 
 Agnew returned to Los Alamos in 1949 , and worked on the Castle Bravo nuclear test at Bikini Atoll in 1954 . He became head of the Weapon Nuclear Engineering Division in 1964 . He also served as a Democratic New Mexico State Senator from 1955 to 1961 , and was the Scientific Adviser to the NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe ( SACEUR ) from 1961 to 1964 . He was director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory from 1970 to 1979 , when he resigned to become President and Chief Executive Officer of General Atomics . He died at his home in Solana Beach , California , on September 29 , 2013 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Harold Melvin Agnew was born in Denver , Colorado on March 28 , 1921 , the only child of a pair of stonecutters . He attended South Denver High School and entered the University of Denver , where he majored in chemistry . He was a strong athlete who pitched for the university softball that won a championship . He left the University of Denver in January 1942 , but had enough credits to graduate Phi Beta Kappa with his Bachelor of Arts degree in June , and he received a scholarship to Yale University . 
 After the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor brought the United States into the Pacific War , Agnew and his girlfriend Beverly , a fellow graduate of South Denver High School and the University of Denver , attempted to join the United States Army Air Corps together . They were persuaded not to sign the enlistment papers . Instead , Joyce C. Stearns , the head of the physics department at the University of Denver , persuaded Agnew to come with him to the University of Chicago , where Stearns became the deputy head of the Metallurgical Laboratory . Although Agnew had enough credits to graduate , Beverly did not and had to remain behind . They were married in Denver on May 2 , 1942 . They then went to Chicago , where Beverly became a secretary to Richard L. Doan , then head of the Metallurgical Laboratory . Agnew and Beverly had two children , a daughter Nancy , and a son , John . 
 At the Metallurgical Laboratory , Agnew worked with Enrico Fermi , Walter Zinn and Herbert L. Anderson . There , he was involved in the construction of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 . Initially , Agnew worked with the instrumentation . The Geiger counters were calibrated using a radon @-@ beryllium source , and Agnew received too high a dose of radiation . He was then put to work stacking the graphite bricks that were the reactor 's neutron moderator . He witnessed the first controlled nuclear chain reaction when the reactor went critical on December 2 , 1942 . 
 Agnew and Beverly moved to the Los Alamos Laboratory in March 1943 . Agnew , Beverly and Bernard Waldman first went to the University of Illinois , where the men disassembled the Cockcroft – Walton generator and particle accelerator while Beverly catalogued all the parts . The parts were shipped to New Mexico , where Agnew and Beverly met up with them , and rode the trucks hauling them to the Los Alamos Laboratory . There , Beverly worked a secretary , initially with Robert Oppenheimer and his secretary Priscilla Green . She then became secretary to Robert Bacher , the head of Physics ( P ) Division , and later the Gadget ( G ) Division , for the rest of the war . Agnew 's job was to reassemble the accelerator , which was then used for experiments by John Manley 's group . 
 When experimental work wound down , Agnew was transferred to Project Alberta , working as part of Luis W. Alvarez 's group , whose role was to monitor the yield of nuclear explosions . With Alvarez and Lawrence H. Johnson , Agnew had devised a method for measuring the yield of the nuclear blast by dropping pressure gauges on parachutes and <unk> the readings back to the plane . In June 1945 , he was issued with an Army uniform and dog tags at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , and was flown to Tinian in the Western Pacific in a C @-@ 54 of the 509th Composite Group . Agnew 's first task was to install his yield measurement instrumentation in the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress aircraft The Great Artiste . 
 During the atomic bombing of Hiroshima , on August 6 , 1945 , Agnew , along with Alvarez and Johnson , flew as a scientific observer in the The Great Artiste , piloted by Charles Sweeney , which tailed the Enola Gay as the instrumentation aircraft . Agnew later recalled , " After we dropped our gauges I remember we made a sharp turn to the right so that we would not get caught in the blast – but we still got badly shaken up by it . " He brought along a movie camera and took the only existing movies of the Hiroshima event as seen from the air . 
 After the war ended , Agnew entered the University of Chicago , where he completed his graduate work under Fermi . Agnew and Beverly stayed with Fermi and his family , due to the post @-@ war housing shortage . He received his Master of Science ( MS ) degree in 1948 and his Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) degree in 1949 , writing his thesis on " The beta @-@ spectra of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> " . Fellow postgraduate students at Chicago at the time included Tsung @-@ Dao Lee , Chen Ning Yang , Owen Chamberlain and Jack Steinberger . 
 = = Los Alamos years = = 
 With his doctorate in hand , Agnew returned to Los Alamos as a National Research Foundation Fellow , and worked on weapons development in the Physics Division . In 1950 , he was assigned to the thermonuclear weapons project , and was project engineer for the Castle Bravo nuclear test at Bikini Atoll in 1954 . He became head of the Weapon Nuclear Engineering Division in 1964 . 
 Agnew served as a Democratic New Mexico State Senator from 1955 to 1961 . He was the first state senator to be elected from Los Alamos County . Senators served unpaid , receiving only a per diem allowance of five dollars . Since the New Mexico legislature convened for only 30 days in even numbered years and 60 days in odd numbered years , he was able to continue working at Los Alamos , taking leave without pay to attend . He attempted to reform New Mexico 's liquor laws , which specified a minimum mark @-@ up . He was unsuccessful in 1957 , but the law was reformed in 1963 . 
 From 1961 to 1964 , he was Scientific Adviser to the NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe ( SACEUR ) . He also held a number of part @-@ time advisory position with the military over the years . He was a member of the United States Air Force Scientific Advisory Board from 1957 to 1968 , and was chairman of the Science Advisory Group of the United States Army 's Combat Development Command from 1966 to 1970 . He was a member of the Defense Science Board from 1966 to 1970 , the Army 's Scientific Advisory Panel from 1966 to 1974 , and the Army Science Board from 1978 to 1984 . 
 Agnew became director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory in 1970 , when it had 7 @,@ 000 employees . He took over at a time of great change . His predecessor , Norris Bradbury , had rebuilt the laboratory from scratch after the war , and many of the people he had brought in were approaching retirement . Under his directorship , Los Alamos developed an underground test containment program , completed its Meson Physics Facility , acquired the first Cray supercomputer , and trained the first class of International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors . Agnew managed to get the Los Alamos Laboratory responsibility for the development of the <unk> , used by the Trident I and Trident II Submarine Launched Ballistic Missiles , and the <unk> used by the Minuteman III intercontinental ballistic missiles . He was proud of the work with insensitive high explosive that made nuclear weapons safer to handle . Support from the Atomic Energy Commission for reactor development dried up , but during the 1970s energy crisis , the laboratory explored other types of alternative fuels . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1979 , Agnew resigned from Los Alamos and became President and Chief Executive Officer of General Atomics , a position he held until 1985 . In his letter of resignation to David S. Saxon , the President of the University of California , Agnew wrote that his decision was influenced by " dissatisfaction with University administration policies and a lack of advocacy for the total <unk> [ Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory ] program " and " frustration with what I consider to be a continuing inequitable distribution of defense program funding by the Department of Energy between the <unk> and LLL [ Lawrence Livermore Laboratory ] . " 
 Agnew chaired the General Advisory Committee of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency from 1974 to 1978 , and served as a White House science councillor from 1982 to 1989 . He was a member of NASA 's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel from 1968 to 1974 , and from 1978 to 1987 . He became an adjunct professor at the University of California , San Diego in 1988 . He was the recipient of the E.O. Lawrence Award in 1966 , and of the Department of Energy 's Enrico Fermi Award in 1978 . Along with Hans Bethe , Agnew was the first to receive the Los Alamos National Laboratory Medal . He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering . 
 A proponent of tactical nuclear weapons , Agnew pointed out in 1970 that the Thanh Hoa Bridge in Vietnam required hundreds of sorties to destroy with conventional weapons when a nuclear weapon could have done the job with just one . In a 1977 article for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , Agnew argued that the fusion reactions of neutron bombs could provide " tactical " advantages over conventional fission weapons , especially in countering the " massive armor component possessed by the Eastern bloc . " Citing conclusions reached by the Rand Corporation , Agnew argued that without affecting the armor of a tank , the neutrons produced by a fusion blast would penetrate the vehicle and " in a matter of a few tens of minutes to hours kill or make the crew completely ineffective . " Because the neutron bomb reduced collateral damage , it could be used in a much more selective fashion than a fission weapon , thereby providing a clear " advantage for the military defender as well as for the nearby non @-@ combatant . " 
 Agnew maintained that no new U.S. nuclear weapon design could be certified without nuclear testing , and that stockpile reliability stewardship without such testing may be problematic . In a 1999 letter to the Wall Street Journal , he commented on the significance of allegations of Chinese nuclear espionage . " As long as any nation has a demonstrated nuclear capability and a means of delivering its bombs and warheads , it doesn 't really matter whether the warheads are a little smaller or painted a color other than red , white , and blue , " he wrote . " I suspect information published in the open by the National [ sic . ] Resources Defense Council has been as useful to other nations as any computer codes they may have received by illegal means . " 
 Beverly died on October 11 , 2011 . Agnew was diagnosed of chronic lymphocytic leukemia , and died at his home in Solana Beach , California , on September 29 , 2013 , while watching football on television . He was survived by his daughter Nancy and son John . He had arranged to be cremated and his ashes interred with Beverly 's at the Guaje Pines Cemetery in Los Alamos . 
 In a 2005 BBC interview , Agnew stated , " About three @-@ quarters of the U.S. nuclear arsenal was designed under my tutelage at Los Alamos . That is my legacy . " 
 = Secret of Mana = 
 Secret of Mana , originally released in Japan as Seiken Densetsu 2 ( <unk> , lit . " Legend of the Sacred Sword 2 " ) , is a 1993 action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It is the sequel to the 1991 game Seiken Densetsu , released in North America as Final Fantasy Adventure and in Europe as Mystic Quest , and it was the first Seiken Densetsu title to be marketed as part of the Mana series rather than the Final Fantasy series . Set in a high fantasy universe , the game follows three heroes as they attempt to prevent an empire from conquering the world with the power of an ancient flying fortress . 
 Rather than using a turn @-@ based battle system like contemporaneous role @-@ playing games , Secret of Mana features real @-@ time battles . The game has a unique Ring Command menu system , which pauses the action and allows the player to make decisions in the middle of battle . An innovative cooperative multiplayer system allows a second or third player to drop in and out of the game at any time . Secret of Mana was directed and designed by Koichi Ishii , programmed primarily by Nasir Gebelli , and produced by veteran Square designer Hiromichi Tanaka . 
 The game received considerable acclaim for its brightly colored graphics , expansive plot , Ring Command menu system , and innovative real @-@ time battle system . Critics also praised the soundtrack by Hiroki Kikuta and the customizable artificial intelligence ( AI ) settings for computer @-@ controlled allies . The original version was re @-@ released for the Wii 's Virtual Console in 2008 and the Wii U 's Virtual Console in 2013 . The game was ported to mobile phones in Japan in 2009 , and an enhanced port of the game was released for iOS in 2010 and Android in 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like many other role @-@ playing games of the 16 @-@ bit era , Secret of Mana displays a top @-@ down perspective , in which the player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures . The game features three such characters : the hero , the girl , and the sprite , named Randi , <unk> , and Popoi outside the initial North American release . The player can choose to control each of the characters at any time ; whichever character is currently selected , the other two companions are controlled via artificial intelligence . The game may be played simultaneously by up to three players , made possible by the Super <unk> accessory for the Super NES console . The Virtual Console version of the game supports three @-@ player gameplay via additional GameCube controllers or Classic Controllers . 
 Each character possesses individual strengths and weaknesses . The hero , while unable to use magic , masters weapons at a quicker rate ; the girl is a healer , able to cast restorative and support spells ; and the sprite casts offensive magic to damage and impair enemies . Upon collecting enough experience points in battle , each character increases in level and improves in areas such as strength and evasion . The trio can rest in towns , where they can regain hit points or purchase restorative items and equipment . Options such as changing equipment , casting spells , or checking status are performed by cycling through the game 's Ring Commands , a circular menu which hovers over the currently controlled party member . The game is momentarily paused whenever the Ring Commands appear . 
 Combat takes place in real @-@ time . Located at the bottom of the screen is a gauge that determines the amount of damage done to an enemy when attacking . Swinging a weapon causes the gauge to empty and then quickly recharge , allowing that character to attack at full strength . The party wields eight different types of weaponry : sword , spear , bow , axe , boomerang , glove , whip , and javelin . All weapons can be upgraded eight times , and repeated use of a weapon increases its skill level to a maximum of eight , unlocking a new special attack with each level . Weapons are upgraded with Weapon Orbs , which are found in dungeons or earned by defeating certain bosses . The player takes each Orb to a blacksmith , located in most towns , who uses it to reforge one weapon . 
 In order to learn magic , the party must rescue spirits known as Elementals . The eight Elementals represent different elements — such as water , earth , and life — and each provides the player with specific spells . Magic has skill levels similar to weapons , but each magic spell costs magic points to cast . 
 At the start of the game , to reach a destination players must traverse an enemy @-@ infested countryside . Travel may be expedited with Cannon Travel Centers , where the party may be launched to faraway destinations via a giant cannon . Cannon Travel usually requires a fee , but is mandatory to visit other continents later on . Later , the party is given access to Flammie , a miniature dragon which is controlled by the player and able to fly freely across the world , represented by an overworld map . These sequences make use of the SNES 's Mode 7 capability to create a rotatable background , giving the illusion that the ground beneath Flammie is rendered in three dimensions . While riding Flammie , the player may access either the " rotated map " , which presents the world as a globe , or the " world map " , a two @-@ dimensional view of the overworld . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The story takes place in a high fantasy world , which contains an ethereal energy source named " mana " . An ancient , technologically advanced civilization exploited mana to construct the " Mana Fortress " , a flying warship . This angered the world 's gods , who sent giant beasts to war with the civilization . The conflict was globally destructive and nearly exhausted all signs of mana in the world , until a hero used the power of the Mana Sword to destroy the fortress and the civilization . The world began to recover in peace . As the game opens , an empire seeks eight Mana Seeds , which when " unsealed " will restore mana to the world and allow the empire to restore the Mana Fortress . 
 The three main characters do not have names in the original SNES release , though their names appear in the manual of the Japanese release ; and their names were added into the game in the iOS port worldwide . In all versions , the player can choose to name the characters whatever they wish . The hero ( <unk> , Randi ) , a young boy , is adopted by the Elder of Potos before the start of the game , after the boy 's mother disappears . The girl ( <unk> , <unk> ) is in love with a warrior named Dyluck , who was ordered by the king to attack <unk> 's Castle . Angered by the king 's actions and by her father 's attempt to arrange her marriage to a local nobleman , she leaves the castle to save Dyluck and to accompany the hero as well . The hero and the girl meet the sprite child ( <unk> , Popoi ) at the Dwarf Village . The sprite makes a living by scamming people at a freak show held by dwarves . He does not remember anything about his past , so he joins the team to try to recover his memories . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins as three boys from the small Potos village disobey their Elder 's instructions and trespass into a local waterfall , where a treasure is said to be kept . One of the boys stumbles and falls into the lake , where he finds a rusty sword embedded in a stone . Guided by a disembodied voice , he pulls the sword free , inadvertently unleashing monsters in the surrounding countryside of the village . The villagers interpret the sword 's removal as a bad omen and banish the boy from Potos forever . A traveling knight named <unk> recognizes the blade as the legendary Mana Sword and encourages the hero to re @-@ energize it by visiting the eight Mana Temples . 
 During his journey , the hero is joined by the girl and the sprite . Throughout their travels , the trio is pursued by the empire . The Emperor and his subordinates are being manipulated by Thanatos , an ancient sorcerer who hopes to create a " new , peaceful world " . Due to his own body 's deterioration , Thanatos is in need of a suitable body to possess . After placing the entire kingdom of Pandora under a trance , he abducts two candidates : Dyluck , now enslaved , and a young <unk> girl named <unk> ; he eventually chooses to possess Dyluck . 
 The Empire succeeds in unsealing all eight Mana Seeds . However , Thanatos betrays the Emperor and his henchmen , killing them and seizing control of the Mana Fortress for himself . The hero and his party journey to locate the Mana Tree , the focal point of the world 's life energy . Anticipating their arrival , Thanatos positions the Mana Fortress over the Tree and destroys it . The charred remains of the Tree speak to the heroes , explaining that a giant dragon called the Mana Beast will soon be summoned to combat the Fortress . However , the Beast has little control over its rage and will likely destroy the world as well . The Mana Tree also reveals that it was once the human wife of Serin , the original Mana Knight and the hero 's father . The voice heard at Potos ' waterfall was that of Serin 's ghost . 
 The trio flies to the Mana Fortress and confronts Thanatos , who is preparing to transfer his mind into Dyluck . With the last of his strength , Dyluck warns that Thanatos has sold his soul to the underworld and must not be allowed to have the Fortress . Dyluck kills himself , forcing Thanatos to revert to a skeletal lich form , which the party defeats . The Mana Beast finally flies in and attacks the Fortress . The hero expresses reluctance to kill the Beast , fearing that with the dispersal of Mana from the world , the sprite will vanish . With the sprite 's encouragement , he uses the fully energized Mana Sword to slay the Beast , causing it to explode and transform into snow . At the conclusion of the game , the hero is seen returning the Mana Sword to its place beneath the Potos waterfall . 
 = = Development = = 
 Secret of Mana was directed and designed by Koichi Ishii , the creator of the game 's Game Boy predecessor , Final Fantasy Adventure . He has stated that he feels Secret of Mana is more " his game " than other projects he has worked on , such as the Final Fantasy series . The game was programmed primarily by Nasir Gebelli and produced by veteran Square designer Hiromichi Tanaka . The team hoped to build on the foundation of Final Fantasy Adventure , and they included several modified elements from that game and from other popular Square titles in Secret of Mana . In addition to having better graphics and sound quality than its predecessor , the attack power gauge was changed to be more engaging , and the weapon leveling system replaced Final Fantasy Adventure 's system of leveling up the speed of the attack gauge . The party system also received an upgrade from the first Mana game : instead of temporary companions who could not be upgraded , party members became permanent protagonists and could be controlled by other players . The multiplayer component was not a part of the original design , but was added when the developers realized that they could easily make all three characters human @-@ controlled . 
 The real @-@ time battle system used in Secret of Mana has been described by its creators as an extension of the battle system used in the first three flagship Final Fantasy titles . The system for experience points and leveling up was taken from Final Fantasy III . According to Tanaka , the game 's battle system features mechanics that had first been considered for Final Fantasy IV . Similarly , unused features in Secret of Mana were appropriated by the Chrono Trigger team , which like Final Fantasy IV was in production at the time . 
 Secret of Mana was originally planned to be a launch title for the SNES @-@ CD add @-@ on . After the contract between Nintendo and Sony to produce the add @-@ on failed , and Sony repurposed its work on the SNES @-@ CD into the competing PlayStation console , Square Enix adapted the game for the SNES cartridge format . The game had to be altered to fit the storage space of a SNES game cartridge , which is much smaller than that of a CD @-@ ROM . The developers initially resisted continuing the project without the CD add @-@ on , believing that too much of the game would have to be cut , but they were overruled by company management . As a result of the hardware change , several features had to be cut from the game , and some completed work needed to be redone . Most major of these removals was the option to take multiple routes through the game that led to several possible endings , in contrast to the linear journey in the final product . The plot that remained was different than the original conception , and Tanaka has said that the original story had a much darker tone . Ishii has estimated that up to forty percent of the planned game was dropped to meet the space limitations , and critics have suggested that the hardware change led to technical problems when too much happens at once in the game . In 2006 , Level magazine claimed that Secret of Mana 's rocky development was Square 's main inspiration to move their games , such as the Final Fantasy series , from Nintendo consoles to Sony consoles in 1996 . 
 The English translation for Secret of Mana was completed in only 30 days , mere weeks after the Japanese release , and the North American localization was initially advertised as Final Fantasy Adventure 2 . Critics have suggested that the translation was done hastily so that the game could be released in North America for the 1993 holiday season . According to translator Ted Woolsey , a large portion of the game 's script was cut out in the English localization due to space limitations . To display text on the main gameplay screen , the English translation uses a fixed @-@ width font , which limits the amount of space available to display text . Woolsey was unhappy that he had to trim conversations to their bare essentials and that he had so little time for translation , commenting that it " nearly killed me " . The script was difficult to translate as it was presented to Woolsey in disordered groups of text , like " shuffling a novel " . Other localizations were done in German and French . The Japanese release only named the three protagonists in the manual , while Western versions omitted the characters ' names until the enhanced port on the iOS . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Secret of Mana was composed by Hiroki Kikuta . Kenji Ito , who had composed the soundtrack for Final Fantasy Adventure , was originally slated for the project . He was replaced with Kikuta when Ito was forced to drop Secret of Mana due to other demands on his time , such as the soundtrack to Romancing SaGa . It was Kikuta 's first video game score . Encountering difficulties in dealing with the hardware limitations of the SNES , Kikuta tried to express in the music two " contrasting styles " to create an original score which would be neither pop music nor standard game music . Kikuta worked on the music mostly by himself , spending nearly 24 hours a day in his office , alternating between composing and editing to create a soundtrack that would be , according to him , " immersive " and " three @-@ dimensional " . Rather than having sound engineers create the samples of instruments like most game music composers of the time , Kikuta made his own samples that matched the hardware capabilities of the SNES . These custom samples allowed him to know exactly how each piece would sound on the system 's hardware , so he did not have to worry about differences between the original composition and the SNES . Kikuta said in 2001 that he considered the score for Secret of Mana his favorite creation . 
 The soundtrack 's music includes both " ominous " and " light @-@ hearted " tracks , and is noted for its use of bells and " dark , solemn pianos " . Kikuta 's compositions for the game were partly inspired by natural landscapes , as well as music from Bali . Hardware limitations made the title screen to the game slowly fade in , and Kikuta designed the title track to the game , " Fear of the Heavens " , to sync up with the screen . At that time , composers rarely tried to match a game 's music to its visuals . Kikuta also started the track off with a " whale noise " , rather than a traditional " ping " , in order to try to " more deeply connect " the player with the game from the moment it started up . Getting the sound to work with the memory limitations of the SNES was a difficult technical challenge . 
 The 1993 soundtrack album Secret of Mana Original Soundtrack , first released as Seiken Densetsu 2 Original Sound Version in Japan , collects 44 tracks of music from Secret of Mana . Aside from its packaging and localized song titles , the English release is identical to the Japanese original . Secret of Mana was one of the first Japanese games to inspire a localized soundtrack release in North America . An album of arranged music from Secret of Mana and its sequel Seiken Densetsu 3 was produced in 1993 as Secret of Mana + . The music in the album was all composed and arranged by Kikuta . Secret of Mana + contains a single track , titled " Secret of Mana " , that incorporates themes from the music of both Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 , which was still under development at the time . The style of the album has been described by critics as " experimental " , using " strange sounds " such as waterfalls , bird calls , cell phone sounds , and " typing " sounds . The music has also been described by critics as covering many different musical styles , such as " Debussian impressionist styles , his own heavy electronic and synth ideas , and even ideas of popular musicians " . The latest album of music from the game is a 2012 arranged album titled Secret of Mana Genesis / Seiken Densetsu 2 Arrange Album . The 16 tracks are upgraded versions of the original SNES tracks , and Kikuta said in the liner notes for the album that they are " how he wanted the music to sound when he wrote it " , without the limitations of the SNES hardware . Critics such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , however , have noted that the differences are minor . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 In 1999 Square announced they would be porting Secret of Mana to Bandai 's handheld system WonderSwan Color as one of nine planned games for the system . No such port was ever released . A mobile phone port of Secret of Mana was released on October 26 , 2009 . A port of the game for iOS was revealed at E3 2010 , and released on Apple 's App Store on December 21 , 2010 . The port fixed several bugs , and the English script was both edited and retranslated from the original Japanese . The enhanced port from the iOS version was released on Android devices in 2014 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 As of February 2004 , Secret of Mana had shipped 1 @.@ 83 million copies worldwide , with 1 @.@ 5 million of those copies being shipped in Japan and 330 @,@ 000 abroad . The initial shipment of games in Japan sold out within days of the release date . Edge noted in November 1993 that the game was " the most widely covered game of the year in Japan " , with a high number of sales , but was released in North America " completely un @-@ hyped and mostly unheard of " . Nevertheless , Secret of Mana was the second best @-@ selling Super NES game on Babbage 's North American chart in October 1993 , behind only Mortal Kombat . 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly magazine 's reviewers heavily praised the graphics , music , and multiplayer gameplay , saying that it had " some of the best music I 've ever heard from a cartridge " . They hoped that other companies would take the game 's lead in adding multiplayer modes to role @-@ playing games . Diehard GameFan 's review of the game named the multiplayer as the game 's best component , with reviewer Kelly Rickards saying that while the graphics were nice , the multiplayer " made the game " . GamePro 's review praised the graphics , plot , " first @-@ rate gameplay " and " positively massive " world " dwarfing even Zelda " , while stating the gameplay and multiplayer were " rough around the edges " , concluding it to be " one of the finest action / RPGs " on the SNES . Nintendo Power called it an " enthralling epic " , praising the " wide variety of sites and terrain , " music , " Beautiful graphics and great depth of play " but criticizing the " unnecessarily long " sword powering @-@ up and " awkward " item selection method . 
 Secret of Mana was awarded Game of the Month in December 1993 and Best Role @-@ Playing Game of 1993 by Electronic Gaming Monthly . In its annual <unk> , GameFan awarded it Best Action / RPG ( SNES ) . GamePro gave it the award for Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year , ahead of <unk> and Shadowrun as runners @-@ up . 
 Edge 's review said that Secret of Mana was better than contemporary role @-@ playing games <unk> I & II , The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , and Landstalker : The Treasures of King Nole . The review stated that Secret of Mana " includes some of the best game design and features ever seen : simultaneous <unk> action , the best combat system ever designed , the best player interface ever designed , a superb control system , and yes , some of the most engrossing and rewarding gameplay yet " . They concluded that the game was one of the best action RPGs or adventure games . Game designer Sandy Petersen reviewed the game in Dragon , and described the game as much like Zelda but with conventional role @-@ playing game features . He predicted that the game would be regarded as a classic . Peterson concluded that Secret of Mana was one of the best SNES role @-@ playing games and that it was " a much larger game than Zelda , with many more types of monsters , character options , and fortresses to explore " . Nintendo Magazine System ( now Official Nintendo Magazine ) also compared it favorably with A Link to the Past ; reviewer Paul stated that " even the magnificence of Zelda III seems stale in comparison to the incredible features found within this refreshing , exhilarating adventure " while Tim stated that it " comes the closest yet " to surpassing Zelda , concluding that Secret of Mana was " one of the greatest graphical RPGs in the history of the world " . 
 In 2008 , Lucas Thomas of IGN reviewed the Virtual Console port of Secret of Mana and stated that it was considered one of the best video games ever made . Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead also recommended the port , describing it as " essential " and as the formative game of the Mana series . The iOS port of the game was praised by Nadia Oxford of Slide to Play for its improved graphics and computer @-@ controlled characters . She also praised the quality of the touch controls relative to other role @-@ playing game phone versions , though she disliked that the multiplayer mode had been removed . 
 In 2014 , Edge magazine described Secret of Mana as " one of the high points of the 16bit era " . A writer for the magazine noted that , 20 years after Secret of Mana 's release , its reputation as a SNES action RPG had been surpassed only by that of The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past . Review aggregator site GameRankings lists the game as the 13th @-@ highest rated SNES game . In 1996 , Super Play ranked Secret of Mana eighth on its list of the best 100 SNES games of all time . It took 42nd place on Nintendo Power magazine 's 2006 " Top 200 Nintendo Games of All Time " list , and the magazine called it the 86th best game on a Nintendo system . IGN 's " Top 100 Games " list ranked the game at number 48 in 2005 , number 49 in 2006 , and number 79 in 2007 . In 2006 , Famitsu 's " All Time Top 100 " audience poll ranked it number 97 . Secret of Mana was an influential game in its time , and its influence continued into the 2010s . Elements such as its ring menu system , described by Edge as " oft @-@ mimicked " , were borrowed by later games such as The Temple of Elemental Evil . Its cooperative multiplayer gameplay has been mentioned as an influence on Dungeon Siege III . 
 = Aspect weaver = 
 An aspect weaver is a metaprogramming utility for aspect @-@ oriented languages designed to take instructions specified by aspects ( isolated representations of a significant concepts in a program ) and generate the final implementation code . The weaver integrates aspects into the locations specified by the software as a pre @-@ compilation step . By merging aspects and classes ( representations of the structure of entities in the program ) , the weaver generates a woven class . 
 Aspect weavers take instructions known as advice specified through the use of pointcuts and join points , special segments of code that indicate what methods should be handled by aspect code . The implementation of the aspect then specifies whether the related code should be added before , after , or throughout the related methods . By doing this , aspect weavers improve modularity , keeping code in one place that would otherwise have been interspersed throughout various , unrelated classes . 
 = = Motivation = = 
 Many programming languages are already widely accepted and understood . However , the desire to create radically different programming languages to support the aspect @-@ oriented programming paradigm is not significant due to business @-@ related concerns ; there are risks associated with adopting new technologies . Use of an entirely new language relies on a business 's ability to acquire new developers . Additionally , the existing code base of a business would need to be discarded . Finally , a business would need to acquire a new toolchain ( suite of tools ) for development , which is often both an expense in both money and time . Primary concerns about <unk> for the adoption of new technologies tend to be the need to train new developers and adapt existing processes to the new technology . 
 To address these business concerns , an aspect weaver enables the use of widely adopted languages like Java with aspect @-@ oriented programming through minor adaptations such as AspectJ which work with existing tools . Instead of developing an entirely new language , the aspect weaver interprets the extensions defined by AspectJ and builds " woven " Java code which can then be used by any existing Java compiler . This ensures that any existing object oriented code will still be valid aspect @-@ oriented code and that development will feel like a natural extension of the object @-@ oriented language . The <unk> + + programming language extends C + + through the use of an aspect weaver , offering the additional efficiency over AspectJ that is necessary for embedded systems while still retaining the benefits of aspect @-@ oriented programming . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 Aspect weavers operate by taking instructions specified by aspects , known as advice , and distributing it throughout the various classes in the program automatically . The result of the weaving process is a set of classes with the same names as the original classes but with additional code injected into the classes ' functions automatically . The advice specifies the exact location and functionality of the injected code . 
 Through this weaving process , aspect weavers allow for code which would have otherwise been duplicated across classes . By eliminating this duplication , aspect weavers promote modularity of cross @-@ cutting concerns . Aspects define the implementation code which would have otherwise been duplicated and then use pointcuts and join points to define the advice . During weaving , the aspect weaver uses the pointcuts and join points , known as a pointcut designator , to identify the positions in candidate classes at which the implementation should be injected . The implementation is then injected into the classes at the points identified , thus permitting the code to be executed at the appropriate times without relying on manual duplication by the programmer . 
 = = = Weaving in AspectJ = = = 
 In the programming language AspectJ , pointcuts , join points , and the modularized code are defined in an aspect block similar to that of Java classes . Classes are defined using Java syntax . The weaving process consists of executing the aspect advice to produce only a set of generated classes that have the aspect implementation code woven into it . 
 The example at right shows a potential implementation of an aspect which logs the entry and exit of all methods . Without an aspect weaver , this feature would necessitate duplication of code in the class for every method . Instead , the entry and exit code is defined solely within the aspect . 
 The aspect weaver analyzes the advice specified by the pointcut in the aspect and uses that advice to distribute the implementation code into the defined class . The code differs slightly in each method due to slight variances in requirements for the method ( as the method identifier has changed ) . The aspect weaver determines the appropriate code to generate in each situation as defined by the implementation advice and then injects it into methods matching the specified pointcut . 
 = = = Weaving to bytecode = = = 
 Instead of generating a set of woven source code , some AspectJ weavers instead weave the aspects and classes together directly into bytecode , acting both as the aspect weaver and compiler . While it is expected that the performance of aspect weavers which also perform the compilation process will require more computation time due to the weaving process involved . However , the bytecode weaving process produces more efficient runtime code than would usually be achieved through compiled woven source . 
 = = = Run @-@ time weaving = = = 
 Developments in AspectJ have revealed the potential to incorporate just @-@ in @-@ time compilation into the execution of aspect @-@ oriented code to address performance demands . At run @-@ time , an aspect weaver could translate aspects in a more efficient manner than traditional , static weaving approaches . Using AspectJ on a Java Virtual Machine , dynamic weaving of aspects at run @-@ time has been shown to improve code performance by 26 % . While some implementations of just @-@ in @-@ time virtual machines implement this capability through a new virtual machine , some implementations can be designed to use features that already exist in current virtual machines . The requirement of a new virtual machine is contrary to one of the original design goals of AspectJ . 
 To accomplish just @-@ in @-@ time weaving , a change to the virtual machine that executes the compiled bytecode is necessary . A proposed solution for AspectJ uses a layered approach which builds upon the existing Java Virtual Machine to add support for join point management and callbacks to a Dynamic Aspect @-@ Oriented Programming Engine . An alternative implementation uses a weaving engine that uses breakpoints to halt execution at the pointcut , select an appropriate method , embed it into the application , and continue . The use of breakpoints in this manner has been shown to reduce performance due to a very large number of context switches . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Aspect weavers ' performance , as well as the performance of the code that they produce , has been a subject of analysis . It is preferable that the improvement in modularity supplied by aspect weaving does not impact run @-@ time performance . Aspect weavers are able to perform aspect @-@ specific optimizations . While traditional optimizations such as the elimination of unused special variables from aspect code can be done at compile @-@ time , some optimizations can only be performed by the aspect weaver . For example , AspectJ contains two similar but distinct keywords , <unk> , which contains information about this particular instance of woven code , and <unk> , which contains information common to all instances of code relevant to that set of advice . The optimization of replacing <unk> with the more efficient and static keyword <unk> can only be done by the aspect weaver . By performing this replacement , the woven program avoids the creation of a join point object on every execution . Studies have shown that the unnecessary creation of join point objects in AspectJ can lead to a performance overhead of 5 % at run @-@ time , while performance degradation is only approximately 1 % when this object is not created . 
 Compile @-@ time performance is generally worse in aspect weavers than their traditional compiler counterparts due to the additional work necessary for locating methods which match the specified pointcuts . A study done showed that the AspectJ compiler <unk> is about 34 % slower than the Sun Microsystems Java 1 @.@ 3 compiler and about 62 % slower than the Java 1 @.@ 4 compiler . 
 = Surekill = 
 " Surekill " is the eighth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 7 , 2001 . The episode was written by Greg Walker and directed by Terrence O 'Hara . " Surekill " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 0 and was viewed by 13 @.@ 3 million viewers . Overall , the episode received largely negative reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , the fatal shooting of a realtor , while alone in a <unk> jail cell , has Doggett struggling to find out who committed the murder and how the crime was committed . Scully and Doggett , however , soon learn that there is more to this case than meets the eye . 
