 Due to the presence of his " biker buddy " Michael Bowen , series co @-@ star Robert Patrick was noticeably more energized than usual to film the episode , according to Gillian Anderson . In addition , scenes at " AAA @-@ 1 Surekill Exterminators " , the business run by Randall and Dwight , were filmed at an actual business front located on Palmetto Street in Los Angeles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Worcester , Massachusetts , Carlton Chase runs from an unknown assailant , makes a brief phone call , and then runs to a police station . After a skirmish with the guards , he is placed in a large room with cinder blocks for walls and a solid steel door . He screams at the officer that he still is not safe . Suddenly , and mysteriously , he is shot from inside the room . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) are informed that Chase was killed with an armor @-@ piercing round , which appears to have entered the room through the air vent in the ceiling . Upon further investigation , the agents discover that the assassin shot through the roof , ceiling , duct work , and into the victim . 
 Tammi Peyton enters AAA @-@ 1 Surekill Exterminators and plays her message machine that contains the victim 's phone call from the previous night . She attempts to get into her right desk drawer , when Dwight walks in , and begins harassing her about a message on the machine . She mentions the murder to Dwight , and he responds by asking her to try to get Randall on the phone . Dwight then confronts Randall in the alley ; Dwight tells him that he doesn 't mind what he does , as long as he asks first . Later , Scully and Doggett investigate the Chase residence and find a bullet casing on the floor . Doggett notes that it would be difficult to miss a target in a confined space , but Scully notes it would have if the gunman was shooting from outside . Eventually , Scully proposes that the killer can perceive wave lengths of light not visible with an ordinary human eye , allowing him to virtually see through walls . 
 Scully and Doggett arrive at Surekill and inquire as to the company 's client , Carlton Chase . Doggett asks if Dwight did time , and he responds that he did . Doggett asks why Chase would have called Surekill just before his death . After the agents leave , Dwight confronts Tammi about the message , and she lies . Meanwhile , Randall watches Tammi through a wall . Tammi returns to Surekill early the next morning and rushes in to get the deposit book , showing she has taken from the Surekill account out of her desk , but is caught by Dwight and Randall . Dwight is interrupted by the FBI , who have a search warrant . Doggett opens the box Tammi was trying to dispose of , which contains nothing , much to her surprise . Dwight claims he runs a clean business , but Scully pulls out several folders containing invoices for Chase . 
 Doggett interrogates Dwight , and Scully interrogates Randall . Randall repeats Dwight 's words as he reads his lips through a wall . Randall replies that he and Dwight are just exterminators . Later , Tammi returns home and meets up with Randall , and the two go to the bus station . It becomes clear that they intend to run away together , but that Tammi must go get her stash of money . Meanwhile , Doggett find phone records that show that Tammi and Chase had back and forth phone calls , late at night . Doggett and Scully search Tammi 's apartment , and Doggett <unk> Tammi 's phone , getting the bus station . 
 Tammi returns from the bank and gets back in her car . Dwight surprises her from the back seat and puts a gun to her head , and tells her to drive . Dwight comes to the conclusion that Randall killed Chase because he and Tammi were together . Dwight hands Randall a gun and tells him to shoot Tammi . Tammi tries to talk Randall out of it but Randall shoots through the wall next to her and kills Dwight . Randall is eventually arrested , but Tammi successfully manages to run away . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Surekill " was written by executive story editor Greg Walker , and marked his second script contribution to the series , after season seven 's " Brand X " . " Surekill " was the first and only episode of The X @-@ Files to be directed by Terrence O 'Hara . Although the episode was the eighth aired in the season , it was actually the ninth one filmed , as evidenced by its production number : <unk> . Scenes at " AAA @-@ 1 Surekill Exterminators " , the business ran by Randall and Dwight , were filmed at an actual business front located on Palmetto Street in Los Angeles . 
 " Surekill " guest starred Michael Bowen , a " biker buddy " of series co @-@ star Robert Patrick . Because of this , Patrick was noticeably more energetic on the set of the episode . Co @-@ star Gillian Anderson recounted , " Robert was like an Energizer Bunny . He was just wound and wouldn 't unwind until the day was done , no matter how long the day went . So that picked up the energy of the series , in a sense . " The episode also guest @-@ starred a pre @-@ fame James Franco . Franco would later go on to gain recognition for a role in the short @-@ lived cult hit television program Freaks and Geeks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Surekill " first aired on Fox on January 7 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 0 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 0 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 18 million households , and 13 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 36th most @-@ watched episode for the week ending December 3 . The episode subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on April 28 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Ever feel like someone 's watching you ? " 
 The episode received largely negative reviews from critics . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a B – , called the premise " bor @-@ ring [ sic ] " , and noted that the episode 's antagonist " don 't do a whole hell of a lot " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " B – " and called the episode " thoroughly mundane " , especially in comparison to the preceding episode , " Via Negativa " . Handlen felt that " because all of this is very familiar , and without any of the characters distinguishing themselves , there isn ’ t much reason to watch . " Ultimately , he concluded that " ' Surekill ' isn 't terrible , but it 's far too easy to see right through . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two derided the episode for being overly " dull " , noting " you watch with open mouth amazement that writer Greg Walker can spin this premise out for forty @-@ five minutes . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris noted that the episode " takes itself far too seriously " , which resulted in " lifeless guest characters " . 
 = Poliovirus = 
 Poliovirus , the causative agent of poliomyelitis ( commonly known as polio ) , is a human enterovirus and member of the family of Picornaviridae . 
 Poliovirus is composed of an RNA genome and a protein capsid . The genome is a single @-@ stranded positive @-@ sense RNA genome that is about 7500 nucleotides long . The viral particle is about 30 nanometres in diameter with icosahedral symmetry . Because of its short genome and its simple composition — only RNA and a non @-@ enveloped icosahedral protein coat that encapsulates it — poliovirus is widely regarded as the simplest significant virus . 
 Poliovirus was first isolated in 1909 by Karl <unk> and Erwin Popper . In 1981 , the poliovirus genome was published by two different teams of researchers : by Vincent <unk> and David Baltimore at MIT and by Naomi Kitamura and Eckard Wimmer at Stony Brook University . Poliovirus is one of the most well @-@ characterized viruses , and has become a useful model system for understanding the biology of RNA viruses . 
 = = Replication cycle = = 
 Poliovirus infects human cells by binding to an immunoglobulin @-@ like receptor , CD155 , ( also known as the poliovirus receptor ( PVR ) ) on the cell surface . Interaction of poliovirus and CD155 facilitates an irreversible conformational change of the viral particle necessary for viral entry . Attached to the host cell membrane , entry of the viral nucleic acid was thought to occur one of two ways : via the formation of a pore in the plasma membrane through which the RNA is then “ injected ” into the host cell cytoplasm , or that the virus is taken up by receptor @-@ mediated endocytosis . Recent experimental evidence supports the latter hypothesis and suggests that poliovirus binds to CD155 and is taken up via endocytosis . Immediately after internalization of the particle , the viral RNA is released . 
 Poliovirus is a positive stranded RNA virus . Thus the genome enclosed within the viral particle can be used as messenger RNA and immediately translated by the host cell . On entry , the virus hijacks the cell 's translation machinery , causing inhibition of cellular protein synthesis in favor of virus – specific protein production . Unlike the host cell 's mRNAs , the 5 ' end of poliovirus RNA is extremely long — over 700 nucleotides — and highly structured . This region of the viral genome is called internal ribosome entry site ( IRES ) which the first IRES to be discovered was found in the RNA of poliovirus , and it directs translation of the viral RNA . Genetic mutations in this region prevent viral protein production . 
 Poliovirus mRNA is translated as one long polypeptide . This polypeptide is then auto @-@ cleaved by internal proteases into approximately 10 individual viral proteins . One problem that the production of <unk> which refers equal amounts of every protein is produced but e.g. enzymes such as the polymerase are not needed in the same amounts as the structural subunits of the capsid . However , by the control of the cleavage process , some regulation does occur . These individual viral proteins include them which as can be seen below : 
 <unk> , an RNA dependent RNA polymerase whose function is to make multiple copies of the viral RNA genome . 
 <unk> and <unk> / <unk> , proteases which cleave the viral polypeptide . 
 VPg ( 3B ) , a small protein that binds viral RNA and is necessary for synthesis of viral positive and negative strand RNA . 
 <unk> , 2B , 2C ( an ATPase ) , <unk> , 3A , 3B proteins which comprise the protein complex needed for virus replication . 
 VP0 , which is further cleaved into VP2 and VP4 , VP1 and VP3 , proteins of the viral capsid . 
 After translation , transcription / genome replication which involve a single process ( synthesis of ( + ) RNA ) is <unk> order for the infecting ( + ) RNA to be replicated , multiple copies of ( − ) RNA must be transcribed and then used as templates for ( + ) RNA synthesis . <unk> intermediates ( <unk> ) which is an association of RNA molecules consisting of a template RNA and several growing RNAs of varying length , are seen in both the replication complexes for ( − ) RNAs and ( + ) RNAs . The primer for both ( + ) and ( − ) strand synthesis is the small protein VPg , which is <unk> at the hydroxyl group of a tyrosine residue by the poliovirus RNA polymerase at a cis @-@ acting replication element ( <unk> ) located in a stem @-@ loop in the virus <unk> of the ( + ) RNA molecules are used as templates for further ( − ) RNA synthesis , some function as mRNA and some are destined to be the genomes of progeny virions . 
 In the assembly of new virus particles ( i.e. the packaging of progeny genome into a procapsid which can survive outside the host cell ) , including , respectively ; 
 Five copies each of VP0 , VP3 and VP1 which its N termini and VP4 form interior surface of capsid , assemble into a ‘ <unk> ’ and 12 <unk> form a procapsid . ( The outer surface of capsid is consisting of VP1 , VP2 , VP3 ; C termini of VP1 and VP3 form the canyons which around each of the vertices ; at around this time the 60 copies of VP0 are cleaved into VP4 and VP2 . ) 
 Each procapsid acquires a copy of the virus genome , with VPg still attached at the 5 end . 
 Fully assembled poliovirus leaves the confines of its host cell by Lysis 4 to 6 hours following initiation of infection in cultured mammalian cells . The mechanism of viral release from the cell is unclear , but each dying cell can release up to 10 @,@ 000 polio virions . 
 Drake demonstrated that poliovirus is able to undergo multiplicity reactivation . That is , when polioviruses were irradiated with UV light and allowed to undergo multiple infections of host cells , viable progeny could be formed even at UV doses that inactivated the virus in single infections . 
 = = Origin and serotypes = = 
 Poliovirus is structurally similar to other human enteroviruses ( <unk> , <unk> , and rhinoviruses ) , which also use immunoglobulin @-@ like molecules to recognize and enter host cells . Phylogenetic analysis of the RNA and protein sequences of poliovirus ( PV ) suggests that PV may have evolved from a C @-@ cluster Coxsackie A virus ancestor , that arose through a mutation within the capsid . The distinct speciation of poliovirus probably occurred as a result of change in cellular receptor specificity from intercellular adhesion molecule @-@ 1 ( ICAM @-@ 1 ) , used by C @-@ cluster Coxsackie A viruses , to CD155 ; leading to a change in pathogenicity , and allowing the virus to infect nervous tissue . 
 The mutation rate in the virus is relatively high even for an RNA virus with a synonymous substitution rate of 1 @.@ 0 x 10 − 2 substitutions / site / year and non synonymous substitution rate of 3 @.@ 0 x 10 − 4 substitutions / site / year . Base distribution within the genome is non random with adenosine being less common than expected at the 5 ' end and higher at the 3 ' end . Codon use is non random with codons ending in adenosine being favoured and those ending in cytosine or guanine being avoided . Codon use differs between the three genotypes and appears to be driven by mutation rather than selection . 
 There are three serotypes of poliovirus , PV1 , PV2 , and PV3 ; each with a slightly different capsid protein . <unk> proteins define cellular receptor specificity and virus <unk> . PV1 is the most common form encountered in nature , however all three forms are extremely infectious . As of November 2015 , wild PV1 is highly localized to regions in Pakistan and Afghanistan . Wild PV2 was declared eradicated in September 2015 after last being detected in October 1999 in Uttar Pradesh , India . As of November 2015 , wild PV3 has not been seen since its 2012 detection in parts of Nigeria and Pakistan . 
 Specific strains of each serotype are used to prepare vaccines against polio . Inactive polio vaccine ( IPV ) is prepared by formalin inactivation of three wild , virulent reference strains , Mahoney or <unk> ( PV1 ) , MEF @-@ 1 / Lansing ( PV2 ) , and <unk> / Leon ( PV3 ) . Oral polio vaccine ( OPV ) contains live attenuated ( weakened ) strains of the three serotypes of poliovirus . <unk> the virus strains in monkey kidney epithelial cells introduces mutations in the viral IRES , and hinders ( or attenuates ) the ability of the virus to infect nervous tissue . 
 <unk> were formerly classified as a distinct species belonging to the genus Enterovirus in the family Picornaviridae . In 2008 the Poliovirus species was eliminated from the genus Enterovirus and the three serotypes were assigned to the species Human enterovirus C ( later renamed to Enterovirus C ) , in the genus Enterovirus in the family Picornaviridae . The type species of the genus Enterovirus was changed from Poliovirus to ( Human ) Enterovirus C. 
 = = Pathogenesis = = 
 The primary determinant of infection for any virus is its ability to enter a cell and produce additional infectious particles . The presence of CD155 is thought to define the animals and tissues that can be infected by poliovirus . CD155 is found ( outside of laboratories ) only on the cells of humans , higher primates , and Old World monkeys . Poliovirus is however strictly a human pathogen , and does not naturally infect any other species ( although chimpanzees and Old World monkeys can be experimentally infected ) . 
 The CD155 gene appears to have been subject to positive selection . The protein has several domains of which domain D1 contains the polio virus binding site . Within this domain 37 amino acids are responsible for binding the virus . 
 Poliovirus is an enterovirus . Infection occurs via the fecal – oral route , meaning that one ingests the virus and viral replication occurs in the alimentary tract . Virus is shed in the feces of infected individuals . In 95 % of cases only a primary , transient presence of viremia ( virus in the bloodstream ) occurs , and the poliovirus infection is asymptomatic . In about 5 % of cases , the virus spreads and replicates in other sites such as brown fat , reticuloendothelial tissue , and muscle . The sustained viral replication causes secondary viremia and leads to the development of minor symptoms such as fever , headache and sore throat . Paralytic poliomyelitis occurs in less than 1 % of poliovirus infections . Paralytic disease occurs when the virus enters the central nervous system ( CNS ) and replicates in motor neurons within the spinal cord , brain stem , or motor cortex , resulting in the selective destruction of motor neurons leading to temporary or permanent paralysis . In rare cases , paralytic poliomyelitis leads to respiratory arrest and death . In cases of paralytic disease , muscle pain and spasms are frequently observed prior to onset of weakness and paralysis . Paralysis typically persists anywhere from days to weeks prior to recovery . 
 In many respects the neurological phase of infection is thought to be an accidental diversion of the normal gastrointestinal infection . The mechanisms by which poliovirus enters the CNS are poorly understood . Three non @-@ mutually exclusive hypotheses have been suggested to explain its entry . All theories require primary viremia . The first hypothesis predicts that virions pass directly from the blood into the central nervous system by crossing the blood – brain barrier independent of CD155 . A second hypothesis suggests that the virions are transported from peripheral tissues that have been bathed in the <unk> blood , for example muscle tissue , to the spinal cord through nerve pathways via retrograde axonal transport . A third hypothesis is that the virus is imported into the CNS via infected monocytes or macrophages . 
 Poliomyelitis is a disease of the central nervous system . However , CD155 is believed to be present on the surface of most or all human cells . Therefore , receptor expression does not explain why poliovirus preferentially infects certain tissues . This suggests that tissue tropism is determined after cellular infection . Recent work has suggested that the type I interferon response ( specifically that of interferon alpha and beta ) is an important factor that defines which types of cells support poliovirus replication . In mice expressing CD155 ( through genetic engineering ) but lacking the type I interferon receptor , poliovirus not only replicates in an expanded repertoire of tissue types , but these mice are also able to be infected orally with the virus . 
 = = Immune system avoidance = = 
 Poliovirus uses two key mechanisms to evade the immune system . First , it is capable of surviving the highly acidic conditions of the gastrointestinal tract , allowing the virus to infect the host and spread throughout the body via the lymphatic system . Second , because it can replicate very quickly , the virus overwhelms the host organs before an immune response can be mounted . If detail is given ; at the attachment phase ; Poliovirus with canyons on the virion surface there are virus attachment sites located in pockets at the canyon bases . The canyons are too narrow for access by antibodies so the virus attachment sites are protected from the host ’ s immune surveillance , while the remainder of the virion surface can mutate to avoid the host ’ s immune response . 
 Individuals who are exposed to poliovirus , either through infection or by immunization with polio vaccine , develop immunity . In immune individuals , antibodies against poliovirus are present in the tonsils and gastrointestinal tract ( specifically IgA antibodies ) and are able to block poliovirus replication ; IgG and IgM antibodies against poliovirus can prevent the spread of the virus to motor neurons of the central nervous system . Infection with one serotype of poliovirus does not provide immunity against the other serotypes , however second attacks within the same individual are extremely rare . 
 = = PVR transgenic mouse = = 
 Although humans are the only known natural hosts of poliovirus , monkeys can be experimentally infected and they have long been used to study poliovirus . In 1990 – 91 , a small animal model of poliomyelitis was developed by two laboratories . Mice were engineered to express a human receptor to poliovirus ( hPVR ) . 
 Unlike normal mice , transgenic poliovirus receptor ( TgPVR ) mice are susceptible to poliovirus injected intravenously or intramuscularly , and when injected directly into the spinal cord or the brain . Upon infection , TgPVR mice show signs of paralysis that resemble those of poliomyelitis in humans and monkeys , and the central nervous systems of paralyzed mice are <unk> similar to those of humans and monkeys . This mouse model of human poliovirus infection has proven to be an invaluable tool in understanding poliovirus biology and pathogenicity . 
 Three distinct types of TgPVR mice have been well studied : 
 In <unk> mice the transgene encoding the human PVR was incorporated into mouse chromosome 4 . These mice express the highest levels of the transgene and the highest sensitivity to poliovirus . <unk> mice are susceptible to poliovirus through the <unk> , intracerebral , intramuscular , and intravenous pathways , but not through the oral route . 
 <unk> mice have incorporated the human PVR at chromosome 13 . These mice are less susceptible to poliovirus infection through the intracerebral route , possibly because they express decreased levels of hPVR . <unk> mice have been shown to be susceptible to poliovirus infection through intranasal inoculation , and may be useful as a mucosal infection model . 
 In <unk> mice the human transgene is located on chromosome 12 . These mice exhibit the lowest levels of hPVR expression and are the least susceptible to poliovirus infection . 
 Recently a fourth TgPVR mouse model was developed . These " <unk> " mice carry hPVR cDNA , driven by a β @-@ actin promoter , and have proven susceptible to poliovirus through intracerebral , intramuscular , and intranasal routes . In addition , these mice are capable of developing the bulbar form of polio after intranasal inoculation . 
 The development of the TgPVR mouse has had a profound effect on oral poliovirus vaccine ( OPV ) production . Previously , monitoring the safety of OPV had to be performed using monkeys , because only primates are susceptible to the virus . In 1999 the World Health Organization approved the use of the TgPVR mouse as an alternative method of assessing the effectiveness of the vaccine against poliovirus type @-@ 3 . In 2000 the mouse model was approved for tests of vaccines against type @-@ 1 and type @-@ 2 poliovirus . 
 = = Cloning and synthesis = = 
 In 1981 <unk> and Baltimore used recombinant DNA technology to generate the first infectious clone of an animal RNA virus , poliovirus . DNA encoding the RNA genome of poliovirus was introduced into cultured mammalian cells and infectious poliovirus was produced . Creation of the infectious clone propelled understanding of poliovirus biology , and has become a standard technology used to study many other viruses . 
 In 2002 Eckard Wimmer 's group at SUNY Stony Brook succeeded in synthesizing poliovirus from its chemical code , producing the world 's first synthetic virus . Scientists first converted poliovirus 's published RNA sequence , <unk> bases long , into a DNA sequence , as DNA was easier to synthesize . Short fragments of this DNA sequence were obtained by mail @-@ order , and assembled . The complete viral genome was then assembled by a gene synthesis company . This whole painstaking process took two years . Nineteen markers were incorporated into the synthesized DNA , so that it could be distinguished from natural poliovirus . Enzymes were used to convert the DNA back into RNA , its natural state . Other enzymes were then used to translate the RNA into a polypeptide , producing functional viral particle . The newly minted synthetic virus was injected into PVR transgenic mice , to determine if the synthetic version was able to cause disease . The synthetic virus was able to replicate , infect , and cause paralysis or death in mice . However , the synthetic version was between 1 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 times less lethal than the original virus . 
 = = Modification for therapies = = 
 A modification of the polio virus , called <unk> , has recently been used ( in early clinical trials ) for treating cancer . 
 = Piccadilly = 
 Piccadilly ( / <unk> / ) is a road in the City of Westminster , London to the south of Mayfair , between Hyde Park Corner in the west and Piccadilly Circus in the east . It is part of the A4 road that connects central London to Hammersmith , Earl 's Court , Heathrow Airport and the M4 motorway westward . St James 's is to the south of the eastern section , while the western section is built up only on the northern side . At just under 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in length , Piccadilly is one of the widest and straightest streets in central London . 
 Piccadilly has been a main road since at least medieval times , and in the middle ages was known as " the road to Reading " or " the way from Colnbrook " . Around 1611 or 1612 , a Robert Baker acquired land in the area and prospered by making and selling <unk> . Shortly after purchasing the land , he enclosed it and erected several dwellings , including his home , <unk> Hall . What is now Piccadilly was named Portugal Street in 1663 after Catherine of Braganza , wife of Charles II , and grew in importance after the road from Charing Cross to Hyde Park Corner was closed to allow the creation of Green Park in 1668 . Some of the most notable stately homes in London were built on the northern side of the street during this period , including Clarendon House and Burlington House in 1664 . Berkeley House , constructed around the same time as Clarendon House , was destroyed by a fire in 1733 and rebuilt as Devonshire House in 1737 by William Cavendish , 3rd Duke of Devonshire . It was later used as the main headquarters for the Whig party . Burlington House has since been home to several noted societies , including the Royal Academy of Arts , the Geological Society of London and the Royal Astronomical Society . Several members of the Rothschild family had mansions at the western end of the street . St James 's Church was consecrated in 1684 and the surrounding area became St James Parish . 
 The Old White Horse Cellar , at No. 155 , was one of the most famous coaching inns in England by the late @-@ 18th century , by which time the street had become a favourable location for booksellers . The Bath Hotel emerged around 1790 , and Walsingham House was built in 1887 . Both the Bath and the Walsingham were purchased and demolished when the prestigious Ritz Hotel was built on the site in 1906 . Piccadilly Circus station , at the east end of the street , was designed by Charles Holden and built between 1925 – 28 . It was the first underground station to have no above @-@ ground premises ; the station is only accessible by subways from street level . The clothing store Simpson 's was established at 203 - 206 Piccadilly by Alec Simpson in 1936 . During the 20th century , Piccadilly became known as a place to acquire heroin , and was notorious in the 1960s as the centre of London 's illegal drug trade . Today , Piccadilly is regarded as one of London 's principal shopping streets . Its landmarks include the Ritz , Park Lane , Athenaeum and Intercontinental hotels , Fortnum & Mason , the Royal Academy , the RAF Club , Hatchards , the Embassy of Japan and the High Commission of Malta . 
 Piccadilly has inspired several works of fiction , including Oscar Wilde 's The Importance of Being Earnest and the work of P. G. Wodehouse . It is one of a group of squares on the London Monopoly board . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The street has been part of a main road for centuries although there is no evidence that it was part of a Roman Road , unlike Oxford Street further north . In the middle ages it was known as " the road to Reading " or " the way from Colnbrook " . During the Tudor period , relatively settled conditions made expansion beyond London 's city walls a safer venture . Property speculation became a lucrative enterprise and developments grew so rapidly that the threat of disease and disorder prompted the government to ban developments . Owing to the momentum of growth , the laws had little real effect . 
 A plot of land bounded by Coventry , Sherwood , Glasshouse and Rupert Streets and the line of Smith 's Court was granted by Elizabeth I to William Dodington , a gentlemen of London , in 1559 – 60 . A year or so later it was owned by a brewer , Thomas Wilson of St Botolph @-@ without @-@ Aldgate . The grant did not include a small parcel of land , 1 3 ⁄ 8 acres in area , on the east of what is now Great Windmill Street . That plot may have never belonged to Crown and was owned by Anthony Cotton in the reign of Henry VIII ; John Cotton granted it to John Golightly in 1547 and his descendants sold it to a tailor , Robert Baker , in c . 1611 – 12 . Six or seven years later , Baker brought 22 acres of Wilson 's land , thanks largely to money from his second marriage . 
 Baker became financially successful by making and selling fashionable <unk> . Shortly after purchasing the land , he enclosed it ( the parishioners had Lammas grazing rights ) and erected several dwellings , including a residence and shop for himself ; within two years his house was known as <unk> Hall . A map published by <unk> in 1658 describes the street as " the way from Knightsbridge to Piccadilly Hall " . A nearby gaming house , known as Shaver 's Hall and nicknamed " Tart Hall " or " <unk> Hall " , was popular with the gentry of London . In 1641 Lord Dell lost £ 3000 in cards gambling there . 
 After Robert Baker 's death in 1623 and the death of his eldest son Samuel shortly after , his widow and her father purchased the wardship of their surviving children ; the death of the next eldest son , Robert , in 1630 , allowed them to effectively control the estate . Their only daughter died and her widower , Sir Henry Oxenden , retained an interest in the land . Several relatives claimed it , but after Mary Baker 's death in c . 1665 , the estate reverted to the Crown . A great @-@ nephew , John Baker , obtained possession of part of it , but squabbled over the lands with his cousin , James Baker ; trying to play one another off , they paid or granted rights to Oxenden and a speculator , Colonel Thomas Panton , but the pair eventually lost out to them . By the 1670s , Panton was developing the lands and , despite the claims of some distantly related Bakers , he steadily built them up . 
 = = = Later 17th century = = = 
 Piccadilly was named Portugal Street in 1663 after Catherine of Braganza , wife of Charles II . Its importance to traffic increased after an earlier road from Charing Cross to Hyde Park Corner was closed to allow the creation of Green Park in 1668 . After the Restoration of the English monarchy in 1660 , Charles II encouraged the development of Portugal Street and the area to the north ( Mayfair ) and they became fashionable residential localities . Some of the grandest mansions in London were built on the northern side of the street . Edward Hyde , 1st Earl of Clarendon and close political adviser to the king , purchased land for a house ; Clarendon House ( now the location of Albemarle Street ) was built in 1664 , and the earl sold the surplus land partly to Sir John Denham , who built what later became Burlington House . Denham chose the location because it was on the outskirts of London surrounded by fields . The house was first used to house the poor , before being reconstructed by the third Earl of Burlington in 1718 . Berkeley House was constructed around the same time as Clarendon House . It was destroyed by a fire in 1733 and rebuilt as Devonshire House in 1737 by William Cavendish , 3rd Duke of Devonshire , and was subsequently used as the headquarters for the Whig party . Devonshire House survived until 1921 , before being sold for redevelopment by Edward Cavendish , 10th Duke of Devonshire for £ 1 million . Burlington House has since been home to the Royal Academy of Arts , the Geological Society of London , the Linnean Society of London , the Royal Astronomical Society , the British Astronomical Association , the Society of Antiquaries of London and the Royal Society of Chemistry . 
 The land to the south of Piccadilly was leased to trustees of the Earl of St Albans in 1661 for a thirty @-@ year term , subsequently extended to 1740 . No. 162 – 165 were granted freehold by the king to Sir Edward Villiers in 1674 . The White Bear Inn had been established between what is now No. 221 Piccadilly and the parallel Jermyn Street since 1685 . It remained in use throughout the 18th century before being demolished in 1870 to make way for a restaurant . 
 St James 's Church was first proposed in 1664 , when residents wanted to become a separate parish from St Martin in the Fields . After several Bill readings , construction began in 1676 . The building was designed by Christopher Wren and cost around £ 5 @,@ 000 . It was consecrated in 1684 when the surrounding area became St James Parish . 
 By 1680 , most of the original residential properties along Portugal Street had been demolished or built over . The name Piccadilly was applied to part of the street east of Swallow Street by 1673 , and eventually became the de facto name for the entire length of Portugal Street . A plan of the area around St James Parish in 1720 describes the road as " Portugal Street aka Piccadilly " . John Rocque 's Map of London , published in 1746 , refers to the entire street as Piccadilly . 
 = = = 18th – 19th centuries = = = 
 Piccadilly was increasingly developed and by the middle of the 18th century it was continuously built on as far as Hyde Park Corner . The development of St James 's and Mayfair in particular made Piccadilly into one of the busiest roads in London . Hugh Mason and William Fortnum started the Fortnum & Mason partnership on Piccadilly in 1705 , selling recycled candles from Buckingham Palace . By 1788 , the store sold poultry , potted meats , lobsters and prawns , savoury patties , Scotch eggs , and fresh and dried fruits . 
 The street acquired a reputation for numerous inns and bars during this period . The Old White Horse Cellar , at No. 155 , was one of the most famous coaching inns in England but was later destroyed . The Black Bear and White Bear ( originally the Fleece ) public houses were nearly opposite each other , although the former was demolished in about 1820 . Also of note were the Hercules ' Pillars , just west of Hamilton Place , the Triumphant Car , which was popular with soldiers , and the White Horse and Half Moon . The Bath Hotel emerged around 1790 and Walsingham House was built in 1887 . The Bath and the Walsingham were demolished when the Ritz Hotel opened on the site in 1906 . 
 No. 106 , on the corner of Piccadilly and Brick Street was built for Hugh Hunlock in 1761 . It was subsequently owned by the 6th Earl of Coventry who remodelled it around 1765 ; most of the architecture from this renovation has survived . In 1869 , it became home to the St James 's Club , a gentleman 's club which stayed there until 1978 . The building is now the London campus of the <unk> University of Creative Technology . 
 Several members of the Rothschild family had mansions at the western end of the street . Nathan Mayer Rothschild moved his banking premises to No. 107 in 1825 , and the construction of other large buildings , complete with ballrooms and marble staircases , led to the street being colloquially referred to as Rothschild Row . Ferdinand James von Rothschild lived at No. 143 with his wife Evelina while Lionel de Rothschild lived at No. 148 . Melbourne House was designed by William Chambers for Peniston Lamb , 1st Viscount Melbourne and built between 1770 and 1774 . In 1802 , it was converted to apartments , and is now the Albany . The house has been the residence for the British Prime Ministers William Ewart Gladstone and Edward Heath . St James 's Hall was designed by Owen Jones and built between 1857 – 8 . Charles Dickens gave several readings of his novels in the hall , including Great Expectations and Oliver Twist . The hall hosted performances from Antonín Dvořák , Edvard Grieg and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky . It was demolished in 1905 and replaced by the Piccadilly Hotel . 
 In the late @-@ 18th century , Piccadilly was a favoured place for booksellers . In 1765 , John Almon opened a shop in No. 178 , which was frequented by Lord Temple and other Whigs . John Stockdale opened a shop on No. 181 in 1781 . The business continued after his death in 1810 , and was run by his family until 1835 . The oldest surviving bookshop in Britain , Hatchards was started by John Hatchard at No. 173 in 1797 , moving to the current location at No. 189 @-@ 90 ( now No. 187 ) in 1801 . Aldine Press moved to Piccadilly from Chancery Lane in 1842 , and remained there until 1894 . 
 The Egyptian Hall at No. 170 , designed in 1812 by P. F. Robinson for W. Bullock of Liverpool , was modelled on Ancient Egyptian architecture , particularly the Great Temple of Dendera ( <unk> ) . One author described it as " one of the strangest places Piccadilly ever knew " . It was a venue for exhibitions by the Society of Painters in Water Colours and the Society of Female Artists during the 19th century . It contained numerous Egyptian antiquaries ; at an auction in June 1822 two " imperfect " Sekhmet statues were sold for £ 380 , and a flawless one went for £ 300 . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 By the 1920s most old buildings had been demolished or were in institutional use as traffic noise had driven away residents but a few residential properties remained . Albert , Duke of York lived at No. 145 at the time of his accession as King George VI in 1936 . 
 The clothing store Simpson 's was established at 203 - 206 Piccadilly by Alec Simpson in 1936 , who provided factory @-@ made men 's clothing . The premises were designed by the architect Joseph Amberton in a style that mixed art deco and Bauhaus school design and an influence from Louis Sullivan . On opening it claimed to be the largest menswear store in London . It closed in January 1999 and its premises are the flagship shop of the booksellers Waterstones . 
 During the 20th century , Piccadilly became known as a place to acquire heroin . Jazz trumpeter Dizzy Reece recalled people queuing outside Piccadilly 's branch of Boots for heroin pills in the late 1940s . By the 1960s , the street and surrounding area were notorious as the centre of London 's illegal drug trade , where heroin and cocaine could be purchased on the black market from unscrupulous chemists . By 1982 , up to 20 people could be seen queueing at a chemist dealing in illegal drugs in nearby Shaftesbury Avenue . No. 144 was occupied by squatters in 1968 , taking advantage of a law that allowed disused buildings to be used for emergency shelter for the homeless . The radical squatting movement that resulted foundered soon after due to the rise of drug dealers and Hell 's Angels occupying the site . An eviction took place on 21 September 1969 and the events resulted in licensed squatting organisations that could take over empty premises to use as homeless shelters . In 1983 , A. Burr of the British Journal of Addiction published an article on " The Piccadilly Drug Scene " , in which the author discussed the regular presence of known dealers and easy accessibility of drugs . 
 Today , Piccadilly is regarded as one of London 's principal shopping streets , hosting several famous shops . The Ritz Hotel , the Park Lane Hotel , the Athenaeum Hotel and Intercontinental Hotels are located on the street , along with other luxury hotels and offices . Having been an established area for gentlemen 's clubs in the 20th century , this has declined and only the Cavalry and Guards Club and the Royal Air Force Club are left . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Piccadilly is a major thoroughfare in the West End of London and has several major road junctions . To the east , Piccadilly Circus opened in 1819 connecting it to Regent Street . It has become one of the most recognised landmarks in London , particularly after a statue of Eros was constructed on the junction in 1893 , and the erection of large electric billboards in 1923 . At the western end of Piccadilly is Hyde Park Corner , and the street has a major road junction with St James 's Street and other significant junctions at Albemarle Street , Bond Street and Dover Street . 
 The road is part of the A4 connecting central London to Hammersmith , Earl 's Court , Heathrow Airport and the M4 motorway . Congestion along the road has been reported since the mid @-@ 19th century , leading to its progressive widening and removing the northern portions of Green Park . Traffic signals were installed in the 1930s . In the late 1950s , the Ministry of Transport remodelled Hyde Park Corner at the western end to form a major traffic gyratory system , including enlargement of Park Lane . It opened on 17 October 1962 at a cost of £ 5 million . 
 The London bus routes 9 , 14 , 19 , 22 , 38 , C2 , N9 , N19 , <unk> , N38 and N97 all run along Piccadilly . Part of the Piccadilly line on the London Underground travels under the street . Green Park , Hyde Park Corner , and Piccadilly Circus stations ( which are all on the Piccadilly line ) have entrances in or near Piccadilly . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The music hall song " It 's a Long Way to Tipperary " mentions Piccadilly and Leicester Square in its lyrics . It was written in 1912 about an Irishman living in London , but became popular after being adopted by the mostly Irish Connaught Rangers during World War I. 
 Piccadilly is mentioned in several works of fiction . Raffles , E. W. Hornung 's " gentleman thief " lives at the Albany as does Jack Worthing from Oscar Wilde 's The Importance of Being Earnest . According to author Mary C King , Wilde chose the street because of its resemblance to the Spanish word <unk> , meaning " slashed " or " pierced " . 
 In Evelyn Waugh 's novel Brideshead Revisited , the mansion , Marchmain House , supposedly located in a cul @-@ de @-@ sac off St James 's near Piccadilly , is demolished and replaced with flats . In the 1981 Granada Television dramatisation , Bridgewater House in Cleveland Row was used as the exterior of Marchmain House . 
 In Arthur Machen 's 1894 novella The Great God Pan , Helen Vaughan , the satanic villainess and offspring of Pan , lives off Piccadilly in the pseudonymous Ashley Street . Margery Allingham 's detective , Albert Campion , has a flat at 17A Bottle Street , Piccadilly , over a police station , although Bottle Street is fictitious . 
 Several P.G. Wodehouse novels use the setting of Piccadilly as the playground of the rich , idle bachelor in the inter @-@ war period of the 20th century . Notable instances are present in the characters of Bertie Wooster and his Drones Club companions in the Jeeves stories and the character of James Crocker in the story Piccadilly Jim . 
 The street is a square on the British Monopoly board , forming a set with Leicester Square and Coventry Street . When a European Union version of the game was produced in 1992 , Piccadilly was one of three London streets selected , along with Oxford Street and Park Lane . 
 In 1996 , Latvian singer Laima <unk> released an album " Ya <unk> na <unk> " ( " I Went Out on Piccadilly " ) . 
 = Albert Gould = 
 Sir Albert John Gould ( 12 February 1847 – 27 July 1936 ) was an Australian politician and solicitor who served as the second President of the Australian Senate . 
 A solicitor , businessman and citizen soldier before his entry into politics , Gould was a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly from 1882 to 1898 , during which time he served as Minister for Justice in two Free Trade governments . He later served two years in the New South Wales Legislative Council from 1899 to 1901 until his election to the Australian Senate . Gould 's interest in parliamentary procedure saw him become involved with the relevant standing committee and he was elected unopposed as the second President of the Senate in 1907 . His tenure is remembered as more traditionalist and <unk> than his predecessor 's . 
 Defeated by the Labor nominee in 1910 following the Liberal government 's defeat , Gould remained in parliament as a backbencher until 1917 , when he retired after he was not re @-@ endorsed by the Nationalist Party . He was active in community and religious affairs during his long retirement . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Gould was born in Sydney , the son of solicitor John Morton Gould and his wife Anne ( née Livingstone ) . He attended William Woolls ' school in Parramatta , and went on to study law at the University of Sydney , although he did not take a degree . He served his articles with his father and was admitted to the bar in December 1870 . He then worked in Singleton for a Sydney legal firm . Gould also developed significant business interests , being involved with the Great Cobar Copper Mining syndicate and serving as a director of the Electric Light and Power Supply Company , the City Bank of Sydney and the Oriental Timber Corporation . On 12 September 1872 , he married Jeanette Jessie Maitland at St Paul 's Church of England in West Maitland . 
 Gould was also a citizen soldier , enlisting as a volunteer in the West Maitland company of the New South Wales volunteer forces . He later took command of the Singleton Company , becoming a major in 1886 . He later received the Volunteer Officers ' Decoration for long service ; he would retire from the regiment in 1902 as a lieutenant @-@ colonel . 
 = = State politics = = 
 In 1882 , Gould was elected to the New South Wales Legislative Assembly as the member for Patrick 's Plains ( renamed Singleton in 1894 ) . Initially an opponent of the coalition associated with Henry Parkes and John Robertson , he later supported Robertson 's government in 1885 . By 1887 he was supporting his career with his own legal practice in Singleton and Sydney , and when the party system came into being in New South Wales in that year he identified as a Free Trader . In 1889 he was appointed Minister for Justice under Parkes , serving until 1891 ; he held the position again under George Reid from 1894 to 1898 . During the first period of his ministry he became involved in a dispute with the Chief Justice , Sir Frederick Darley , over requests for improved court accommodation and a contested punishment for contempt of two witnesses . Despite embarrassing his premier , he remained close with Parkes throughout his state career and in later years frequently gave speeches in his memory . 
 Gould 's career as justice minister was marked by consolidation of the law , tightening of licensing laws and reforms relating to police courts . A supporter of Federation , he nevertheless opposed the 1898 bill , which he believed deprived New South Wales of adequate recognition . He was defeated in the election of that year , but in 1899 he was one of Premier Reid 's twelve appointments to the Legislative Council that enabled the passage of the legislation for a referendum on Federation . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 Following Federation , Gould contested the first federal election in March 1901 , standing for the Senate as a Free Trader . He was elected in the third of six positions , entitling him to a six @-@ year term . His first speech was largely devoted to his impassioned support for free trade , and in his early years as a senator he also supported decentralisation and opposed proposals to establish a federal capital . A supporter of the White Australia policy , he expressed concern over Kanaka labour in Queensland , although his assumption that the arrangement was temporary enabled his pragmatism on this issue . Gould was also involved in defence matters , supporting the introduction of conscription and maintaining loyalty to the Empire , where " there are men much more experienced in the principles of government than we are " . At the 1906 election , Gould was easily re @-@ elected in the first position , winning the largest vote for any senator to that time . 
 From 1901 Gould maintained an interest in the procedure of the Senate , and was a member of the standing orders committee from its appointment in 1901 until 1907 . He had supported the opening of Senate proceedings with prayer and had made frequent reference to the standing orders of the British House of Commons . He contested the Presidency of the Senate in 1904 , but was defeated by the incumbent , Sir Richard Baker . 
 On Baker 's retirement , Gould was unanimously elected President on 20 February 1907 . He endeavoured to keep the Senate representative of the states ' interests and free from party politics , and his rulings focused on unparliamentary language and relevance . Gould , appointed Knight Bachelor in 1908 , differed from his predecessor in his adherence to British influence . With the election of the Fisher Labor Government in 1910 , Gould was defeated by Harry Turley for the presidency . 
 Despite his support for conscription , Gould was not endorsed by the new Nationalist Party to contest the 1917 election . Deeply offended , Gould nevertheless elected to retire rather than run as an independent and split the Nationalist vote . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In his retirement , Gould continued his community involvement . A director of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and the Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children , he also served as a member and chancellor of the Sydney and Newcastle synods of the Church of England . He died in July 1936 at Rose Bay aged 89 ; he was survived by two sons and three daughters ( his wife died in 1928 ; one daughter had also predeceased him ) . Gould was given a state funeral at St Andrew 's Cathedral and was buried at South Head Cemetery . 
 = New Jersey Route 495 = 
 Route 495 is a 3 @.@ 45 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 55 km ) freeway in Hudson County , New Jersey in the United States that connects the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) at exits 16E and 17 in Secaucus to New York State Route 495 inside the Lincoln Tunnel in Weehawken , providing access to midtown Manhattan . The road is owned and operated by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority between the New Jersey Turnpike and Route 3 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation between Route 3 and Park Avenue near the Union City / Weehawken border , and by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey east of Park Avenue , including the helix used to descend the New Jersey Palisades to reach the entrance of the Lincoln Tunnel . Route 495 is mostly a six @-@ lane freeway with a reversible bus lane used during the morning rush hour . The bus lane , which runs the entire length of the freeway , continues into the Lincoln Tunnel 's center tube . 
 The first portion of the present @-@ day Route 495 , at the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel , was constructed in 1937 when the Lincoln Tunnel opened . In 1939 , it was extended west to Route 3 and it became an eastern extension of that route . In 1952 , the portion of the route west of Route 3 was opened when the New Jersey Turnpike was completed . In 1959 , the road was incorporated into the Interstate Highway System and was designated as part of Interstate 495 . Since the Mid @-@ Manhattan Expressway that would have connected the route to New York 's Interstate 495 ( Long Island Expressway ) was canceled , Interstate 495 officially became New Jersey Route 495 in 1979 , and the signs were changed in 1989 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 495 officially begins at the Exit 16E off @-@ ramp of the northbound lanes of the New Jersey Turnpike near the boundary of Secaucus and North Bergen . The main roadway heads east through North Bergen as a freeway with three lanes in the eastbound and westbound directions , maintained by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority . The route has an interchange with Route 3 , with access to eastbound Route 3 and U.S. Route 1 / 9 for traffic in the eastbound direction and to westbound Route 3 in the westbound direction . Past this interchange , Route 495 becomes a six @-@ lane freeway maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation that intersects U.S. Route 1 / 9 at a partial interchange , with a westbound exit and eastbound entrance . Past U.S. Route 1 / 9 , the freeway has an interchange with County Route 501 ( John F. Kennedy Boulevard ) , which uses 30th Street and 31st Street as collector / distributor roads . East of this junction , Route 495 enters Union City and heads through developed residential areas , passing under numerous streets . There is an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for Park Avenue , which provides access to Weehawken and Hoboken , where Route 495 becomes maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . It enters Weehawken and comes to a westbound exit and eastbound entrance for Park Avenue . 
 At this point , the roadway loops around itself at a section in the roadway locally known as The Helix , descending the New Jersey Palisades to reach the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel under the Hudson River . The route has a westbound exit for County Route 677 ( John F. Kennedy / Hudson Boulevard East ) and another exit for Boulevard East with a westbound exit and eastbound entrance . After interchanging with Boulevard East , the road features an eastbound toll plaza and enters the Lincoln Tunnel . At the New York state line , which is located at the midpoint of the Hudson River , the road continues as New York State Route 495 , which is separate from Interstate 495 ( New York ) , and heads into midtown Manhattan in New York City . 
 Since 1970 , the left lane of the three westbound lanes is converted during the morning rush hour to a reversible bus lane , known as the " XBL " , or Exclusive Bus Lane . The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is responsible for daily operation of the XBL , including its opening and closing , removal of disabled vehicles , and response to emergencies . It is used by buses headed east from the New Jersey Turnpike and Route 3 , mainly to the Port Authority Bus Terminal just past the Lincoln Tunnel in Manhattan , serving over 1 @,@ 800 buses and 65 @,@ 000 bus commuters on regular weekday mornings , ( 6 @-@ 10 a.m. ) . This bus lane is the busiest in the United States . Route 495 is a busy route that carries approximately 74 @,@ 571 vehicles at its western terminus and approximately 119 @,@ 432 vehicles by the time it reaches the Lincoln Tunnel . 
 Each of the travel lanes in the Lincoln Tunnel 's center tube is reversible . In general , both of the lanes , including one " XBL " ( Exclusive Bus Lane ) , serve Manhattan @-@ bound traffic during the weekday morning rush hour , both of the lanes serve New Jersey @-@ bound traffic during the weekday evening rush hour , and one lane is provided in each direction during other time periods . New Jersey @-@ bound traffic normally uses both lanes of the north tube and Manhattan @-@ bound traffic normally uses both lanes of the south tube . 
 = = History = = 
 The road was built as an approach to the Lincoln Tunnel , with the first section opening December 22 , 1937 , when the first ( now the center ) tube of the tunnel was completed . This section ran only from the tunnel portal south through the toll booths to a plaza with Park Avenue and Hudson County Boulevard East . Marginal Street , providing access from Hudson County Boulevard East west over Park Avenue to 32nd Street and the Bergen Turnpike , was also opened at that time . In 1939 , the Port Authority opened the rest of the approach , up the helix and west to Route 3 , and it was designated as an eastern extension of Route 3 . The final section of today 's Route 495 opened on January 15 , 1952 , with the completion of the New Jersey Turnpike . The turnpike interchange ( exit 16 ) only served Route 3 traffic to and from the south ; exit 17 served Route 3 traffic to and from the north . 
 With the creation of the Interstate Highway System in 1956 , the approach to the Lincoln Tunnel was planned to become an Interstate Highway along with present @-@ day Route 3 , which itself was not included in the Interstate Highway System because New Jersey thought it would be too expensive to bring it up to Interstate Highway standards . However , the Lincoln Tunnel approach was included in the Interstate Highway System and in 1959 , it was renumbered from Route 3 to Interstate 495 despite the fact it does not meet Interstate Highway standards . Shortly after the road became Interstate 495 , the western portion of the road was brought up to Interstate Highway standards with the improvements of the interchanges with the New Jersey Turnpike and Route 3 . Interstate 495 was intended to connect with New York 's Interstate 495 by way of the Mid @-@ Manhattan Expressway ; however , this proposed controlled @-@ access highway through Manhattan was canceled in 1971 due to strong opposition to the road running through the heart of Midtown Manhattan . Due to the fact that New Jersey 's Interstate 495 would not be connected to New York 's , NJDOT started referring to the route as New Jersey Route 495 in 1979 . The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) approved the decommissioning of I @-@ 495 between I @-@ 95 and Pleasant Avenue / Park Avenue in Union City in 1980 . In 1986 , AASHTO approved the decommissioning of the rest of the I @-@ 495 designation in New Jersey . 
 Starting with the viaduct , which passes over the Conrail rail lines just west of Route 1 and 9 , the roadway going east is listed as being eligible for state registry in the New Jersey Register of Historic Places for its engineering , architecture and history . The designations for eligibility were given in segments between 1991 and 2003 and include the Lincoln Tunnel Approach and Helix , as well as the tunnels , toll booths , and ventilation towers . 
 The Helix has traditionally been known for offering a panoramic view of the New York skyline . While local zoning laws prohibit the construction of high @-@ rise buildings that would obstruct sight @-@ lines from higher points in town , as of June 2013 construction of a new residential building partially blocked the view from the lower portion of the roadway . As of 2015 , the Helix is considered by the PANYNJ to have a working life @-@ span of ten years . Alternatives to its replacement include tunnels under the Palisades directly to the Lincoln Tunnel portals . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Hudson County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Vertigo ( wordless novel ) = 
 Vertigo is a wordless novel by American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) , published in 1937 . In three intertwining parts , the story tells of the effects the Great Depression has on the lives of an elderly industrialist and a young man and woman . Considered his masterpiece , Ward uses the work to express the socialist sympathies of his upbringing ; he aimed to present what he called " impersonal social forces " by depicting the individuals whose actions are responsible for those forces . 
 The work is filled with symbolic motifs , and is in a more detailed and realistic style than Ward 's Expressionistic earlier works . The images — one to a page — are borderless and of varied dimensions . At 230 wood engravings Vertigo was Ward 's longest and most complex wordless novel , and proved to be the last he finished — in 1940 he abandoned one he was working on , and in the last years of his life began another that he never finished . For the remainder of his career Ward turned to book illustration , especially children 's books , some of which he or his wife May McNeer authored . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story takes place from 1929 to 1935 and follows three main characters : a young woman , a young man , and an elderly man . Each is the focus of a section of the book , which is in three parts : " The Girl " , broken into subsections labeled by years ; " An Elderly Gentleman " , whose subsections are in months ; and " The Boy " , subdivided into days . 
 In " The Girl " , a musically @-@ gifted young woman with an optimistic future finds and gets engaged to a young man . As the Great Depression deepens , her lover moves away and ceases to contact her , and her father loses his job with the Eagle Corporation of America . He shoots himself blind in an failed attempt to escape his debts through suicide , and the pair are evicted and lose all they own . 
 " An Elderly Gentleman " depicts an infirm , wealthy old capitalist . As the outlook of his business becomes bleaker , he lays off or reduces the wages of workers . He has organized labor in his factories suppressed through armed violence and murder . His infirmity worsens and he is bedridden , and he has a group of doctors work to cure him . As he recuperates , his lackeys inform him that profits have begun to rise again . 
 The young man of " The Boy " stands up to his abusive father , leaves home , and proposes marriage to the Girl . He sets off with his suitcase in fruitless search of work ; when he returns , he finds his fiancée has been evicted , and is too embarrassed with his own situation to approach her . His search for work becomes increasingly desperate , and he considers turning to crime ; he manages to make some money donating blood to the Elderly Gentleman . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Chicago , Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister Harry F. Ward ( 1873 – 1966 ) , a social activist and the first chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union . Throughout his career , Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . The younger Ward was early drawn to art , and contributed art and text to high school and college newspapers . 
 After graduating from university in 1926 , Ward married writer May McNeer and the couple left for an extended honeymoon in Europe Ward spent a year studying wood engraving in Leipzig , Germany , where he encountered German Expressionist art and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . Ward returned to the United States and freelanced his illustrations . In 1929 , he came across German artist Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City . Nückel 's only work in the genre , Destiny told of the life and death of a prostitute in a style inspired by Masereel 's , but with a greater cinematic flow . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) . He continued with Madman 's Drum ( 1930 ) , Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) , Prelude to a Million Years ( 1933 ) , and Song Without Words ( 1936 ) , the last of which he made while engraving the blocks for Vertigo . Each of these books sold fewer copies than the last , and publishers were wary of publishing experiments in the midst of the Depression . 
 = = Production and publication history = = 
 Ward found the composition of Vertigo the most difficult of his wordless novels to manage ; he spent two years engraving the blocks , which range in size from 3 1 ⁄ 2 × 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 × 5 @.@ 1 cm ) to 5 × 3 1 ⁄ 2 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 × 8 @.@ 9 cm ) . Ward discarded numerous blocks he was dissatisfied with , using 230 in the finished work . The book was published by Random House in November 1937 . 
 Following its initial publication the book was not reprinted for over seventy years . It has since been reprinted by Dover Publications in 2009 and Library of America , in a 2010 complete collection of Ward 's wordless novels . The blocks for the book — including discards — are in the Special Collection of Rutgers University in New Jersey . The university hosted a display of the blocks in 2003 . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 The story was a criticism of the failures of capitalism during the Great Depression ; Ward stated the title " was meant to suggest that the <unk> of what we saw happening all around us in the thirties was enough to set the mind spinning through space and the emotions hurtling from great hope to the depths of despair " . Ward had strong socialist sympathies and was a supporter of organized labor ; the Boy expresses this union solidarity by abandoning the only job he could find rather than work as a strikebreaker . 
 The pages are unnumbered ; the stories are instead broken into parts and chapters . The overlapping of stories encourages readers to revisit earlier portions as the characters appear in each other 's stories . Ward did away with borders in the compositions , allowing artwork to bleed to the edges of the woodblocks . He manipulates the reader 's focus with the variously @-@ sized images , as in the small images that close in on the faces of the businessmen who surround the Elderly Gentleman . The images are more realistic and finely detailed than in Ward 's previous wordless novels , and display a greater sense of balance of contrast and whitespace , and crispness of line . 
 Ward employs symbols such as a rose , which takes different meanings in different contexts : creative beauty for the Girl , an item for purchase for the Elderly Gentleman . The same telephone system that provides the Elderly Gentleman with quick communication is an alienating , isolating symbol for the Boy , as it is beyond his means yet telephone poles are ever @-@ present . Ward displays discontinuous contrasts throughout the book : the Girl stretches herself out nude and carefree in a chapter of her section , while in his the Elderly Gentleman sadly views his worn @-@ out naked form in a mirror . While essentially wordless , via signs and placards the graphics incorporate far more text into the imagery than in earlier works . To wordless novel scholar David Beronä , this shows an affinity to the development of the graphic novel , even if Vertigo itself is perhaps not comics ; Ward himself was not permitted to read comics in his youth . 
 Ward aimed to present what he called " impersonal social forces " by depicting the individuals whose actions are responsible for those forces . Though the Elderly Gentleman 's actions are at the heart of the misery of his workers , Ward depicts him with sympathy , sad , lonely , and alienated despite his wealth and charity . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The success of Ward 's early wordless novels led American publishers to put out a number of such books , both new American works and reprints of European ones . Interest in wordless novels was short @-@ lived , and few besides Masereel and Ward produced more than a single work ; Ward was the lone American to produce any after 1932 , each of which sold fewer copies than the last . 
 Upon release , reviewer Ralph M. Person was enthusiastic about the book on its release and the form 's potential to " <unk> [ e ] the picture from its past limitation to the single scene or event " and place pictorial narrative in the realm of literature and theater . Reviewer for the Evening Independent Bill Wiley proclaimed it " a dramatic story in a brilliant medium " that " will leave a vivid memory with the reader long after many novels in words are forgotten " . At the Sarasota Herald @-@ Tribune John Selby found the book " more uniform in quality " than Ward 's earlier wordless novels , yet " the book would ' read ' more easily and produce a greater effect if the individual woodcuts were not so small " . 
 Vertigo was the last wordless novel Ward was to complete , and has come to be seen as his masterpiece ; cartoonist Art Spiegelman called it " a key work of Depression @-@ era literature " . In 1940 he abandoned another , to be titled Hymn for the Night , after completing twenty blocks of it . Ward found the story too far from his own immediate experience : a resetting of the Mary and Joseph story in Nazi Germany . He turned to the making of stand @-@ alone prints and book illustration for the remainder of his career . In the late 1970s he began cutting blocks for another wordless novel , which remained unfinished on his death in 1985 . 
 An exhibition of the original woodblocks was held at Rutgers University in 2003 . It was curated by Michael Joseph , and included numerous woodblocks Ward had discarded from the work . 
 = Tropical Storm Linfa ( 2003 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Linfa , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Chedeng , brought deadly flooding to areas of the Philippines and Japan in May and June 2003 . The fifth named storm within the northwestern Pacific that year , Linfa developed as a tropical depression just off the western coast of Luzon on May 25 . The disturbance quickly intensified to reach tropical storm intensity a few hours after cyclogenesis . However , intensification leveled off as Linfa executed a small clockwise loop before a subsequent landfall on Luzon on May 27 . Due to land interaction the storm temporarily weakened and decoupled before reforming in the Philippine Sea . Afterwards Linfa began reintensifying and reached its peak intensity on May 29 with maximum sustained winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) . Following its peak the tropical storm began to deteriorate and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on May 30 ; these extratropical remnants continued to track northward through Japan before dissipating in the Sea of Okhotsk on June 4 . 
 The erratic and slow movement of Linfa off the western Philippines was the catalyst for extreme rainfall and flooding , killing 41 persons in the archipelago . Precipitation peaked at 723 mm ( 28 @.@ 5 in ) near Dagupan . Rising floodwaters resulted in numerous mudslides and the temporary shutdown of government offices . In addition , strong winds caused widespread power outages . Overall damage from Linfa in the Philippines amounted to ₱ 192 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 65 million ) . The floods also displaced 8 @,@ 367 people in 1 @,@ 686 families and destroyed 178 homes . Linfa and its extratropical remnants later brought torrential rainfall and widespread flooding to Japan , particularly southwestern regions . Rainfall there peaked at 727 mm ( 28 @.@ 62 in ) . Flood damage was worst in Kōchi and Tokushima Prefectures , where several buildings were destroyed by floodwater . Other locations in Japan experienced considerable agricultural damage as well as numerous landslides . Overall , Linfa caused roughly $ 28 @.@ 2 million in damage , much of which occurred in Japan , though the entirety of deaths associated with the cyclone took place in the Philippines . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late @-@ May an area of disturbed weather began to persist roughly 650 km ( 400 mi ) west of Manila , Philippines in the South China Sea . Late on May 23 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began to monitor the area for potential signs of tropical cyclogenesis . Over the next few days the disturbance began to consolidate towards a common low pressure center , resulting in a burst in convective activity . At 0000 UTC on May 25 , the JTWC classified the resulting system as a tropical depression west of Luzon ; six hours later both the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) and the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) began to monitor the newly formed tropical cyclone , though the latter classified it as a tropical storm . During these initial stages of development the tropical cyclone slowly intensified as it slowly tracked in a clockwise loop throughout the course of the day . At 1800 UTC , the JTWC upgraded the depression to tropical storm status while the JMA followed suit six hours later , thus designating the cyclone with the name Linfa . 
 In response to a strengthening ridge to the south , Linfa began tracking eastward . Despite its proximity to land , the tropical storm 's slow forward motion allowed for additional strengthening , and according to the JMA , Linfa reached an initial peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 90 km / h ( 50 mph ) at 0000 UTC on May 27 , just within the threshold of severe tropical storm status . Concurrently the cyclone made landfall near Dagupan , Luzon . Upon landfall , Linfa began to weaken as it crossed Luzon before emerging into the Pacific as a minimal tropical storm late that day . However , as a result of land interaction the initial surface circulation center of Linfa greatly weakened and was overtaken by a newly formed low @-@ level circulation center on May 28 , resulting in the storm 's position to shift well northeastward . This was the primary basis on which the JTWC downgraded Linfa to tropical depression status early on May 28 , though the JMA continued to analyze the system as a weak tropical storm . Afterwards , as the cyclone began to track northeastward , the new circulation center became more organized , resulting in the JTWC reclassifying Linfa as a tropical storm at 0600 UTC the following day . Gradual strengthening followed , and at 1800 UTC that day Linfa reached peak intensity with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) south of Okinawa . Subsequently the system began to take a more northward course and undergo extratropical transition , which was completed at 0000 UTC on May 30 . Though by this time most tropical cyclone monitoring agencies ceased the monitoring of these extratropical remnants by this time , the JMA continued to track them as they made landfall near Uwajima , Ehime at 0800 UTC the following day . Linfa 's remnants then paralleled the western coast of Japan before dissipating on June 4 well into the Sea of Okhotsk . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Linfa 's slow movement off the western coast of Luzon , followed by its eventual landfall , allowed for copious amounts of rain to occur in areas of the Philippines , leading to widespread flooding . Prior to landfall , waves generated by Linfa offshore hampered search and rescue operations following the collision of the MV San Nicholas and <unk> 12 ships on May 25 . Over land , precipitation amounts officially peaked at a station in Dagupan , near the tropical storm 's point of landfall . There , 723 mm ( 28 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall was observed , including 629 mm ( 24 @.@ 8 in ) of rain in a 12 ‑ hour period . The second highest precipitation total from a station operated by the World Meteorological Organization observed 364 mm ( 14 @.@ 3 in ) of rain in Baguio . These rainfall totals were further enhanced by the concurrent southwesterly monsoon . The resulting floods forced then @-@ President of the Philippines Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo to order the temporary shutdown of government offices and mobilize city officials to aid in clearing threatened areas of people . In addition , commuter bus operations were forced to cease . 
 The first documented fatality associated with the storm occurred in Taytay , Rizal , after heavy rains on May 27 triggered a mudslide that killed an infant and injured three other people . That same day the rains resulted in thick traffic jams in Manila . Strong winds in the capital city also toppled billboards and electric posts . Floodwaters forced over 600 families to evacuate in Valenzuela , a suburb located northwest of Manila . Similarly strong winds in Pangasinan caused widespread power outage to much of the province . Areas in the central parts of the province experienced their worst flooding conditions in at least 60 years . Two ferries capsized off of <unk> , Camarines Sur , killing six people . Sixty @-@ seven others were rescued in the search and rescue operation that followed the incident . Overall , Linfa killed 41 people in the Philippines due to flooding . Damage associated with the tropical storm included ₱ 66 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 25 million ) to agriculture and livestock , ₱ 83 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 58 million ) to fisheries , and ₱ 42 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 800 @,@ 000 ) to infrastructure , equating to a total of ₱ 192 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 65 million ) in damage in the Philippines . Nationwide , 8 @,@ 367 persons in roughly 1 @,@ 686 families evacuated into 44 evacuation centers at the height of the storm . The floods destroyed 178 homes and damaged an additional 2 @,@ 040 . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the storm and associated flooding , the Department of Agriculture readied for the distribution of 3 million <unk> fry , 250 @,@ 000 tilapia fry , and 315 bags of rice seeds to affected regions . Furthermore , the National Food Authority allocated 200 sacks of rice to Pangasinan . The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council assisted in relief operations by allocating ₱ 10 million ( US $ 200 @,@ 000 ) and 800 bags of rice for such efforts . In addition , one of eight regional Filipino health offices distributed roughly ₱ 600 @,@ 000 ( US $ 10 @,@ 000 ) worth of various medicines to Dagupan and Urdaneta , Pangasinan . According to the National Disaster Coordinating Council , ₱ 15 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) worth in relief operations was allocated . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 After tracking eastward across the Philippines , Linfa reorganized and curved northeastward toward Japan . The Japan Meteorological Agency anticipated heavy precipitation and strong winds in the island nation 's southwestern regions . The agency also warned residents in low @-@ lying areas of potential flooding . The JMA indicated the heightened possibility of landslides in the Tōhoku region due to a recent earthquake in the area . Due to the forecasted impacts and track , as many as 102 domestic flights were cancelled in a single day , particularly those associated with southwestern Japan . In addition , five ferry services were cancelled . Upon making landfall on Shikoku , Linfa became the first tropical cyclone since 1965 to strike Japan during May , as well as the third earliest tropical cyclone to make landfall on any of Japan 's four main islands since standardized records began in 1951 . 
 Throughout Linfa 's passage of Japan , the storm brought heavy rainfall across a wide swath of the country , resulting in extensive and damaging flooding . Damage was primarily concentrated on Kyushu Island . Precipitation peaked at 727 mm ( 28 @.@ 62 in ) at a station in <unk> , Miyazaki Prefecture . However , a station in Owase , Mie observed 497 mm ( 19 @.@ 56 in ) of rain in 24 hours , greater than any other location for that period of time . Despite making landfall on Ehime Prefecture , Linfa did not cause as much damage there relative to other provinces , particularly those bordering Ehime . Nonetheless , nearly 300 homes lost power during the storm there . Linfa 's worst impacts occurred in Kōchi Prefecture , where severe flooding inundated several buildings and triggered numerous landslides . Damage there totaled ¥ 1 @.@ 28 billion ( US $ 10 @.@ 7 million ) . Similar effects took place in Tokushima Prefecture , in addition to widespread evacuations from impacted areas . Damage accrued by Linfa in Tokushima Prefecture reached ¥ 1 @.@ 22 billion ( US $ 10 @.@ 3 million ) . Located near the coast , high seas generated by Linfa were reported in Wakayama Prefecture , resulting in cancellations of offshore activities and transportation . However , much of the damage in Wakayama Prefecture was caused by torrential precipitation , damaging roads in seven locations , amounting to ¥ 197 @.@ 45 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 65 million ) . Severe flooding in Mie Prefecture resulted from heavy , prolonged rainfall , which peaked prefecture @-@ wide at 497 mm ( 19 @.@ 57 in ) in Owase . Precipitation in Mie caused widespread power outages . As many as 65 buildings were flooded , and approximately 87 ha ( 215 ac ) of arable land was inundated by rainwater . In addition to surface inundation , the rains caused twenty landslides , blocking roads the traffic and suspending some rail operations . Power outages were also widespread in Hyōgo Prefecture , including a localized outage stripping electricity from 900 homes in the Kita @-@ ku ward in Kobe ; similar impacts occurred in Osaka Prefecture . Rising floodwater in Kanagawa Prefecture engulfed the first floors of several office buildings and residences . The rain also deluged roads in Yokohama , Fujisawa , <unk> and Odawara . 
 On <unk> @-@ shima Island in Honshu 's Shimane Prefecture , precipitation caused the deterioration of surface sediments , resulting in landslides that damaged several buildings . Agricultural damage totaled to ¥ 660 @,@ 000 ( US $ 5 @,@ 500 ) , and three flights were cancelled at Oki Airport . Multiple landslides occurred in Miyagi Prefecture . In <unk> , the rains triggered a rockfall , prompting evacuations and damaging a home . A second rockfall incident occurred on June 2 , destroying several buildings . Residents of <unk> and Ishinomaki were ordered to evacuate due to the threat of additional rockfalls and landslides , . In both Hino and <unk> , Tottori , heavy rain caused damage to roads and farmland erosion . The precipitation also caused a river to flow over its banks , flooding adjacent land . Damage in Tottori Prefecture amounted to ¥ 890 million ( US $ 75 @,@ 000 ) . Significant damage occurred in Ōita Prefecture , where heavy rains caused landslides and suspended rail operations . Most of the damage in Ōita Prefecture was done to crops , particularly vegetables , and totaled ¥ 27 @.@ 37 million ( US $ 230 @,@ 000 ) . Damage to sweet potato and tobacco crops alone in Kagoshima Prefecture reached ¥ 21 million ( US $ 180 @,@ 000 ) , while damage to agricultural infrastructure totaled ¥ 2 million ( US $ 16 @,@ 800 ) . Damage to tobacco crops in Miyazaki Prefecture were estimated even higher at ¥ 50 @.@ 57 million ( US $ 420 @,@ 000 ) . In Nagasaki Prefecture , the rains also damaged forests , with damage estimated at ¥ 23 million ( US $ 190 @,@ 000 ) ; other agricultural damage was estimated at ¥ 60 million ( US $ 500 @,@ 000 ) . Voluntary evacuation procedures took place in <unk> , Nagasaki due to the threat of building collapse . 
 Despite transitioning into an extratropical cyclone during its passage of Japan , Linfa still maintained strong winds , which caused heavy damage to susceptible structures . The highest wind associated with Linfa in Japan was clocked at 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) in <unk> , Kōchi Prefecture . Operations on the Tōhoku Main Line were delayed as a result of strong winds onset by Linfa . Wind gusts as high as 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) in <unk> in Tochigi Prefecture caused the complete destruction of at least five buildings and damaged several others , resulting in ¥ $ 760 @,@ 000 ( US $ 6 @,@ 400 ) in damage . More considerable damage occurred in Shiga Prefecture , where strong winds caused damage to greenhouses and nearby crops , accruing ¥ 36 @.@ 75 million ( US $ 308 @,@ 700 ) in damage . In addition , two people were injured after winds threw a section of plywood into the car they were occupying . 
 = Charles Cruft ( showman ) = 
 Charles Alfred Cruft ( 28 June 1852 – 10 September 1938 ) was a British showman who founded the Crufts dog show . Charles first became involved with dogs when he began to work at Spratt 's , a manufacturer of dog biscuits . He rose to the position of general manager , and whilst working for Spratt 's in France he was invited to run his first dog show at the 1878 Exposition Universelle . After running dog shows in London for four years , he ran his first Cruft 's dog show in 1891 , and continued to run a further 45 shows until his death in 1938 , as well as running two cat shows in 1894 and 1895 . He was involved in a range of dog breed clubs , including that for <unk> , Pugs and Borzois . He and his wife upheld a story that they never owned a dog , and instead owned a cat , however Cruft admitted to owning at least one Saint Bernard in his memoirs , published posthumously . 
 = = Early life and <unk> = = 
 Charles Cruft was born on 28 June 1852 , one of four children . In his youth , Charles attended Ardingly College in Sussex , and Birkbeck College in London . Cruft first followed in his father 's footsteps by becoming a manufacturing jeweller but he ultimately decided that the career was not for him and left the business in 1865 . 
 He went on to apply for the post of office boy in the Holborn shop of James Spratt , the manufacturer of Spratt 's dog biscuits . He was recruited by Spratt , who would later go on to say that Cruft had lent forward in the interview at one point whilst talking about the business and said " You know , I think this kind of business ought to do very well , I do honestly . " Cruft overhauled the bookkeeping in the shop , changing it from a system using crosses to distinguish between wholesale and retail customers to a far more detailed system . The Maltese cross that was previously used in the bookkeeping was later instead stamped onto the biscuits as a type of trademark to distinguish Spratt 's biscuits from other dog biscuits . 
 Several months after joining , Crufts convinced Spratt to hire a new boy to work in the shop to free himself up to solicit orders for the dog biscuits from gamekeepers , promoters of dog shows and the like . He saw a connection between improved feeding and purebred dogs , and so supported the foundation of canine societies . As part of this new role , he was expected to have attended the " Grand National Exhibitions of Sporting and other Dogs " at The Crystal Palace , London , annually between 1870 and 1872 . These early shows were unsuccessful financially and were not continued . Whilst at Spratt 's , Cruft gradually rose to the role of general manager , after being head of their Show Department for several years . At the age of 26 , some twelve years after leaving the jewellery business , Cruft was made office manager . The Spratt 's dog biscuits became the forerunner of the modern dry dog food , and under Cruft 's work the company went from a single small shop to the British leader in these types of products . 
 = = Conformation shows = = 
 In 1878 , whilst still working for Spratt 's , Cruft travelled across Europe to expand the biscuit business . Whilst in France , he was invited to run the dog show at the third World 's Fair whilst he was there promoting Spratt 's dog cake , known as the Exposition Universelle . Further offers to run shows came in for Cruft , including an offer to become Secretary of the Dutch Kennel Club , and an offer to run the livestock section of the Brussels and Antwerp International Exhibitions . He took up job offers to run the shows for the Scottish Kennel Club , and became manager of the poultry section of the shows of the Royal Agricultural Society . He also co @-@ founded and became club secretary of the <unk> Club of Brussels . 
 By the time Cruft turned 30 in 1882 , <unk> had been sold to Edward <unk> who in turn promoted Charles first to " Chief Traveller " , and then to general manager . Under Crufts guidance , the company diversified its product base and expanded into game bird and poultry food markets , as well as producing a range of accessories for cats and dogs . Cruft himself became secretary of the Toy Spaniel Club and the Pug Dog Club . He was also involved in clubs which promoted the Saint Bernard and Borzoi breeds . 
 In 1886 , Cruft was approached to run a dog show for terriers in London by the Duchess of Newcastle , and so on 10 March his show opened at the Royal Aquarium in Westminster , London . Entitled " The first Great Show of all kinds of Terriers " , the show received 570 entries across 57 classes and included Lord Alfred Paget among the patrons . <unk> and several breeds of toy dogs were added by 1890 . 
 This gradual expansion of breeds led to the creation of the first show to be named after Cruft was in 1891 , when " Cruft 's Greatest Dog Show " was held at the Royal Agricultural Hall , Islington , with part of the deal to hold the show at that location was to restrict the venue to only allowing Cruft to run dog shows at the location . He designed the logo himself , the head of a Saint Bernard surrounded by a collar with a crown on top . He introduced a system where competitors would pay to enter their dogs , and make additional payments if they wished to take the dogs away each night of the three @-@ day competition , and again pay if they wanted to take them away early on the final day . By 1914 , the show had grown in popularity until it was recognised as the largest dog show in the world and by 1936 when the show celebrated its Golden Jubilee , over 10 @,@ 000 dogs were entered at the event . Cruft 's shows were frequented by Royalty , with Queen Victoria exhibiting dogs , and King Edward VII also doing so prior to becoming King . In 1893 , Tsar Alexander III of Russia sent eighteen Borzois to compete , and from 1916 King George V entered his Labrador Retrievers regularly . 
 On 7 and 8 March 1894 , he experimented with expanding his shows and held his first Cat conformation show . The first show had over 600 entries , becoming easily the biggest of its kind so far , with patrons that included the Duchess of Newcastle , the Countess de Sefton and Lady de Trafford . The publication Fur and Feather praised the new venture and encouraged more . Crufts however wasn 't so sure as the initial show had lost over a hundred pounds , and entries in some of the classes were restricted to only a handful of cats . He held a second show in March 1895 , which once again Fur and Feather heaped praise upon , despite the cutbacks that Cruft had initiated to make the show more profitable . Fur and Feather announced in March 1896 that the cat show had been postponed due to Cruft 's other business commitments , but he never went on to run such a show again . 
 In 1896 , Cruft designed special train carriages to carry competition dogs for his shows from around the country . Cruft was Secretary of the Ranelagh Fox Terrier Show in 1901 , and together with several colleagues including Sir Humphrey de Trafford created the National Terrier Club , and from the second show onwards on 21 June 1902 , the show became known as the National Terrier Show . Cruft continued as Secretary of the club until 1914 when Sir William Savory took on the role . 
 Despite the fact that he gave away very few details about himself to the press , to make them concentrate more on promotion of his shows , he did not always see eye to eye with all members of the media . One newspaper refused to publish his name at all , and whenever it made reference to Cruft 's dog shows , it simply referred to them as " a dog show in Islington " . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After running his 45th Crufts show in 1938 , he fell ill . By the late summer he was recovering , but he died due to a heart attack at around 5 : 30am on 10 September . Tributes came in from media agencies , with Our Dogs calling him " the man who made dog shows " , and comparisons with the American showman P. T. Barnum . 
 The funeral occurred on 21 September . Cruft was buried in a tomb in the western area of Highgate Cemetery , London . It would become Grade II listed on 14 May 1974 . The London Borough of Islington placed a plaque commemorating Charles Cruft at Ashurst Lodge , Highbury Grove , N5 . 
 His will left £ <unk> 9s 3d to his family and friends , with the majority going to his second wife , Emma , and £ 2000 going to his daughter Clara . Two grandchildren , Charles and Betty Cruft each received £ 500 , and two nephews , Kenneth and John Hartshorn , each received the same . Eight nieces , one great nephew and a young cousin each received £ 50 . One of his maids , Kate Hempstead , who had worked for him for over thirty years also received £ 50 . His cousin Lt Arthur Cruft received £ 100 , while Cruft 's secretary Miss E. Harrington , who had worked on the Crufts dog shows since 1925 received £ 500 . 
 At the time of his death in 1938 , it was thought that his wife , Emma Cruft , would continue to run the dog shows with the help of the show 's secretary , Miss Hardingham . After running the show in 1939 , Mrs Cruft sold the show to The Kennel Club , however due to World War II , it wasn 't until 1948 when they ran the show for the first time . The show would remain being called Cruft 's until 1974 , when during a rebrand the apostrophe was dropped , resulting in the show being called Crufts , which it continues to be called at the present . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Cruft 's first marriage was to Charlotte Hutchinson in 1878 . Together they had four children , Charles Francis , Louise , Cecil Arthur and Clara Helen Grace . His second marriage was to Emma Isabel Hartshorn in 1894 , they had no children . He remained in close contact with his children , and involved each of them in the dog show business . Such was the relationship with his daughter Clara , who was nicknamed " Birdie " , that she alone was listed in his second wife 's will as a step daughter . 
 His wife Emma stated in her book , Mrs Charles Cruft 's Famous Dog Book , published in 1949 that there was an unwritten rule that both herself and her husband couldn 't own any dogs for fear of making others believe that they favoured one breed over another , even going as far to say " we were determined to own a pet , so we took the least like of resistance and kept a – CAT ! " This was disproved in Cruft 's memoirs , published posthumously in Charles Cruft 's Dog Book in 1952 , where Cruft explained that he had lived in households which had Alsatians and Borzois . He went on to make particular reference to the fact that he and his wife Emma had owned at least one Saint Bernard ; the same breed of dog he had used in his creation of the Crufts logo . 
 At the time of the United Kingdom Census 1901 , Cruft was living at 325 Holloway Road , N7 with his wife Emma , his father Charles , a boarder named Albert <unk> and a servant named Alice Gregory . He listed his profession as " show promoter " . Emma would go on to outlive Charles , she died at the age of 82 on 5 September 1950 . At the time of his death , he was living at 12 Highbury Grove , London , N5 . His staff included a cook , a chauffeur , two maids and a gardener . Additionally , he owned a country home called Windmill Farm , in Coulsdon , Surrey . 
 = The Hobbit = 
 The Hobbit , or There and Back Again is a children 's fantasy novel by English author J. R. R. Tolkien . It was published on 21 September 1937 to wide critical acclaim , being nominated for the Carnegie Medal and awarded a prize from the New York Herald Tribune for best juvenile fiction . The book remains popular and is recognized as a classic in children 's literature . 
 Set in a time " Between the Dawn of <unk> and the Dominion of Men " , The Hobbit follows the quest of home @-@ loving hobbit Bilbo Baggins to win a share of the treasure guarded by the dragon , Smaug . Bilbo 's journey takes him from light @-@ hearted , rural surroundings into more sinister territory . The story is told in the form of an episodic quest , and most chapters introduce a specific creature , or type of creature , of Tolkien 's geography . By accepting the disreputable , romantic , fey and adventurous sides of his nature and applying his wits and common sense , Bilbo gains a new level of maturity , competence and wisdom . The story reaches its climax in the Battle of the Five Armies , where many of the characters and creatures from earlier chapters re @-@ emerge to engage in conflict . 
 Personal growth and forms of heroism are central themes of the story . Along with motifs of warfare , these themes have led critics to view Tolkien 's own experiences during World War I as instrumental in shaping the story . The author 's scholarly knowledge of Germanic philology and interest in fairy tales are often noted as influences . 
 Encouraged by the book 's critical and financial success , the publisher requested a sequel . As Tolkien 's work on the successor The Lord of the Rings progressed , he made retrospective accommodations for it in The Hobbit . These few but significant changes were integrated into the second edition . Further editions followed with minor emendations , including those reflecting Tolkien 's changing concept of the world into which Bilbo stumbled . The work has never been out of print . Its ongoing legacy encompasses many adaptations for stage , screen , radio , board games and video games . Several of these adaptations have received critical recognition on their own merits . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Bilbo Baggins , the titular protagonist , is a respectable , reserved hobbit . During his adventure , Bilbo often refers to the contents of his larder at home and wishes he had more food . Until he finds a magic ring , he is more baggage than help . Gandalf , an itinerant wizard , introduces Bilbo to a company of thirteen dwarves . During the journey the wizard disappears on side errands dimly hinted at , only to appear again at key moments in the story . Thorin Oakenshield , the proud , pompous head of the company of dwarves and heir to the destroyed dwarvish kingdom under the Lonely Mountain , makes many mistakes in his leadership , relying on Gandalf and Bilbo to get him out of trouble , but he proves himself a mighty warrior . Smaug is a dragon who long ago pillaged the dwarvish kingdom of Thorin 's grandfather and sleeps upon the vast treasure . 
 The plot involves a host of other characters of varying importance , such as the twelve other dwarves of the company ; two types of elves : both <unk> and more serious warrior types ; Men ; man @-@ eating trolls ; boulder @-@ throwing giants ; evil cave @-@ dwelling goblins ; forest @-@ dwelling giant spiders who can speak ; immense and heroic eagles who also speak ; evil wolves , or wargs , who are allied with the goblins ; Elrond the sage ; Gollum , a strange creature inhabiting an underground lake ; Beorn , a man who can assume bear form ; and Bard the Bowman , a grim but honourable archer of Lake @-@ town . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Gandalf tricks Bilbo into hosting a party for Thorin and his band of dwarves , who sing of reclaiming the Lonely Mountain and its vast treasure from the dragon Smaug . When the music ends , Gandalf unveils a map showing a secret door into the Mountain and proposes that the dumbfounded Bilbo serve as the expedition 's " burglar " . The dwarves ridicule the idea , but Bilbo , indignant , joins despite himself . 
 The group travels into the wild , where Gandalf saves the company from trolls and leads them to Rivendell , where Elrond reveals more secrets from the map . Passing over the Misty Mountains , they are caught by goblins and driven deep underground . Although Gandalf rescues them , Bilbo gets separated from the others as they flee the goblins . Lost in the goblin tunnels , he stumbles across a mysterious ring and then encounters Gollum , who engages him in a game of riddles . As a reward for solving all riddles Gollum will show him the path out of the tunnels , but if Bilbo fails , his life will be forfeit . With the help of the ring , which confers invisibility , Bilbo escapes and rejoins the dwarves , improving his reputation with them . The goblins and Wargs give chase , but the company are saved by eagles before resting in the house of Beorn . 
 The company enters the black forest of Mirkwood without Gandalf . In Mirkwood , Bilbo first saves the dwarves from giant spiders and then from the dungeons of the Wood @-@ elves . Nearing the Lonely Mountain , the travellers are welcomed by the human inhabitants of Lake @-@ town , who hope the dwarves will fulfil prophecies of Smaug 's demise . The expedition travels to the Lonely Mountain and finds the secret door ; Bilbo scouts the dragon 's lair , stealing a great cup and learning of a weakness in Smaug 's armour . The enraged dragon , deducing that Lake @-@ town has aided the intruder , sets out to destroy the town . A thrush had overheard Bilbo 's report of Smaug 's vulnerability and reports it to Lake @-@ town defender Bard . His arrow finds the chink and slays the dragon . 
 When the dwarves take possession of the mountain , Bilbo finds the Arkenstone , an heirloom of Thorin 's dynasty , and hides it away . The Wood @-@ elves and Lake @-@ men besiege the mountain and request compensation for their aid , reparations for Lake @-@ town 's destruction , and settlement of old claims on the treasure . Thorin refuses and , having summoned his kin from the Iron Hills , reinforces his position . Bilbo tries to ransom the Arkenstone to head off a war , but Thorin is intransigent . He banishes Bilbo , and battle seems inevitable . 
 Gandalf reappears to warn all of an approaching army of goblins and Wargs . The dwarves , men and elves band together , but only with the timely arrival of the eagles and Beorn do they win the climactic Battle of Five Armies . Thorin is fatally wounded and reconciles with Bilbo before he dies . Bilbo accepts only a small portion of his share of the treasure , having no want or need for more , but still returns home a very wealthy hobbit . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the early 1930s Tolkien was pursuing an academic career at Oxford as Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo @-@ Saxon , with a fellowship at Pembroke College . Several of his poems had been published in magazines and small collections , including Goblin Feet and The Cat and the Fiddle : A Nursery Rhyme Undone and its Scandalous Secret Unlocked , a reworking of the nursery rhyme Hey Diddle Diddle . His creative endeavours at this time also included letters from Father Christmas to his children — illustrated manuscripts that featured warring gnomes and goblins , and a helpful polar bear — alongside the creation of elven languages and an attendant mythology , which he had been creating since 1917 . These works all saw posthumous publication . 
 In a 1955 letter to W. H. Auden , Tolkien recollects that he began work on The Hobbit one day early in the 1930s , when he was marking School Certificate papers . He found a blank page . Suddenly inspired , he wrote the words , " In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit . " By late 1932 he had finished the story and then lent the manuscript to several friends , including C. S. Lewis and a student of Tolkien 's named Elaine Griffiths . In 1936 , when Griffiths was visited in Oxford by Susan Dagnall , a staff member of the publisher George Allen & Unwin , she is reported to have either lent Dagnall the book or suggested she borrow it from Tolkien . In any event , Dagnall was impressed by it , and showed the book to Stanley Unwin , who then asked his 10 @-@ year @-@ old son Rayner to review it . Rayner 's favourable comments settled Allen & Unwin 's decision to publish Tolkien 's book . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 One of the greatest influences on Tolkien was the 19th century Arts and Crafts polymath William Morris . Tolkien wished to imitate Morris 's prose and poetry romances , following the general style and approach of the work . The Desolation of Smaug as portraying dragons as detrimental to landscape , has been noted as an explicit motif borrowed from Morris . Tolkien wrote also of being impressed as a boy by Samuel Rutherford Crockett 's historical novel The Black Douglas and of basing the Necromancer — Sauron — on its villain , Gilles de Retz . Incidents in both The Hobbit and Lord of the Rings are similar in narrative and style to the novel , and its overall style and imagery have been suggested as having had an influence on Tolkien . 
 Tolkien 's portrayal of goblins in The Hobbit was particularly influenced by George MacDonald 's The Princess and the Goblin . However , MacDonald influenced Tolkien more profoundly than just to shape individual characters and episodes ; his works further helped Tolkien form his whole thinking on the role of fantasy within his Christian faith . 
 Tolkien scholar Mark T. Hooker has cataloged a lengthy series of parallels between The Hobbit and Jules Verne 's Journey to the Center of the Earth . These include , among other things , a hidden runic message and a celestial alignment that direct the adventurers to the goals of their quests . 
 Tolkien 's works incorporate much influence from Norse mythology reflecting his lifelong passion for those stories and his academic career in Germanic philology . The Hobbit is no exception to this ; the work shows influences from northern European literature , myths and languages and the strong influence of Norse mythology , especially from the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda . Examples include the names of some characters , such as Fili , Kili , Oin , <unk> , <unk> , Bofur , <unk> , Dori , Nori , <unk> , Balin , Dain , Nain , Thorin Oakenshield and Gandalf ( deriving from the Old Norse names <unk> , <unk> , Oin , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Dori , <unk> , Dvalinn , <unk> , Dain , Nain , <unk> <unk> and <unk> ) . But whilst their names are from Old Norse , the characters of the dwarves are more directly taken from fairy tales such as Snow White and Snow @-@ White and Rose @-@ Red as collected by the Brothers Grimm . The latter of these tales may have also influenced the character of Beorn . 
 Tolkien 's use of descriptive personal and place names such as Misty Mountains and Bag End echoes the descriptive names used in Old Norse sagas . The names of the dwarf @-@ friendly ravens are also derived from Old Norse for ' raven ' and ' rook ' , but their characters are unlike the typical war @-@ carrion from Old Norse and Old English literature . Tolkien , however , is not simply skimming historical sources for effect : linguistic styles , especially the relationship between the modern and ancient , has been seen to be one of the major themes explored by the story . Another characteristic of The Hobbit found in Old Norse sagas is maps accompanying the text of the story . Several of the author 's illustrations ( including the dwarven map , the frontispiece and the dust jacket ) make use of Anglo @-@ Saxon runes , an English extension of the Germanic runic alphabets . 
 Themes found in Old English literature , and specifically in the poem Beowulf , have a heavy presence in defining the ancient world Bilbo stepped into . Tolkien , an accomplished Beowulf scholar , claims the poem to be among his " most valued sources " in writing The Hobbit . Tolkien is credited with being the first critic to expound on Beowulf as a literary work with value beyond merely historical , and his 1936 lecture Beowulf : the Monsters and the Critics is still required in some Old English courses . The Beowulf poem contains several elements that Tolkien borrowed for The Hobbit , including a monstrous , intelligent dragon . Certain descriptions in The Hobbit seem to have been lifted straight out of Beowulf with some minor rewording , such as when each dragon stretches out its neck to sniff for intruders . Likewise , Tolkien 's descriptions of the lair as accessed through a secret passage mirror those in Beowulf . Other specific plot elements and features in The Hobbit that show similarities to Beowulf include the title thief as Bilbo is called by Gollum and later by Smaug , and Smaug 's personality which leads to the destruction of Lake @-@ town . Tolkien refines parts of Beowulf 's plot that he appears to have found less than satisfactorily described , such as details about the cup @-@ thief and the dragon 's intellect and personality . 
 Another influence from Old English sources is the appearance of named blades of renown , adorned in runes . It is in the use of his elf @-@ blade that we see Bilbo finally taking his first independent heroic action . By his naming the blade " Sting " we see Bilbo 's acceptance of the kinds of cultural and linguistic practices found in Beowulf , signifying his entrance into the ancient world in which he found himself . This progression culminates in Bilbo stealing a cup from the dragon 's hoard , rousing him to wrath — an incident directly mirroring Beowulf , and an action entirely determined by traditional narrative patterns . As Tolkien wrote , " The episode of the theft arose naturally ( and almost inevitably ) from the circumstances . It is difficult to think of any other way of conducting the story at this point . I fancy the author of Beowulf would say much the same . " 
 The name of the wizard Radagast is widely recognized to be taken from the name of the Slavic deity <unk> . 
 The representation of the dwarves in The Hobbit was influenced by his own selective reading of medieval texts regarding the Jewish people and their history . The dwarves ' characteristics of being dispossessed of their ancient homeland at the Lonely Mountain , and living among other groups whilst retaining their own culture are all derived from the medieval image of Jews , whilst their warlike nature stems from accounts in the Hebrew Bible . The Dwarven calendar invented for The Hobbit reflects the Jewish calendar in beginning in late autumn . And although Tolkien denied allegory , the dwarves taking Bilbo out of his complacent existence has been seen as an eloquent metaphor for the " impoverishment of Western society without Jews . " 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 George Allen & Unwin Ltd. of London published the first edition of The Hobbit on 21 September 1937 with a print run of 1 @,@ 500 copies , which sold out by December because of enthusiastic reviews . This first printing was illustrated in black and white by Tolkien , who designed the dust jacket as well . Houghton Mifflin of Boston and New York reset type for an American edition , to be released early in 1938 , in which four of the illustrations would be colour plates . Allen & Unwin decided to incorporate the colour illustrations into their second printing , released at the end of 1937 . Despite the book 's popularity , paper rationing brought on by wartime conditions and not ending until 1949 meant that the Allen & Unwin edition of the book was often unavailable during this period . 
 Subsequent editions in English were published in 1951 , 1966 , 1978 and 1995 . The novel has been reprinted frequently by many publishers . In addition , The Hobbit has been translated into over forty languages , with more than one published version for some languages . 
 = = = = Revisions = = = = 
 In December 1937 , The Hobbit 's publisher , Stanley Unwin , asked Tolkien for a sequel . In response Tolkien provided drafts for The Silmarillion , but the editors rejected them , believing that the public wanted " more about hobbits " . Tolkien subsequently began work on The New Hobbit , which would eventually become The Lord of the Rings , a course that would not only change the context of the original story , but lead to substantial changes to the character of Gollum . 
 In the first edition of The Hobbit , Gollum willingly bets his magic ring on the outcome of the riddle @-@ game , and he and Bilbo part amicably . In the second edition edits , to reflect the new concept of the ring and its corrupting abilities , Tolkien made Gollum more aggressive towards Bilbo and distraught at losing the ring . The encounter ends with Gollum 's curse , " Thief ! Thief , Thief , Baggins ! We hates it , we hates it , we hates it forever ! " This presages Gollum 's portrayal in The Lord of the Rings . 
 Tolkien sent this revised version of the chapter " Riddles in the Dark " to Unwin as an example of the kinds of changes needed to bring the book into conformity with The Lord of the Rings , but he heard nothing back for years . When he was sent galley proofs of a new edition , Tolkien was surprised to find the sample text had been incorporated . In The Lord of the Rings , the original version of the riddle game is explained as a " lie " made up by Bilbo under the harmful influence of the Ring , whereas the revised version contains the " true " account . The revised text became the second edition , published in 1951 in both the UK and the US . 
 Tolkien began a new version in 1960 , attempting to adjust the tone of The Hobbit to its sequel . He abandoned the new revision at chapter three after he received criticism that it " just wasn 't The Hobbit " , implying it had lost much of its light @-@ hearted tone and quick pace . 
 After an unauthorized paperback edition of The Lord of the Rings appeared from Ace Books in 1965 , Houghton Mifflin and Ballantine asked Tolkien to refresh the text of The Hobbit to renew the US copyright . This text became the 1966 third edition . Tolkien took the opportunity to align the narrative even more closely to The Lord of the Rings and to cosmological developments from his still unpublished Quenta Silmarillion as it stood at that time . These small edits included , for example , changing the phrase " elves that are now called Gnomes " from the first and second editions on page 63 , to " High Elves of the West , my kin " in the third edition . Tolkien had used " gnome " in his earlier writing to refer to the second kindred of the High Elves — the Noldor ( or " Deep Elves " ) — thinking " gnome " , derived from the Greek gnosis ( knowledge ) , was a good name for the wisest of the elves . However , because of its common denotation of a garden gnome , derived from the 16th @-@ century Paracelsus , Tolkien abandoned the term . 
 = = = = Posthumous editions = = = = 
 Since the author 's death , two editions of The Hobbit have been published with commentary on the creation , emendation and development of the text . In The Annotated Hobbit Douglas Anderson provides the entire text of the published book , alongside commentary and illustrations . Later editions added the text of The Quest of Erebor . Anderson 's commentary shows many of the sources Tolkien brought together in preparing the text , and chronicles in detail the changes Tolkien made to the various published editions . Alongside the annotations , the text is illustrated by pictures from many of the translated editions , including images by Tove Jansson . The edition also presents a number of little @-@ known texts such as the 1923 version of Tolkien 's poem " <unk> Gold <unk> <unk> " . 
 With The History of The Hobbit , published in two parts in 2007 , John Rateliff provides the full text of the earliest and intermediary drafts of the book , alongside commentary that shows relationships to Tolkien 's scholarly and creative works , both contemporary and later . Rateliff moreover provides the abandoned 1960s retelling and previously unpublished illustrations by Tolkien . The book keeps Rateliff 's commentary separate from Tolkien 's text , allowing the reader to read the original drafts as contained stories . 
 = = = Illustration and design = = = 
 Tolkien 's correspondence and publisher 's records show that he was involved in the design and illustration of the entire book . All elements were the subject of considerable correspondence and fussing over by Tolkien . Rayner Unwin , in his publishing memoir , comments : " In 1937 alone Tolkien wrote 26 letters to George Allen & Unwin ... detailed , fluent , often pungent , but infinitely polite and exasperatingly precise ... I doubt any author today , however famous , would get such scrupulous attention . " 
 Even the maps , of which Tolkien originally proposed five , were considered and debated . He wished <unk> 's map to be tipped in ( that is , glued in after the book has been bound ) at first mention in the text , and with the moon @-@ letters ( Anglo @-@ Saxon runes ) on the reverse so they could be seen when held up to the light . In the end the cost , as well as the shading of the maps , which would be difficult to reproduce , resulted in the final design of two maps as endpapers , <unk> 's map , and the Map of <unk> , both printed in black and red on the paper 's cream background . 
 Originally Allen & Unwin planned to illustrate the book only with the endpaper maps , but Tolkien 's first tendered sketches so charmed the publisher 's staff that they opted to include them without raising the book 's price despite the extra cost . Thus encouraged , Tolkien supplied a second batch of illustrations . The publisher accepted all of these as well , giving the first edition ten black @-@ and @-@ white illustrations plus the two endpaper maps . The illustrated scenes were : The Hill : Hobbiton @-@ across @-@ the @-@ Water , The Trolls , The Mountain Path , The Misty Mountains looking West from the Eyrie towards Goblin Gate , Beorn 's Hall , Mirkwood , The Elvenking 's Gate , Lake Town , The Front Gate , and The Hall at Bag @-@ End . All but one of the illustrations were a full page , and one , the Mirkwood illustration , required a separate plate . 
 Satisfied with his skills , the publishers asked Tolkien to design a dust jacket . This project , too , became the subject of many iterations and much correspondence , with Tolkien always writing disparagingly of his own ability to draw . The runic inscription around the edges of the illustration are a phonetic transliteration of English , giving the title of the book and details of the author and publisher . The original jacket design contained several shades of various colours , but Tolkien redrew it several times using fewer colours each time . His final design consisted of four colours . The publishers , mindful of the cost , removed the red from the sun to end up with only black , blue , and green ink on white stock . 
 The publisher 's production staff designed a binding , but Tolkien objected to several elements . Through several iterations , the final design ended up as mostly the author 's . The spine shows Anglo Saxon runes : two " þ " ( <unk> and <unk> ) and one " D " ( Door ) . The front and back covers were mirror images of each other , with an elongated dragon characteristic of Tolkien 's style stamped along the lower edge , and with a sketch of the Misty Mountains stamped along the upper edge . 
 Once illustrations were approved for the book , Tolkien proposed colour plates as well . The publisher would not relent on this , so Tolkien pinned his hopes on the American edition to be published about six months later . Houghton Mifflin rewarded these hopes with the replacement of the frontispiece ( The Hill : Hobbiton @-@ across @-@ the Water ) in colour and the addition of new colour plates : Rivendell , Bilbo Woke Up with the Early Sun in His Eyes , Bilbo comes to the Huts of the Raft @-@ elves and a Conversation with Smaug , which features a dwarvish curse written in Tolkien 's invented script Tengwar , and signed with two " þ " ( " Th " ) runes . The additional illustrations proved so appealing that George Allen & Unwin adopted the colour plates as well for their second printing , with exception of Bilbo Woke Up with the Early Sun in His Eyes . 
 Different editions have been illustrated in diverse ways . Many follow the original scheme at least loosely , but many others are illustrated by other artists , especially the many translated editions . Some cheaper editions , particularly paperback , are not illustrated except with the maps . " The Children 's Book Club " edition of 1942 includes the black @-@ and @-@ white pictures but no maps , an anomaly . 
 Tolkien 's use of runes , both as decorative devices and as magical signs within the story , has been cited as a major cause for the popularization of runes within " New Age " and esoteric literature , stemming from Tolkien 's popularity with the elements of counter @-@ culture in the 1970s . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The Hobbit takes cues from narrative models of children 's literature , as shown by its omniscient narrator and characters that young children can relate to , such as the small , food @-@ obsessed , and morally ambiguous Bilbo . The text emphasizes the relationship between time and narrative progress and it openly distinguishes " safe " from " dangerous " in its geography . Both are key elements of works intended for children , as is the " home @-@ away @-@ home " ( or there and back again ) plot structure typical of the Bildungsroman . While Tolkien later claimed to dislike the aspect of the narrative voice addressing the reader directly , the narrative voice contributes significantly to the success of the novel . Emer O 'Sullivan , in her Comparative Children 's Literature , notes The Hobbit as one of a handful of children 's books that has been accepted into mainstream literature , alongside Jostein <unk> 's Sophie 's World ( 1991 ) and J. K. Rowling 's Harry Potter series ( 1997 – 2007 ) . 
 Tolkien intended The Hobbit as a " fairy @-@ story " and wrote it in a tone suited to addressing children although he said later that the book was not specifically written for children but had rather been created out of his interest in mythology and legend . Many of the initial reviews refer to the work as a fairy story . However , according to Jack Zipes writing in " The Oxford Companion to Fairy Tales " , Bilbo is an atypical character for a fairy tale . The work is much longer than Tolkien 's ideal proposed in his essay On Fairy @-@ Stories . Many fairy tale motifs , such as the repetition of similar events seen in the dwarves ' arrival at Bilbo 's and Beorn 's homes , and folklore themes , such as trolls turning to stone , are to be found in the story . 
 The book is popularly called ( and often marketed as ) a fantasy novel , but like Peter Pan and Wendy by J. M. Barrie and The Princess and the Goblin by George MacDonald , both of which influenced Tolkien and contain fantasy elements , it is primarily identified as being children 's literature . The two genres are not mutually exclusive , so some definitions of high fantasy include works for children by authors such as L. Frank Baum and Lloyd Alexander alongside the works of Gene Wolfe and Jonathan Swift , which are more often considered adult literature . The Hobbit has been called " the most popular of all twentieth @-@ century fantasies written for children . " Chance , however , considers the book to be a children 's novel only in the sense that it appeals to the child in an adult reader . Sullivan credits the first publication of The Hobbit as an important step in the development of high fantasy , and further credits the 1960s paperback debuts of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings as essential to the creation of a mass market for fiction of this kind as well as the fantasy genre 's current status . 
 = = Style = = 
 Tolkien 's prose is unpretentious and straightforward , taking as given the existence of his imaginary world and describing its details in a matter @-@ of @-@ fact way , while often introducing the new and fantastic in an almost casual manner . This down @-@ to @-@ earth style , also found in later fantasy such as Richard Adams ' Watership Down and Peter Beagle 's The Last Unicorn , accepts readers into the fictional world , rather than cajoling or attempting to convince them of its reality . While The Hobbit is written in a simple , friendly language , each of its characters has a unique voice . The narrator , who occasionally interrupts the narrative flow with asides ( a device common to both children 's and Anglo @-@ Saxon literature ) , has his own linguistic style separate from those of the main characters . 
 The basic form of the story is that of a quest , told in episodes . For the most part of the book , each chapter introduces a different denizen of the <unk> , some helpful and friendly towards the protagonists , and others threatening or dangerous . However the general tone is kept light @-@ hearted , being interspersed with songs and humour . One example of the use of song to maintain tone is when Thorin and Company are kidnapped by goblins , who , when marching them into the underworld , sing : 
 Clap ! Snap ! the black crack ! 
 Grip , grab ! Pinch , nab ! 
 And down down to Goblin @-@ town 
 You go , my lad ! 
 This onomatopoeic singing undercuts the dangerous scene with a sense of humour . Tolkien achieves balance of humour and danger through other means as well , as seen in the foolishness and Cockney dialect of the trolls and in the drunkenness of the elven captors . The general form — that of a journey into strange lands , told in a light @-@ hearted mood and interspersed with songs — may be following the model of The Icelandic Journals by William Morris , an important literary influence on Tolkien . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 The evolution and maturation of the protagonist , Bilbo Baggins , is central to the story . This journey of maturation , where Bilbo gains a clear sense of identity and confidence in the outside world , may be seen as a Bildungsroman rather than a traditional quest . The Jungian concept of individuation is also reflected through this theme of growing maturity and capability , with the author contrasting Bilbo 's personal growth against the arrested development of the dwarves . Thus , while Gandalf exerts a parental influence over Bilbo early on , it is Bilbo who gradually takes over leadership of the party , a fact the dwarves could not bear to acknowledge . The analogue of the " underworld " and the hero returning from it with a boon ( such as the ring , or Elvish blades ) that benefits his society is seen to fit the mythic archetypes regarding initiation and male coming @-@ of @-@ age as described by Joseph Campbell . Chance compares the development and growth of Bilbo against other characters to the concepts of just kingship versus sinful kingship derived from the <unk> Wisse ( which Tolkien had written on in 1929 ) and a Christian understanding of Beowulf . 
 The overcoming of greed and selfishness has been seen as the central moral of the story . Whilst greed is a recurring theme in the novel , with many of the episodes stemming from one or more of the characters ' simple desire for food ( be it trolls eating dwarves or dwarves eating Wood @-@ elf fare ) or a desire for beautiful objects , such as gold and jewels , it is only by the Arkenstone 's influence upon Thorin that greed , and its attendant vices " coveting " and " malignancy " , come fully to the fore in the story and provide the moral crux of the tale . Bilbo steals the Arkenstone — a most ancient relic of the dwarves — and attempts to ransom it to Thorin for peace . However , Thorin turns on the Hobbit as a traitor , disregarding all the promises and " at your services " he had previously bestowed . In the end Bilbo gives up the precious stone and most of his share of the treasure to help those in greater need . Tolkien also explores the motif of jewels that inspire intense greed that corrupts those who covet them in the Silmarillion , and there are connections between the words " Arkenstone " and " <unk> " in Tolkien 's invented etymologies . 
 The Hobbit employs themes of animism . An important concept in anthropology and child development , animism is the idea that all things — including inanimate objects and natural events , such as storms or purses , as well as living things like animals and plants — possess human @-@ like intelligence . John D. Rateliff calls this the " Doctor Dolittle Theme " in The History of the Hobbit , and cites the multitude of talking animals as indicative of this theme . These talking creatures include ravens , a thrush , spiders and the dragon Smaug , alongside the anthropomorphic goblins and elves . Patrick Curry notes that animism is also found in Tolkien 's other works , and mentions the " roots of mountains " and " feet of trees " in The Hobbit as a linguistic shifting in level from the inanimate to animate . Tolkien saw the idea of animism as closely linked to the emergence of human language and myth : " ... The first men to talk of ' trees and stars ' saw things very differently . To them , the world was alive with mythological beings ... To them the whole of creation was ' myth @-@ woven and elf @-@ patterned ' . " 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 As in plot and setting , Tolkien brings his literary theories to bear in forming characters and their interactions . He portrays Bilbo as a modern anachronism exploring an essentially antique world . Bilbo is able to negotiate and interact within this antique world because language and tradition make connections between the two worlds . For example , Gollum 's riddles are taken from old historical sources , while those of Bilbo come from modern nursery books . It is the form of the riddle game , familiar to both , which allows Gollum and Bilbo to engage each other , rather than the content of the riddles themselves . This idea of a superficial contrast between characters ' individual linguistic style , tone and sphere of interest , leading to an understanding of the deeper unity between the ancient and modern , is a recurring theme in The Hobbit . 
 Smaug is the main antagonist . In many ways the Smaug episode reflects and references the dragon of Beowulf , and Tolkien uses the episode to put into practice some of the ground @-@ breaking literary theories he had developed about the Old English poem in its portrayal of the dragon as having bestial intelligence . Tolkien greatly prefers this motif over the later medieval trend of using the dragon as a symbolic or allegorical figure , such as in the legend of St. George . Smaug the dragon with his golden hoard may be seen as an example of the traditional relationship between evil and metallurgy as collated in the depiction of <unk> with its " <unk> fire and rolling smoke " in Milton 's Paradise Lost . Of all the characters , Smaug 's speech is the most modern , using idioms such as " Don 't let your imagination run away with you ! " 
 Just as Tolkien 's literary theories have been seen to influence the tale , so have Tolkien 's experiences . The Hobbit may be read as Tolkien 's parable of World War I with the hero being plucked from his rural home and thrown into a far @-@ off war where traditional types of heroism are shown to be futile . The tale as such explores the theme of heroism . As Janet Croft notes , Tolkien 's literary reaction to war at this time differed from most post @-@ war writers by eschewing irony as a method for distancing events and instead using mythology to mediate his experiences . Similarities to the works of other writers who faced the Great War are seen in The Hobbit , including portraying warfare as anti @-@ pastoral : in " The Desolation of Smaug " , both the area under the influence of Smaug before his demise and the setting for The Battle of the Five Armies later are described as barren , damaged landscapes . The Hobbit makes a warning against repeating the tragedies of World War I , and Tolkien 's attitude as a veteran may well be summed up by Bilbo 's comment : " Victory after all , I suppose ! Well , it seems a very gloomy business . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 On first publication in October 1937 , The Hobbit was met with almost unanimously favourable reviews from publications both in the UK and the US , including The Times , Catholic World and The New York Post . C. S. Lewis , friend of Tolkien ( and later author of The Chronicles of Narnia between 1949 and 1954 ) , writing in The Times reports : 
 The truth is that in this book a number of good things , never before united , have come together : a fund of humour , an understanding of children , and a happy fusion of the scholar 's with the poet 's grasp of mythology ... The professor has the air of inventing nothing . He has studied trolls and dragons at first hand and describes them with that fidelity that is worth oceans of glib " originality . " 
 Lewis compares the book to Alice in Wonderland in that both children and adults may find different things to enjoy in it , and places it alongside Flatland , Phantastes , and The Wind in the Willows . W. H. Auden , in his review of the sequel The Fellowship of the Ring calls The Hobbit " one of the best children 's stories of this century " . Auden was later to correspond with Tolkien , and they became friends . The Hobbit was nominated for the Carnegie Medal and awarded a prize from the New York Herald Tribune for best juvenile fiction of the year ( 1938 ) . More recently , the book has been recognized as " Most Important 20th @-@ Century Novel ( for Older Readers ) " in the Children 's Books of the Century poll in Books for Keeps . 
 Publication of the sequel The Lord of the Rings altered many critics ' reception of the work . Instead of approaching The Hobbit as a children 's book in its own right , critics such as Randell Helms picked up on the idea of The Hobbit as being a " prelude " , relegating the story to a dry @-@ run for the later work . Countering a <unk> interpretation are those who say this approach misses out on much of the original 's value as a children 's book and as a work of high fantasy in its own right , and that it disregards the book 's influence on these genres . Commentators such as Paul Kocher , John D. Rateliff and C. W. Sullivan encourage readers to treat the works separately , both because The Hobbit was conceived , published , and received independently of the later work , and also to prevent the reader from having false expectations of tone and style dashed . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = The Lord of the Rings = = = 
 While The Hobbit has been adapted and elaborated upon in many ways , its sequel The Lord of the Rings is often claimed to be its greatest legacy . The plots share the same basic structure progressing in the same sequence : the stories begin at Bag End , the home of Bilbo Baggins ; Bilbo hosts a party that sets the novel 's main plot into motion ; Gandalf sends the protagonist into a quest eastward ; Elrond offers a haven and advice ; the adventurers escape dangerous creatures underground ( Goblin Town / Moria ) ; they engage another group of elves ( The Elvenking ’ s realm / Lothlórien ) ; they traverse a desolate region ( Desolation of Smaug / the Dead Marshes ) ; they are received and nourished by a small settlement of men ( Lake @-@ town / Ithilien ) ; they fight in a massive battle ( The Battle of Five Armies / Battle of Pelennor Fields ) ; their journey climaxes within an infamous mountain peak ( Lonely Mountain / Mount Doom ) ; a descendant of kings is restored to his ancestral throne ( Bard / Aragorn ) ; and the questing party returns home to find it in a deteriorated condition ( having possessions auctioned off / the scouring of the Shire ) . 
 The Lord of the Rings contains several more supporting scenes , and has a more sophisticated plot structure , following the paths of multiple characters . Tolkien wrote the later story in much less humorous tones and infused it with more complex moral and philosophical themes . The differences between the two stories can cause difficulties when readers , expecting them to be similar , find that they are not . Many of the thematic and stylistic differences arose because Tolkien wrote The Hobbit as a story for children , and The Lord of the Rings for the same audience , who had subsequently grown up since its publication . Further , Tolkien 's concept of Middle @-@ earth was to continually change and slowly evolve throughout his life and writings . 
 = = = In education = = = 
 The style and themes of the book have been seen to help stretch young readers ' literacy skills , preparing them to approach the works of Dickens and Shakespeare . By contrast , offering advanced younger readers modern teenage @-@ oriented fiction may not exercise their reading skills , while the material may contain themes more suited to adolescents . As one of several books that have been recommended for 11- to 14 @-@ year @-@ old boys to encourage literacy in that demographic , The Hobbit is promoted as " the original and still the best fantasy ever written . " 
 Several teaching guides and books of study notes have been published to help teachers and students gain the most from the book . The Hobbit introduces literary concepts , notably allegory , to young readers , as the work has been seen to have allegorical aspects reflecting the life and times of the author . Meanwhile , the author himself rejected an allegorical reading of his work . This tension can help introduce readers to <unk> and writerly interpretations , to tenets of New Criticism , and critical tools from Freudian analysis , such as sublimation , in approaching literary works . 
 Another approach to critique taken in the classroom has been to propose the insignificance of female characters in the story as sexist . While Bilbo may be seen as a literary symbol of small folk of any gender , a gender @-@ conscious approach can help students establish notions of a " socially symbolic text " where meaning is generated by tendentious readings of a given work . By this interpretation , it is ironic that the first authorized adaptation was a stage production in a girls ' school . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 The first authorized adaptation of The Hobbit appeared in March 1953 , a stage production by St. Margaret 's School , Edinburgh . The Hobbit has since been adapted for other media many times . 
 The first motion picture adaptation of The Hobbit , a 12 @-@ minute film of cartoon stills , was commissioned from Gene Deitch by William L. Snyder in 1966 , as related by Deitch himself . This film was publicly screened in New York City . In 1969 ( over 30 years after first publication ) , Tolkien sold the film and merchandising rights to The Hobbit to United Artists under an agreement stipulating a lump sum payment of £ 10 @,@ 000 plus a 7 @.@ 5 % royalty after costs , payable to Allen & Unwin and the author . In 1976 ( three years after the author 's death ) United Artists sold the rights to Saul Zaentz Company , who trade as Tolkien Enterprises . Since then all " authorized " adaptations have been signed @-@ off by Tolkien Enterprises . In 1997 Tolkien Enterprises licensed the film rights to Miramax , which assigned them in 1998 to New Line Cinema . The heirs of Tolkien , including his son Christopher Tolkien , filed suit against New Line Cinema in February 2008 seeking payment of profits and to be " entitled to cancel ... all future rights of New Line ... to produce , distribute , and / or exploit future films based upon the Trilogy and / or the Films ... and / or ... films based on The Hobbit . " In September 2009 , he and New Line reached an undisclosed settlement , and he has withdrawn his legal objection to The Hobbit films . 
 The BBC Radio 4 series The Hobbit radio drama was an adaptation by Michael <unk> , broadcast in eight parts ( four hours in total ) from September to November 1968 . It starred Anthony Jackson as narrator , Paul <unk> as Bilbo and Heron <unk> as Gandalf . The series was released on audio cassette in 1988 and on CD in 1997 . 
 The Hobbit , an animated version of the story produced by Rankin / Bass , debuted as a television movie in the United States in 1977 . In 1978 , Romeo Muller won a Peabody Award for his teleplay for The Hobbit . The film was also nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , but lost to Star Wars . The adaptation has been called " execrable " and confusing for those not already familiar with the plot . 
 In Decembers of 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer and New Line Cinema released one part each of a three @-@ part live @-@ action film version produced and directed by Peter Jackson . The titles were The Hobbit : An Unexpected Journey , The Hobbit : The Desolation of Smaug , and The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies . 
 A three @-@ part comic @-@ book adaptation with script by Chuck Dixon and Sean Deming and illustrated by David Wenzel was published by Eclipse Comics in 1989 . In 1990 a one @-@ volume edition was released by Unwin Paperbacks . The cover was artwork by the original illustrator David Wenzel . A reprint collected in one volume was released by Del Rey Books in 2001 . Its cover , illustrated by Donato <unk> , was awarded the Association of Science Fiction Artists Award for Best Cover Illustration in 2002 . 
 ME Games Ltd ( formerly Middle @-@ earth Play @-@ by @-@ Mail ) , which has won several Origin Awards , uses the Battle of Five Armies as an introductory scenario to the full game and includes characters and armies from the book . 
 Several computer and video games , both licensed and unlicensed , have been based on the story . One of the most successful was The Hobbit , an award @-@ winning computer game published in 1982 by Beam Software and published by Melbourne House with compatibility for most computers available at the time . A copy of the novel was included in each game package . The game does not retell the story , but rather sits alongside it , using the book 's narrative to both structure and motivate gameplay . The game won the Golden Joystick Award for Strategy Game of the Year in 1983 and was responsible for popularizing the phrase , " Thorin sits down and starts singing about gold . " 
 = = = Collectors ' market = = = 
 While reliable figures are difficult to obtain , estimated global sales of The Hobbit run between 35 and 100 million copies since 1937 . In the UK The Hobbit has not retreated from the top 5 @,@ 000 books of Nielsen BookScan since 1995 , when the index began , achieving a three @-@ year sales peak rising from 33 @,@ 084 ( 2000 ) to 142 @,@ 541 ( 2001 ) , 126 @,@ 771 ( 2002 ) and 61 @,@ 229 ( 2003 ) , ranking it at the 3rd position in Nielsens ' " Evergreen " book list . The enduring popularity of The Hobbit makes early printings of the book attractive collectors ' items . The first printing of the first English @-@ language edition can sell for between £ 6 @,@ 000 and £ 20 @,@ 000 at auction , although the price for a signed first edition has reached over £ 60 @,@ 000 . 
 = M @-@ 62 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 62 is an arc @-@ shaped state trunkline highway in the southwestern part of the US state of Michigan . The highway runs from the Indiana state line north and west to M @-@ 140 in Eau Claire . In between , it serves the western Cass County communities of Dowagiac and Cassopolis . The highway was formed in the 1920s , originally as a north – south route . It was later extended , taking the current arc @-@ shaped routing . A short truncation in the 1950s produced the current routing , which has remained unchanged since . In total , M @-@ 62 runs about 28 1 ⁄ 3 miles ( 45 @.@ 6 km ) in the two counties . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 62 follows a roughly " question mark " -shaped routing in southwestern Michigan . It starts at the Indiana state line south of Edwardsburg in Cass County 's <unk> Township north of Granger , Indiana . The trunkline connects with State Road 23 and runs north through farmland to Edwardsburg , intersecting US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in town . M @-@ 62 turns northeasterly running out of town parallel to a rail line up to Cassopolis . The trunkline crosses the rail line and runs concurrently with M @-@ 60 through Cassopolis . The two highways pass Stone Lake on the way into downtown . M @-@ 62 continues north after leaving M @-@ 60 , then curves west to leave town ; between these locations is where the change in signposting from north – south to east – west occurs . It then continues through more farmland to La Grange , where it crosses the Dowagiac River at the mouth of La Grange Lake . It crosses the river a second time on the way northwest to Dowagiac . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) tracks the traffic volumes along the roads it maintains . This is measured using a metric called average annual daily traffic , which is the number of vehicle per day that use a roadway segment for any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT 's survey calculated that 2 @,@ 246 vehicles used the section of M @-@ 62 between Cassopolis , La Grange and Dowagiac . This was the lowest traffic count along the whole highway . 
 The third crossing of the Dowagiac is at the mouth of Mill Pond in eastern Dowagiac , where M @-@ 62 follows Division Street through downtown . This section of the highway had the highest traffic count with 9 @,@ 088 vehicles in 2009 . At Front Street , M @-@ 51 merges with M @-@ 62 , and the two run concurrently to the west through town . M @-@ 62 continues westerly after M @-@ 51 separates and turns southwesterly near the Dowagiac Municipal Airport . The highway crosses into Berrien County south of Indian Lake and continues west through more scattered farms and woodland to a junction with M @-@ 140 . At this intersection , M @-@ 140 turns west along the roadway , and M @-@ 62 ends . No section of M @-@ 62 has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads considered important to the country 's defense , economy or mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 62 was formed before 1924 along a portion of its current routing . The trunkline started at the Indiana state line and ran north through Edwardsburg and Cassopolis . The northern terminus was at M @-@ 40 ( now M @-@ 51 ) in Dowagiac . The southern section was moved by the end of 1925 to follow a more direct routing between Edwardsburg and the state line . An extension in 1930 moved the northern terminus west into Berrien County , ending in Eau Claire . The final few miles of highway were transferred back in local control around 1957 . Before the transfer , M @-@ 62 ran concurrently with M @-@ 140 west and continued into Eau Claire . After the transfer , M @-@ 62 ended at the eastern M @-@ 140 junction and the concurrency was removed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Gliding = 
 Gliding is a recreational activity and competitive air sport in which pilots fly unpowered aircraft known as gliders or sailplanes using naturally occurring currents of rising air in the atmosphere to remain airborne . The word soaring is also used for the sport . 
 Gliding as a sport began in the 1920s . Initially the objective was to increase the duration of flights but soon pilots attempted cross @-@ country flights away from the place of launch . Improvements in aerodynamics and in the understanding of weather phenomena have allowed greater distances at higher average speeds . Long distances are now flown using any of the main sources of rising air : ridge lift , thermals and lee waves . When conditions are favourable , experienced pilots can now fly hundreds of kilometres before returning to their home airfields ; occasionally flights of more than 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 621 mi ) are achieved . 
 Some competitive pilots fly in races around pre @-@ defined courses . These gliding competitions test pilots ' abilities to make best use of local weather conditions as well as their flying skills . Local and national competitions are organized in many countries , and there are biennial World Gliding Championships . Techniques to maximize a glider 's speed around the day 's task in a competition have been developed , including the optimum speed to fly , navigation using GPS and the carrying of water ballast . If the weather deteriorates pilots are sometimes unable to complete a cross @-@ country flight . Consequently , they may need to land elsewhere , perhaps in a field , but <unk> pilots can avoid this by starting an engine . 
 Powered @-@ aircraft and winches are the two most common means of launching gliders . These and other launch methods require assistance and facilities such as airfields , tugs , and winches . These are usually provided by gliding clubs who also train new pilots and maintain high safety standards . Although in most countries the standards of safety of the pilots and the aircraft are the responsibility of governmental bodies , the clubs and sometimes national gliding associations often have delegated authority . 
 = = History = = 
 The development of heavier @-@ than @-@ air flight in the half century between Sir George Cayley 's coachman in 1853 and the Wright brothers mainly involved gliders ( see Aviation history ) . However , the sport of gliding only emerged after the First World War , as a result of the Treaty of Versailles , which imposed severe restrictions on the manufacture and use of single @-@ seat powered aircraft in Germany 's Weimar Republic . Thus , in the 1920s and 1930s , while aviators and aircraft makers in the rest of the world were working to improve the performance of powered aircraft , the Germans were designing , developing and flying ever more efficient gliders and discovering ways of using the natural forces in the atmosphere to make them fly farther and faster . With the active support of the German government , there were 50 @,@ 000 glider pilots by 1937 . The first German gliding competition was held at the <unk> in 1920 , organized by Oskar Ursinus . The best flight lasted two minutes and set a world distance record of 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . Within ten years , it had become an international event in which the achieved durations and distances had increased greatly . In 1931 , Gunther <unk> flew 272 kilometres ( 169 mi ) on the front of a storm from Munich to <unk> ( <unk> in German ) in Western Czechoslovakia , farther than had been thought possible . 
 In the 1930s , gliding spread to many other countries . In the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin gliding was a demonstration sport , and it was scheduled to be a full Olympic sport in the 1940 Games . A glider , the Olympia , was developed in Germany for the event , but World War II intervened . By 1939 the major gliding records were held by Russians , including a distance record of 748 kilometres ( 465 mi ) . During the war , the sport of gliding in Europe was largely suspended , though several German fighter aces in the conflict , including Erich Hartmann , began their flight training in gliders . 
 Gliding did not return to the Olympics after the war for two reasons : a shortage of gliders , and the failure to agree on a single model of competition glider . ( Some in the community feared doing so would hinder development of new designs . ) The re @-@ introduction of air sports such as gliding to the Olympics has occasionally been proposed by the world governing body , the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale ( FAI ) , but has been rejected on the grounds of lack of public interest . 
 In many countries during the 1950s a large number of trained pilots wanted to continue flying . Many were also aeronautical engineers who could design , build and maintain gliders . They started both clubs and manufacturers , many of which still exist . This stimulated the development of both gliding and gliders , for example the membership of the Soaring Society of America increased from 1 @,@ 000 to 16 @,@ 000 by 1980 . The increased numbers of pilots , greater knowledge and improving technology helped set new records , for example the pre @-@ war altitude record was doubled by 1950 , and the first 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilometre ( 620 mi ) flight was achieved in 1964 . New materials such as glass fiber and carbon fiber , advances in wing shapes and airfoils , electronic instruments , the Global Positioning System and improved weather forecasting have since allowed many pilots to make flights that were once extraordinary . Today over 550 pilots have made flights over 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) . Although there is no Olympic competition , there are the World Gliding Championships . The first event was held at the <unk> in 1948 . Since World War II it has been held every two years . There are now six classes open to both sexes , plus three classes for women and two junior classes . The latest worldwide statistics for 2011 indicate that Germany , the sport 's birthplace , is still a center of the gliding world : it accounted for 27 percent of the world 's glider pilots , and the three major glider manufacturers are still based there . However the meteorological conditions that allow soaring are common and the sport has been taken up in many countries . At the last count there were over 111 @,@ 000 active civilian glider pilots and 32 @,@ 920 gliders , plus an unknown number of military cadets and aircraft . Clubs actively seek new members by giving trial flights , which are also a useful source of revenue for them . 
 = = Soaring = = 
 Glider pilots can stay airborne for hours by flying through air that is ascending as fast or faster than the glider itself is descending , thus gaining potential energy . The most commonly used sources of rising air are 
 thermals ( updrafts of warm air ) ; 
 ridge lift ( found where the wind blows against the face of a hill and is forced to rise ) ; and 
 wave lift ( standing waves in the atmosphere , analogous to the ripples on the surface of a stream ) . 
 Ridge lift rarely allows pilots to climb much higher than about 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) above the terrain ; thermals , depending on the climate and terrain , can allow climbs in excess of 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) in flat country and much higher above mountains ; wave lift has allowed a glider to reach an altitude of 15 @,@ 447 metres ( 50 @,@ 679 ft ) . In a few countries such as the UK , gliders may continue to climb into the clouds in uncontrolled airspace , but in many European countries the pilot must stop climbing before reaching the cloud base ( see Visual Flight Rules ) . 
 = = = Thermals = = = 
 Thermals are streams of rising air that are formed on the ground through the warming of the surface by sunlight . If the air contains enough moisture , the water will condense from the rising air and form cumulus clouds . When the air has little moisture or when an inversion stops the warm air from rising high enough for the moisture to condense , thermals do not create cumulus clouds . Without clouds or dust devils to mark the thermals , thermals are not always associated with any feature on the ground . The pilot must then use both skill and luck to find them using a sensitive vertical speed indicator called a variometer that quickly indicates climbs and descents . Occasionally reliable thermals can be found in the exhaust gases from power stations or from fires . 
 Once a thermal is encountered , the pilot can fly in tight circles to keep the glider within the thermal , so gaining altitude before flying towards the destination or to the next thermal . This is known as " <unk> " . Alternatively , glider pilots on cross @-@ country flights may choose to ' dolphin ' . This is when the pilot merely slows down in rising air , and then speeds up again in the non @-@ rising air , thus following an undulating flight path . <unk> allows the pilot to minimize the loss of height over great distances without spending time turning . Climb rates depend on conditions , but rates of several meters per second are common and can be maximized by gliders equipped with flaps . Thermals can also be formed in a line usually because of the wind or the terrain , creating cloud streets . These can allow the pilot to fly straight while climbing in continuous lift . 
 As it requires rising heated air , <unk> is most effective in mid @-@ latitudes from spring through late summer . During winter the sun 's heat can only create weak thermals , but ridge and wave lift can still be used during this period . 
 = = = Ridge lift = = = 
 A ridge soaring pilot uses upward air movements caused when the wind blows on to the sides of hills . It can also be augmented by thermals when the slopes also face the sun . In places where a steady wind blows , a ridge may allow virtually unlimited time aloft , although records for duration are no longer recognized because of the danger of exhaustion . 
 = = = Wave lift = = = 
 The powerfully rising and sinking air in mountain waves was discovered by glider pilot , Wolf Hirth , in 1933 . Gliders can sometimes climb in these waves to great altitudes , although pilots must use supplementary oxygen to avoid hypoxia . 
 This lift is often marked by long , stationary lenticular ( lens @-@ shaped ) clouds lying perpendicular to the wind . Mountain wave was used to set the current altitude record of 15 @,@ 453 metres ( 50 @,@ 699 ft ) on 29 August 2006 over El <unk> , Argentina . The pilots , Steve Fossett and Einar Enevoldson , wore pressure suits . The current world distance record of 3 @,@ 008 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 869 mi ) by Klaus <unk> ( set on 21 January 2003 ) was also flown using mountain waves in South America . 
 A rare wave phenomenon is known as Morning Glory , a roll cloud producing strong lift . Pilots near Australia 's Gulf of Carpentaria make use of it in springtime . 
 = = = Other sources of lift = = = 
 The boundaries where two air masses meet are known as convergence zones . These can occur in sea breezes or in desert regions . In a sea @-@ breeze front , cold air from the sea meets the warmer air from the land and creates a boundary between two masses of air like a shallow cold front . Glider pilots can gain altitude by flying along the intersection as if it were a ridge of land . Convergence may occur over considerable distances and so may permit virtually straight flight while climbing . 
 Glider pilots have occasionally been able to use a technique called " dynamic soaring " allowing a glider to gain kinetic energy by repeatedly crossing the boundary between air masses of different horizontal velocity . However , such zones of high " wind gradient " are usually too close to the ground to be used safely by gliders . 
 = = Launch methods = = 
 Most gliders do not have engines or at least engines that would allow a take @-@ off under their own power . Various methods are therefore used to get airborne . Each method requires specific training , therefore glider pilots must be in current practice for the type of launch being used . Licensing rules in some countries , such as the USA , differentiate between <unk> and ground launch methods , due to the widely different techniques . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In an aerotow a powered aircraft is attached to a glider with a tow rope . Single @-@ engined light aircraft or motor gliders are commonly used . The tow @-@ plane takes the glider to the height and location requested by the pilot where the glider pilot releases the tow @-@ rope . A weak link is often fitted to the rope to ensure that any sudden loads do not damage the airframe of the tow @-@ plane or the glider . Under extreme loads the weak link will fail before any part of the glider or plane fails . There is a remote chance that the weak link might break at low altitude , and so pilots plan for this eventuality before launching . 
 During the aerotow , the glider pilot keeps the glider behind the tow @-@ plane in either the " low tow " position , just below the wake from the tow @-@ plane , or the " high tow " position just above the wake . In Australia the convention is to fly in low tow , whereas in the United States and Europe the high tow prevails . One rare aerotow variation is attaching two gliders to one tow @-@ plane , using a short rope for the high @-@ towed glider and a long rope for the low tow . The current record is nine gliders in the same aerotow . 
 = = = Winch launching = = = 
 Gliders are often launched using a stationary ground @-@ based winch mounted on a heavy vehicle . This method is widely used at many European clubs , often in addition to an aerotow service . The engine is usually a large diesel , gasoline or LPG engine , though hydraulic fluid engines and electrical motors are also used . The winch pulls in a 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 500 ft ) cable , made of high @-@ tensile steel wire or a synthetic fiber , attached to the glider . The cable is released at a height of about half the cable length after a short , steep ride . Strong winches , light gliders and strong headwind result in higher launches . 
 Winch launches are much cheaper than <unk> , permit a higher take off frequency and have the advantage that many members of a club can be taught to operate the equipment . A winch may also be used at sites where an aerotow could not operate , because of the shape of the field or because of noise restrictions . The height gained from a winch is usually less than from an aerotow so pilots need to find a source of lift soon after releasing from the cable , otherwise the flight will be short . A break in the cable or the weak link during a winch launch is a possibility for which pilots are trained . 
 = = = Auto @-@ tow = = = 
 Another method of launching , the " autotow " , is rarer nowadays . The direct autotow requires a hard surface and a powerful vehicle that is attached to the glider by a long steel cable . After gently taking up slack in the cable , the driver accelerates hard and as a result the glider rises rapidly to about 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) , especially if there is a good headwind and a runway of 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) or more . This method has also been used on desert dry lakes . 
 A variation on the direct autotow is known as the " reverse pulley " method . In this method , the truck drives towards the glider being launched . The cable passes around a pulley at the far end of the airfield , resulting in an effect similar to that of a winch launch . 
 = = = Bungee launch = = = 
 Bungee launching was widely used in the early days of gliding , and occasionally gliders are still launched from the top of a gently sloping hill into a strong breeze using a substantial multi @-@ stranded rubber band , or " bungee " . For this launch method , the glider 's main wheel rests in a small concrete trough . The hook normally used for winch @-@ launching is instead attached to the middle of the bungee . Each end is then pulled by three or four people . One group runs slightly to the left , the other to the right . Once the tension in the bungee is high enough , the glider is released and the glider 's wheel pops out of the trough . The glider gains just enough energy to leave the ground and fly away from the hill . 
 = = Cross @-@ country = = 
 One of the measures of a glider 's performance is the distance that it can fly for each meter it descends , known as its glide ratio . Glide ratio is dependent on an aircraft 's class , and can typically range from 44 : 1 ( for modern designs in the Standard Class ) up to 70 : 1 ( for the largest aircraft ) . A good gliding performance combined with regular sources of rising air enables modern gliders to fly long distances at high speeds . The weather is a major factor in determining cross @-@ country speeds . The record average speed for 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) is 203 @.@ 1 kilometres per hour ( 126 @.@ 2 mph ) . required unusually good conditions , but even in places with less favorable conditions ( such as Northern Europe ) a skilled pilot could expect to complete flights over 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) every year . 
 As the performance of gliders improved in the 1960s , the concept of flying as far away as possible became unpopular with the crews who had to retrieve the gliders . Pilots now usually plan to fly around a course ( called a task ) via turn @-@ points , returning to the starting point . 
 In addition to just trying to fly further , glider pilots also race each other in competitions . The winner is the fastest , or , if the weather conditions are poor , the furthest round the course . Tasks of up to 1 @,@ 000 km have been set and average speeds of 120 km / h are not unusual . 
 Initially , ground observers confirmed that pilots had rounded the turn @-@ points . Later , the glider pilots photographed these places and submitted the film for verification . Today , gliders carry secure <unk> Flight Recorders that record the position every few seconds from GPS satellites . These recording devices now provide the proof that the turn @-@ points have been reached . 
 National competitions generally last one week , with international championships running over two . The winner is the pilot who has amassed the greatest number of points over all the contest days . However , these competitions have as yet failed to draw much interest outside the gliding community for several reasons . Because it would be unsafe for many gliders to cross a start line at the same time , pilots can choose their own start time . Furthermore , gliders are not visible to the spectators for long periods during each day 's contest and the scoring is complex , so traditional gliding competitions are difficult to televise . In an attempt to widen the sport 's appeal , a new format , the Grand Prix , has been introduced . Innovations introduced in the Grand Prix format include simultaneous starts for a small number of gliders , cockpit mounted cameras , telemetry giving the positions of the gliders , tasks consisting of multiple circuits , and simplified scoring . 
 There is a decentralized Internet @-@ based competition called the Online Contest , in which pilots upload their GPS data files and are automatically scored based on distance flown . Worldwide , 6 @,@ 703 pilots registered for this contest in 2010 . 
 = = = <unk> average speed = = = 
 Soaring pioneer Paul MacCready is usually credited with developing mathematical principles for optimizing the speed at which to fly when cross @-@ country soaring , although it was first described by Wolfgang Späte in 1938 . The speed to fly theory allows the optimal cruising speed between thermals to be computed , using thermal strength , glider performance and other variables . It accounts for the fact that if a pilot flies faster between thermals , the next thermal is reached sooner . However at higher speeds the glider also sinks faster , requiring the pilot to spend more time circling to regain the altitude . The MacCready speed represents the optimal trade @-@ off between cruising and circling . Most competition pilots use MacCready theory to optimize their average speeds , and have the calculations programmed in their flight computers , or use a " McCready ring " , a rotatable bezel on the glider 's variometer to indicate the best speed to fly . The greatest factor in maximizing average speed , however , remains the ability of the pilot to find the strongest lift . 
 On cross @-@ country flights on days when strong lift is forecast , pilots fly with water ballast stored in tanks or bags in the wings and fin . The fin tank is used to reduce trim drag by optimizing the center of gravity , which typically would shift forward if water is stored only in the wings ahead of the spar . Ballast enables a sailplane to attain its best L / D at higher speeds but slows its climb rate in thermals , in part because a sailplane with a heavier wing loading cannot circle within a thermal as tightly as one with a lower , <unk> wing loading . But if lift is strong , typically either from thermals or wave , the disadvantage of slower climbs is outweighed by the higher cruising speeds between lift areas . Thus , the pilot can improve the average speed over a course by several percent or achieve longer distances in a given time . If lift is weaker than expected , or if an off @-@ field landing is imminent , the pilot can jettison the water ballast by opening the dump valves . 
 On days with particularly strong and widespread lift pilots can attain high average speeds by alternating periods of fast flight with pull @-@ ups , merely slowing down in areas of lift without deviating from the course . This ' <unk> ' technique can result in high average speeds because the height lost can be minimised until particularly strong lift is encountered when circling would be most effective . 
 = = = Badges = = = 
 Achievements in gliding have been marked by the awarding of badges since the 1920s . For the lower badges , such as the first solo flight , national gliding federations set their own criteria . Typically , a bronze badge shows preparation for cross @-@ country flight , including precise landings and witnessed soaring flights . Higher badges follow the standards set down by the Gliding Commission of the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale ( FAI ) . 
 The FAI 's Sporting Code defines the rules for observers and recording devices to validate the claims for badges that are defined by kilometers of distance and meters of altitude gained . The Silver @-@ C badge was introduced in 1930 . Earning the Silver Badge shows that a glider pilot has achieved an altitude gain of at least 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) , made a five @-@ hour duration flight , and has flown cross @-@ country for a straight @-@ line distance of at least 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) : these three attainments are usually , but not invariably , achieved in separate flights . The Gold and Diamond Badges require pilots to fly higher and further . A pilot who has completed the three parts of the Diamond Badge has flown 300 kilometres ( 186 mi ) to a pre @-@ defined goal , has flown 500 kilometres ( 311 mi ) in one flight ( but not necessarily to a pre @-@ defined goal ) and gained 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) in height . The FAI also issues a diploma for a flight of 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 621 mi ) and further diplomas for increments of 250 kilometres ( 155 mi ) . 
 = = = Landing out = = = 
 If lift is not found during a cross @-@ country flight , for example because of deteriorating weather , the pilot must choose a location to " land out " . Although inconvenient and often mistaken for " emergency landings " , landing out ( or " outlanding " ) is a routine event in cross @-@ country gliding . The pilot has to choose a location where the glider can be landed safely , without damaging the plane , the pilot , or property such as crops or livestock . The glider and the pilot ( s ) can then be retrieved by road from the outlanding location using a purpose @-@ built trailer . In some instances , a tow @-@ plane can be summoned to re @-@ launch the aircraft . 
 = = = Use of engines or motors = = = 
 Although adding to the weight and expense , some gliders are fitted with small power units and are known as motor gliders . This avoids the inconvenience of landing out . The power units can be internal combustion engines , electrical motors , or retractable jet engines . <unk> propellers are fitted to high performance sailplanes , though in another category , called touring motor gliders , non @-@ retractable propellers are used . Some powered gliders are " self launching " , which makes the glider independent of a tow plane . However some gliders have " sustainer " engines that can prolong flight but are not powerful enough for launching . All power units have to be started at a height that includes a margin that would still allow a safe landing out to be made , if there were a failure to start . 
 In a competition , using the engine ends the soaring flight . <unk> gliders are lighter and , as they do not need a safety margin for starting the engine , they can safely thermal at lower altitudes in weaker conditions . Consequently , pilots in unpowered gliders may complete competition flights when some powered competitors cannot . Conversely , motor glider pilots can start the engine if conditions will no longer support soaring flight , while unpowered gliders will have to land out , away from the home airfield , requiring retrieval by road using the glider 's trailer . 
 = = Aerobatic competitions = = 
 World and European Aerobatic competitions are held regularly . In this type of competition , the pilots fly a program of maneuvers ( such as inverted flight , loop , roll , and various combinations ) . Each maneuver has a rating called the " K @-@ Factor " . Maximum points are given for the maneuver if it is flown perfectly ; otherwise , points are deducted . Efficient maneuvers also enable the whole program to be completed with the height available . The winner is the pilot with the most points . 
 = = Hazards = = 
 Unlike hang gliders and paragliders , gliders surround the pilots with strong structures and have undercarriages to absorb impacts when landing . These features prevent injuries from otherwise minor incidents , but there are some hazards . Although training and safe procedures are central to the ethos of the sport , a few fatal accidents occur every year , almost all caused by pilot error . In particular there is a risk of mid @-@ air collisions between gliders , because two pilots might choose to fly to the same area of lift and so might collide . Because of this risk , pilots usually wear parachutes . To avoid other gliders and general aviation traffic , pilots must comply with the Rules of the Air and keep a good lookout . In several European countries and Australia , the <unk> warning system is used to help avoid mid @-@ air collisions between gliders . A few modern gliders have a ballistic emergency parachute to stabilize the aircraft after a collision . 
 = = Training and regulation = = 
 In addition to national laws controlling aviation , the sport in many countries is regulated though national gliding associations and then through local gliding clubs . Much of the regulation concerns safety and training . 
 Many clubs provide training for new pilots . The student flies with an instructor in a two @-@ seat glider fitted with dual controls . The instructor performs the first launches and landings , typically from the back seat , but otherwise the student manages the controls until the student is deemed to have the skill and the airmanship necessary to fly solo . <unk> are also beginning to be used in training , especially during poor weather . 
 After the first solo flights glider pilots are required to stay within gliding range of their home airfield . In addition to solo flying , further flights are made with an instructor until the student is capable of taking a glider cross @-@ country and of handling more difficult weather . Cross @-@ country flights are allowed when they have sufficient experience to find sources of lift away from their home airfield , to navigate , and to select and land in a field if necessary . In most countries pilots must take a written examination on the regulations , navigation , use of the radio , weather , principles of flight and human factors . Proposals are being made to standardise the training requirements across European countries . 
 In addition to the regulation of pilots , gliders are inspected annually and after exceeding predetermined flight times . Maximum and minimum payloads are also defined for each glider . Because most gliders are designed to the same specifications of safety , the upper weight limit for a pilot , after allowing for a parachute , is usually 103 kilograms ( 227 lb ) . There is also a limit , 193 centimetres ( 6 ft 4 in ) , on the tallest pilots who can safely fit into a typical glider 's cockpit . 
 = = Challenges for the gliding movement = = 
 According to the FAI President , gliding as a sport faces challenges in the years ahead . These include : 
 Time pressures on participants : gliding typically takes whole days that many people today find harder to devote . As a result , the average age of glider pilots is increasing . 
 In some countries , the need for more land for housing is threatening small airfields . These airfields may also be used for other general aviation activities , and the addition of gliding may be difficult to accommodate . This can limit the number of available airfields and so it can require longer drives to reach them . 
 Airspace : in many European countries , the growth of civil aviation is reducing the amount of uncontrolled airspace . In the U.S. new security requirements , and the growth of controlled airspace around cities , has also had some impact on where to fly . 
 Competition from other activities : there is now a greater variety of similar sports such as hang gliding and paragliding that may attract potential glider pilots . 
 Lack of publicity : without coverage by television or popular publications , many people are unaware that gliding is even a sport . Without this knowledge the public may have a poor understanding of how flying without an engine is possible and safe . 
 Increasing costs : due to higher costs of fuel and insurance , and due to greater regulation requiring equipment such as new radios , or in some cases transponders , gliding costs have increased , although without the continuous use of engines and fuel , they are still considerably lower than traditional power flying . 
 = = Related air sports = = 
 The two air sports that are most closely related to gliding are hang gliding and paragliding . Although all three sports rely on rising air , there are significant differences which are listed in detail in a comparison of sailplanes hang gliders and paragliders . The main difference is that both hang gliders and paragliders are simpler , less sophisticated and cheaper aircraft that use the pilot 's feet as the undercarriage . All paragliders and most hang gliders have no protective structure around the pilot . However , the dividing line between basic gliders and sophisticated hang @-@ gliders is becoming less distinct . For example , hang gliders typically use fabric wings , shaped over a framework , but hang gliders with rigid wings and three @-@ axis controls are also available . The lower air speeds and lower glide ratios of typical hang gliders means that shorter cross @-@ country distances are flown than in modern gliders . <unk> are more basic craft . They are also foot @-@ launched , but their wings usually have no frames and their shape is created by the flow and pressure of air . The airspeeds and glide ratios of paragliders are generally lower still than the typical hang gliders , and so their cross @-@ country flights are even shorter . Radio @-@ controlled gliding uses scale @-@ models of gliders mainly for ridge soaring ; however thermic <unk> craft are also used . 
 = Siege of Dubrovnik = 
 The Siege of Dubrovnik ( Croatian : Opsada Dubrovnika , Serbian Latin : <unk> Dubrovnika ) was a military engagement fought between the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) and Croatian forces defending the city of Dubrovnik and its surroundings during the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA started its advance on 1 October 1991 and by late October had captured virtually all of the territory between the Pelješac and Prevlaka peninsulas on the coast of the Adriatic Sea — except for Dubrovnik itself . The JNA attacks and bombardment of Dubrovnik , including the Old Town — a UNESCO World Heritage Site — culminated on 6 December 1991 . The bombardment provoked strong international condemnation of the JNA and became a public relations disaster for Serbia and Montenegro , contributing to their diplomatic and economic isolation and the international recognition of the independence of Croatia . In May 1992 , the JNA pulled back from Dubrovnik to Bosnia and Herzegovina , less than 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 miles ) from the coast in some places , and east of the city to hand over its equipment to the newly formed Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) . During this time , the Croatian Army ( HV ) attacked from the west and pushed back the JNA / VRS from the areas east of Dubrovnik , both in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina , and by the end of May linked up with the HV unit defending the city . Fighting between the HV and the Yugoslav troops east of Dubrovnik gradually died down . 
 The siege and a naval blockade by the Yugoslav Navy caused the deaths of between 82 and 88 Croatian civilians and 194 Croatian military personnel . The JNA suffered 165 fatalities . By the end of 1992 , when the entire region was recaptured by the HV in Operation Tiger and the Battle of Konavle , 417 HV troops had been killed . The offensive displaced 15 @,@ 000 refugees — mainly from Konavle — who fled to Dubrovnik . Approximately 16 @,@ 000 refugees were evacuated from Dubrovnik by sea and the city was resupplied by blockade @-@ evading <unk> and a convoy of civilian vessels . 11 @,@ 425 buildings suffered a degree of damage and numerous homes , businesses , and public buildings were looted or torched by the JNA . 
 The JNA operation was a part of a plan drawn up by top JNA officers aimed at securing the Dubrovnik area and then proceeding north @-@ west to link up with the JNA troops in northern Dalmatia via western Herzegovina . The offensive came immediately after war propaganda in Montenegro , which said that Croatian troops were about to attack and capture the Bay of Kotor and that the offensive was a " war for peace " , and that the Old Town was not being targeted by the JNA . Montenegrin President Milo Đukanović apologized for the attack in 2000 , eliciting an angry response from his political opponents and from Serbia . 
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) convicted two Yugoslav officers for their involvement in the siege and handed a third over to Serbia for prosecution . The ICTY indictment stated that the offensive was designed to detach the Dubrovnik region from Croatia and integrate it into a Serb @-@ dominated state through an unsuccessful proclamation of the Dubrovnik Republic on 24 November 1991 . In addition , Montenegro convicted four former JNA soldiers with prisoner abuse at the Morinj camp . Croatia also charged several former JNA or Yugoslav Navy officers and a former Bosnian Serb leader with war crimes but no trials have yet resulted from these indictments . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 , an insurrection centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , and settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations took place in Croatia . These areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) and after declaring its intention to integrate with Serbia , the Government of Croatia declared the RSK a rebellion . By March 1991 , the conflict had escalated and the Croatian War of Independence erupted . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated . A three @-@ month moratorium followed , after which the decision came into effect on 8 October . The RSK then initiated a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Croatian civilians , expelling most non @-@ Serbs by early 1993 . By November 1993 , less than 400 ethnic Croats remained in the United Nations ( UN ) protected area known as Sector South , and a further 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 remained in Sector North . 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported by the RSK and the Croatian Police was unable to cope with the situation , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 . In November , the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( HV ) . The development of the military of Croatia was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September , while the military conflict in Croatia continued to escalate with the Battle of Vukovar , which started on 26 August . 
 Dubrovnik is the southernmost major Croatian city . It is located on the Adriatic Sea coast . The walled city centre , known as the Old Town , is a site of historical monuments and heritage buildings largely dating to the Republic of Ragusa ; the city has been placed on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites . In 1991 , the city had a population of approximately 50 @,@ 000 , of whom 82 @.@ 4 % were Croats and 6 @.@ 8 % were Serbs . Croatian territory surrounding the city stretches from the Pelješac peninsula to the west and the Prevlaka peninsula in the east at the entrance to the Bay of Kotor on the border with Montenegro . This territory is very narrow , especially near Dubrovnik itself , and consists of a 0 @.@ 5 to 15 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 to 9 @.@ 32 miles ) wide coastal strip of land . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In mid @-@ 1991 , top JNA commanders — including Yugoslav Federal Defence Minister General Veljko Kadijević , JNA Chief of the General Staff General Blagoje Adžić and deputy defence minister Vice Admiral Stane <unk> — planned a military offensive entailing an attack on the Dubrovnik area followed by a westward JNA advance towards western Herzegovina to link up with the JNA 9th Knin Corps in northern Dalmatia once the area was secured . General <unk> Cokić submitted the plan of the Dubrovnik offensive to Adžić for his approval . 
 In September 1991 , the JNA and the leaders of Montenegro said that Dubrovnik should be attacked and neutralized to ensure Montenegro 's territorial integrity , to prevent ethnic clashes and to preserve the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Đukanović stated that Croatian borders needed be revised , attributing the existing border line to " poorly educated Bolshevik cartographers " . The propaganda , compounded by JNA Colonel General Pavle Strugar 's allegations that 30 @,@ 000 Croatian troops and 7 @,@ 000 terrorists and Kurdish mercenaries were about to attack Montenegro and seize the Bay of Kotor led many in Montenegro to believe that Croatia had actually started an invasion . The newspaper <unk> was the most significant media source that contributed to the spread of the propaganda . In July 1991 , high @-@ ranking Serbian official <unk> <unk> said at a political rally in Nikšić that a Serbian state was to be established west of Montenegro extending to the Neretva River with Dubrovnik — renamed Nikšić @-@ at @-@ Sea — as its capital . 
 On 16 September 1991 , the JNA mobilized in Montenegro citing the deteriorating situation in Croatia . Despite a radio broadcast appeal by the JNA 2nd Titograd Corps on 17 September , considerable numbers of reservists refused to respond to the call @-@ up . On 18 September , Đukanović threatened harsh punishment of deserters and those refusing to respond to the mobilization . The mobilization and the propaganda were in contrast with assurances from Yugoslav federal authorities in Belgrade that there would be no attack against Dubrovnik . The JNA 's strategic plan to defeat Croatia included an offensive to cut off the southernmost parts of Croatia , including Dubrovnik , from the rest of the country . 
 On 23 September , JNA artillery attacked the village of <unk> in the eastern part of Konavle and Brgat to the east of Dubrovnik . Two days later , the Yugoslav Navy blockaded maritime routes to the city . On 26 September , the JNA renamed its Eastern Herzegovina Operational Group the 2nd Operational Group and subordinated it directly to the Federal Ministry of Defence and the JNA General Staff . Cokić was appointed the first commanding officer of the 2nd Operational Group but was replaced by General Mile Ružinovski on 5 October following the shooting down of Cokić 's helicopter . Strugar replaced Ružinovski on 12 October . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The JNA tasked the 2nd Titograd Corps and the 9th Boka Kotorska Military @-@ Maritime Sector ( VPS ) — both of which were elements of the 2nd Operational Group — with cutting off and capturing the Dubrovnik area . The 2nd Titograd Corps deployed the 1st Nikšić Brigade while the 9th Boka Kotorska VPS employed the 5th and the 472nd Motorized Brigades . The Corps boundary running north @-@ to @-@ south near Dubrovnik was set . The 2nd Operational Group also commanded the 16th Border Patrol Detachment and 107th Coastal Artillery Group , and mobilised Territorial Defence units from Herceg @-@ Novi , Kotor , Tivat , Budva , Bar , <unk> , Bijelo Polje and Trebinje . Strugar was in overall command of the 2nd Operative Group while the 9th Boka Kotorska VPS was commanded by Vice Admiral Miodrag Jokić . Jokić replaced Admiral <unk> <unk> , who had died in uncertain circumstances hours before the offensive began . Major General <unk> Marinović , once commanding the 472nd Motorized Brigade and subordinate of <unk> , said that the JNA had killed the admiral because he opposed the offensive . Marinović resigned his post on 17 September and joined the Croatian ZNG . The JNA 2nd Operational Group initially deployed 7 @,@ 000 troops and maintained similar troop levels throughout the offensive . 
 The defences of Dubrovnik were almost non @-@ existent — at the outset of hostilities there were 480 troops in the city area , out of which only 50 had some training . The only regular military unit was a platoon armed with light infantry weapons that was stationed in the Napoleonic era Fort Imperial atop the Srđ Hill overlooking Dubrovnik . The rest of the troops in the area were poorly armed because the Croatian Territorial Defence had been disarmed by the JNA in 1989 . Unlike elsewhere in Croatia , there had been no JNA garrisons or storage depots in Dubrovnik since 1972 and thus very few arms and munitions captured during the September Battle of the Barracks were available to defend Dubrovnik . On 26 September 200 rifles and four artillery pieces captured from the JNA on the island of Korčula were sent to reinforce the city . The guns were a mix of 76 mm and 85 mm Soviet World War II @-@ era divisional guns . In addition , an improvised armoured vehicle was supplied to the city . Dubrovnik also received additional HV , Croatian Police and Croatian Defence Forces troops from other parts of Croatia . This brought the number of Croatian troops in Dubrovnik to 600 . By November , about 1 @,@ 000 Croatian troops were defending the city . On 19 September , Marinović was appointed commanding officer of the defences in Dubrovnik , at which time he assessed them as inadequate . The troops , initially organized as the Territorial Defence of Dubrovnik , were reorganized into the HV 75th Independent Battalion on 28 December 1991 and were later reinforced with elements of the 116th Infantry Brigade to form the 163rd Infantry Brigade on 13 February 1992 . The Armed Boats Squadron Dubrovnik , a volunteer military unit of the Croatian Navy consisting of 23 vessels of various sizes and 117 volunteers , was established on 23 September to counter the Yugoslav Navy blockade . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = JNA advance = = = 
 On 1 October , the JNA started its offensive towards Dubrovnik , moving the 2nd Titograd Corps west through the Popovo field north of the city . The JNA 2nd Corps destroyed the village of Ravno before turning south towards Dubrovačko Primorje area , aiming to envelop Dubrovnik from the west . The second axis of the JNA advance was assigned to the 9th Boka Kotorska VPS . It originated in the Bay of Kotor about 35 kilometres ( 22 miles ) south @-@ east of Dubrovnik and was directed through Konavle . The advance started at 5 am after preparatory artillery fire against <unk> and other targets in Konavle . The advance , using several roads in the region , was supported by the Yugoslav Navy and the Air Force . Croatian defences were nonexistent in Konavle and light in Dubrovačko Primorje — the only JNA casualties of the day occurred during a successful ZNG ambush in <unk> village . On the first day of the offensive , the JNA artillery attacked Srđ Hill and the Žarkovica promontory just to the north and east of Dubrovnik , while the Yugoslav Air Force MiG @-@ 21s raided Komolac in Rijeka Dubrovačka to the west , destroying supplies of electricity and water to Dubrovnik . Until the end of December , Dubrovnik relied on fresh water supplied by boats and electricity from the few electric generators . 
 Over the next three days , the JNA made slow progress . Its artillery attacked Srđ Hill , the Fort Imperial and Žarkovica on 2 October . The next day , the JNA shelled Dubrovnik 's Belvedere Hotel , where a ZNG defence post was located , and the Yugoslav Air Force bombarded the city 's Argentina Hotel . On 4 October , the JNA 2nd Corps captured Slano in Dubrovačko Primorje , interdicting the Adriatic Highway there and isolating Dubrovnik from the rest of Croatia . On 5 October , the Ploče district of Dubrovnik was shelled , followed by a Yugoslav Air Force strike on the Fort Imperial the next day . 
 On 15 October , Croatia offered peace talks to Montenegro , but the President of Serbia Slobodan Milošević dismissed the offer . The offer was made to the Montenegrin officials because the offensive was first officially endorsed by the Montenegrin government on 1 October . Three days later , Serbia publicly distanced itself from the move , blaming Croatia for provoking the JNA . On the seventh day of the offensive , the Montenegrin parliament blamed the JNA for the attack . On 16 October — a day after Milošević declined the Croatian offer — the JNA 9th Boka Kotorska VPS force captured Cavtat . The capture of Cavtat was supported by an amphibious landing operation approximately 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) east of Dubrovnik and an airstrike on Ploče district of Dubrovnik on 18 October . The following day , a ceasefire was agreed but it was violated as soon as it came into effect . On 20 October , the Yugoslav Air Force attacked Dubrovnik and on 22 October , the Yugoslav Navy bombarded hotels housing refugees in the Lapad area of the city . 
 On 23 October , the JNA started a sustained artillery bombardment of Dubrovnik , including the Old Town within the city walls , drawing a protest from the United States Department of State the next day . The JNA 9th VPS captured Župa Dubrovačka and Brgat on 24 October , while the Yugoslav Navy bombarded Lokrum Island . The next day , the JNA issued an ultimatum to the city , demanding its surrender and the removal of elected officials from Dubrovnik . On 26 October , the JNA captured the Žarkovica promontory 2 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 miles ) south @-@ east from the city centre , and took most of the high ground overlooking Dubrovnik by 27 October . The JNA 2nd Corps south @-@ western drive towards Dubrovnik was slower . It destroyed a large portion of the <unk> Arboretum . The JNA advance displaced about 15 @,@ 000 refugees from the areas it captured . About 7 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from Dubrovnik by sea in October ; the rest took refuge in hotels and elsewhere in the city . 
 = = = Defence of Dubrovnik = = = 
 The JNA continued its artillery strikes against Dubrovnik on 30 October and the bombardment continued until 4 November , targeting the western areas of Dubrovnik — Gruž and Lapad — as well as the Babin Kuk and Argentina hotels , which were housing refugees . On 3 – 4 November , JNA troops attacked the Old Town and the Argentina Hotel using small arms and sniper fire from positions held by the 3rd Battalion of the JNA <unk> Motorized Brigade , which occupied the positions closest to the city centre . The next day , the Fort Imperial was bombarded once again . On 7 November , the JNA issued a new ultimatum demanding the surrender of Dubrovnik by noon . The demand was rejected and Jokić announced that the JNA would only spare the Old Town from destruction . The same day , fighting resumed near Slano . 
 JNA artillery and the Yugoslav Navy resumed the bombardment of Dubrovnik between 9 and 12 November , targeting the Old Town , Gruž , Lapad and Ploče , as well as the Belvedere , Excelsior , Babin Kuk , <unk> , Imperial and Argentina hotels . Wire @-@ guided missiles were used to attack boats in the Old Town harbour , while some larger ships at the port of Gruž — including the ferryboat Adriatic and the American @-@ owned sailing ship Pelagic , were set ablaze and destroyed by gunfire . The Fort Imperial was attacked by the JNA on 9 , 10 and 13 November . These attacks were followed by a lull which lasted until the end of November when the European Union Monitoring Mission ( ECMM ) mediated in negotiations between the JNA and Croatian authorities in Dubrovnik . The ECMM was withdrawn in mid @-@ November after its personnel were attacked by the JNA , and the mediation was taken over by French State Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs Bernard <unk> and UNICEF Mission Chief Stephan Di <unk> . The negotiations produced ceasefire agreements on 19 November and 5 December , but neither yielded any specific results on the ground . Instead , the JNA 2nd Corps units located in Dubrovačko Primorje , north @-@ west of Dubrovnik , closed in on the city , reaching the farthest point of their advance on 24 November , as the city defences were pushed back to <unk> – Srđ – Belvedere Hotel line . That day , the JNA tried to establish the Dubrovnik Republic in the area it occupied , but the attempt ultimately failed . 
 In November , Dubrovnik began receiving the largest deliveries of humanitarian aid since the beginning of the siege . The first successful attempt to sustain the city was the Libertas convoy — a fleet of civilian vessels , the largest being Jadrolinija 's Slavija — which arrived in Dubrovnik on 31 October . The convoy sailed from Rijeka and made several port calls , growing to 29 vessels as it approached Dubrovnik . The convoy — which also carried the ECMM observers , at least 1 @,@ 000 protesters , the President of the Presidency of Yugoslavia Stjepan Mesić and the former Prime Minister of Croatia Franjo Gregurić — was initially stopped by the Yugoslav frigate JRM Split between the islands of Brač and Šolta , and the next day by Yugoslav patrol boats off Korčula before the Armed Boats Squadron linked up with the fleet and escorted it to the Port of Dubrovnik in Gruž . On its return , the 700 @-@ capacity Slavija evacuated 2 @,@ 000 refugees from Dubrovnik , although she had to sail to the Bay of Kotor first for inspection by the Yugoslav Navy . 
 On 2 – 3 December , the JNA resumed infantry weapons fire against the Old Town , followed by mortar fire against the Fort Imperial on 4 December . The heaviest bombardment of the Old Town started at 5 : 48 am on 6 December . The Old Town was struck by 48 82 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) missiles , 232 82 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) and 364 120 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) mortar shells , as well as 22 wire @-@ guided missiles . Two impact craters indicated the use of heavier weapons . The bombardment was concentrated on <unk> — the central promenade of the Old Town — and areas north @-@ east of <unk> , while other parts of the Old Town sustained relatively few impacts . The attack subsided at 11 : 30 am . It killed 13 civilians — the heaviest loss of civilian life during the siege . The Dubrovnik Inter @-@ University Centre library containing 20 @,@ 000 volumes was also destroyed in the attack and the Libertas Hotel was bombarded by JNA artillery aiming to kill firefighters putting out fires caused by an attack earlier that day . The 6 December attack of the Old Town was met with strong protests from the international media , UNESCO Director @-@ General Federico Mayor Zaragoza , Special Envoy of the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Cyrus Vance and the ECMM on the day of the bombardment . Later that day , the JNA issued a statement of regret and promised an inquiry . On 7 December , representatives of the JNA visited the Old Town to inspect the damage but no further actions were noted . 
 All of the Croatian defences were 3 to 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 5 miles ) away from the Old Town , except for the Fort Imperial about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 miles ) to the north . The fortress was attacked at 5 : 50 am — minutes after the bombardment of the Old Town began . The attack was executed by the 3rd Battalion of the JNA 472nd Motorized Brigade , advancing simultaneously from two directions . The primary attack consisted of a company @-@ sized force , and the secondary of a platoon of infantrymen — both supported by T @-@ 55 tanks and artillery . By 8 am , the infantry reached the Fort Imperial , forcing the defending force to retreat into the fortification and request help . Marinović ordered the HV artillery to fire directly onto the fortress and dispatched a special police unit to reinforce the Fort Imperial garrison . By 2 pm , the JNA called off the attack . That day , Sveti Vlaho — the first vessel commissioned by the Armed Boats Squadron Dubrovnik and named after the patron saint of the city Saint Blaise — was sunk by a wire @-@ guided missile . 
 = = = Croatian counterattack = = = 
 On 7 December 1991 , another ceasefire was agreed and the JNA force besieging Dubrovnik became largely inactive . In January 1992 , the Sarajevo Agreement was signed by representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the UN , and fighting was paused . The United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed to Croatia to supervise and maintain the agreement . Serbia continued to support the RSK . The conflict largely passed onto entrenched positions and the JNA soon retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina , where a new conflict was anticipated . The only exception was the Dubrovnik area , where the JNA attacked westward from Dubrovačko Primorje , pushing back elements of the HV 's 114th and 116th Infantry Brigades and reaching the outskirts of Ston by the beginning of 1992 . 
 The capabilities of the HV increased dramatically in the first few months of 1992 because it acquired large stockpiles of JNA 's weapons in the Battle of the Barracks . After the JNA disengaged in Croatia , its personnel prepared to set up a new Bosnian Serb army , later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) . The move followed the Bosnian Serb declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the 29 February – 1 March 1992 referendum on independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The referendum would later be cited as a pretext for the Bosnian War , which had begun by 4 April when VRS artillery began shelling Sarajevo . The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina were confronted by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively . The HV sometimes deployed to Bosnia and Herzegovina to support the HVO . 
 In April 1992 , the JNA began offensive operations against the HV and the HVO in areas of western and southern Herzegovina near Kupres and Stolac . The 4th Military District of the JNA , commanded by Strugar , aimed to capture Stolac and most of the eastern bank of the Neretva River south of Mostar . The fighting around Mostar and JNA artillery attacks on the city started on 6 April . The JNA pushed the HV / HVO force from Stolac on 11 April and Čapljina came under JNA fire . A ceasefire was arranged on 7 May but the JNA and the Bosnian Serb forces resumed the attack the next day . The attack succeeded in capturing a large part of Mostar and some territory on the western bank of the Neretva River . On 12 May , the JNA forces based in Bosnia and Herzegovina became part of the VRS , and the JNA 2nd Operational Group was renamed as the 4th VRS Herzegovina Corps . Croatia saw the JNA moves as a prelude to attacks on southern Croatia specifically aimed at the Port of Ploče and possibly Split . To counter the threat , the HV appointed General Janko Bobetko to command the Southern Front , encompassing the Herzegovina and Dubrovnik areas . Bobetko reorganized the HVO command structure and assumed command of the HVO in the region and newly deployed HV units , the 1st Guards and the 4th Guards Brigades . 
 The VRS / JNA force attacked north of Ston on 11 April , pushing back elements of the HV 115th Infantry Brigade and elements of the arriving HV Guards Brigades for only modest territorial gain . The frontline stabilized by 23 April and the HV counterattacked and reclaimed some ground after 27 April . On 17 May , Bobetko ordered a major attack of the two full guards brigades . The 1st Guards Brigade was tasked with advancing to link up with the Ston Company guarding access to the Pelješac Peninsula and advance to Slano . The 4th Guards Brigade was ordered to secure the hinterland of the Dubrovačko Primorje by advancing along the rim of the Popovo field . At the same time , the JNA was pressured by the international community to pull back east of Dubrovnik to Konavle . 
 The 1st Guards Brigade , supported by elements of the 115th Infantry Brigade , captured <unk> on 21 May and Slano on 22 – 23 May . The Armed Boats Squadron Dubrovnik landed troops in Slano the previous night , but they were repulsed by the JNA . On the night of 23 – 24 May , the JNA attacked <unk> and the northern outskirts of Dubrovnik . On 26 May , the JNA started to pull out of <unk> and Žarkovica . The 163rd Infantry Brigade advanced from Dubrovnik ; its 1st Battalion took positions in Brgat and Župa Dubrovačka , and the 2nd Battalion deployed to <unk> . On 29 May , the 4th Guards Brigade recaptured Ravno . On 31 May , the 2nd Battalion of the 163rd Brigade pushed the JNA to the Golubov Kamen massif overlooking the Adriatic Highway section tracing around the Rijeka Dubrovačka embayment , but failed to capture the massif . The brigade was relieved by the 145th Infantry Brigade on 15 June . Dubrovnik was targeted by the JNA artillery continuously until 16 June , and then intermittently until 30 June . On 7 June , the 1st Guards and the 4th Guards Brigades ceased their advance in Dubrovačko Primorje in the vicinity of <unk> Do , a village to the north of Slano . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Regardless of its military outcome , the Siege of Dubrovnik is primarily remembered for the large @-@ scale looting by JNA troops and the artillery bombardment of Dubrovnik , especially its Old Town . The reaction of the international media and media coverage of the siege reinforced an opinion , already taking shape since the fall of Vukovar , that the conduct of the JNA and the Serbs was barbaric and intent on dominating Croatia — regardless of the destruction of priceless cultural heritage that occurred in the process . Serbian authorities thought the international community had no moral grounds to judge because they did not interfere when hundreds of thousands of Serbs were brutally killed in Croatian concentration camps during World War II . Besides the protests made by Mayor Zaragoza , Vance and the ECMM , 104 Nobel Prize laureates published a full @-@ page advertisement in the The New York Times on 14 January 1992 at the incentive of Linus Pauling , urging governments throughout the world to stop the unrestrained destruction by the JNA . Because the siege shaped the international opinion of the Croatian War of Independence , it became a major contributor to a shift in the international diplomatic and economic isolation of Serbia and rump Yugoslavia , which came to be viewed as an aggressor @-@ state in the West . On 17 December 1991 , the European Economic Community agreed to recognize the independence of Croatia on 15 January 1992 . 
 Between October and December 1991 , the JNA captured approximately 1 @,@ 200 square kilometres ( 460 square miles ) of territory around Dubrovnik — all of which the HV recaptured in its May 1992 counterattack as the JNA pulled back east of Dubrovnik , and in subsequent HV offensives — Operation Tiger and the Battle of Konavle between July and October 1992 . Between 82 and 88 Croatian civilian deaths were caused by the JNA advance and siege . 194 Croatian military personnel were also killed . Ninety @-@ four of these were killed between October and December 1991 . A total of 417 were killed in all military operations around Dubrovnik by the end of October 1992 . The JNA suffered 165 fatalities during the siege . Approximately 15 @,@ 000 refugees from Konavle and other areas around Dubrovnik fled to the city , and about 16 @,@ 000 refugees were evacuated by sea from Dubrovnik to other parts of Croatia . The JNA set up two prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps — the Bileća and Morinj camp — to detain those it captured . During and after the offensive , 432 people , mainly civilians from Konavle , were imprisoned there — 292 in Morinj and 140 in Bileća — and subjected to physical and psychological abuse . The abuse was perpetrated by the JNA personnel and paramilitaries as well as civilians , and included beatings and mock executions . A large portion of the prisoners was exchanged for prisoners of war held by Croatia on 12 December 1991 , but the camps JNA operated until August 1992 . 
 11 @,@ 425 buildings in the region sustained damage ; 886 were totally destroyed and 1 @,@ 675 sustained damage . The cost of the damage was estimated at 480 million Deutsche Marks . Damage to the Old Town of Dubrovnik was observed by a UNESCO team which stayed in the city from 27 November until 20 December 1991 . It was estimated that 55 @.@ 9 % of buildings were damaged , that 11 @.@ 1 % were heavily damaged and 1 % were burnt down . Seven burnt Baroque palaces were the greatest losses . Additional damage was caused by the JNA troops looting museums , businesses and private homes . All exhibits held by Vlaho Bukovac Memorial Museum in Cavtat were taken away by the JNA , as were contents of hotels in <unk> . The Franciscan monastery of St. Jerome in Slano was also targeted . The JNA admitted that looting took place , but Jokić said the property would be distributed to Serbian refugees by a special JNA administration set up on 15 December 1991 . It is probable , however , that the looted property ended up in private homes or was sold on the black market . Dubrovnik 's Čilipi Airport was also targeted and its equipment taken to Podgorica and Tivat Airports . 
 Following attempts to justify the JNA offensive , authorities in Serbia and Montenegro tried to deny damage to the Old Town . Radio Television of Serbia said that smoke rising from the Old Town was the result of automobile tyres set on fire by the population of Dubrovnik , echoing Kadijević . Officials and media in Montenegro referred to the offensive as the " war for peace " , or a blockade — applying the term to land operations and the naval blockade . According to a 2010 survey of public opinion in Serbia , 40 % of those polled did not know who bombarded Dubrovnik , while 14 % believed that no shelling occurred . In a June 2000 meeting with Croatian President Mesić , the President of Montenegro Milo Đukanović apologized to Croatia for the attack . The gesture was welcomed in Croatia , but it was condemned by Đukanović 's political opponents in Montenegro and by authorities in Serbia . 
 In 2007 , Montenegrin filmmaker Koča Pavlović released a documentary entitled Rat za mir ( War for peace ) , covering the role of propaganda in the siege , testimonies of Morinj camp prisoners and interviews with JNA soldiers . In 2011 , Radio Television of Montenegro broadcast a documentary series using archive footage titled Rat za Dubrovnik ( War for Dubrovnik ) , although an attempt to destroy records of warmongering television and <unk> newspaper reports had been made . In 2012 , Aleksandar <unk> and Marin <unk> produced a feature documentary titled <unk> Libertas ( Libertas Convoy ) , which was about the delivery of humanitarian aid to Dubrovnik through the naval blockade . 
 = = War crime charges = = 
 Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , set up in 1993 and based on UN Security Council Resolution 827 , indicted Milošević , Strugar , Jokić , the JNA 9th VPS chief of staff Captain Milan Zec and the commanding officer of the 3rd Battalion of the JNA 472nd Motorized Brigade Captain 1st Class Vladimir Kovačević . The charges included allegations that the offensive against Dubrovnik aimed to detach the area from Croatia and annex it to Serbia or Montenegro . Jokić said that the offensive only aimed to blockade Dubrovnik , but that claim was later refuted by Cokić . Mihailo <unk> , a former Yugoslav ambassador to the European Union , speculated that the siege was intended to force an end to blockades of JNA barracks in Croatia and to claim the Prevlaka Peninsula for <unk> . 
 The trial of Slobodan Milošević was never completed because Milošević died on 11 March 2006 while in ICTY custody . Strugar was transferred to ICTY custody on 21 October 2001 . The trial and appeals process was completed in 2008 , with a final verdict of conviction of crimes — including attacks on civilians , devastation not required by military necessity and violation of the laws and customs of war . He was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison . Strugar was granted an early release in 2009 , seven years and four months after his transfer to the ICTY . Jokić was turned over to the ICTY on 12 November 2001 . He pleaded guilty and was convicted of crimes including murder , cruel treatment , attacks on civilians and violations of laws of war . In 2004 , he was sentenced to seven years in prison . The verdict was confirmed and became final in 2005 . Jokić was transferred to Denmark to serve his sentence and was released on 1 September 2008 . The ICTY withdrew charges against Zec on 26 July 2002 . Kovačević was arrested in 2003 in Serbia and transferred to the ICTY . Following an insanity defence , he was provisionally released on 2 June 2004 and the proceedings were transferred to the judiciary in Serbia in 2007 and he underwent psychiatric treatment at the Military Medical Academy in Belgrade . As of May 2012 , Kovačević was considered unfit to stand trial by authorities in Serbia . The charges against him include murder , cruel treatment , devastation not required by military necessity and violations of laws of war . 
 In 2008 , authorities in Montenegro charged six former JNA soldiers with prisoner abuse committed in Morinj in 1991 and 1992 . Four of the six were convicted of war crimes in July 2013 . Ivo <unk> was given a four @-@ year sentence , <unk> <unk> and Boro <unk> were sentenced to three years while Ivo <unk> was sentenced to two . The four appealed the decision , and in April 2014 , the Montenegrin Supreme Court rejected their appeal . A number of former prisoners of the Morinj camp sued Montenegro and were paid compensation . 
 In October 2008 , Croatia indicted Božidar Vučurević — the mayor of Trebinje and Bosnian Serb leader in eastern Herzegovina at the time of the offensive — for attacks against the civilian population of Dubrovnik . Jokić confirmed that he received orders from both Strugar and Vučurević . On 4 April 2011 , Vučurević was arrested in Serbia and Croatia requested his extradition . He was released on bail on 17 June . In September , the extradition request was approved but Vučurević left Serbia and returned to Trebinje , avoiding extradition . In 2009 , Croatian authorities filed charges against ten JNA officers , including Cokić , Ružinovski , Strugar , Jokić , Zec and Kovačević . They were charged with war crimes committed in the area of Dubrovnik prior to or after 6 December 1991 , which were not covered by the ICTY indictments . The charges were made after the ICTY supplied documents collected during its investigation . In 2012 , Croatia indicted the commanding officer of the 3rd Battalion of the JNA 5th Motorized Brigade and charged him with arson for burning 90 houses , businesses and public buildings in Čilipi from 5 to 7 October 1991 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 = Women 's Boat Race 2014 = 
 The 69th Women 's Boat Race took place on 30 March 2014 . The race , between crews representing Oxford University Women 's Boat Club and Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club , was umpired by Judith Packer . Cambridge 's crew , the heavier of the two , was entirely British , while Oxford 's boat included rowers from Canada , Switzerland and the United States . Oxford won by four lengths in a time of 5 minutes 50 seconds , their second consecutive win . The victory took the overall record in the event to 41 – 28 in Cambridge 's favour . It was the last time the race would be conducted over a 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) straight race as part of the Henley Boat Races . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Women 's Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between eights from Oxford University Women 's Boat Club and the Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club that has taken place since 1927 . Oxford went into the race as champions , having won the previous year 's race by one and three @-@ quarter lengths ; Cambridge led 41 – 27 overall . It was the last time the race would be conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , along a 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) stretch of the River Thames referred to as the Straight Course which is used for the Henley Royal Regatta since 1924 . The 2015 race would be conducted on The Championship Course on the same day as men 's race . 
 Cambridge 's number five , Catherine Foot , remarked " After training , I step back and think ' wow , I 'm part of this incredible tradition ' . There is nothing else I 'd rather be doing than training for this event " , while Oxford 's stroke Amber de Vere said " All the training has been leading up to this weekend . Next year is definitely exciting and it has added something to training , but as a crew , we 're only thinking about Sunday . " This year 's race was umpired by Judith Packer and was sponsored by Newton Investment Management , a subsidiary of The Bank of New York Mellon , for the third successive year . 
 = = Crews = = 
 During the build @-@ up to the race , the two universities sent trial boats to race on 19 December 2013 . For the first time in the history of the competition , this took place on the Tideway on part of the Championship Course . The two Cambridge boats were named Nudge Nudge and Wink Wink ( with a third reserve boat called Say No More ) , while Oxford 's trialists rowed in Cleopatra and Boudicca . Both trials were overseen by Olympic bronze medallist Sarah Winckless . 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 73 @.@ 2 kg ( 161 lb ) per rower , 4 kilograms ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) more than their opponents . Three members of Oxford 's 2013 crew returned to race in 2014 : Alice Carrington @-@ Windo , Maxie Scheske and Anastasia Chitty . Cambridge 's boat included two double Blues in Caroline Reid and Holly Game , while four other members of the crew had taken part in the previous year 's race . Every member of the Cambridge crew was British , while Oxford 's boat included Canadian Elizabeth Fence , German / Britons Carrington @-@ Windo and Scheske , Nadine <unk> <unk> from Switzerland and American Laura <unk> ( who had rowed in the Harvard – Yale Regatta for Harvard University on four occasions ) . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Berkshire side , handing the Buckinghamshire station to Oxford . At 3 p.m. , umpire Palmer dropped the flag to start the race . Both crews went off rating 40 strokes per minute and after the first 500 metres ( 550 yd ) Oxford were half a length ahead . By the time the crews passed the Upper Thames Rowing Club , Oxford 's lead was over a length . Cambridge made a series of pushes ; both crews were warned by the umpire to avoid a collision . Oxford continued to extend their lead to win by four lengths , the largest winning margin since the 2010 race . Their time was 5 minutes 50 seconds , six seconds slower than the record time set by Oxford in the 2006 race . The victory was Oxford 's second consecutive win and their sixth in the last seven ; it took the overall record in the event to 41 – 28 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 The former Oxford cox Rachel Quarrell , writing in The Daily Telegraph stated that the race " was won in storming style " and suggested the contest was over within the first two minutes . A newly @-@ designed trophy , to replace the existing wooden shield , was awarded to the Oxford president by Olympic gold medallist Sophie Hosking who had won the Women 's lightweight double sculls at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = Tropical Storm Hazel ( 1965 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Hazel was a weak East Pacific tropical cyclone that caused heavy damage in Mexico . The costliest storm of the 1965 Pacific hurricane season , it formed from a northward @-@ moving disturbance that originated southeast of Socorro Island . After reaching tropical storm strength on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , the cyclone turned to the east @-@ northeast . The storm made landfall near Mazatlán on September 26 and quickly transitioned an extratropical cyclone . Although fairly weak , the system was responsible for causing heavy damage to the Mexican economy . Flooding in Mazatlán washed out many houses and submerged others in muddy water . At least six people died with damages totaling $ 10 million ( 1965 USD ) and possibly higher . The name Hazel was retired following this storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 22 , a weak tropical disturbance was first observed southeast of Socorro Island . The disturbance moved northward uneventfully until late on September 23 , when the disturbance became a tropical depression at a distance of 100 mi ( 160 km ) . The next day , the depression intensified into a tropical storm while moving north at 8 mph ( 15 km / h ) . Later on September 24 , satellite imagery suggested winds of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) near the center . Around that time , Tropical Storm Hazel reached its peak pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . On September 26 , a ship reported peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm then moved towards the east @-@ northeast and made landfall just south of Mazatlán on September 26 and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone shortly thereafter . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Since meteorologists were expecting Hazel to remain away from land , many residents were unprepared for the storm . However , 10 @,@ 000 people fled the low @-@ lying areas of Mazatlán . Substantial damage was recorded in the city Many rivers overflowed its banks , and roughly 5 @,@ 000 people were without shelter . The entire city of Mazatlán was without power and the city water system was damaged . At least 50 boats were damaged or sunk by the storm . The damage from the storm was estimated to be at least $ 10 million ( 1965 USD ) , making Hazel the costliest tropical cyclone of the season . Three people were reported killed in Mazatlán , two fishermen died when attempted to ride out the storm , and a boy who was electrocuted by a downed power line . Three additional deaths from electrocutions were reported in a rural section of Nayarit . Due to a communications breakdown , no word was received about six vacationers in Mazatlán . The city was only reachable by boat . In addition , several shacks made of wood , tin , and cardboard were either washed away or inundated by up to 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of muddy water while flooding from the storm had washed out bridges and roads throughout the state and some merges were cancelled . The cyclone also had a major impact on the coastal economy since Mazatlán 's shrimp fleet , which makes up the base of the city 's economy . In southern Sinaloa , 55 @,@ 000 acres ( 220 km2 ) of cotton , corn , and sorghum were lost . There were also reports of heavy losses to livestock . 
 After the storm , 1 @,@ 000 people were sought shelter in schools ; in the farm areas of Barron and El <unk> , people were taking refuge on top of trees and homes . Army units and relief agencies rushed to provide aid to coastal cities . The name Hazel was retired ; the name was replaced with Heather in 1969 . 
 = Freemasonry and women = 
 Freemasonry and women have a complex relationship , which can be readily divided into many phases with no demonstrable relationship to each other until the 20th century . A few women were involved in Freemasonry before the 18th century ; however the first printed constitutions of the Premier Grand Lodge of England appeared to bar them from the Craft forever . 
 The French Lodges of Adoption which spread through Continental Europe during the second half of the 18th century admitted Masons and their female relatives to a system of degrees parallel , but unrelated to the original rite . After eclipse in the 19th century , they were revived as women @-@ only lodges in the 20th , and these later adopted the male degrees to give rise to French women 's Masonry in the 1950s . 
 18th @-@ century British lodges and their American offshoots remained male only . In the late 1800s , rites similar to adoption emerged in the United States , allowing masons and their female relatives to participate in ritual together . These bodies , however , were more careful to discriminate between the mixed ritual and the genuine Freemasonry of the men . 
 In the 1890s , mixed lodges following a standard Masonic ritual started to appear in France , and quickly spread to other countries . Women @-@ only jurisdictions appeared soon afterwards . As a general rule , the admission of women is now recognised in Continental ( Grand Orient ) jurisdictions . In Anglo @-@ American Freemasonry , neither mixed nor all @-@ female lodges are officially recognised , although unofficial relations can be cordial , with premises sometimes shared . 
 = = Women as Operative Masons = = 
 Women in Mediaeval and Renaissance Europe were legally assumed to be subject to their fathers , then to their husbands after marriage . The status of women within Mediaeval trades was largely dependent on the local interpretation of femme sole , the legal term for a single woman . This was usually the widow of a tradesman , who was permitted to continue her husband 's business after his death , and often established in the rights and privileges of his trade guild or company . More rarely , single women would achieve success in their father 's trade . Exceptions occurred mainly in trades linked to traditional women 's occupations , such as haberdashery and <unk> . 
 In Norwich , a woman called <unk> is listed as a mason in the Calendar for Close Rolls for 1256 . It is reputed that Sabina von Steinbach , the daughter of the Architect , worked on Strasbourg Cathedral in the early part of the 14th century , although the first reference to her work comes 300 years later . In England , hints of female participation appear in the Regius Manuscript ( ca 1390 @-@ 1425 ) , and in the Guild records at York Minster in 1408 . Women were employed in administrative roles in the London Mason 's Company , and as such received the benefits of membership . Also , the charge in York Manuscript No 4 , dated 1693 and used as a warrant by the later Grand Lodge of All England at York , contains the phrase " hee or shee that is to be made mason " . While a number of masonic historians have categorised this as a " misprint " , Adolphus Frederick Alexander Woodford , who studied and catalogued these documents , considered it genuine . 
 In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries , the status of women amongst masons in Britain is likely to be similar to that codified in the minutes of the lodge at St. Mary 's Chapel in Edinburgh . A burgess could pay for the Freedom to employ and instruct masons . The widow of a master mason could accept commissions from his old clients , provided that she employed a journeyman of the lodge to supervise the work . 
 = = Lodges of Adoption = = 
 As the Freemasonry of the Premier Grand Lodge of England spread in France , the French fraternity stayed within the letter of Anderson 's proscription of women , but saw no reason to ban them from their banquets or their religious services . During the 1740s , lodges of adoption began to appear . Attached to a regular ( men only ) lodge , wives and female relatives of the masons would be admitted to a parallel system of degrees , with a similar moral undertone to the authentic rite of the lodge . The earliest had a nautical theme . In 1747 , the Chevalier <unk> began the Order of <unk> ( Ordre des <unk> ) , with rites supposedly based on an early version of the Carbonari . In 1774 , the lodges of adoption came under the jurisdiction of the Grand Orient de France , and the published regulations show a system of four degrees : 
 <unk> , or Female Apprentice . 
 <unk> , or <unk> . 
 <unk> , or Mistress . 
 <unk> <unk> , or Perfect <unk> . 
 Further degrees came and went , with a ten @-@ degree system evolving at the end of the Eighteenth century . The idea spread widely in Europe , but never appeared in England . After a brief eclipse during the Reign of Terror at the start of the French Revolution , lodges of adoption flourished , with the Empress Josephine presiding over one in Strasbourg in 1805 . 
 In 1808 , the Grand Orient decided that these lodges were unconstitutional , and they became marginalised until re @-@ activated by the same Grand Orient in 1901 . In their new incarnation , the chair was taken by a woman , where previously only a man could occupy the " Chair of King Solomon " . Final separation occurred in 1935 , and in 1959 they adopted the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite , embracing regular masonry as Grande Loge féminine de France . Only one lodge , Cosmos , holds to the adoptive rite . 
 = = Other concordant bodies admitting women = = 
 <unk> rites exist with the blessing and often the active support of regular masonic lodges . There are several concordant bodies in the United States which admit the wives and female relatives of Freemasons . The Dutch Order of Weavers admits only the wives , while in the American orders the men and women share in the ritual . Like the lodges of adoption , they have their own ceremonies , which means that some grand lodges view them as irregular . 
 Order of the Eastern Star In 1850 , Rob Morris created the Order of the Eastern Star for Freemasons and their female relatives . Often classed as an adoptive rite , its ritual is based on the Bible . It continues to flourish in the United States of America , and maintains a presence in Scotland . 
 Order of the Amaranth The ritual of the Order of the Amaranth was conceived in 1860 to be loosely based on a society with a similar name instituted over two centuries earlier by Queen Christina of Sweden . Open to master masons and their female relatives , members were once compelled to join the Order of the Eastern Star first , but the two organisations became separate in 1921 . 
 Ladies ’ Oriental Shrine of North America Founded in 1903 in Wheeling , West Virginia , the order has over 16 @,@ 000 members in 76 Courts across North America . A woman must be related to a member of the Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine or a Master Mason by birth , marriage or adoption . She must be at least 18 years of age and a resident for at least six months in the area of the Court in which membership is desired . 
 The Order of the White Shrine of Jerusalem Like the members of the Masonic Lodge and other appendant bodies , members of the White Shrine must profess a belief in a Supreme Being . However , the White Shrine goes one step further , requiring members to profess a belief in Jesus Christ as the Savior and Redeemer of the World . Membership is open to female relatives of Master Masons or members either active for three years or majority of the International Order of Rainbow for Girls or Job 's Daughters International who have attained of eighteen ( 18 ) years of age . 
 Heroines of Jericho , Order of <unk> <unk> of Prince Hall Freemasonry , these two orders are open to Royal Arch and Templar masons respectively , together with their female relatives . 
 Order of Weavers Formed on 17 July 1947 , the Orde van <unk> Vita <unk> <unk> , or the Order of Weavers was the creation of the wives of Dutch Freemasons . They constructed a ritual system using the tools of weaving in their symbology , which they judged to be more appropriate for women than stonemasons tools . There are now 17 lodges spread through the Netherlands . 
 = = Quasi @-@ Masonic Rites = = 
 Many rites accepting women have ritual of a Masonic style , are founded by Masons , but at best have an ambivalent reception amongst Grand Lodge masons . Nonetheless , they actively recruit new members from within regular masonry . 
 The Order of the Pug The Order of the Pug , or <unk> @-@ Orden , is believed to have been founded in Bavaria in about 1740 , to circumvent the Papal ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons . Admitting both men and women , the order had a single rite , based on the faithfulness of the pug dog . 
 Cagliostro 's Egyptian Rite In 1784 , in Bordeaux , the man calling himself Count Alessandro di Cagliostro opened the first lodge of his Egyptian Rite masonry . This had the three degrees of normal French masonry ( Apprentice , Companion and Master ) , but with a greatly different , more mystical ritual . Cagliostro claimed that he was re @-@ introducing true Freemasonry , and he attempted to attract candidates wherever he went . Male candidates were already Freemasons , but women were also admitted . The ceremony for the two sexes differed only in minor points - males were admitted by Cagliostro ( the Grand <unk> ) and females by his wife ( the Queen of Sheba ) . On admission , the women were told that they were now Freemasons . 
 Rite of Memphis @-@ Misraïm Proceeding from Cagliostro 's rite , the Rite of Misraïm ( from Arabic <unk> Miṣr = Egypt ) continued as a form of mixed , esoteric masonry . Banned in 1817 , it was reformulated as the Rite of Memphis in 1838 , and in spite of fluctuating fortunes in its French home , began to spread internationally during the second half of the nineteenth century . During the 1880s the two rites were fused by Giuseppe Garibaldi into the Rite of Memphis @-@ Misraïm . The modern order now boasts up to 99 degrees , not all of which actually worked . 
 The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn The membership and ritual of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn were strongly linked to Freemasonry , but membership was open to non @-@ masons and to women . The grades formed a teaching system for the <unk> , and initiates had to pass an exam before being allowed to advance to the next degree . 
 = = Female Masons in " Masculine Only " Masonic Bodies = = 
 There have been a few reported cases of a woman joining a " masculine only " masonic lodge . These cases are exceptions and are debated by masonic historians . 
 = = = Elizabeth Aldworth = = = 
 One account of a woman being admitted to Freemasonry in the 18th century is the case of Elizabeth Aldworth ( born St Leger ) , who is reported to have surreptitiously viewed the proceedings of a Lodge meeting held at Doneraile House , the private house of her father , first Viscount Doneraile , a resident of Doneraile , County Cork , Ireland . Upon discovering the breach of their secrecy , the Lodge resolved to admit and obligate her , and thereafter she proudly appeared in public in Masonic clothing . Speculative attempts to link the lodge of her initiation with a documented lodge of the Grand Lodge of Ireland have proved futile , but there is no reason that her father should not have instituted a lodge in his home , and the authenticity of her initiation is generally accepted . 
 = = = Madame de Xaintrailles = = = 
 The story runs that this woman dressed as a man to enlist in the French Army , and attained the rank of Captain of Cavalry . Since the Army treated her as a man , the Lodge of Freres @-@ Artistes in Paris voted to initiate her , knowing she was a woman , when she presented herself in her cavalry uniform , with her paperwork as an Aide @-@ de @-@ camp . She is said to have been the wife of " General de Xaintrailles " , probably Charles Antoine Dominique Xaintrailles . 
 = = = Countess Helene / Ilona Hadik @-@ Barkóczy de <unk> = = = 
 Countess Barkóczy ( 1833 - 1887 ) became fascinated by her grand @-@ uncle 's books on Freemasonry , browsing through his library after his death . By this time , she was married to Count Bela Hadik , Emperor Maximilian 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp . The Countess ' request for initiation into a Masonic lodge was supported by the <unk> Grand Master Ferenc <unk> , and she was duly initiated in 1875 by a provincial lodge of Grand Orient , Lodge <unk> ( Equality ) in <unk> . ( In Hungary in that time there were two masonic Grand Lodges , the Grand Lodge of St. John and the Grand Orient worked independently from each other . ) Her initiation was then declared void by decision of Grand Orient and the perpetrators were punished , but the lodge wasn 't erased , and only one officer was excluded . The countess defended her request and argued its validity in common law . In her reasoning she brought up her knowledge of freemasonry , her legal status as a son ( <unk> ) and the absence of any mention of candidates ' gender in the constitution of the Grand Orient . The Orient , holding to Prussian law , considered the initiation null and void because the usual bureaucratic formalities were not adhered to . The next year , after debating her status , the Grand Orient demanded the return of her certificate , but she never complied . Masonic sources repeat <unk> and Truman ( 10 @,@ 000 masons ) giving her name as Countess Helene Hadik Barkóczy , while biographical and family sources use the Hungarian name Ilona . 
 = = = Salome Anderson = = = 
 In 1892 , American newspapers hailed Salome Anderson , of Oakland , California as " the only female Freemason in the world " . She had , according to some , learned the secrets of masonry by hiding in the lodge room in her uncle 's house , and was made a mason in order to pledge her to secrecy . She served on the board of trustees of her temple , and took higher degrees , as well as joining the Order of the Eastern Star . 
 The theme of a young woman hiding in a lodge room had become a standard formula for this type of report , which was uncritically echoed and embellished as it spread from newspaper to newspaper . Anderson herself denied that it was possible for a woman to be made a mason , but remained non @-@ committal or downright enigmatic when questioned as to the origin of her extensive knowledge of Freemasonry . Born in Alsace in 1818 , she was raised in Paris after her parents died by her uncle , a " prominent mason " . She met and married Captain Andrew Anderson in the 1840s , and settled in New Orleans , accompanying her husband on his coastal voyages in their own vessel , and managing their finances . They moved to Oakland , California in 1854 , where Andrew became a respected businessman and an active mason . He died in 1867 , leaving Salome a wealthy widow , who turned her fortune to helping masonic charities . She became the founding treasurer of Oak Leaf Chapter No 8 of the Order of the Eastern Star , and when a Masonic Temple was built , she became the largest stock @-@ holder . In spite of opposition , she was elected to the board of trustees . In 1892 , the Trestle Board published a biography of her as a prominent citizen and implied that she had acquired some degree of masonic knowledge from the masons meeting at the house of her uncle . The San Francisco News @-@ Letter and Advertiser then embellished the story by saying that she " claimed to be a mason " , having cajoled the younger members of her uncle 's lodge into clandestinely conferring the three Blue Lodge degrees on her . This story was rapidly picked up by the West Coast press , and various versions of the story were passed around . While she strenuously denied that she had come by her knowledge in an improper way , in subsequent interviews she refused to be drawn on the source of her masonic knowledge . It not known if she was ever initiated . 
 = = = Catherine Babington = = = 
 A similar story was published about Catherine Babington , first in her obituary , in Shelby , North Carolina , in 1886 , then in a short book by her son outlining her masonic career . Hailed as the only female mason in the United States , she is said to have obtained the secrets at the age of 16 by hiding in her uncles ' lodge room in Princess , Kentucky . Having lost her father at an early age , she spent much of her childhood at her grandfather 's house , where she became a favourite of her uncles . They attended a lodge in an unused chapel above Catherine 's school @-@ room , which she often helped them clean . As a teenager , Catherine Sweet ( Babington being her married name ) attended lodge meetings for a year , hiding in the old pulpit , finally being discovered when one of her uncles returned unexpectedly for a rifle he had left in the ante @-@ room . Being questioned by the lodge , it was discovered that she had committed much of the ritual to memory , and was , like Anderson , made a mason to swear her to secrecy , but in this instance not admitted to membership of the lodge . The sole source of the story is her son , and much of the detail remains unconfirmed . There is no account or recollection of such a lodge room in or around Princess . 
 = = Co @-@ Freemasonry : Freemasonry for Men and Women = = 
 On 14 January 1882 , Maria Deraismes was initiated into Freemasonry in Loge Libre <unk> ( <unk> Lodge ) , in Le <unk> , just outside Paris . Deraismes was a well known writer and campaigner for democracy , women 's rights , and the separation of church and state . Her lodge , on 9 January , had seceded from la Grande Loge <unk> Ecossaise in order to initiate her . She then resigned , to enable her lodge to rejoin their previous jurisdiction . She did , however , persist in her efforts to legitimately become a mason , with the assistance of Doctor Georges Martin , a fellow campaigner for women 's rights , and a Freemason . After a decade of trying they started to form their own lodge , and between 1 June 1892 and 4 March 1893 , assembled 16 women who wished to become masons . They were initiated as Apprentices on 14 March 1893 , Companions on 24 March , and Master Masons on 1 April . This done , on 4 April the now mixed lodge of male and female masons proceeded to elect its officers and constitute itself as La Grande Loge <unk> Ecossaise de France , Le Droit Humain , soon to become l ’ Ordre <unk> Mixte International Le Droit Humain . This would flourish as international co @-@ masonry , which Deraismes never lived to see . She died the following February . 
 Having resolved at the outset to adopt the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite as their ritual , the new Grand Lodge found itself with only the three craft degrees , and aspiring to a 33 @-@ degree system . Male masons were sent into other jurisdictions to acquire the necessary ritual . In 1899 , ten masons in the Droit Humain received the 33rd degree , allowing them to form a Supreme Council . Lodges had opened in Paris , Blois , Lyon , Rouen , and Zürich . By 1914 , the movement had spread to Britain , the Far East , the United States , Belgium , and the Netherlands . 
 Co @-@ Freemasonry was brought to the English @-@ speaking world by the socialist and theosophist Annie Besant . Passing through the usual three degrees of craft masonry in 1902 , she founded the Lodge of Human Duty No. 6 in London that same year . French @-@ speaking lodges started to appear in the United States in 1903 , but it was again Besant who opened the first English speaking lodge , in 1908 . The French lodges took their lead from the Grand Orient de France in not requiring any religious belief in their members . Besant , with the blessing of Paris , followed the lead of the United Grand Lodge of England in requiring initiates to believe in a supreme being . Craft degrees in English speaking lodges took on a less continental , and more mystical flavour , with Besant importing the Dharma , or Besant Leadbeater ritual to both Britain and the United States . 
 Modern Co @-@ Freemasonry is divided into self @-@ governing Federations , Jurisdictions , and pioneer lodges , bound to an International Constitution and a Supreme Council , which delegates elect at an international convention every five years . In common with any other Masonic jurisdiction , the president of the Supreme Council is referred to as the Grand Master . It currently has 28 @,@ 000 members spread through 60 countries and 5 continents . 
 = = Exclusive Women 's Lodges = = 
 It is possible that a women 's lodge existed in Boston during the last quarter of the eighteenth century . Hannah Mather Crocker , in an apology for Freemasonry written in 1815 , claims to have presided over such a lodge , yet her description , " founded on the original principles of true ancient masonry , as far as was consistent with the female character " leaves the actual constitution open to question . It is also clear that St. Anne 's lodge was extinct at the time of her writing about it . 
 As Co @-@ Freemasonry spread in England from 1902 , some members became alarmed by decisions taken by the governing body in Paris . There was a perceived threat to the ancient form of masonic ritual . Resignations resulted , in 1908 , in the formation of a new Grand Lodge , which became the Honourable Fraternity of Antient Masonry , under a clergyman , the Rev. Dr. William Frederick Cobb , as Grand Master . His retirement after four years led to the election of a female Grand Master . Reverting to the original legal meaning of Brotherhood , the members have addressed each other as Brother since 1908 . A further split occurred in 1913 , when those wishing to include higher degrees , specifically the Royal Arch , left to form the Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons . Both societies are now exclusively female . The Honourable Fraternity of Antient Masonry restricted initiation to women and stopped admitting male visitors . The last male member left in 1935 . The older society , having started working higher degrees , changed its name in 1958 , appending the Order of Women Freemasons , as they are known today . Both bodies have lodges throughout the United Kingdom , and the Order of Women Freemasons also has lodges in Australasia , Zimbabwe , and Spain . 
 La Grande Loge féminine de France , which emerged from adoptive masonry in 1959 , spread to Belgium in 1974 , and la Grande Loge féminine de Belgique was formed in 1981 . By 2001 , they had 35 lodges , three of which were in the United States . These arose due to La <unk> des Chemins ( Crossroads ) , a lodge under la Grande Loge féminine de Belgique formed to spread Freemasonry amongst the women of other countries . 
 = = Recognition of Women as Freemasons = = 
 The Anglo @-@ American jurisdictions of " regular " Freemasonry follow a set of traditions referred to in ritual as the Ancient Landmarks . These comprise the practices and precepts perceived as " ancient " at the beginning of the 18th century , and frozen in time by Anderson 's Constitutions and similar works which followed and copied it . Among Anderson 's Ancient Charges , still enshrined in the constitutions of the United Grand Lodge of England ( UGLE ) and many other Grand Lodges , is a description of the person who may be admitted to Freemasonry , " good and true men , free @-@ born , and of mature and discreet age and sound judgement , no bondmen , no women , no immoral or scandalous men , but of good report " . For this reason , any lodge admitting women is considered irregular by mainstream lodges and Grand Lodges . Masons attending irregular lodges or subscribing to irregular jurisdictions , are subject to immediate exclusion or suspension from the craft . This practice is said to follow the regulation of Mediaeval stonemasons " guilds " which , UGLE claims , never accepted women . However , the UGLE has stated since 1999 that two English women 's jurisdictions ( The Order of Women Freemasons and The Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons ) are regular in practice except for their inclusion of women , and has indicated that , while not formally recognized , these bodies may be regarded as part of Freemasonry when describing Freemasonry in general . In North America , neither " mainstream " Freemasonry nor Prince Hall Freemasonry accept women , but rather have associated separate bodies , some of which are mentioned above , which are " Masonic " in character , but not Masonic in their content . These bodies , together with co @-@ freemasonry , remain anathema to UGLE . 
 Continental Freemasonry has no such problems . Le Droit Humain enjoys fraternal relations with the Grand Orient de France , the Grande Loge féminine de France , and the Grande Loge de France . The Grand Orient de France , in addition to recognising women 's masonry , decided in 2010 that there was no reason that its lodges should not be able to initiate women , thus adding another strand to international co @-@ masonry . 
 = Fagel Attraction = 
 " Fagel Attraction " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the fourth season of the American television series Will & Grace . It was written by Jenji Kohan and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on April 25 , 2002 . Michael Douglas , Molly Shannon , and Barry Livingston guest starred in " Fagel Attraction " . 
 In the episode , Will ( Eric McCormack ) files a police report after his laptop computer is stolen . He then meets a police detective ( Douglas ) who takes a special interest in his case as they go undercover — however , Will does not know that the detective participates in Jack 's ( Sean Hayes ) therapy group for gays . Meanwhile , Grace ( Debra Messing ) is once again hassled by her kleptomaniac neighbor Val ( Shannon ) who opens a rival design business and prospers by stealing Grace 's ideas . 
 Since airing , " Fagel Attraction " has received positive reviews from television critics . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 14 @.@ 3 million households during its original broadcast . Douglas was mostly praised from critics for his performance and received an Emmy Award nomination in the " Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series " category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following the theft of Will 's ( Eric McCormack ) laptop computer , detective Gavin Hatch ( Michael Douglas ) assures Will he will do everything he can to get his laptop back . Upon meeting Will , Gavin becomes attracted to him . Instead of asking him out on a date , due to fear of rejection , Gavin makes up an elaborate story that Will 's laptop theft was part of a " gay laptop @-@ theft ring . " Meanwhile , at Grace Adler Designs , Grace ( Debra Messing ) is showing some designs to a potential client , Vince ( Barry Livingston ) . He is fond of her work and would like to become her client , but reveals that he promised another designer he would listen to her ideas too . Grace becomes horrified when she learns that her kleptomaniac neighbor and nemesis , Val ( Molly Shannon ) , is the other designer . 
 Meanwhile , Will and Gavin go undercover at a gay nightclub . Will believes they are doing police business for the " gay laptop @-@ theft ring " , but it is actually a date planned by Gavin . Jack ( Sean Hayes ) , a friend of Will 's , sees the two dancing and is dumbfounded . Jack and Gavin attend the same gay therapy group , and the two dislike one another , which leads Jack to tell Will all he knows about Gavin . At Will 's apartment , Gavin reveals to Will that he is gay , after Will admits to having a liking to him , but that he is " barking up the wrong tree . " Will , however , identifies Gavin 's problem with asking men out and his knack of making stories up to spend time with them . Before Gavin leaves , Will tells him to face his fears . 
 At Grace Adler Designs , Val suggests she and Grace integrate their presentations in the same meeting with Vince , to which Grace agrees . In the middle of Grace 's presentation , Val begins repeating the same thing Grace says . This leads to the two bickering , which prompts Karen ( Megan Mullally ) , Grace 's friend and socialite assistant , to pull them apart . She tells them that violence is never the answer , " but sometimes it is , " then chops Val behind the neck , rendering Val unconscious . Karen tells Grace to go get Vince , who was out of the room , while she gets " rid " of Val 's body . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fagel Attraction " was written by Jenji Kohan and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode 's title is a reference to the 1987 film Fatal Attraction which starred actor Michael Douglas . In March 2002 , it was announced that Michael Douglas would guest star on the show , playing a gay detective who becomes attracted to Will . His role on the show was his first television acting role in almost 30 years , since his role in the police drama The Streets of San Francisco . It was also confirmed that actress Molly Shannon would reprise her role as Val , Grace 's nemesis . This was Shannon 's fourth appearance on the show . 
 While in negotiations , Douglas ' staff approached the show 's producers about a guest spot for Douglas and the sitcom 's executives sought to work against Douglas ' image . His management team wanted him to stretch beyond his usual roles , and believed a successful comedy show like Will & Grace would be a good way to do so . The show 's producers said that Douglas was willing to go with any story line the writers could come up with . Executive producer and co @-@ creator of the show , David Kohan said : " There 's something great about playing on a person 's iconic status . [ ... ] Michael Douglas often plays these virile men , and the idea of making him a gay cop too shy to ask Will out was funny . " 
 However , in another interview , it was revealed that Douglas himself called the show 's producers to ask them about a guest appearance . " I am a big fan of the show , so when the opportunity to guest @-@ star came along , I had to grab it " , Douglas said on his official website . " It 's been awhile since I 've performed in front of a live audience , and it was great to flex that old theater acting muscle . It was also my first experience with a television sitcom . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Fagel Attraction " was watched by 14 @.@ 3 million households , according to Nielsen ratings . It received a 10 @.@ 3 rating / 15 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , and was the seventh highest @-@ rated show on the NBC network that week . " Fagel Attraction " has received mostly positive reviews from television critics since airing , and several reviewers praised Douglas for his appearance . Debra Messing , who plays Grace , commented that it was " hilarious how easily " Douglas played his character in the episode . In 2002 , he was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series " category for this episode , but lost to Anthony LaPaglia of Frasier . In March 2006 , Entertainment Weekly named Douglas ' guest spot the fourth most memorable guest appearance on Will & Grace . 
 Kevin McDonough of Charleston Daily Mail called Douglas ' appearance an " unforgettable performance " , and Adam Buckman of the New York Post commented that Douglas is " such a commanding presence on screen " that he " steals every scene " . Renée Peck of The Times @-@ Picayune reported that she enjoyed watching Douglas have fun with an " off @-@ the @-@ wall " role combining an alternate lifestyle with altered consciousness . TV Guide contributor Matt Roush , in review of season four , said that without guest appearances from actors such as Douglas , the season " would be an awfully sad misfire . " Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald wrote that the " biggest laughs " in the episode come when Douglas holds hands with Will and then dances with him . Alan Pergament of The Buffalo News also praised this sequence , calling it " priceless " . 
 The episode received less positive reviews as well . Allan Johnson of the Chicago Tribune wrote that the episode is good , but not great : " It proves stunt @-@ casting doesn 't necessarily work unless the actor is up to the script and lead performers . And Douglas , an otherwise fine actor , basically does a caricature of a macho gay man . " Ted Cox of the Daily Herald wrote that the idea of Douglas being cast as a neurotic gay man " isn 't a whole lot to this episode . " A television reviewer from Deseret News thought that because of his role on Will & Grace , Douglas should give the Oscar he won earlier in his career back . The reviewer concluded : " He 's embarrassingly bad , as is this episode . " 
 Johnson was complimentary towards Molly Shannon : " Far funnier is a subplot with Molly Shannon of Saturday Night Live back as Will and Grace 's ( Messing ) whacked @-@ out neighbor Val [ ... ] Shannon , always funny and fun to watch , isn 't a mere stunt ... Shannon shows a guest actor can shine when paired with the right character . " The Palm Beach Post 's Kevin D. Thompson wrote that Shannon 's performance " displays why she should have her own sitcom " , while Cox wrote that she has a " quality in which a tightly bound surface normalcy seems to barely contain a bundle of tics and impulses , and the writers make excellent use of it by having Val try to first steal Grace 's flair for design , then cop one of her clients . " Perigard noted that Grace and Val 's storyline made it " clear that the producers just like the sight of the two women flailing their arms in a mock catfight . " 
 = Rongorongo = 
 Rongorongo ( / <unk> / ; Rapa Nui : [ <unk> ] ) is a system of glyphs discovered in the 19th century on Easter Island that appears to be writing or proto @-@ writing . Numerous attempts at decipherment have been made , none successfully . Although some calendrical and what might prove to be genealogical information has been identified , not even these glyphs can actually be read . If rongorongo does prove to be writing and proves to be an independent invention , it would be one of very few independent inventions of writing in human history . 
 Two dozen wooden objects bearing rongorongo inscriptions , some heavily weathered , burned , or otherwise damaged , were collected in the late 19th century and are now scattered in museums and private collections . None remain on Easter Island . The objects are mostly tablets shaped from irregular pieces of wood , sometimes driftwood , but include a chieftain 's staff , a bird @-@ man statuette , and two reimiro ornaments . There are also a few petroglyphs which may include short rongorongo inscriptions . Oral history suggests that only a small elite was ever literate and that the tablets were sacred . 
 Authentic rongorongo texts are written in alternating directions , a system called reverse boustrophedon . In a third of the tablets , the lines of text are inscribed in shallow fluting carved into the wood . The glyphs themselves are outlines of human , animal , plant , artifact and geometric forms . Many of the human and animal figures , such as glyphs 200 and 280 , have characteristic protuberances on each side of the head , possibly representing eyes . 
 Individual texts are conventionally known by a single uppercase letter and a name , such as Tablet C , the Mamari Tablet . The somewhat variable names may be descriptive or indicate where the object is kept , as in the Oar , the <unk> , the Small Santiago Tablet , and the Santiago Staff . 
 = = Etymology and variant names = = 
 Rongorongo is the modern name for the inscriptions . In the Rapa Nui language it means " to recite , to declaim , to chant out " . 
 The original name — or perhaps description — of the script is said to have been kohau motu mo rongorongo , " lines incised for chanting out " , shortened to kohau rongorongo or " lines [ for ] chanting out " . There are also said to have been more specific names for the texts based on their topic . For example , the kohau ta ‘ u ( " lines of years " ) were annals , the kohau îka ( " lines of fishes " ) were lists of persons killed in war ( îka " fish " was homophonous with or used figuratively for " war casualty " ) , and the kohau ranga " lines of fugitives " were lists of war refugees . 
 Some authors have understood the ta ‘ u in kohau ta ‘ u to refer to a separate form of writing distinct from rongorongo . Barthel recorded that , " The Islanders had another writing ( the so @-@ called ' ta ‘ u script ' ) which recorded their annals and other secular matters , but this has disappeared . " However , Fischer writes that " the ta ‘ u was originally a type of rongorongo inscription . In the 1880s , a group of elders invented a derivative ' script ' [ also ] called ta ‘ u with which to decorate carvings in order to increase their trading value . It is a primitive imitation of rongorongo . " An alleged third script , the mama or va ‘ <unk> ‘ e described in some mid @-@ twentieth @-@ century publications , was " an early twentieth @-@ century geometric [ decorative ] invention " . 
 = = Form and construction = = 
 The forms of the glyphs are standardized contours of living organisms and geometric designs about one centimeter high . The wooden tablets are irregular in shape and , in many instances , fluted ( tablets B , E , G , H , O , Q , and possibly T ) , with the glyphs carved in shallow channels running the length of the tablets , as can be seen in the image of tablet G at right . It is thought that irregular and often blemished pieces of wood were used in their entirety rather than squared off due to the scarcity of wood on the island . 
 = = = Writing media = = = 
 Except for a few possible glyphs cut in stone ( see petroglyphs ) , all surviving texts are inscribed in wood . According to tradition , the tablets were made of <unk> wood . However , Orliac ( 2005 ) examined seven objects ( tablets B , C , G , H , K , Q , and reimiro L ) with stereo optical and scanning electron microscopes and determined that all were instead made from Pacific rosewood ( <unk> <unk> ) ; the same identification had been made for tablet M in 1934 . This 15 @-@ meter tree , known as " Pacific rosewood " for its color and called mako ‘ i in Rapanui , is used for sacred groves and carvings throughout eastern Polynesia and was evidently brought to Easter Island by the first settlers . However , not all the wood was native : Orliac ( 2007 ) established that tablets N , P , and S were made of South African <unk> ( Podocarpus <unk> ) and therefore that the wood had arrived with Western contact . Fischer describes P as " a damaged and <unk> European or American oar " , as are A ( which is European ash , Fraxinus excelsior ) and V ; notes that wood from the wreck of a Western boat was said to have been used for many tablets ; and that both P and S had been recycled as planking for a Rapanui driftwood canoe , suggesting that by that time the tablets had little value to the islanders as texts . Several texts , including O , are carved on gnarled driftwood . The fact that the islanders were reduced to inscribing driftwood , and were regardless extremely economical in their use of wood , may have had consequences for the structure of the script , such as the abundance of ligatures and potentially a telegraphic style of writing that would complicate textual analysis . 
 Oral tradition holds that , because of the great value of wood , only expert scribes used it , while pupils wrote on banana leaves . German ethnologist Thomas Barthel believed that carving on wood was a secondary development in the evolution of the script based on an earlier stage of incising banana leaves or the sheaths of the banana trunk with a bone stylus , and that the medium of leaves was retained not only for lessons but to plan and compose the texts of the wooden tablets . He found experimentally that the glyphs were quite visible on banana leaves due to the sap that emerged from the cuts and dried on the surface . However , when the leaves themselves dried they became brittle and would not have survived for long . 
 Barthel speculated that the banana leaf might even have served as a prototype for the tablets , with the fluted surface of the tablets an emulation of the veined structure of a leaf : 
 Practical experiments with the material available on [ Easter Island ] have proved that the above @-@ mentioned parts of the banana tree are not only an ideal writing material , but that in particular a direct correspondence exists between the height of the lines of writing and the distance between the veins on the leaves and stems of the banana tree . The classical inscriptions can be arranged in two groups according to the height of the lines ( 10 – 12 mm vs. 15 mm ) ; this corresponds to the natural disposition of the veins on the banana stem ( on average 10 mm in the lower part of a medium @-@ sized tree ) or on the banana leaf ( [ ... ] maximum 15mm ) . 
 = = = Direction of writing = = = 
 Rongorongo glyphs were written in reverse boustrophedon , left to right and bottom to top . That is , the reader begins at the bottom left @-@ hand corner of a tablet , reads a line from left to right , then rotates the tablet 180 degrees to continue on the next line . When reading one line , the lines above and below it would appear upside down , as can be seen in the image at left . 
 However , the writing continues onto the second side of a tablet at the point where it finishes off the first , so if the first side has an odd number of lines , as is the case with tablets K , N , P , and Q , the second will start at the upper left @-@ hand corner , and the direction of writing shifts to top to bottom . 
 Larger tablets and staves may have been read without turning , if the reader were able to read upside @-@ down . 
 = = = Writing instruments = = = 
 According to oral tradition , scribes used obsidian flakes or small shark teeth , presumably the <unk> tools still used to carve wood in Polynesia , to flute and polish the tablets and then to <unk> the glyphs . ( See shark tooth tools . ) The glyphs are most commonly composed of deep smooth cuts , though superficial hair @-@ line cuts are also found . In the closeup image at right , a glyph is composed of two parts connected by a hair @-@ line cut ; this is a typical convention for this shape . Several researchers , including Barthel , believe that these superficial cuts were made by obsidian , and that the texts were carved in a two @-@ stage process , first sketched with obsidian and then deepened and finished with a worn shark tooth . The remaining hair @-@ line cuts were then either errors , design conventions ( as at right ) , or decorative embellishments . Vertical strings of chevrons or lozenges , for example , are typically connected with hair @-@ line cuts , as can be seen repeatedly in the closeup of one end of tablet B below . However , Barthel was told that the last literate Rapanui king , Nga ‘ ara , sketched out the glyphs in soot applied with a fish bone and then engraved them with a shark tooth . 
 Tablet N , on the other hand , shows no sign of shark teeth . <unk> noticed that the glyphs of this text appear to have been incised with a sharpened bone , as evidenced by the shallowness and width of the grooves . N also " displays secondary working with obsidian flakes to elaborate details within the finished contour lines . No other <unk> @-@ <unk> inscription reveals such graphic extravagance " . 
 Other tablets appear to have been cut with a steel blade , often rather crudely . Although steel knives were available after the arrival of the Spanish , this does cast suspicion on the authenticity of these tablets . 
 = = = Glyphs = = = 
 The glyphs are stylized human , animal , vegetable and geometric shapes , and often form compounds . Nearly all those with heads are oriented head up and are either seen face on or in profile to the right , in the direction of writing . It is not known what significance turning a glyph head @-@ down or to the left may have had . Heads often have characteristic projections on the sides which may be eyes ( as on the sea turtle glyph below , and more clearly on sea @-@ turtle petroglyphs ) but which often resemble ears ( as on the anthropomorphic petroglyph in the next section ) . Birds are common ; many resemble the frigatebird ( see image directly below ) which was associated with the supreme god Makemake . Other glyphs look like fish or arthropods . A few , but only a few , are similar to petroglyphs found throughout the island . 
 Some of the more iconic rongorongo glyphs . The seated man [ bottom left ] is thought to be a compound . 
 ( Readings from Barthel ( 1958 ) . The captions in the right @-@ most column are merely descriptive . ) 
 = = Origin = = 
 Oral tradition holds that either <unk> <unk> ‘ a or Tu ‘ u ko <unk> , the legendary founder ( s ) of Rapa Nui , brought 67 tablets from their homeland . The same founder is also credited with bringing indigenous plants such as the <unk> . However , there is no homeland likely to have had a tradition of writing in Polynesia or even in South America . Thus rongorongo appears to have been an internal development . Given that few if any of the Rapanui people remaining on the island in the 1870s could read the glyphs , it is likely that only a small minority were ever literate . Indeed , early visitors were told that literacy was a privilege of the ruling families and priests who were all kidnapped in the Peruvian slaving raids or died soon afterwards in the resulting epidemics . 
 = = = Dating the tablets = = = 
 Little direct dating has been done . The start of forest @-@ clearing for agriculture , and thus presumably colonization , has been dated to circa 1200 , implying a date for the invention of rongorongo no earlier than the 13th century . Tablet Q ( Small Saint Petersburg ) is the sole item that has been carbon dated , but the results only constrain the date to sometime after 1680 . Glyph 67 ( ) is thought to represent the extinct Easter Island palm , which disappeared from the island 's pollen record circa 1650 , suggesting that the script itself is at least that old . 
 Texts A , P , and V can be dated to the 18th or 19th century by virtue of being inscribed on European oars . Orliac ( 2005 ) argued that the wood for tablet C ( Mamari ) was cut from the trunk of a tree some 15 meters ( 50 ft ) tall , and Easter Island has long been deforested of trees that size . Analysis of charcoal indicates that the forest disappeared in the first half of the 17th century . <unk> , who discovered Easter Island in 1722 , described the island as " destitute of large trees " and in 1770 González de <unk> wrote , " Not a single tree is to be found capable of furnishing a plank so much as six inches [ 15 cm ] in width . " Forster , with Cook 's expedition of 1774 , reported that " there was not a tree upon the island which exceeded the height of 10 feet [ 3 m ] . " 
 All of these methods date the wood , not the inscriptions themselves . Pacific rosewood is not durable , and is unlikely to survive long in Easter Island 's climate . 
 = = = 1770 Spanish expedition = = = 
 In 1770 the Spanish annexed Easter Island under Captain González de <unk> . A signing ceremony was held in which a treaty of annexation was signed by an undisclosed number of chiefs " by marking upon it certain characters in their own form of script . " ( Reproduction at right ) 
 Several scholars have suggested that rongorongo may have been an invention inspired by this visit and the signing of the treaty of annexation . As circumstantial evidence , they note that no explorer reported the script prior to Eugène Eyraud in 1864 , and are of the opinion that the marks with which the chiefs signed the Spanish treaty do not resemble rongorongo . The hypothesis of these researchers is not that rongorongo was itself a copy of the Latin alphabet , or of any other form of writing , but that the concept of writing had been conveyed in a process anthropologists term trans @-@ cultural diffusion , which then inspired the islanders to invent their own system of writing . If this is the case , then rongorongo emerged , flourished , fell into oblivion , and was all but forgotten within a span of less than a hundred years . 
 However , known cases of the diffusion of writing , such as Sequoyah 's invention of the Cherokee syllabary after seeing the power of English @-@ language newspapers , or <unk> 's invention of the <unk> script inspired by readings from Christian scripture , involved greater contact than the signing of a single treaty . The glyphs could be crudely written rongorongo , as might be expected for Rapa Nui representatives writing with the novel instrument of pen on paper . The fact that the script was not otherwise observed by early explorers , who spent little time on the island , may reflect that it was taboo ; such taboos may have lost power along with the tangata rongorongo ( scribes ) by the time Rapanui society collapsed following European slaving raids and the resulting epidemics , so that the tablets had become more widely distributed by Eyraud 's day . Orliac points out that Tablet C would appear to predate the Spanish visit by at least a century . 
 = = = Petroglyphs = = = 
 Easter Island has the richest assortment of petroglyphs in Polynesia . Nearly every suitable surface has been carved , including the stone walls of some houses and a few of the famous mo ‘ ai statues and their fallen <unk> . Around one thousand sites with over four thousand glyphs have been catalogued , some in <unk> or sunken @-@ relief , and some painted red and white . Designs include a concentration of chimeric bird @-@ man figures at <unk> , a ceremonial center of the tangata manu ( " bird @-@ man " ) cult ; faces of the creation deity Makemake ; marine animals like turtles , tuna , swordfish , sharks , whales , dolphins , crabs , and octopus ( some with human faces ) ; roosters ; canoes , and over five hundred <unk> ( vulvas ) . Petroglyphs are often accompanied by carved <unk> ( " <unk> " ) in the rock . Changing traditions are preserved in bas @-@ relief <unk> , which were carved over simpler outline forms and in turn carved over with <unk> . Although the petroglyphs cannot be directly dated , some are partially obscured by pre @-@ colonial stone buildings , suggesting they are relatively old . 
 Several of the anthropomorphic and animal @-@ form petroglyphs have parallels in rongorongo , for instance a double @-@ headed frigatebird ( glyph 680 ) on a fallen mo ‘ ai topknot , a figure which also appears on a dozen tablets . McLaughlin ( 2004 ) illustrates the most prominent correspondences with the petroglyph corpus of Lee ( 1992 ) . However , these are mostly isolated glyphs ; few text @-@ like sequences or ligatures have been found among the petroglyphs . This has led to the suggestion that rongorongo must be a recent creation , perhaps inspired by petroglyph designs or retaining individual petroglyphs as logograms ( Macri 1995 ) , but not old enough to have been incorporated into the <unk> tradition . The most complex candidate for <unk> rongorongo is what appears to be a short sequence of glyphs , one of which is a ligature , carved on the wall of a cave . However , the sequence does not appear to have been carved in a single hand ( see image at right ) , and the cave is located near the house that produced the <unk> tablet , a crude imitation of rongorongo , so the Ana o Keke petroglyphs may not be authentic . 
 = = Historical record = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Eugène Eyraud , a lay friar of the <unk> de Picpus , landed on Easter Island on January 2 , 1864 , on the 24th day of his departure from Valparaíso . He was to remain on Easter Island for nine months , evangelizing its inhabitants . He wrote an account of his stay in which he reports his discovery of the tablets that year : 
 In every hut one finds wooden tablets or sticks covered in several sorts of hieroglyphic characters : They are depictions of animals unknown on the island , which the natives draw with sharp stones . Each figure has its own name ; but the scant attention they pay to these tablets leads me to think that these characters , remnants of some primitive writing , are now for them a habitual practice which they keep without seeking its meaning . 
 There is no other mention of the tablets in his report , and the discovery went unnoticed . Eyraud left Easter Island on October 11 , in extremely poor health . Ordained a priest in 1865 , he returned to Easter Island in 1866 where he died of tuberculosis in August 1868 , aged 48 . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 In 1868 the Bishop of Tahiti , <unk> @-@ Étienne " <unk> " Jaussen , received a gift from the recent Catholic converts of Easter Island . It was a long cord of human hair , a fishing line perhaps , wound around a small wooden board covered in hieroglyphic writing . Stunned at the discovery , he wrote to Father Hippolyte Roussel on Easter Island to collect all the tablets and to find natives capable of translating them . But Roussel could only recover a few , and the islanders could not agree on how to read them . 
 Yet Eyraud had seen hundreds of tablets only four years earlier . What happened to the missing tablets is a matter of conjecture . Eyraud had noted how little interest their owners had in them . <unk> Chauvet reports that , 
 The Bishop questioned the Rapanui wise man , <unk> <unk> , the son of the wise man <unk> [ who said that ] he , himself , had begun the requisite studies and knew how to carve the characters with a small shark 's tooth . He said that there was nobody left on the island who knew how to read the characters since the Peruvians had brought about the deaths of all the wise men and , thus , the pieces of wood were no longer of any interest to the natives who burned them as firewood or wound their fishing lines around them ! A. <unk> also saw some in 1877 . [ He ] was not able to acquire these tablets because the natives were using them as reels for their fishing lines ! 
 Orliac has observed that the deep black indentation , about 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long , on lines 5 and 6 of the recto of tablet H is a groove made by the rubbing of a fire stick , showing that tablet H had been used for fire @-@ making . Tablets S and P had been cut into lashed planking for a canoe , which fits the story of a man named <unk> who made a canoe out of abandoned tablets . 
 As European @-@ introduced diseases and raids by Peruvian slavers , including a final devastating raid in 1862 and a subsequent smallpox epidemic , had reduced the Rapa Nui population to under two hundred by the 1870s , it is possible that literacy had been wiped out by the time Eyraud discovered the tablets in 1866 . 
 Thus in 1868 Jaussen could recover only a few tablets , with three more acquired by Captain Gana of the Chilean corvette O 'Higgins in 1870 . In the 1950s Barthel found the decayed remains of half a dozen tablets in caves , in the context of burials . However , no glyphs could be salvaged . 
 Of the 26 commonly accepted texts that survive , only half are in good condition and authentic beyond doubt . 
 = = = Anthropological accounts = = = 
 British archaeologist and anthropologist Katherine Routledge undertook a 1914 – 1915 scientific expedition to Rapa Nui with her husband to catalog the art , customs , and writing of the island . She was able to interview two elderly informants , <unk> and a leper named <unk> , who allegedly had some knowledge of rongorongo . The sessions were not very fruitful , as the two often contradicted each other . From them Routledge concluded that rongorongo was an idiosyncratic mnemonic device that did not directly represent language , in other words , proto @-@ writing , and that the meanings of the glyphs were reformulated by each scribe , so that the kohau rongorongo could not be read by someone not trained in that specific text . The texts themselves she believed to be <unk> for priest @-@ scribes , kept apart in special houses and strictly tapu , that recorded the island 's history and mythology . By the time of later ethnographic accounts , such as Métraux ( 1940 ) , much of what Routledge recorded in her notes had been forgotten , and the oral history showed a strong external influence from popular published accounts . 
 = = Corpus = = 
 The 26 rongorongo texts with letter codes are inscribed on wooden objects , each with between 2 and 2320 simple glyphs and components of compound glyphs , for over 15 @,@ 000 in all . The objects are mostly oblong wooden tablets , with the exceptions of I , a possibly sacred chieftain 's staff known as the Santiago Staff ; J and L , inscribed on reimiro pectoral ornaments worn by the elite ; X , inscribed on various parts of a tangata manu ( " birdman " ) statuette ; and Y , a European snuff box assembled from sections cut from a rongorongo tablet . The tablets , like the pectorals , statuettes , and staves , were works of art and valued possessions , and were apparently given individual proper names in the same manner as jade ornaments in New Zealand . Two of the tablets , C and S , have a documented pre @-@ missionary provenance , though others may be as old or older . There are in addition a few isolated glyphs or short sequences which might prove to be rongorongo . 
 = = = Classic texts = = = 
 Barthel referred to each of 24 texts he accepted as genuine with a letter of the alphabet ; two texts have been added to the corpus since then . The two faces of the tablets are distinguished by suffixing r ( recto ) or v ( verso ) when the reading sequence can be ascertained , to which the line being discussed is appended . Thus Pr2 is item P ( the Great Saint Petersburg Tablet ) , recto , second line . When the reading sequence cannot be ascertained , a and b are used for the faces . Thus <unk> is item A ( <unk> ) , side b , first line . The six sides of the Snuff Box are lettered as sides a to f . Nearly all publications follow the Barthel convention , though a popular book by Fischer uses an idiosyncratic numbering system . 
 Crude glyphs have been found on a few stone objects and some additional wooden items , but most of these are thought to be fakes created for the early tourism market . Several of the 26 wooden texts are suspect due to uncertain provenance ( X , Y , and Z ) , poor quality craftsmanship ( F , K , V , W , Y , and Z ) , or to having been carved with a steel blade ( K , V , and Y ) , and thus , although they may prove to be genuine , should not be trusted in initial attempts at decipherment . Z resembles many early forgeries in not being boustrophedon , but it may be a palimpsest on an authentic but now illegible text . 
 = = = Additional texts = = = 
 In addition to the petroglyphs mentioned above , there are a few other very short <unk> texts that may be rongorongo . Fischer reports that " many statuettes reveal rongorongo or rongorongo @-@ like glyphs on their crown . " He gives the example of a compound glyph , , on the crown of a mo ‘ ai <unk> statuette . Many human skulls are inscribed with the single ' fish ' glyph 700 , which may stand for îka " war casualty " . There are other designs , including some tattoos recorded by early visitors , which are possibly single rongorongo glyphs , but since they are isolated and pictographic , it is difficult to know whether or not they are actually writing . 
 = = = Glyphs = = = 
 The only published reference to the glyphs which is even close to comprehensive remains Barthel ( 1958 ) . Barthel assigned a three @-@ digit numeric code to each glyph or to each group of similar @-@ looking glyphs that he believed to be allographs ( variants ) . In the case of <unk> , the bare numeric code was assigned to what Barthel believed to be the basic form ( <unk> ) , while variants were specified by alphabetic suffixes . Altogether he assigned 600 numeric codes . The hundreds place is a digit from 0 to 7 , and categorizes the head , or overall form if there is no head : 0 and 1 for geometric shapes and inanimate objects ; 2 for figures with " ears " ; 3 and 4 for figures with open mouths ( they are differentiated by their legs / tails ) ; 5 for figures with miscellaneous heads ; 6 for figures with beaks ; and 7 for fish , arthropods , etc . The digits in tens and units places were allocated similarly , so that , for example , glyphs 206 , 306 , 406 , 506 , and 606 all have a downward @-@ pointing wing or arm on the left , and a raised four @-@ fingered hand on the right : 
 Coding : The first digit distinguishes head and basic body shape , and the six in the units place indicates a specific raised hand . 
 There is some arbitrariness to which glyphs are grouped together , and there are inconsistencies in the assignments of numerical codes and the use of affixes which make the system rather complex . However , despite its shortcomings , Barthel 's is the only effective system ever proposed to categorize rongorongo glyphs . 
 Barthel ( 1971 ) claimed to have parsed the corpus of glyphs to 120 , of which the other 480 in his inventory are allographs or ligatures . The evidence was never published , but similar counts have been obtained by other scholars , such as Pozdniakov & Pozdniakov ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = Published corpus = = = 
 For almost a century only a few of the texts were published . In 1875 the director of the Chilean National Museum of Natural History in Santiago , Rudolf Philippi , published the Santiago Staff , and Carroll ( 1892 ) published part of the Oar . Most texts remained beyond the reach of would @-@ be <unk> until 1958 , when Thomas Barthel published line drawings of almost all the known corpus in his Grundlagen zur <unk> der <unk> ( " Bases for the Decipherment of the Easter Island script " ) which remains the fundamental reference to rongorongo . He transcribed texts A through X , over 99 % of the corpus ; the <unk> estimates that it is 97 % accurate . Barthel 's line drawings were not produced free @-@ hand but copied from rubbings , which helped ensure their faithfulness to the originals . 
 Fischer ( 1997 ) published new line drawings . These include lines scored with obsidian but not finished with a shark tooth , which had not been recorded by Barthel because the rubbings he used often did not show them , for example on tablet N. ( However , in line <unk> shown in the section on writing instruments above , the light lines were recorded by both Fischer and Barthel . ) There are other omissions in Barthel which Fischer corrects , such as a sequence of glyphs at the transition from line <unk> to <unk> which is missing from Barthel , presumably because the carving went over the side of the tablet and was missed by Barthel 's rubbing . ( This missing sequence is right in the middle of Barthel 's calendar . ) However , other discrepancies between the two records are straightforward contradictions . For instance , the initial glyph of <unk> ( line 12 of the Santiago Staff ) in Fischer does not correspond with that of Barthel or Philippi , which agree with each other , and Barthel 's rubbing ( below ) is incompatible with Fischer 's drawing . Barthel 's annotation , Original doch 53 @.@ 76 ! ( " original indeed 53 @.@ 76 ! " ) , suggests that he specifically verified Philippi 's reading : 
 In addition , the next glyph ( glyph 20 , a " spindle with three knobs " ) is missing its right @-@ side " sprout " ( glyph 10 ) in Philippi 's drawing . This may be the result of an error in the inking , since there is a blank space in its place . The corpus is thus tainted with quite some uncertainty . It has never been properly checked for want of high @-@ quality photographs . 
 = = Decipherment = = 
 As with most undeciphered scripts , there are many fanciful interpretations and claimed translations of rongorongo . However , apart from a portion of one tablet which has been shown to have to do with a lunar Rapa Nui calendar , none of the texts are understood . There are three serious obstacles to decipherment , assuming rongorongo is truly writing : the small number of remaining texts , the lack of context such as illustrations in which to interpret them , and the poor attestation of the Old Rapanui language , since modern Rapanui is heavily mixed with Tahitian and is therefore unlikely to closely reflect the language of the tablets . 
 The prevailing opinion is that rongorongo is not true writing but proto @-@ writing , or even a more limited mnemonic device for genealogy , choreography , navigation , astronomy , or agriculture . For example , the Atlas of Languages states , " It was probably used as a memory aid or for decorative purposes , not for recording the Rapanui language of the islanders . " If this is the case , then there is little hope of ever deciphering it . For those who believe it to be writing , there is debate as to whether rongorongo is essentially logographic or syllabic , though it appears to be compatible with neither a pure <unk> nor a pure syllabary . 
 = = Computer encoding = = 
 The SMP range <unk> – <unk> has been tentatively allocated for encoding the Rongorongo script . An encoding proposal has been written by Michael Everson . 
 = 1920 Canton Bulldogs season = 
 The 1920 Canton Bulldogs season was the franchise 's sixteenth and its first in the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) , which became the National Football League two years later . Jim Thorpe , the APFA 's president , was Canton 's coach and a back who played on the team . The Bulldogs entered the season coming off a 9 – 0 – 1 performance as Ohio League champions in 1919 . The team opened the season with a 48 – 0 victory over the Pitcairn Quakers , and finished with a 7 – 4 – 2 record , taking eighth place in the 14 @-@ team APFA . A then @-@ record crowd of 17 @,@ 000 fans watched Canton 's week 12 game against Union AA of Phoenixville . 
 The 1920 season was Thorpe 's last with the Bulldogs . Thorpe , who was of mixed American Indian ancestry , left after the season to organize and play for an all @-@ Native American team in LaRue , Ohio . Cap Edwards replaced Thorpe as the team 's coach , and Wilbur Henry , Cub Buck , Harrie <unk> , Joe Guyon , and Pete Calac were named to the All @-@ Pro list . Three 1920 Bulldogs players — Thorpe , Guyon and Pete Henry — were later elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 Representatives of four Ohio League teams — the Bulldogs , the Cleveland Tigers , the Dayton Triangles , and the Akron Pros — called a meeting on August 20 , 1920 to discuss the formation of a new league . At the meeting , they tentatively agreed on a salary cap and pledged not to sign college players or players already under contract with other teams . They also agreed on a name for the circuit : the American Professional Football Conference . They then invited other professional teams to a second meeting on September 17 . At that meeting , held at Bulldogs owner Ralph Hay 's Hupmobile showroom in Canton , representatives of the Rock Island Independents , the Muncie Flyers , the Decatur Staleys , the Racine Cardinals , the Massillon Tigers , the Chicago Cardinals , and the Hammond Pros agreed to join the league . Representatives of the Buffalo All @-@ Americans and Rochester Jeffersons could not attend the meeting , but sent letters to Hay asking to be included in the league . Team representatives changed the league 's name slightly to the American Professional Football Association and elected officers , installing Jim Thorpe as president . Under the new league structure , teams created their schedules dynamically as the season progressed , and representatives of each team voted to determine the winner of the APFA trophy . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 2 : vs. Pitcairn Quakers = = = 
 October 3 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Bulldogs opened the 1920 season against the Pitcairn Quakers . The team got out to a quick lead and was never in danger , scoring 34 points in the first quarter as back Joe Guyon rushed for three touchdowns , tackle Pete Henry caught a 15 @-@ yard touchdown pass from back Tex Grigg , and back Johnny Hendren returned an interception for a touchdown . The Bulldogs were only forced to punt once in the game , and did not attempt to score in the second and third quarters because of the large lead . In the fourth quarter , however , end Bunny Corcoran caught a 35 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Guyon , and back Ike Martin ran for a one @-@ yard touchdown . The final score was 48 – 0 , and Guyon was the offensive star . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs. Toledo Maroons = = = 
 October 10 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Bulldogs were scheduled to play their second game against the Rochester Jeffersons , but faced the Toledo Maroons after that match was cancelled . For the second game in a row the Bulldogs scored over 40 points in a shutout as Martin and Guyon dominated on offense . Martin scored the first touchdown of the game with a run in the first quarter . In the second quarter , Hendren scored a rushing touchdown , and end Tom Whelan caught a touchdown pass from Grigg . In the third quarter , Martin caught a touchdown pass from Grigg , and Grigg rushed for another . The Bulldogs ' final score was a rushing touchdown from back Pete Calac in the fourth quarter . The final score was 48 – 0 . The Maroons never got close to scoring and did not make a single a first down . 
 = = = Week 4 : vs. Cleveland Tigers = = = 
 October 17 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Bulldogs next faced the Cleveland Tigers , their first APFA opponent , and won 7 – 0 before a crowd of 7 @,@ 000 people . Despite the Bulldogs ' 15 first downs , the only score of the game came on Martin 's 7 @-@ yard touchdown run in the first quarter . Thorpe made his season debut in the game , coming in as a substitute in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Week 5 : at Dayton Triangles = = = 
 October 24 , 1920 at Triangle Park 
 Bulldogs battled the Dayton Triangles in week five . The Bulldogs opened the scoring in the first quarter on a two @-@ yard rushing touchdown by Pete Calac . But the Triangles came back in the second quarter , scoring twice : back Frank Bacon had a four @-@ yard rushing touchdown , and end Dave Reese had a 50 @-@ yard receiving touchdown . Guyon scored a 22 @-@ yard rushing touchdown during the corner , but the extra point sailed wide . In the third quarter , the Triangles responded with a 3 @-@ yard rushing touchdown by back Lou Partlow , but Dayton missed the extra point to make the score 20 – 14 . Thorpe then came into the game , and kicked a 45 @-@ yard field goal to bring his team within three points . In the final minutes , Thorpe kicked another 35 @-@ yard field goal to tie it . The Triangles were the first team to score on the Bulldogs since the opening game of the previous year . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs. Akron Pros = = = 
 October 31 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Bulldogs ' next opponent was the Akron Pros , who were undefeated at the time and were gaining attention around the league . The game was the first of a two @-@ game series between the Bulldogs and Pros , considered to be two of the best teams in the country . In the first quarter , after an exchange of punts , Pros tackle Charlie Copley kicked a 38 @-@ yard field goal . On a Bulldog possession at midfield , a Gilroy pass was tipped by the Pros ' Copley and Bob Nash . Pros tackle Pike Johnson caught the ball before it landed and ran 55 yards for a touchdown . In the third quarter , Jim Thorpe came into the game but could not get the Bulldogs back into the game . 
 = = = Week 7 : at Cleveland Tigers = = = 
 November 7 , 1920 at Dunn Field 
 Coming off their first loss , the Bulldogs faced the Cleveland Tigers in week seven . Neither team scored in the first quarter , but the Bulldogs ran for two touchdowns in the second . Calac and Grigg had 6- and 15 @-@ yard rushing touchdowns . The Bulldogs ' defense forced two safeties — one in the third and one in the fourth quarter — to win the game 18 – 0 . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs. Chicago Tigers = = = 
 November 14 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Bulldogs ' next matchup was against the Chicago Tigers . The first scoring came in the second quarter , when Higgins recovered a fumble and ran it back for a touchdown . In the same quarter , Henry caught an interception and ran it back 50 yards for a touchdown . Calac then ran for a one @-@ yard touchdown in the third quarter to seal the 21 – 0 win . 
 = = = Week 9 : at Buffalo All @-@ Americans = = = 
 November 21 , 1920 at Buffalo Baseball Park 
 In week nine , the Bulldogs played the Buffalo All @-@ Americans , who were undefeated at the time . Thorpe started the game but came out at halftime because he believed it would end in a tie . Both teams were slowed by a muddy field , and the football became soggy after three quarters . The lone score of the game came with under four minutes to play : a field goal from the Bulldogs ' Feeney . The game was the only loss of the season for the All @-@ Americans . 
 = = = Week 10 : at Akron Pros = = = 
 November 25 , 1920 at League Park 
 In week ten , the Bulldogs played the Pros for the second time in the season . In the first quarter , a fumbled punt by the Bulldogs gave the Pros the ball at their 32 @-@ yard line . On the ensuing drive , the Pros passed for the game 's lone score , a touchdown from King to Nash . The Bulldogs lost 7 – 0 in the first professional game played on Thanksgiving Day , which launched a yearly tradition . 
 = = = Week 11 : at Buffalo All @-@ Americans = = = 
 December 4 , 1920 at Polo Grounds 
 The following week , the Bulldogs played their second game against the All @-@ Americans , losing 7 – 3 . The Bulldogs did not get a first down or complete a pass during the game , but Thorpe kicked a field goal in the third quarter after a fumble recovery for the team 's only score . In the fourth quarter , All @-@ Americans tackle Youngstrom blocked a Thorpe punt and returned it for a touchdown . The Sunday Chronicle named Thorpe , Henry and Lowe as the Bulldogs ' stars , while Anderson , Youngstrom , and Miller were the standouts for the All @-@ Americans . 
 = = = Week 11 : at Washington Glee Club = = = 
 December 5 , 1920 in Weiss Park 
 The following day , the Bulldogs played the non @-@ APFA Washington Glee Club . Coming into the game , the Glee Club allowed just seven points all season . The teams tied 0 – 0 before a crowd of 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = Week 12 : at Union AA of Phoenixville = = = 
 December 11 , 1920 at Phillies Park 
 In their third game in seven days , the Bulldogs played Union AA of Phoenixville , who came into the game undefeated . Before the largest recorded crowd of the season , the Bulldogs lost to Union AA 13 – 7 . Neither team scored in the first quarter , but each scored a touchdown in the second . The Bulldogs ' Calac had a six @-@ yard rushing touchdown , and Union AA 's , Hayes caught a six @-@ yard pass from Scott for a touchdown . In the third quarter , Union AA 's Hayes blocked a punt and ran it back for a touchdown , sealing the win . Despite not being part of the APFA , AA of Phoenixville after the season called themselves the " US Professional Champions " . 
 = = = Week 13 : at Richmond AC = = = 
 December 18 , 1920 at Boulevard Field 
 The Bulldogs beat Richmond AC 39 – 0 in the final game of the season . Richmond AC was not part of the APFA , and this was the team 's only game in 1920 . The Bulldogs scored 13 points in the first , third , and fourth quarter to win in the shutout . Guyon scored two rushing touchdowns , while Jim Thorpe threw touchdown passes to Corcoran and Lowe . The other two touchdowns came on runs by <unk> and Grigg . Guyon made two field goals , and Thorpe added a third . 
 = = Standings = = 
 Awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup and named APFA Champions.Note : Tie games were not officially counted in the standings until 1972 . 
