 Back in Scranton , the rest of the employees are going to be forced to work on a Saturday to record their own sales as the website 's sales , which is , according to Ryan , " a temporary procedure to increase the legitimacy of the website . " With no one eager to participate , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) decides to ask everyone to stay in the office late instead of coming in for the Saturday . They all agree to the plan , and after working until 9 : 00 pm , they are shocked to find the parking lot gates locked . Jim had forgotten to tell the security guard that they were staying late . They are unable to return to the office because Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) locked the door from the inside , and Dwight , miles away in New York , has both the spare and master keys . Jim repeatedly calls Hank the security guard ( Hugh Dane ) . Pam accidentally injures Meredith by hitting her head with a football that was found in the parking lot . Sitting in the lobby area waiting for the security guard to arrive , the employees are clearly frustrated with Jim , and even vote by a show of hands that Andy and Angela are a better couple than Jim and Pam . 
 During a moment of levity , Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) affectionately places his hand on Pam 's knee . After an awkward silence , Toby proclaims that he is moving to Costa Rica ; he then hops the parking lot fence and runs away . The cleaning staff arrives and lets the group out ( with help from Oscar , who speaks Spanish ) . 
 At the end of the episode , Hank finally shows up but is upset because everyone but the cleaning staff is gone . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Night Out " was the seventh episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . It was written by Mindy Kaling , who also acts in the show as customer @-@ service representative Kelly Kapoor . The episode was the eighth of the series to be written by Kaling . " Night Out " was the third new episode of The Office to be broadcast since the episode " The Deposition " on November 15 , 2007 , due to the effects of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Filming of The Office immediately halted on that date , because many members of the cast including Carell , Novak , Kaling , and Lieberstein are members of the WGA and refused to cross WGA picket lines . If not for the writers ' strike , this episode would have most likely been filmed in November 2007 . 
 Most of " Night Out " was shot during the night . The scene that has Toby putting his hand on Pam 's knee was shot at 2 : 30 am on a Friday . The scene was shot about eight times because according to Kaling , " everyone kept breaking because Toby was so vulnerable and awkward . " Kate Flannery did her stunts in the scene where Pam throws a football and hits Customer and Supplier Relations worker Meredith Palmer ( Flannery ) in the face . Flannery had a stunt double on the set , but she was never needed for the scene . Kate recalls that she " didn 't get a scratch in all 14 takes that we shot . " Lieberstein on the other hand used a stunt double for the scene in which Toby climbs over the fence . Although Lieberstein offered to do the stunt himself , executive producer and show runner Greg Daniels decided against it . 
 When casting " Tall Girl # 1 " ( the woman who would kiss with Dwight ) , the show was looking for a girl 6 ' 1' ' or taller . Actress Cassie Fliegel , who is 5 ' 11 ' ' , auditioned for the part anyway . After getting a callback , Fliegel went to a gym to work out , attempting to gain muscle to look more like a basketball player . On the day of the callbacks , Fliegel remembers being next to a girl who was 6 ' <unk> ' . Despite her size , Fliegel , a former basketball player herself , was cast for the part . Initially , she did not know that her character was going to make out with Dwight . Fliegel recalls that when she first heard about kissing Dwight she " was like , I don 't think so " . However , after finding out that she had her own trailer , Fliegel warmed up to the idea . The music in the club was chosen by Novak , Kaling 's then @-@ boyfriend Benjamin Nugent , and Daniel Chun . When filming Ryan dancing in the club , the girl that Ryan hit was actually a stunt woman . Pads had been placed on the floor so Novak could fall down safely . The German lullaby that Dwight sang to Ryan was script supervisor Veda Semarne 's idea . Semarne 's Austrian grandmother sang the same song to her when she was a child . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Night Out " received 4 @.@ 0 / 10 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that four percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and ten percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 56 million viewers . " Night Out " did not do as well as " Chair Model " did the week before , losing 20 percent of the previous episode 's viewers . Some attribute the loss of viewers to a lack of Grey 's Anatomy and a repeat of CSI the previous week . With 7 @.@ 69 million , " Night Out " had fewer viewers than any other episode of The Office from the fourth season , except for " Job Fair " , which garnered only 7 @.@ 16 million viewers . 
 Reviews for " Night Out " were mixed . Zap2It 's Rick Porter thought that although it wasn 't " as sublime in its Needy Michael @-@ ness as last week 's ( episode ) " and " in some ways , though , it was maybe even a little sadder " , " Night Out " was " still pretty darn funny " . Porter went on to praise the acting work of both B.J. Novak and Paul Lieberstein , as well as the writing of Mindy Kaling . TV Squad 's Jay Black said that Michael summed up " Night Out " perfectly when he said " Best . Night . Ever . " Black went on to praise both of the storylines , and the ability of the show to achieve success both in as well as out of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton building . Similar to Black 's statements , Gretchen Hansen of Entertainment Weekly stated that " ' Best . Night . Ever . ' Oh , so true , Michael . " She also stated that " I guess I knew it was going to be a good episode of The Office when I had two pages of scribbled notes before the first commercial break . " Hansen went on to praise both the acting and the writing of the episode as points that contributed to the success of the episode . Rachel Cericola , of TV Fodder , praised the writing of the episode by Mindy Kaling . She also praised the storyline of the episode that didn 't involve Michael and Dwight , saying " The second plotline was its usual funny filler . However , it was Toby 's revelation that made it all worthwhile . " 
 Travis Fickett of IGN said that the episode was " still satisfying , even when it 's not one of the show 's funnier episodes " , but " it 's a bit of a shame this episode wasn 't a home run , because having Dwight and Michael hit the clubs is a funny idea . " Fickett went on to praise the episode 's awkward moment between Toby and Pam , when Toby placed his hand on Pam 's leg , and Toby 's subsequent escape by hopping the fence . Fickett stated that , for Toby 's growing love of Pam , and growing jealousy of Jim , " this is pretty great pay off " . Claire Zulkey , a writer for the Los Angeles Times , was not as pleased with the episode . Zulkey wrote " that when it 's at its zaniest , The Office is at its worst " , and the episode was " just too silly to be funny " . Zulkey did say that " it was hilarious to see him ( Toby ) let his hand more @-@ than @-@ linger on her knee and then abruptly flee the premises by jumping over the fence and running home . " In a poll done by Office fansite OfficeTally.com , viewers ranked " Night Out " as the 13th @-@ most popular episode out of the 14 episodes of season four . 
 = Raining Men ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Raining Men " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . Written by Melvin Hough II , <unk> Wouter , Timothy Thomas , Theron Thomas and Onika Maraj , and produced by Mel & Mus , the song was sent to urban radio on December 7 , 2010 , as the album 's third single in the United States , and was re @-@ sent to urban radio on January 25 , 2011 . A hip hop song , it features rap vocals by Nicki Minaj and instrumentation consisting of sirens and bass . The song 's lyrics revolve around how there is an endless supply of men available in the world . The song garnered a mixed response from music critics ; some praised the chemistry between Rihanna and Minaj , while others commented that it bore strong resemblances to Beyoncé 's song " Diva " with regard to its composition , and were critical of the notion . 
 Upon the release of Loud , " Raining Men " charted on the singles charts in South Korea , the United Kingdom and the United States on the strength of digital download sales . In South Korea , the song peaked at number 41 , while in the United Kingdom it peaked at number 142 on the UK Singles Chart and number 31 on the UK R & B Chart . In the United States , it peaked at number 11 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , making this Rihanna 's third single that failed to reach the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ( " We Ride " , " Wait Your Turn " ) . Following the song 's release to US urban radio , " Raining Men " peaked at number 48 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . No music video was shot for the song , and it received no televised performances as part of promotion . The song was included on the set list of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) . The performance featured Rihanna in a camouflage inspired outfit , accompanied by dancers in the same attire who held pink rifles . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " Raining Men " was written by Melvin Hough II , <unk> Wouter , Timothy Thomas , Theron Thomas and Nicki Minaj ( credited as Onika Maraj ) , with instrumental production of the song done by Mel & Mus . It features rap vocals by Minaj ; Rihanna 's and Minaj 's vocals were recorded by Kuk Harrell , Josh Gudwin , Marcos Tovar and Aerial Chobaz at Platinum Sound Recording Studios ; Manhattan , New York City ; Electric Lady Studios , Greenwich Village , New York City and Glenwood Recording Studios , Burbank , California . <unk> Hassi served as the assistant vocal recorder . The song 's music was recorded by Dana Nielsen , and was mixed by Jaycen Joshua . Jesus Garnica served as the mixing assistant . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 " Raining Men " marked the second collaboration between Rihanna 's and Minaj , the first being Minaj 's song " Fly " , from her album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) , on which Rihanna appeared as a guest vocalist . During an interview with Capital FM radio station in London , England , Rihanna revealed that herself and Minaj had written songs together , specifically ballads , for possible inclusion on the formers fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) , however none of the songs made the final track listing . Rihanna concluded her statement by saying that she could not wait to collaborate with the rapper again for her fifth studio album , the at the time unreleased and unnamed Loud . When questioned about what " Raining Men " was like , the singer stated that it is " a really fun song . Nothing like the original . It 's quite uptempo but kind of quirky and funny . " 
 In the same interview , Rihanna explained why she liked to collaborate with Minaj , saying " She has a great buzz and she has a ' thing ' to her . She is a star and that 's why people love her . She 's also really entertaining with her visual as well as her lyrics , and she has a great melody . " The singer continued to reveal how she was impressed with Minaj 's songwriting abilities , saying " I 'm really amazed that she can write like that . [ Nicki ] not only raps but she can write songs too ... It was really easy actually . We were going back and forth with the texts on how we were going to get to do it because we were in two different places and had two opposite schedules . " In an interview with DJ Semtex for BBC Radio , Minaj explained how the concept for her rap verse developed , revealing " I just wanted to be crazy , I wrote that track in bed actually . I had an off day , they sent me a record and said they needed it back in 24 hours and I wrote . " With regard to the original , " It 's Raining Men " , Minaj stated that she wanted to make " Raining Men " " more melodic and crazy . " " Raining Men " was sent for urban radio adds as the third single from Loud on December 7 , 2010 . On January 25 , 2011 , the song was re @-@ released for urban radio adds . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Raining Men " is a hip hop song , with a " shiny trap beat " . that lasts for a duration of 3 : 44 ( 3 minutes , 44 seconds ) . The song is not a cover of The Weather Girls song " It 's Raining Men " , composed by Paul Jabara and Paul Shaffer , however it is based on it with regard to its lyrical content and does sample it . Instrumentation consists of sirens and " mind @-@ melting " bass . The song is written in the key of B ♭ major and is set in simple time with a moderated hip @-@ hop groove , with a metronome of 80 beats per minute . " Raining Men " ' s composition was likened to the work of M.I.A. by Emily McKay for NME . Stacey Anderson for Spin commented on Minaj 's vocal <unk> of the word " really , " writing that she projects the word as a " breathless contortion into its own fully demented sideshow , " with regard to the fast speed in which Minaj raps . James Reed for The Boston Globe described Minaj 's verse as a " manic guest rhyme " . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 . According to Jon Pareles for The New York Times , the songs lyrics revolve around Rihanna and Minaj " singing and rapping about an endless supply of available men . " Lyrically , Kevin O 'Donnell of Spin described the song as Rihanna and Minaj 's own " female empowerment anthem . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Jon Pareles and Jon Caramanica of The New York Times commented that " Rihanna shares the mechanized , chattering beat of " Raining Men " with Nicki Minaj , singing and rapping about an endless supply of available men " . Stacey Anderson of Spin commented that the song is the highlight of the album , calling it " a gloriously eccentric collaboration with Nicki Minaj that <unk> their minor @-@ key hyperventilating , air sirens dissolving into mind @-@ melting bass , and the scene @-@ stealing Minaj 's breathless contortion of the simple word ' really ' into its own fully demented sideshow " . BBC Music also commended Minaj 's presence on the song , saying that " Nicki Minaj makes for a superb partner in crime on Raining Men , her wild , kinetic flow complementing Rihanna ’ s steely delivery to wicked effect " . Jim Farber for New York Daily News said that " Rihanna pairs just as well with Nicki Minaj , on a complete tear @-@ down on the old Weather Girls disco standard ' It 's Raining Men . ' Here it 's not a gay song of lust but a statement of assurance that no man should incite too much worry , considering their sheer numbers " . Chris Richards of The Washington Post said that " Nicki Minaj , a quick @-@ witted rapper able to assume the voices of a dozen characters in a single song , fails to impart any wisdom on her colleague with " Raining Men " . Emily Mackay of NME said that " Raining Men " is a bold collaboration between Rihanna and Minaj , which plays to both of their strengths in the " hip @-@ pop " collaboration . 
 August Brown for Los Angeles Times said that " ' Cheers ( Drink to That ) ' and ' Raining Men , ' as foamy and spunky as they may be , are such a dogleg turn from Rated R that they come off as little more than image recalibration . That 's her prerogative as an artist , and it 's certainly earned . But it underscores the one thing we 've always wondered about Rihanna — what is she really feeling ? " . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media was more critical of the song , commenting that " Raining Men is a shameless Beyoncé rip @-@ off that would be quickly dismissed if not for the fact that it 's a pretty @-@ damn @-@ good Beyoncé rip off with a characteristically scene @-@ stealing guest verse from Nicki Minaj " . James Reed of The Boston Globe also noticed the similarity between the song 's composition and the work of American R & B recording artist Beyoncé Knowles , saying " ' Raining Men ' , borrowing a digitized riff from Beyoncé 's ' Diva ' , features rising rapper Nicki Minaj on a typically manic guest rhyme . The song 's message doubles as the album 's mantra : Some cats really do have nine lives " . Idolator reviewer Becky Bain praised Minaj 's " infectious and energetic verse " and felt the song 's rhythm " fits Nicki 's quirkiness perfectly " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of Loud , " Raining Men " charted in South Korea , the United Kingdom and the United States on the strength of digital download sales . The song debuted at number 41 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on November 14 , 2010 , and fell to number 85 the following week before dropping out of the chart . It debuted and peaked at number 142 on the UK Singles Chart on November 27 , 2010 . The song was more successful on the UK R & B Chart , where it peaked at number 30 in the same chart issue . " Raining Men " peaked at number 11 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , a component chart which represents the 25 songs which failed to make an impact on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The song debuted at number 69 US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for the week of December 25 , 2010 . It peaked at number 48 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Raining Men " was included on the set list of the Loud Tour in 2011 . The performance featured Rihanna in a camouflage inspired outfit , and was accompanied by dancers in the same attire who held pink rifles . The set included a pink tank which was also present on the Rated R supported tour , Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 / 11 ) . It began with Rihanna appearing on stage sitting on the pink tank as it was wheeled from the back of the stage to the front while Minaj 's rap verse played ; Rihanna then concluded the song with her vocals . " Raining Men " was preceded by " Hard " and " Breakin ' Dishes " , and featured the singer wearing the same outfit and set design . Minaj has also performed her verse on her Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Loud , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 Management 
 SESAC / ASCAP / BMI 
 Mel & Mus appears on behalf of Wall Street Ent . 
 Kuk Harrell appears on behalf of Suga <unk> Music , Inc . 
 Jaycen Joshua appears on behalf of the Penua Project / Innersound Management 
 Nicki Minaj appears courtesy of Young Money / Universal Motown 
 Recording 
 Vocal recording – Platinum Sound Recording Studios ( New York City , NY ) ; Electric Lady Recording Studios ( New York City , NY ) ; Glenwood Studios ( Burbank , CA ) 
 Music recording – Cahuenga Pass Studio ( Los Angeles , CA ) 
 Mixing – Larrabee Sound Studios ( Los Angeles , CA ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio history = = 
 = Brooks Laich = 
 Evan Brooks Laich ( / <unk> / ; born June 23 , 1983 ) is a Canadian ice hockey player currently playing for the Toronto Maple Leafs of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . 
 Laich was originally drafted by the Ottawa Senators in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft , and was later traded to the Washington Capitals as part of the package for Peter Bondra . Before playing professionally , Laich spent time in the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) playing with the Moose Jaw Warriors and Seattle Thunderbirds . He has represented Canada internationally , capturing a silver medal at the 2003 World Junior Championships , and playing for Canada again at the 2010 World Hockey Championships . 
 = = Hockey career = = 
 = = = Minor = = = 
 Laich started playing minor hockey in his hometown of <unk> , Saskatchewan . During the 1999 – 2000 season , he was the top scorer and most valuable player for the midget AAA Tisdale Trojans . He was the runner up for league MVP . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Laich started his junior hockey career with the Moose Jaw Warriors of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) during the 2000 – 01 season . He played in 71 games with the Warriors , scoring nine goals and adding 21 assists . Laich was a dedicated student in Moose Jaw , being awarded the club 's Scholastic Player of the Year for the 2000 – 01 season . After the season , he was drafted by the Ottawa Senators in the sixth round , 193rd overall , of the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . He started the 2001 – 02 season with the Warriors , but was traded to the Seattle Thunderbirds along with Tomáš <unk> for Craig <unk> and Stas <unk> . The deal was unpopular with Warriors fans , as <unk> left the club and <unk> never reported . 
 Laich spent the rest of his junior career with the Thunderbirds . He started to develop more of an offensive game , finishing off the 2001 – 02 season with 58 points in the 47 games he played in Seattle . Laich has said that getting traded to Seattle was a good move for him , with coach Dean Chynoweth providing ample opportunities for him to display his skills . He was named the team 's Most Dedicated Player after the 2001 – 02 season . His offensive game flourished further in his first full season with the Thunderbirds ( 2002 – 03 ) , as he finished the season with 41 goals and 53 assists , leading the team . These stats placed him sixth overall in the WHL points race . He was named the WHL 's Western Conference MVP . He was also named to the WHL 's Western Conference First All @-@ Star Team , and the Canadian Hockey League 's Third All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Laich attended the Ottawa Senators training camp before the 2002 – 03 season . He played his first professional game in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) for the Binghamton Senators in 2003 . He made his National Hockey League ( NHL ) debut with the Senators on February 3 , 2003 , against the New Jersey Devils . Later in the season , Laich was traded to the Washington Capitals , along with a second round draft pick , for Peter Bondra , a deal which ended Bondra 's 14 @-@ year career with the Capitals . After the trade , he reported to the Capitals ' AHL affiliate , the Portland Pirates , making his debut with the Capitals on March 12 , 2003 , against the Chicago Blackhawks . He finished the season playing with the Pirates , appearing in six playoff games . The NHL lockout saw Laich spend the entire 2004 – 05 season with the Pirates , playing in 68 games , finishing eighth on the team in scoring with 16 goals and 10 assists . 
 During the 2005 – 06 season , Laich played in 104 regular season and playoff games between the Capitals and their new AHL affiliate , the Hershey Bears ; this tied him for the most games played in the organization with Boyd Gordon . After training camp , he started the season in the AHL , but was optimistic about his chances to play in the NHL , saying , " You 've just got to work hard . There 's spots up there , guys could go down with an injury , you want to be the first guy called up . " He spent most of the season at the NHL level , playing in 73 games and recording 21 points . After the Capitals ' season was over , Laich rejoined the Bears for their playoff run and scored eight goals in 21 games while helping the team capture the Calder Cup . Laich played the entire 2006 – 07 season with the Capitals , scoring eight goals and adding ten assists . After the season , Laich and the Capitals went to salary arbitration , where he was awarded a one @-@ year contract worth $ 725 @,@ 000 . 
 Laich played in all 82 games for the Capitals during the 2007 – 08 season , and set career highs in goals , assists and points . His 21 goals ranked third overall on the team . He led the Capitals with two short handed goals , and played in his 200th career regular season game . After a two @-@ goal game against the Atlanta Thrashers , Laich summed up his philosophy towards scoring : " If you want money , go to the bank . If you want bread , go to the bakery . If you want goals , go to the net . " During the playoffs , Laich had a five @-@ game point streak in the Eastern Conference quarter @-@ finals against the Philadelphia Flyers . This tied him for the longest point streak during the first round of the playoffs . As a restricted free agent after the season , Laich signed a three @-@ year deal with the team on July 9 , 2008 . 
 The 2008 – 09 season saw Laich play in all 82 games for the Capitals again , where he set new career highs in goals , assists and points ; he scored 23 goals and added 30 assists , breaking the 50 @-@ point plateau for the first time in his career . During the Capitals ' playoff run , Laich played in 14 games and added seven points . He assisted on the overtime winning goal in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference Semi @-@ Final against the eventual Stanley Cup champions Pittsburgh Penguins . 
 Laich 's streak of consecutive games played was broken in the 2009 – 10 season , when he missed four games with a cheekbone injury in February 2010 . He still managed to set new career highs in both goals ( 25 ) and assists ( 34 ) . On February 10 , shortly after returning from injury , Laich recorded his first career NHL hat trick , against the Montreal Canadiens . During the playoffs , Laich scored the last goal of the Capitals season during Game 7 against the Montreal Canadiens . 
 During the 2010 – 11 season , the Capitals participated in the 2011 NHL Winter Classic against the Pittsburgh Penguins at Heinz Field , Pittsburgh . Leading up to the game , both teams were featured on HBO 's 24 / 7 , which offered a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look at both teams as they prepared . Laich refused to blame the presence of the cameras for the team 's losing streak , saying , " There 's no using the HBO cameras as a crutch or an annoyance or anything like that . There 's no excuse . I don 't think HBO has played any bit of an ounce in how things have gone the last two weeks . " Laich was appreciative of the opportunities afforded by the outdoor game , and was happy to be able to share time with his family and friends on the outdoor rink set up at Heinz Field . 
 On June 28 , 2011 , Laich signed a six @-@ year , $ 27 million contract extension worth $ 4 @.@ 5 million per season . 
 As the player representative for the Washington Capitals during the 2012 NHL @-@ NHLPA CBA negotiations , Laich stated in support of the National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) that , " At some point you have to dig your heels in and fight . If we don ’ t this time , then what happens next ? Appeasement only makes the aggressor more aggressive , and the players really understand that . We believe in our cause and our leadership and I believe we ’ re more unified this time and ready for a fight . " 
 Prior to the start of the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 @-@ 2013 playing season , Laich played for the Kloten Flyers of Switzerland 's National League . In 35 games for the Flyers , Laich posted 17 goals and a total of 38 points . He also reportedly suffered a groin injury , which limited his play upon his return stateside with the NHL . When play resumed for the 2012 – 13 season , Laich was limited to nine games . 
 On March 17 , 2014 , the Capitals announced via Twitter that Laich " underwent a successful procedure to release a tight adductor , " a part of the groin muscle . He is expected to miss the rest of the season with a recovery time of four @-@ to @-@ six weeks . 
 Except for a minor shoulder injury resulting in him missing 16 games , Laich returned to full health in 2014 @-@ 15 . He finished with seven goals and 20 points in 66 games played . 
 In the 2015 – 16 season , Laich 's offensive production rapidly declined , while his $ 4 @.@ 5 million cap hit stuck out as one of the only adverse aspects of a league @-@ leading Capitals squad . On February 27 , 2016 , the Capitals placed Laich on waivers for the purpose of sending him to the Hershey Bears of the AHL . The following day , on the eve of the trade deadline , Laich , along with Connor Carrick and a second round selection in the 2016 draft , were traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Daniel <unk> and a fifth round pick in the 2016 draft . The purpose of the trade was to give the Capitals salary cap relief to use toward younger core player contracts that needed re @-@ signing the following off @-@ season . Capitals GM Brian <unk> called the trade , when asked , the hardest thing he had done as General Manager of the team . Laich had been the longest tenured active professional Washington @-@ area athlete at the time of the trade , concluding his service of 12 years with the franchise . In what easily stands as the most emotional trade in Capitals history since Laich was dealt to Washington in a package for Peter Bondra , one journalist wrote " It 's ironic that money is what ultimately forced the Caps to move Laich . This is a guy who loves the game so much , he 'd probably play for free . " 
 Laich 's play improved significantly in Toronto , recording identical numbers to what he scored in Washington while playing in a third of the games . 
 = = International play = = 
 Laich debuted with Team Canada at the 2003 World Junior Championships , which were held in Halifax , Nova Scotia . In a game against Sweden , Laich scored Canada 's first goal of the tournament . He scored two goals and added four assists in six games at the tournament , where Canada won a silver medal . According to his father , Harold , his son had always dreamed of playing for Canada . Laich 's next experience with Team Canada came at the 2010 World Championships . He scored one goal in seven games as Canada finished seventh . During the tournament in a game against Russia , Laich raised the ire of his Capitals ' teammate Semyon Varlamov for slashing and cross @-@ checking Alexander Ovechkin . Varlamov said of Laich 's play , " ... Brooks Laich was constantly trying to slash and cross @-@ check him ( Ovechkin ) as painful [ sic ] as possible . After the game he certainly wished me luck and victory at the world championship , but the unpleasant impression still remains . " 
 = = Playing style = = 
 In 2009 , Capitals ' Head Coach Bruce Boudreau believed that Laich had not yet reached his full potential , saying , " ... I still don 't think we 've seen the best of Brooks . I think he 's going to be a 25- , 30 @-@ goal scorer in this league and become a staple for a while . " Boudreau also said Laich is considered one of the hardest working players on the Capitals ' roster by his coaches and teammates . Part of Laich 's inspiration comes from his father , who , during a 34 @-@ year tenure as a high school principal , only missed three days of work . Laich plays on the Capitals power play and kills penalties in addition to his ice time at even strength . Superstar Alexander Ovechkin is the Capitals current captain , but Laich has been lauded for his leadership and was considered for a more formal role in the team 's leadership structure in 2009 . 
 Laich is a hard worker , and dedicated to his team , saying , " If I asked you about your family , you would talk about them forever because it 's something you love . That 's the way I feel about this team . This team is my life , and I love playing here and I 'm passionate about playing hockey . So it 's easy for me to talk about it . " Boudreau has said , " You are never going to find a guy that cares more than Brooks Laich . " Laich spends time in the off @-@ season with a power skating instructor , which he feels is key to a long career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Laich has two siblings , an older sister and younger brother . His father worked as a high school teacher and principal . In his free time , he plays guitar and <unk> . Colorado Avalanche star Joe Sakic was Laich 's favorite player growing up . He is actively involved in charity work , supporting charities related to multiple sclerosis and Athletes Against Autism . While still playing junior hockey , Laich helped his hometown of <unk> raise money to purchase a Zamboni for the local arena . 
 Laich received national media attention when he stopped to help two stranded Capitals fans change their flat tire after a Game 7 loss in the 2010 playoffs . When he came across the woman and her teenaged daughter stranded on the Theodore Roosevelt Bridge , Laich stopped to install their spare and apologized for the club 's early loss in the playoffs . For his efforts , Laich was hockey analyst Michael Farber 's nominee for the 2010 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year . When asked about the incident , Laich responded , " It 's not a big deal . It was just a tire . The lady was stranded on the side of the road , I saw that it was just a lady and her daughter , and I figured my tire expertise outweighed hers . " 
 In February 2014 , it was revealed that he started dating professional dancer and actress Julianne Hough . On August 18 , 2015 Laich officially announced via Instagram that he and Hough were engaged . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Statistics source 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics source 
 = Tempus Fugit ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Tempus Fugit " is the seventeenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 16 , 1997 . It was directed by Rob Bowman , and written by Frank Spotnitz and series creator Chris Carter . " Tempus Fugit " featured guest appearances by Joe Spano , Tom O 'Brien and Brendan Beiser , and saw the return of Scott Bellis as alien abductee Max Fenig . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Tempus Fugit " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 9 , being watched by 18 @.@ 85 million people in its initial broadcast . The title translates from Latin as " time flies . " 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Max Fenig — an old acquaintance of Mulder — is found dead following an airplane crash , which Mulder believes to have been caused by a UFO attempting to abduct Fenig . " Tempus Fugit " is a two @-@ part episode , with the plot continuing in the next episode , " Max " . 
 " Tempus Fugit " was conceived when the series ' special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier constructed an elaborate rig capable of simulating a crashing airplane . Carter and Spotnitz expanded upon the idea of a crash to bring back the character of Fenig , who had last been seen in season one 's " Fallen Angel " . " Tempus Fugit " received mixed to positive critical reception , and earned the production crew two Emmy Award nominations , including a win for Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Max Fenig ( Scott Bellis ) , last seen in Fallen Angel , is traveling on an airplane , Flight 549 , which flies over upstate New York . He watches another man on the plane who seems to be following him . The man heads to the plane 's bathroom , where he assembles a zip gun . However , when he comes back out , the airplane begins shaking and a bright light flashes outside , showing that the plane is encountering a UFO . The emergency door next to Max 's seat is opened . 
 Elsewhere , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) celebrate Scully 's birthday . They are approached by a woman named Sharon <unk> , who claims to be Max 's sister ; she tells them that Max planned to deliver something to Mulder , but that his flight to Washington has crashed . The agents head to the crash site in Northville , New York , and attend an NTSB meeting where Flight 549 's final transmissions are shown . Mulder theorizes that the plane was forced down by aliens attempting to abduct Max ; the NTSB team , led by chief investigator Mike Millar ( Joe Spano ) , dismisses his claims . 
 When Mulder and Scully survey the crash site , they realize that there is a nine @-@ minute disparity between the crash and the time on the victims ' wristwatches , indicating missing time . Mulder believes that Max was abducted from the plane and that his body will not be found . Meanwhile , Scott Garrett , a Man in Black posing as an NTSB investigator , steals the zip gun from the assassin 's body and erases his face and fingerprints with acid . <unk> <unk> , a passenger who sat next to Max , is found alive . His injuries indicate exposure to radiation . 
 Upon being confronted by Scully , Sharon denies that Max brought a radioactive substance aboard the plane , but divulges that she is not actually Max 's sister . She also gives up details about his underground life . Scully subsequently tells Mulder that Max worked at an environmental energy plant in Colorado under an alias , and believes that he may have caused the crash after bringing plutonium on board ; Mulder , however , believes that Max was taken off the plane by a UFO , and that <unk> 's injuries were caused by exposure to the craft . Scully informs Mulder that Max 's body has already been pulled from the crash site . Meanwhile , Sharon is abducted from her hotel room . 
 After identifying Max 's body , Mulder finds that the wristwatches have been stolen from the other victims . He refutes the NTSB 's official explanation of malfunction as a cause of the crash , and is doubtful that the true cause will be found unless they discern what happened during the nine minutes of missing time . The agents visit Sergeant Louis Frish ( Tom O 'Brien ) , an air traffic controller from the U.S. Air Force who was on duty during the crash . Frish denies anything unusual happened . However , after the agents leave , Frish and a colleague argue over whether to reveal the " truth " about Flight 549 's demise . 
 After finding Sharon 's trashed hotel room , Mulder meets with Millar , who tells him that the door was pulled off the plane from the outside while it was in flight . Later , Frish finds his colleague dead from a faked suicide . A group of commandos arrive to capture Frish , but he escapes . Frish goes to see Mulder and Scully , telling them that he lied before and that his commanding officer had ordered him to track the plane 's coordinates as it was being intercepted by a second aircraft . Seconds later , there was an explosion and the plane disappeared from his radar . Mulder believes that a third aircraft , a UFO , approached the plane and was destroyed by the second aircraft , also causing the Flight 549 crash . The agents leave with Frish and are soon chased by the commandos . Meanwhile , Millar returns to the crash site and encounters a UFO . He finds Sharon nearby , having just been returned by her abductors . 
 Scully returns to Washington with Frish while Mulder heads to Great Sacandaga Lake , searching for the crashed UFO . Scully brings Frish to a local bar where they run into fellow FBI agent Pendrell ( Brendan Beiser ) . The Man in Black soon enters the bar seeking to kill Frish , accidentally shooting Pendrell instead . Meanwhile , Mulder arrives at the lake where he finds a team of men already searching for the crashed UFO . He dives underwater and finds the craft , including an alien body . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 During the production of the third season , special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier constructed an elaborate mock @-@ up of a Boeing 737 airplane in order to be able to simulate a crash . Series creator Chris Carter decided to make use of this rig during the fourth season . When conceiving of the episode , the desire to add to Fox Mulder 's emotional involvement by having someone he knew on board led to the writers bringing back the character of Max Fenig to be that person . 
 Scott Bellis , who had previously portrayed Fenig in the first season episode " Fallen Angel " , had auditioned for other roles on the show in the interim , but had always been rejected by the producers because his character was felt to be too memorable . Bellis met series star David Duchovny at a gym several times , and learnt from him that the character of Max was being considered for a two @-@ part episode . The episode 's co @-@ writer Frank Spotnitz did not want to have Fenig 's appearance " milked " or do something the show had already done . As such he came up with the idea to kill off Fenig in the first part of the episode , which he felt was " a bold choice " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Gauthier 's 737 rig — which required 400 U.S. gallons ( 1 @,@ 500 L ) of hydraulic fluid to construct — was designed to move across multiple axes in order to better simulate turbulence ; it could rotate 22 degrees each way about its length , and move four feet to either side . The fuselage could be opened up at intervals every 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) to better allow cameras to record inside it . The show 's producers wanted the plane crash site and investigation to be as authentic as possible , so they used a National Transportation Safety Board official to act as their technical advisor on the episode to ensure that everything was properly recreated . The NTSB officials noted that the site was authentic in every way " except for the smell " ; Carter has noted that this level of verisimilitude left some of the crew members " frightened by their work " . Director Rob Bowman admitted that the episode exceeded its given budget , noting that Carter would often defend him from Fox studio officials angry at his production costs . Bellis ' abduction scene , in which his character is levitated through the door of the airplane , was achieved by pulling the actor out of the airplane rig with a harness ; additional coverage was achieved by repeating this with a stuntman , who Bellis notes was pulled out of the rig " a lot harder " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Tempus Fugit " premiered on the Fox network on March 16 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 14 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 9 with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 18 @.@ 85 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , rated " Tempus Fugit " an A − . Handlen praised the effectiveness of the cold open , and noted the episode highlighted how " particularly ruthless " the series was with its recurring cast , noting " the mortality rate helps to create a mood of ever @-@ encroaching doom , as if the darkness that seems about to swallow Mulder and Scully in so many scenes ... is as much symbolic as it is literal " . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Tempus Fugit " two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , describing it as " gripping " with " lots of action " . However , Vitaris felt that the fleeting use of guest star Scott Bellis was " a waste " , and that the discovery of an alien corpse towards the end " robs this story of any ambiguity " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , calling it " the best conspiracy episode we 've seen in nearly two years " . Shearman and <unk> felt that " Tempus Fugit " was " told very clearly , with remarkably little baggage " , and praised the acting of guests Tom O 'Brien and Joe Spano . Twelve members of the show 's post @-@ production crew won the 1997 Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series for their work on this episode ; while four others received a nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series . 
 = Pain in My Heart = 
 Pain in My Heart is the debut album of soul singer @-@ songwriter Otis Redding . Redding recorded for Volt Records , a subsidiary of Stax Records , based in Memphis , Tennessee . Volt LPs were initially issued on the Atco label , which released this album ( the singles were issued on the Volt label ) . 
 The album includes four successful singles , released in 1962 and 1963 : " These Arms of Mine " , " That 's What My Heart Needs " , " Security " , and the title track . Since Billboard did not publish an R & B singles chart from late 1963 to early 1965 , the R & B chart peaks of the latter two singles are unknown . 
 = = Biography = = 
 As a member of the Pat T. Cake and the Mighty Panthers , Redding toured in the Southern United States , mostly on the chitlin ' circuit , a string of nightclubs and dance halls hospitable to African @-@ American musicians when racial segregation of performance venues was prevalent . Guitarist Johnny Jenkins , who helped Redding win a talent contest at the Hillview Springs Social Club 15 times in row and also at the talent show " The Teenage Party " , left the band to become a featured artist with the Pinetoppers . Around this time , Redding met Phil Walden , the future founder of the recording company Phil Walden and Associates ( even though without an associate ) , and later Bobby Smith , who ran Confederate Records , a small label . He signed with Confederate and recorded his second single , " Shout Bamalama " ( a rewrite of his " Gamma Lamma " ) , with his band Otis and the Shooters . Wayne Cochran , the only solo artist signed to Confederate , became the Pinetoppers ' bass guitarist . 
 At the same time , Walden started to look for a record label . Atlantic Records representative Joe Galkin was interested in working with Jenkins and around 1962 proposed to send him to the Stax studio in Memphis . On the way to a Pinetoppers studio session , Redding drove for Jenkins , as the latter did not have a driver 's license . Jenkins performed with Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , and when the session ended early , Redding received the opportunity to perform two songs . The first was " Hey Hey Baby " , but studio chief Jim Stewart thought it sounded too much like Little Richard . Next , he sang " These Arms of Mine " , which became his first single for Stax . After that performance , Redding was signed by Stax . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 Pain in My Heart includes songs from Redding 's 1962 – 1963 sessions . Stewart signed Redding for Stax and released Redding 's debut single , " These Arms of Mine " , with " Hey Hey Baby " on the B @-@ side . " These Arms of Mine " was released by Volt , a subsidiary of Stax , in October 1962 , and charted in March the following year . It was one of his most successful songs , selling more than 800 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the 1963 session , " That 's What My Heart Needs " and " Mary 's Little Lamb " were recorded and cut in June 1963 ; the latter became one of the worst @-@ selling singles by Redding . Rob Bowman , in his book <unk> , U.S.A. : The Story of Stax Records , wrote that in these two songs " Otis sings with a harsh , impassioned gospel voice reminiscent of Archie Brownlee of the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi " and further reckoned the ending of the first would have made Redding " a <unk> gospel singer had he chosen to record in that idiom . " " That 's What My Heart Needs " became Redding 's second single on Stax . 
 The title track , recorded on September , the next year , sparked some copyright issues , as it sounded like Irma Thomas 's " Ruler of My Heart " . After a few months , " Pain in My Heart " , with the B @-@ side " Something Is Worrying Me " , peaked at number 60 on Billboard 's Hot 100 chart . Rob Bowman observed that " with ' Pain in My Heart , ' Otis 's dynamic control is front and center as he uses his voice as a horn , swelling and decreasing in volume , swallowing syllables and worrying the word ' heart . ' ... It was Otis 's most successful effort to date , commercially and aesthetically . " 
 The last single , " Security " , was released in April 1964 and reached number 97 on Billboard 's Hot 100 chart . According to Matthew Greenwald of Allmusic , the song is " a stinging , up @-@ tempo <unk> " and " showed Otis Redding stretching his funky rock & roll roots . Aided by the usual gang of Stax musicians , it 's one of his tightest early records .... [ T ] he song could have easily succeeded as an instrumental . " 
 The other tracks on the album are covers of popular songs , including " The Dog " , by Rufus Thomas ; " Louie Louie " , by Richard Berry ; " Lucille " , by Little Richard ; and " Stand by Me " , by Ben E. King . 
 Despite the alleged copyright infringement , Pain in My Heart was released on Atlantic Records ' subsidiary Atco Records on January 1 , 1964 , and peaked at number 20 on Billboard 's R & B chart and at number 85 on Billboard 's Hot 100 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pain in My Heart received positive critical reception . Bruce Eder of Allmusic gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , reckoning that the album " was practically a road map to Mick Jagger and any number of other would @-@ be white soul <unk> in the UK " , and finding elements of hard rock in " Hey Hey Baby " . He praised Redding 's version of " You Send Me " , considering it " the least stylized of any of his renditions of [ Sam ] Cooke 's songs " , but criticized Redding 's restraint , compared to future recordings , and the " somewhat less than memorable " writing , except on " Security " , " These Arms of Mine " and " That 's What My Heart Needs " . The reviewer concluded by saying " Redding exudes astonishing power , energy and boldness " . 
 A review of several albums by Redding in Rolling Stone magazine observed that " [ t ] he title track on [ Pain in My Heart ] set the pattern for all his ballads to come — Otis triumphed at rendering agony . Signs of the singer 's virtuosity are already apparent in the almost teasing way he lingers over some lyrics and spits out others ; virtually never would he sing a line the same way twice " . The review gave the album 4 out of 5 stars . 
 When Redding performed " These Arms of Mine " during his first session at Stax , <unk> Jenkins on guitar and Steve Cropper on piano , producer Jim Stewart praised his performance and noted , " Everybody was fixin ' to go home , but Joe Galkin insisted we give Otis a listen . There was something different about [ the ballad ] . He really poured his soul into it . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Musicians = = 
 Otis Redding - vocals 
 Booker T. Jones - keyboards , organ , piano 
 Isaac Hayes - keyboards , piano 
 Steve Cropper - guitar , keyboards , piano 
 Donald Dunn - bass 
 Al Jackson , Jr . - drums 
 Johnny Jenkins - guitar 
 Lewis Steinberg - bass 
 Wayne Jackson - trumpet 
 Charles Axton - tenor sax 
 Floyd Newman - baritone sax 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Southampton town walls = 
 Southampton 's town walls are a sequence of defensive structures built around the town in southern England . Although earlier Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon settlements around Southampton had been fortified with walls or ditches , the later walls originate with the move of the town to the current site in the 10th century . This new town was defended by banks , ditches and the natural curve of the river and coastline . The Normans built a castle in Southampton but made no attempts to improve the wider defences of the town until the early 13th century , when Southampton 's growing prosperity as a trading centre and conflict with France encouraged the construction of a number of gatehouses and stone walls to the north and east sides of the settlement . 
 In 1338 Southampton was raided by French forces ; the town 's defences proved inadequate , particularly along the quays on the west and south of the city . Edward III ordered some immediate improvements to Southampton 's town walls but it was not until the 1360s that substantial work began . Over the coming decades the town was entirely enclosed by a 2 km ( 1 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ) long stone wall , with 29 towers and eight gates . With the advent of gunpowder weapons in the 1360s and 1370s , Southampton was one of the first towns in England to install the new technology to existing fortifications and to build new towers specifically to house cannon . 
 Southampton 's town walls remained an important defensive feature during the 15th century , the gatehouses sometimes being used as important civic facilities , including acting as the town 's guildhall and housing the town 's gaol . From the end of the 17th century their importance steadily declined and the walls were slowly demolished or adapted for other uses throughout the 18th and 19th centuries . This process continued into the early 20th century until , in the post @-@ war years , the walls were recognised as an important historical feature of Southampton . Conservation projects have since occurred and the walls are now promoted as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1st – 10th centuries = = = 
 Several earlier settlements were built near modern Southampton featuring protective town walls . Following the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43 the fortress settlement of Clausentum was established . It was an important trading port and a defensive outpost for the town of Winchester , located on the site of Bitterne Manor , today a suburb of modern Southampton . Clausentum was defended on its eastern , landwards side by a flint stone wall and two ditches . After the fall of the Roman Empire , in the 7th and 8th centuries the Anglo @-@ Saxons built a planned settlement called Hamwic , close to the current location of Southampton , approximately on the location of the later St Mary 's church . At least some parts of this burh town had a ditch dug around it , 3 m ( 10 feet ) wide and 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 feet ) deep , and possibly was defended by a bank of earth . In the 10th century , Viking raids prompted the settlement of Southampton to move to its current location . 
 = = = 11th – 13th centuries = = = 
 By the time that the Normans conquered England in 1066 , the town of Southampton occupied a rectangular area overlooking the mouth of the River Test , an important medieval waterway . It was protected by water on most sides and by protective ditches and banks to the north and east . Southampton at this time was a relatively large town , but not as significant as in the later medieval period . The Normans built a castle within the town on the site of a probable large English hall , and considerable damage was caused to the surrounding local buildings as space was opened up for the new fortification . 
 During the years of the Anarchy , in which the Empress Matilda and Stephen fought for control of England , Southampton was held by William le Gros , the Bishop of Winchester and a supporter of Stephen . When Henry II came to the throne in 1153 , he took back Southampton and carried out improvements to the castle , as part of his attempt to improve the general standard of security in the south . By the second half of the 12th century , Southampton was increasingly important for coastal defence and as a base for operations on the continent . Following the threat of French invasion in the 1170s , Henry II invested modest additional resources in the castle , but no efforts were undertaken to improve the town 's ditches and banks . 
 By the 12th century , Southampton was an important trading port with trade routes to Normandy , the Levant and Gascony . Both the town and castle played an important role in this trade , in part forming a warehouse for the king 's imports , this process being managed by a Crown Bailiff . The former castle hall was turned into a subterranean vault in the 13th century , probably for storing wine . Stone houses , often combining accommodation and storage facilities , began to be built in Southampton by the wealthiest merchants , particularly in the prosperous western and southern parts of the town , but these properties could not be easily defended against attack . 
 The English Channel was contested militarily between England and France during the 13th century , and Southampton was both an important base for naval operations and a tempting target for raiders . At the start of the 13th century additional work was therefore conducted to improve the town 's defences ; the king granted £ 100 in 1202 and again in 1203 to help develop the earth banks around the town . By 1217 East Gate had been built , probably of stone . In 1260 a murage grant was given to Southampton by Edward I , allowing the town to tax selected imports to build and maintain new stone walls ; these initial murage grants ran from 1260 to 1275 and were then renewed between 1282 and 1285 and from 1286 to 1291 . By the end of this work , many of the earth banks in the north and east of the town had been converted to stone . There appears to have been little interest in defending the west and south quays , however , probably because doing so would have hampered Southampton 's merchants when they moved their trading goods in and out of the town . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 By 1300 , Southampton was a major port and a large provincial town , with a population of around 5 @,@ 000 . The raising of money through murage grants began again in 1321 , possibly paying for the stone towers of the Bargate and some of the semi @-@ circular wall towers . Work also appears to have begun on some stone walling to the south and west of the town , construction may have begun at the South Gate and a wooden barbican was constructed near the western docks . Later investigations by the Crown would suggest that some of the monies raised in these murage grants had been misspent , however , contributing to the poor standard of town defences , which included large gaps in the walled circuit . 
 In 1338 there was a successful French attack on Southampton : the town 's defences , particularly in the west , proved quite inadequate and the French succeeded in burning numerous buildings down , particularly along the western quays , and damaging the castle . Edward III responded to the raid by taking immediate steps to shore up Southampton 's defences and ordering the town to be fully enclosed by stone walls . In 1339 the sheriff conscripted workmen and specialists to improve the defences , and money to pay for the building materials was raised by commuting the prison sentence of a senior official in Southampton to a fine . <unk> grants were reinstated in 1345 , but the economy of Southampton had been temporarily devastated by the raids and indeed never fully recovered . The king 's instructions to fully enclose the town with walls could not be carried out . Nonetheless , by the 1350s , Southampton had mounted mangonel and <unk> siege engines on the existing walls . 
 In 1360 the king conducted an inquiry into Southampton 's defences and in 1363 he established a wider commission to examine how best to improve them . The commission came to a number of conclusions : the town walls should be better maintained and kept clear of housing and other obstructions ; the number of gateways in the walls should be reduced ; and a water @-@ filled ditch should be built to further reinforce the walls on the west . The enquiry also concluded that the outer doors and ground floor windows of properties facing the sea should be filled in to form a more defensible line . 
 The resulting work on Southampton 's defences resulted in considerable improvements : by the late 14th century , the town was completely encircled by 2 km ( 1 @.@ 25 miles ) of stone walls . Some existing buildings , including a dovecote , were reinforced and pressed into service as part of the defences . South Gate was built to protect the southern quays , with a wide archway , complete with parapets and machicolations . The building work proved very expensive , however , and despite the mayor and bailiffs enforcing contributions and assistance from the citizens , Parliament had to be asked several times in the 1370s to assist by remitting arrears of taxes owed by Southampton . 
 In 1370 the French made a successful attack on Portsmouth , commencing a new sequence of raids along the English coast . In due course first Edward , then Richard II , responded by improving the defences in the south of England . Part of this involved improving the condition of Southampton Castle , where , owing in part to the theft of building materials , including stone and lead , by the citizens of the town , the defences were in a poor condition . Henry Yevele , who oversaw the improvements to the castle , probably also constructed the Arcades along the western walls in 1380 : this involved adopting the 1360 proposal to block up the properties along the western quay to form a solid wall , and adding three towers and gunports . Sir John Sondes and John Polymond were appointed by the king in 1386 to further improve the town walls , working with Sir John Arundel , the castle governor – Polymond and Arundel Towers were probably named after these men around this time . 
 One of the major changes from the 1370s onwards was the adaptation of the town walls to mount gunpowder weapons . At this time cannon were still unreliable , only capable of reaching relatively short ranges and required the construction of specialist gunports . Cannons fired stone cannonballs , which did relatively little damage to stronger stone walls , and so were primarily used in defence of fortifications rather than as an offensive weapon by besiegers . The first gunports in Britain were installed in the 1360s on the Isle of Wight , but Southampton was not far behind . Around 1378 to 1379 the ongoing French threat led to gunports for handguns being built into the western Arcade wall , and by 1382 the town bought its own gun . God 's House Tower was built to defend the southern quays around 1417 and the sluices that controlled the level of the town 's moats , and equipped with numerous gunports rooftop firing points , and by 1439 Catchcold tower had also been constructed , again designed to accommodate gunpowder weapons . 
 Another change in the 1370s was the formalisation of the process of guarding and maintaining the walls . During the invasion scare of 1377 , Edward instructed the mayor to review these processes ; it appears that the four wards of the town were surveyed , and each property was assigned a piece of the wall to maintain , varying according to the size of the property . For these purposes , the walls were measured out in units called <unk> , or embrasures . The four wards were also responsible for the security and policing of the town . 
 = = = 15th – 16th centuries = = = 
 The threat of French attack continued throughout the 15th century . Instead of relying on murage grants , more funds for the town walls were directly granted by the king in 1400 , including an ongoing annual grant of £ 100 . Concerns increased significantly after the invasion scare of 1457 , when French troops successfully attacked the town of Sandwich on the south coast . Indeed , the guns on Southampton 's walls were fired at French raiding ships the same year . The walls continued to be maintained for the rest of the century , with £ 40 being allocated annually between 1478 and 1485 for this purpose . By contrast , the castle fell into a rapid decline and its inner bailey became used first as a rubbish tip , then for small @-@ scale agriculture . 
 Nonetheless , a report on the quality of the walls around 1460 noted that on the north and east sides of Southampton , the walls were still too thin to block a cannon shot or for a man to stand on them ; a wood and earth wall @-@ walk had been built behind the walls , but this was proving very expensive to maintain . This contemporary assessment of the weakness of the eastern walls has been confirmed by modern archaeological excavation – in places it was only 0 @.@ 76 m ( 2 @.@ 49 feet ) thick , compared to a typical thickness in other English town walls of around 1 m ( 3 @.@ 28 feet ) . 
 A survey in 1454 , undertaken against the background of another French invasion scare , shows that the 1377 system for maintaining the walls was still in operation . A town gunner had also been appointed by the 15th century , earning the highest salary of any local official and was responsible for maintaining the guns and manufacturing gunpowder . As late as the mid @-@ 16th century , additional improved rectangular gunports , similar to those on the Device Forts along the Channel , were added to the West Gate by the quays . 
 Several of the gatehouses played an important part in the administration of the town in the 15th century . South Gate formed the main administrative centre for the port during the period , housing the Clerk of the King 's Ships and collecting customs revenue . It was expanded in the 1430s and 1440s , but was in poor condition again by the 1480s , resulting in fresh construction work around the site . Bargate was partially used as a prison from the 15th century , in a similar fashion to many other towns . The first floor of the building had been used as the town 's guildhall from at least 1441 onwards , and the treasury was kept in one of the towers . Elaborate feasts were served there on special occasions . 
 = = = 17th – 20th centuries = = = 
 The town walls became less important for defence in the 17th century , although in 1633 , a footpath was built around the inside of the wall to help the watch and other law officers better pursue vagrants and criminals . The walls fared better than Southampton Castle , which was sold off to property speculators in 1618 , but they played no part in the English Civil War . Some of the masonry from the castle was reused to strengthen the town walls in 1650 during the Third English Civil War . 
 In the 18th century onwards the town walls were often adapted for new uses or simply demolished . As early as 1641 , the chapel above East Gate had been leased out to private tenants . By 1707 , part of God 's House tower was being used as a prison ; from 1786 it became the official town gaol . As the century progressed , East Gate was demolished in 1774 , South Gate was mostly demolished in 1803 and Biddles Gate shortly afterwards , along with large sections of adjacent wall . 
 As the 19th century progressed , the destruction and remodelling of the town walls continued . The upper stories of Polymond Tower were demolished in the 1820s , to be rebuilt by 1846 as a shorter , two @-@ storey tower . The remains of the South Gate were turned into a hotel . God 's House tower continued to be used as a gaol , but was criticised by inspectors . An 1823 report described it as an " old and very awkward " facility , containing around a dozen prisoners in damp conditions , and where it was hard to separate the male and female prisoners in an appropriate fashion . In 1855 its role as a gaol was concluded , and the building fell into disuse . 
 In other areas , civic improvements were attempted . In 1853 the " Forty Steps " were built down the side of the west walls to make access to the town easier . Parts of the Arcades were blocked up to prevent homeless people from sleeping under the arches and disturbing the neighbourhood . The Bargate ceased to be used as the guildhall in 1888 and was heavily restored by the town in what was felt to be a more consistent medieval style . 
 The urban growth of Southampton , as in many English walled towns and cities , put considerable pressure on the older fortifications . In 1898 to 1899 , for example , parts of the wall west of Biddles Gate , including a square tower , were demolished to create the Western Esplanade road . By the second half of the century , the Bargate and the surrounding walls were creating serious traffic congestion ; various options were considered to relieve this including demolition , but it was not until the 1930s that the decision was made to retain the gatehouse , but to destroy the walls on either side . 
 Some parts of the Southampton walls were used to mount searchlights and machineguns on during the Second World War ; the walls escaped damage , unlike many other areas of the medieval city . In the post @-@ war period the historic importance of the town walls was recognised and considerable conservation work has been conducted on the walls , including reversing the Victorian alterations to the Arcades . The town walls became seen as an important part of Southampton 's tourist industry ; health and safety concerns , however , prohibit tourists walking along most of the circuit . God 's House tower reopened in 1961 opened as Southampton 's Museum of Archaeology . Today the walls are protected as grade I listed buildings and as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Around half the length of the 2 km ( 1 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ) long medieval town walls still survives in the 21st century , mainly on the north and west sides of Southampton , together with 13 of the 29 defensive towers and six out of the eight gates . The towers are a combination of circular and square designs , with many showing an " open @-@ gorged " design , similar to those built in North Wales , that could be isolated from the rest of the walls by removing small wooden bridges . In general the town walls at Southampton were poorly built in a somewhat chaotic fashion over several years . By contrast , the surviving gatehouses are sophisticated and well designed , probably as a result of their civic importance . Historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham describe the surviving walls as " extremely well preserved " and containing " unique survivals in a British context " . 
 In the south @-@ east corner of the walls is God 's House tower . This is architecturally important as it was one of the first urban buildings to be built to hold gunpowder artillery – in this respect , it closely resembles Cow Tower in Norwich . The tower was built alongside God 's House Gate and is three storeys high . The gunports designed for <unk> can be seen on the outside , and the roof was designed to hold larger cannon . Adjacent to the tower is God 's House Gate , a two @-@ storey building also equipped with a gun @-@ port . 
 Little remains of the eastern walls , but in the north @-@ east corner several towers still remain largely intact , including Polymond tower , a powerful drum tower largely reconstructed during the Victorian period . Further west is the Bargate ; this was originally a simple archway but was expanded with drum towers and arrow slits in the early 14th century , and then expanded again in the early 15th century with battlements and parapets , before being heavily restored in the 19th century . The Bargate remains an elaborate building , taking military symbolism and combining it with rich civic heraldry and decoration above the gateway . 
 At the north @-@ west corner of the walls stands Arundel tower , another large drum tower that originally overlooked a small cliff . South of this is Catchcold tower . Catchcold tower was designed to be defended with guns and has three gunports ; the need to support cannon leaves it much heavier in appearance than the other circular towers on the walls . The remains of machine gun mountings fitted to the tower in 1941 can still be seen . The Arcades form part of the surviving west walls and are a unique feature in England ; their closest architectural equivalent are in Rouen , France . The West Gate still stands three storeys high and was originally defended by two portcullises ; the windows on the west side of the gate are the original medieval designs . Along the south side of the walls one of the twin towers protecting the South Gate still stands , largely intact . 
 = Peter 's Two Dads = 
 " Peter 's Two Dads " is the tenth episode of the fifth season of Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox on February 11 , 2007 . The plot follows Peter traveling to Ireland to find his biological father , after he accidentally kills his stepfather at his daughter 's birthday party . Meanwhile , Stewie undergoes a phase of selfishness , believing everything belongs to him . This results in Lois spanking him , which makes him realize he is a masochist . Also , Meg turns 17 in the episode . 
 The episode was written by Danny Smith and directed by Cyndi Tang , with Greg Lovell as co @-@ director . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 97 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Dan Conroy , Phyllis Diller , Charles Durning and Fred Tatasciore . It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics , for the episode 's song entitled " Drunken Irish Dad " , at the 59th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Meg asks Lois and Peter if she can have a birthday party , preferably a teenager @-@ type party with a band playing at her house . Unfortunately , Peter and Lois don 't even know how old Meg is going to be . They have bought sixteen candles , but Meg overreacts when telling them that she is turning seventeen years old , and calls them jerks . Meg notices that her birthday party is kiddie @-@ type , with games such as Pin the Tail on the Donkey . At the party , Peter dresses up as " Pee Pants the Inebriated Hobo Clown " , " an adorable tramp who wears found clothing and eats out of your garbage can " . Peter then tells Meg that he got her a scarf for her birthday . Meg declines , while Peter then says he got her " a dozen scarves " which Peter then proceeds to regurgitate as one long scarf , as he has actually tied and swallowed them ( which Lois says he was not supposed to do ) . This causes him to cough and vomit . Peter hands Meg the long scarf from his tongue , but Meg refuses to hold it . Peter then urges Meg to hold them , and then asks if his long johns are tied to the end of them . When Meg says they are not , Peter then says " Oh , god " and regurgitates them as well , and then crouches in pain following the ordeal . Meg asks Lois if she can open her gifts , and Meg notices Stewie opening most of them . Peter gets drunk , and attempts to ride a unicycle down the steps , but falls off and crushes his father , Francis , who later dies in the hospital from the accident . Just before Francis dies , he calls Peter " a fat stinking drunk " . 
 Peter is disappointed since Francis did not care about him – so he gives up drinking and does crack instead . Brian notices this , and tells Peter that crack is not a good substitute for drinking . As a result , Peter sees a hypnotherapist , who helps him discover that Francis was not his biological father . When Peter goes to his mom , Thelma Griffin , about it , she reveals that she had an affair with Irish man named Mickey <unk> and that Mickey is Peter 's biological father . 
 Brian and Peter travel to a village in Ireland to find Mickey , who they discover is the town drunk . At first horrified , Peter finds out it is considered an honorable position in Ireland by the locals . Mickey refuses to believe that Peter is his son and mocks him . When Peter sees the ghosts of Yoda , Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , Francis and Hayden Christensen , the first three call him a " fat stinking drunk " , Francis ' last words to Peter , which gives him an idea . In an attempt to persuade him , Peter challenges Mickey to a drinking contest , which Peter wins . During the contest , Peter and Mickey talk about American looks and diet in a drunk language . After the contest Mickey finally believes that Peter is his son , feeling that nobody but a member of his own family could beat him in something like a drinking contest . Although Peter 's excited to have formed a bond with his real father , Brian points out that while Francis may not have been Peter 's real father ( and obviously wasn 't the nicest person ever ) , he did raise Peter like he was his own son , showing that deep down , Francis really did love Peter . After Mickey says " So what ? " to Peter 's statement , " You knocked up my mom and never called her again . " Peter says " So what ? So let 's dance ! " . Peter , Mickey and the Irish crowd enter dancing and singing to " Drunken Irish Dad . " During the last few seconds of the dance , Mickey states that the Irish do not tan well . 
 = = = Subplot = = = 
 Lois spanks Stewie while going through his " it 's mine " phase , claiming everything in the house as his own . At first he is traumatized by the ordeal , but he soon comes to realize that he likes the adrenaline rush that he gets from them , and starts deliberately misbehaving in the hope that Lois will hurt him again , but fails yet realizing he has a problem . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode marks the third appearance of Francis Griffin . As of now , episode writer and series co @-@ executive producer Danny Smith has written all Family Guy episodes to date to feature Francis when he was alive . Show creator Seth MacFarlane comments that the episode came together and played great from start to finish . Prior to the making of the episode , there had been several different ideas and disagreements for Peter 's father 's appearance . MacFarlane comments that he had always pictured Peter 's father to be a fat , drunk leprechaun . The negativity of Francis was becoming " dull to write for " , hence the storyline of Peter finding his biological father . MacFarlane also mentions not having ideas to write for Kevin , Joe Swanson 's son , who was mentioned in a later episode that he died in the war of Iraq ( Stew @-@ Roids ) . A deleted scene showed Peter pretending to quit drinking , but continuing quietly was one of several scenes that was removed from airing as it and the others were described by the producers to be " not going anywhere . " 
 The scene with Peter in the hypnotherapist 's office was censored from television , as Peter discusses his genitals and reproductive organs . When Peter comes to the realization that Francis is not his real father and when Stewie dreams about being tortured by Lois , a harp sound can be heard ; MacFarlane comments that even small things like that take a lot of work to produce . The alcohol bottles being pushed by the airplane that Peter and Brian are traveling on were animated by computer , as is the taxi driving along the street . On the DVD commentary , MacFarlane notes that the scene would not have looked good without computer aid . He said it makes the animations seem more realistic than without a computer . The two men circling each other for fifty years and waiting for the other to throw the first punch was not broadcast for television . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Dan Conroy , actress Phyllis Diller , actor Charles Durning , and voice actor Fred Tatasciore guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Alex Breckenridge , Chris Cox , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Stewie draws a picture of David Tua on the wall to try to get Lois to hit him . It also mocks the main character 's decisions in Pet <unk> when Peter buried Francis ' body at the same cemetery to resurrect him , but decided against it after Francis , as a zombie , jumped out of the grave in a jump scare , remarking " Okay , maybe I 'll bury him in a regular cemetery . " Peter briefly transforms into Wonder Woman after discovering his biological father is not Francis : this is a reference to Wonder Woman , and although the show could not receive rights to reproduce the original music , the scene was still broadcast . Before Peter and Brian leave to Ireland , Meg tells Peter she loves him , in which he replies , " That 'll do pig , that 'll do " , which is a reference to the film Babe . When Francis showed up as a ghost along with Yoda and Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , Hayden Christensen said " And I 'm Hayden Christensen " , as a reference to the ending of Return of the Jedi in the remastered DVD . The song Chris and Herbert sing at the party and up in a tree is " Friends and Lovers " by Gloria Loring and Carl Anderson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 97 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 2 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , being slightly edged out by The Simpsons , while still winning over American Dad ! . 
 A reviewer from <unk> commented that " when I checked the schedule and saw the title of this episode was ' Peter 's Two Dads ' , I was a little torn . First , the Peter @-@ centric episodes generally have a much higher chance of going off the rails , " following on to comment that " the episode that we did see still left me with something of a mixed reaction . " concluding with a positive comment that the episode " was well constructed . " 
 IGN 's Ahsan Haque noted that " despite a couple of underdeveloped plotlines and an overabundance of offensive and uncomfortable jokes , this week 's episode of Family Guy somehow manages to succeed with just enough truly hilarious moments and actual story elements . " MacFarlane has said that this is one of his favorite episodes , alongside " PTV " and " Road to Rhode Island . " 
 = Black mamba = 
 The black mamba ( Dendroaspis polylepis ) is a large and extremely venomous snake endemic to parts of sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Specimens vary in color from grey to dark brown , but not black . Juvenile black mambas tend to be lighter in color than adults and darken with age . It is the longest species of venomous snake indigenous to the African continent ; mature specimens generally exceed 2 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) and commonly attain 3 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Specimens of 4 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 5 meters ( 14 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 8 ft ) have been reported . 
 Although most mamba species are tree @-@ dwelling snakes , the black mamba is not generally arboreal , preferring lairs in terrestrial habitats in a range of terrains . These include savannah , woodlands , rocky slopes and in some regions dense forest . It is diurnal and chiefly an ambush predator , known to prey on hyrax , bushbabies and other small mammals as well as birds . It is also a pursuit predator ; in this it resembles some other long , speedy , highly @-@ venomous species with well @-@ developed vision . Over suitable surfaces it is possibly the speediest species of snake , capable of at least 11 km / h ( 6 @.@ 8 mph ) over short distances . Adult mambas have few natural predators . 
 In a threat display , the mamba usually opens its inky black mouth , spreads its narrow neck @-@ flap and sometimes hisses . It is capable of striking at considerable range and occasionally may deliver a series of bites in rapid succession . Its venom is primarily composed of potent neurotoxins which may cause fast onset of symptoms . Despite its reputation for being formidable and highly aggressive , like most snakes , it usually attempts to flee from humans unless threatened or cornered . Not being proximal to humans , bites from the black mamba are not frequent . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The black mamba is the species Dendroaspis polylepis in the genus Dendroaspis of the family Elapidae . The first formal description was by Albert Günther in 1864 . Although it had been known previously to missionaries and residents by the name " mamba " . Which was already established in the vernacular , presumably borrowed from the Zulu language . In 1873 , Wilhelm Peters described two subspecies : the <unk> <unk> polylepis and also <unk> <unk> . However , these are no longer held to be distinct . In 1896 , Boulenger combined the species ( Dendroaspis polylepis ) as a whole with the eastern green mamba ( Dendroaspis angusticeps ) , a lumping diagnosis that remained in force until 1946 , when FitzSimons split them into separate species again . 
 The generic name , Dendroaspis , derives from Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " tree " , and aspis ( ασπίς ) , which is understood to mean " shield " , but also denotes " cobra " or simply " snake " , in particular " snake with hood ( shield ) " . Via Latin aspis , it is the source of the English word " asp " . In ancient texts , aspis or asp often referred to the Egyptian cobra ( Naja haje ) , in reference to its shield @-@ like hood . Thus , " Dendroaspis " literally means tree asp , reflecting the arboreal nature of most of the species within the genus . 
 The specific epithet polylepis is derived from the Ancient Greek poly meaning " many " and lepis meaning " scale " . It apparently refers to the scale count of this species , which is higher than some other species in the genus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dendroaspis polylepis is a large , round @-@ bodied , slender , but powerful snake . It tapers smoothly towards the tail , but is of markedly more robust build than its distinctly gracile congeners Dendroaspis angusticeps and Dendroaspis viridis . The head is often said to be " coffin @-@ shaped " with a somewhat pronounced brow ridge and a medium @-@ sized eye . It is a highly <unk> snake , with fangs up to 6 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 26 in ) in length located at the front of the maxilla . The adult snake 's length ranges from 2 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) to 3 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) routinely but , according to some sources , specimens have grown to lengths of 4 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 5 meters ( 14 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 8 ft ) . Black mambas weigh about 1 @.@ 6 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 5 lb ) on average . A specimen of 1 @.@ 41 meters ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) was found to have weighed 651 @.@ 7 g ( 1 @.@ 437 lb ) . Dendroaspis polylepis is the second longest venomous snake species , exceeded in length only by the king cobra . 
 In spite of its common name , the black mamba is not actually black ; in fact the interior of the snake 's mouth is its only conspicuously black feature . Specimens vary considerably in color ; some are olive @-@ brown to khaki , many are grey , and some individuals display dark mottling towards the posterior . Such mottling may appear in the form of oblique bars . The underbody is often pale yellow or cream colored and the eyes are dark brown to black with a silver or pale yellow corona surrounding the pupil . Juvenile snakes are lighter in color than adults , typically grey or olive green in appearance , and they darken with age . 
 The " black " mamba has been said to take its name from the color of the inside of its mouth , but this claim is an urban legend , a <unk> that lacks objective or historical support . In particular , it was referred to as the " black mamba " decades before knowledge of the color of its oral mucosa was in common circulation . Common names for mambas are to be taken no more seriously than any other common names , and we find for example that attempts to impose the more logical common name " common mamba " for the " black mamba " , which after all is not black , have been abandoned in favor of applying " common mamba " to the Eastern green mamba , Dendroaspis angusticeps . In the mean time , since the late twentieth century , some authors have unquestioningly copied the claim that the name derived from the color of its open mouth . 
 = = = Scalation = = = 
 Like most Elapidae , the scales of the black mamba are smooth and flat , without keels . Most specimens feature 23 – 25 rows of scales , but rarely as few as 21 . 
 The head , body and tail scalation of the black mamba : 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black mamba has a wide and fragmented range within sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Specifically , it has been observed in : north east Democratic Republic of the Congo , south western Sudan to Ethiopia , Eritrea , Somalia , Kenya , eastern Uganda , Tanzania , Burundi , Rwanda , southwards to Mozambique , Swaziland , Malawi , Zambia , Zimbabwe and Botswana to KwaZulu @-@ Natal in South Africa , and Namibia ; then north easterly through Angola to south eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo . The black mamba 's distribution contains gaps within the Central African Republic , Chad , Nigeria and Mali . These gaps may lead physicians to misidentify black mamba bites and administer an inappropriate antivenom . 
 The black mamba was also recorded in 1954 in West Africa , in the Dakar region of Senegal . However , this observation , and a subsequent observation that identified a second specimen in the region in 1956 , has not been confirmed and thus the snake 's distribution in this area is inconclusive . The black mamba is not commonly found at altitudes above 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , although its distribution does reach 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) in Kenya and 1 @,@ 650 metres ( 5 @,@ 410 ft ) in Zambia . 
 The black mamba is primarily terrestrial , but occasionally arboreal , especially where it occurs in forest . Typically it inhabits neglected areas of scrub , termite mounds , abandoned burrows and rock crevices . It is adapted to terrain ranging from savannah and woodland to rocky slopes and dense forests . The black mamba prefers moderately dry environments such as light woodland and scrub , rocky outcrops , and semi @-@ arid dry savannah , to dense forest or arid desert . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The black mamba is graceful but skittish and often unpredictable . It is agile and can move quickly . It is shy and secretive by nature and , like most snakes , avoids threats . In the wild , a black mamba seldom tolerates humans approaching more closely than about 40 meters . When confronted it can display great truculence and is likely to gape in a threat display , exposing its black mouth and flicking its tongue . It also is likely to form a hood by spreading its neck @-@ flap as cobras do . The mamba 's hood however , is narrower than that of a typical cobra . The threat display may be accompanied by audible hissing . 
 During the threat display , any sudden movement by the intruder may provoke the mamba into a series of rapid strikes leading to severe envenomation . Also , the size of the black mamba , plus its ability to raise its head well off the ground , enable it to launch as much as 40 % of its body length upwards , so that mamba bites in humans quite often are on the upper body , and correspondingly are likely to be difficult to treat . This behaviour also permits the snake to land a strike at unexpectedly long range . The black mamba 's reputed readiness to attack is often much exaggerated and usually is provoked by perceived threats , such as blocking its intended retreat , accidentally or otherwise . 
 = = = Speed = = = 
 For its slender body , the black mamba is deceptively powerful ; it is the fastest moving snake indigenous to Africa , and perhaps the fastest anywhere . It does however , move rather clumsily over soft sand , a surface to which it is not adapted . There have been many unrealistic stories concerning the black mamba 's speed , perhaps partly because the slender body exaggerates the impression of speed . These stories include the myth that it can outrun a galloping horse or a running human . On 23 April 1906 , on the Serengeti Plains , an intentionally provoked black mamba was recorded at a speed of 11 km / h ( 6 @.@ 8 mph ) , over a distance of 43 m ( 141 ft ) . A black mamba would almost certainly not be able to exceed 16 km / h ( 9 @.@ 9 mph ) , and like most reptiles it can maintain such relatively high speeds only for short distances . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The black mamba is diurnal and chiefly an ambush predator , though it has been recorded as hunting partly by pursuit , such as catching pigeons at a watering hole before they can gain sufficient height to escape . It usually goes hunting from a permanent lair , to which it will regularly return to providing that the hunting is good and it is not disturbed . It hunts mainly by sight and in doing so it commonly will raise much of its length well off the ground . The black mamba does not typically hold onto prey after biting , instead releasing its quarry and waiting for it to succumb to paralysis and die . This however depends on the type of prey ; for example , it typically will hold onto a bird till it stops struggling to escape . If prey attempts to escape or defend itself , the black mamba often may follow up its initial bite with a rapid series of strikes to incapacitate and quickly kill its prey . The snake has been known to prey on hyrax and rock hyrax , bushbabies , and bats . The black mamba has a potent digestive system and has been observed to digest prey fully within eight to ten hours . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Not many predators challenge an adult black mamba although it does face a few threats such as birds of prey , particularly snake eagles . Although all species of snake eagle commonly prey on snakes , there are two species in particular that do so with high frequency , including preying on black mambas . These are the black @-@ chested snake eagle ( Circaetus pectoralis ) and the brown snake eagle ( Circaetus cinereus ) . The Cape file snake ( <unk> capensis ) , which is apparently immune to all African snake venoms and preys on other snakes including venomous ones , is a common predator of black mambas ( limited only by the size it can swallow ) . <unk> which also are partially immune to venom , and are often quick enough to evade a bite , will sometimes tackle a black mamba for prey . Humans do not usually consume black mambas , but they often kill them out of fear . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Black mambas breed annually and mating occurs in the early spring , when male mambas locate a female by following her scent trail . After finding a potential mate the male will inspect the female by flicking his tongue over her entire body . As in other species of snakes and many other reptiles , fertilization is internal and the intromittent organs of the males are in the form of <unk> . Females lay clutches of eggs with an incubation period of some 80 to 90 days . Like most snakes female mambas are both oviparous and iteroparous . Egg @-@ laying typically occurs during the middle of summer and egg clutches range from 6 to 17 eggs . 
 During the mating season rival males may compete by wrestling , not by biting . Opponents attempt to subdue each other by intertwining their bodies and raising their heads high off the ground . Observers have on occasion mistaken such wrestling for mating . 
 Black mambas are generally solitary , but not strictly so ; as a rule they interact very little except in male rivalry during the mating season . However , black mambas are well known to share retreats occasionally , either with other mambas , or sometimes with other species of snakes . 
 In hatching , mambas break though the egg shell with an egg tooth and are born with fully developed venom glands ; capable of inflicting a potentially lethal bite minutes after birth . The body of the newly hatched snake contains the residues of the egg yolk , and assimilates them to sustain the young snake until it finds its first prey . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 There is little information available concerning the lifespan of wild black mambas , but the longest surviving captive example had a recorded lifespan of 11 years . It is possible that wild snakes may live significantly longer than this . 
 = = Venom = = 
 The venom of the black mamba is extremely toxic , commonly causing collapse in humans within 45 minutes or less from a single bite . Without effective antivenom therapy , death typically occurs in 7 – 15 hours . The venom is chiefly composed of neurotoxins , specifically <unk> . The black mamba is capable of striking at considerable range and occasionally may deliver a series of bites in rapid succession . Despite its reputation for being highly aggressive , like most snakes , it usually attempts to flee from humans unless threatened or cornered . 
 The black mamba 's venom is composed of neurotoxins ( <unk> ) and cardiotoxins as well as other toxins such as fasciculins . In an experiment , the most abundant toxin found in black mamba venom was observed to be able to kill a mouse in as little as 4 @.@ 5 minutes . Based on the murine median lethal dose ( LD50 ) values , the black mamba 's toxicity from all published sources is as follows : 
 ( SC ) subcutaneous ( most applicable to real bites ) : 0 @.@ 32 mg / kg , 0 @.@ 28 mg / kg . 
 ( IV ) intravenous : 0 @.@ 25 mg / kg , 0 @.@ 011 mg / kg . 
 ( IP ) intraperitoneal : 0 @.@ 30 mg / kg ( average ) , 0 @.@ 941 mg / kg . 0 @.@ 05 mg / kg ( the last quote doesn 't make it clear if is either intravenous or intraperitoneal ) . 
 Its bites can deliver about 100 – 120 mg of venom on average and the maximum dose recorded is 400 mg . It is reported that before antivenom was widely available , the mortality rate from a bite was nearly 100 % . The bite of a black mamba can potentially cause collapse in humans within 45 minutes , or less . Without effective antivenom therapy , death typically occurs in 7 – 15 hours . Presently , there is a polyvalent antivenom produced by the South African Institute for Medical Research to treat black mamba bites from many localities . 
 A bite from a black mamba causes initial neurological and neuromuscular symptoms which may commonly include headache and a metallic taste in the mouth , which may be accompanied by a triad of <unk> , profuse perspiration and salivation . Other symptoms may include ptosis and gradual bulbar palsy . Localised pain or numbness around the bite site is common but not typically severe ; therefore , application of a tourniquet proximal to the bite site is feasible and may assist in slowing the onset of prominent neurotoxicity . Without appropriate treatment , symptoms typically progress to more severe reactions such as <unk> and neurogenic shock , leading to death by asphyxiation , cardiovascular collapse , or respiratory failure . 
 = = Attacks on humans = = 
 The black mamba is popularly regarded as the most dangerous and feared snake in Africa ; to South African locals the black mamba 's bite is known as the " kiss of death " . However , attacks on humans by black mambas are rare , as they usually try to avoid confrontation , and their occurrence in highly populated areas is not very common compared with some other species . Additionally , the ocellated carpet viper is responsible for more human fatalities due to snakebite than all other African species combined . A survey of snakebites in South Africa from 1957 to 1963 recorded over 900 venomous snakebites , but only seven of these were confirmed black mamba bites , at a time when effective antivenom was not widely available . Out of more than 900 bites , only 21 ended in fatalities , including all seven black mamba bites . 
 = = = Reported bite cases = = = 
 In 1998 , Danie Pienaar , now head of South African National Parks Scientific Services , survived the bite of a black mamba without antivenom . Although no antivenom was administered , Pienaar was in serious condition , despite the fact the hospital physicians declared it a " moderate " black mamba envenomation . At one point , Pienaar lapsed into a coma and his prognosis was declared " poor " . Upon arrival at hospital Pienaar was immediately intubated , given supportive drug therapy , put on mechanical ventilation and was placed on life support for three days , until the toxins were flushed out of his system . He was released from hospital on the fifth day . Pienaar believes he survived for a number of reasons . In an article in Kruger Park Times he said : " Firstly , it was not my time to go . " The article went on to state , " The fact that he stayed calmed and moved slowly definitely helped . The tourniquet was also essential . " 
 In another case , 28 @-@ year @-@ old British student Nathan Layton was bitten by a black mamba and died of a heart attack in less than an hour in March 2008 . The black mamba had been found near a classroom at the Southern African Wildlife College in <unk> , where Layton was training to be a safari guide . Layton was bitten by the snake on his index finger while it was being put into a jar , but he didn 't realize he 'd been bitten . He thought the snake had only brushed his hand . Approximately 30 minutes after being bitten Layton complained of blurred vision . He collapsed and died of a heart attack , nearly an hour after being bitten . Attempts to revive him failed , and he was pronounced dead at the scene . 
 In 2013 , in a rare case of survival without treatment , American professional photographer Mark Laita was bitten on the leg by a black mamba during a photo @-@ shoot of a black mamba at a facility in Central America . The bite ruptured an artery in his calf , and he was gushing blood profusely . Laita did not go to the doctor or the hospital , and except for the swollen fang marks giving him intense pain during the night , he was not affected and was fine physically . This led him to believe that the snake either gave him a " dry bite " ( meaning without injecting venom ) or that the heavy bleeding pushed the venom out . Some commenters to the story suggested that it was a <unk> snake ( in which the venom glands are surgically removed ) . Laita responded that it was not the case . Only later , Laita found that he had captured the snake biting his leg in a photograph . 
 = Civil War token = 
 Civil War tokens are token coins that were privately minted and distributed in the United States between 1861 and 1864 . They were used mainly in the Northeast and Midwest . The widespread use of the tokens was a result of the scarcity of government @-@ issued cents during the Civil War . 
 Civil War tokens became illegal after the United States Congress passed a law on April 22 , 1864 prohibiting the issue of any one or two @-@ cent coins , tokens or devices for use as currency . On June 8 , 1864 an additional law was passed that forbade all private coinage . 
 Civil War tokens are divided into three types — store cards , patriotic tokens , and sutler tokens . All three types were utilized as currency , and are differentiated by their designs . The collectible value of the tokens is determined chiefly by their rarity . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1862 , the second year of the Civil War , government @-@ issued coinage began vanishing from circulation . American citizens hoarded all coins with gold and silver , and eventually began hoarding copper @-@ nickel cents as well . This made it extremely difficult for businesses to conduct transactions . In response , many merchants turned to private minters to fill the void left by the hoarded coins . The first of these privately minted tokens appeared in the autumn of 1862 , by H. A. Ratterman , in Cincinnati , Ohio . New York issues followed in the spring of 1863 , first with Lindenmueller currency store card tokens issued by New York barkeep Gustavus Lindenmueller and then with Knickerbocker currency patriotic tokens issued by William H. <unk> . It is estimated that by 1864 , there were 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Civil War tokens ( nearly all redeemable for one cent ) in circulation , consisting of approximately 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 varieties . 
 Lindenmueller currency , or " Lindenmueller tokens , " are one of the best @-@ known and commonly struck types were store cards . Lindenmueller had more than one million of his one @-@ cent tokens struck and placed into circulation in 1863 . One of the common uses for the token was for streetcar fare . The Third Avenue Railroad company of New York , which had willingly accepted a large quantity of the Lindenmueller tokens in lieu of actual currency , asked Lindenmueller to redeem them . He refused , and the railroad had no legal recourse . Incidents such as these eventually forced the government to intervene . 
 On April 22 , 1864 , Congress enacted the Coinage Act of 1864 . While the act is most remembered for the introduction of the phrase " In God We Trust " on the newly created two @-@ cent piece , it also effectively ended the usage of Civil War tokens . In addition to authorizing the minting of the two @-@ cent piece , the act changed the composition of the one @-@ cent piece from a copper @-@ nickel alloy ( weighing 4 @.@ 67 grams ) to a lighter , less thick piece composed of 95 % copper ( weighing 3 @.@ 11 grams ) . The new one @-@ cent piece was much closer in weight to the Civil War tokens , and found greater acceptance among the public . 
 While the Coinage Act made Civil War tokens impractical , the issue of their legality was decided on June 8 , 1864 , when Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. § 486 , which made the minting and usage of non @-@ government issued coins punishable by a fine of up to $ 2 @,@ 000 , a prison term of up to five years , or both . ( Chapter 25 of Title 18 deals specifically with counterfeit and forgery ) . It did not make it illegal to own Civil War tokens , however , and evidence exists that the tokens were viewed as collectibles as early as 1863 , when the first known listings of Civil War tokens were published . 
 = = Types = = 
 = = = Patriotic tokens = = = 
 Patriotic Civil War tokens typically displayed a patriotic slogan or image on one or both sides . Since the majority of these tokens were minted in Union states , the slogans and images were decidedly pro @-@ Union . Some common examples of slogans found on patriotic tokens are " The Union Must and Shall Be Preserved , " " Union For Ever , " and " Old Glory " . Some of the images found on patriotic tokens were the flag of the United States , a 19th @-@ century cannon , and the USS Monitor . 
 Among the best @-@ known varieties of patriotic tokens are the so @-@ called " Dix tokens . " They are named for John Adams Dix , who served as Secretary of the Treasury in 1861 . In a letter from Dix to a revenue cutter captain , Lieutenant Caldwell , he orders Caldwell to relieve another cutter captain of his command for refusing an order to transfer from New Orleans to New York . The letter ends with the following sentence : " If any one attempts to haul down the American flag , shoot him on the spot . " The quote found its way to a number of patriotic tokens , albeit with a slightly modified wording ( " haul down " is usually replaced by " tear it down " ) . 
 = = = Store cards = = = 
 Civil War store cards differ from patriotic tokens in that one or both sides displays the name and / or location of a privately owned business . Businesses that could afford it had two custom dies made , with both advertising the business . Otherwise , only one side displayed the business 's information . 
 = = = Sutler tokens = = = 
 Sutler tokens are similar to store cards . Rather than listing the name of a private business , however , these tokens bore the name of a particular army unit ( usually a regiment ) and the name of the sutler who conducted transactions with the regiment . Of the three types of Civil War tokens , sutler tokens are by far the rarest . 
 = = Collectible value = = 
 There are several factors that determine the collectible value of Civil War tokens . The main factor is rarity , which is measured on a scale from 1 to 10 ( 1 being the most common type ) . The scale was developed by noted numismatic dealer and writer George Fuld . 
 The material used to mint Civil War tokens can also affect <unk> . Civil war tokens were minted using a variety of materials , copper being a common choice ( often actually bronze ) . Other materials used for minting were nickel , tin , German silver , white metal , and silver . Examples of tokens minted using rubber are also known to exist . 
 = = = Fuld rarity scale = = = 
 R @-@ 1 : Greater than 5 @,@ 000 
 R @-@ 2 : Between 2 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 
 R @-@ 3 : Between 500 and 2 @,@ 000 
 R @-@ 4 : Between 200 and 500 
 R @-@ 5 : Between 76 and 200 
 R @-@ 6 : Between 21 and 75 
 R @-@ 7 : Between 11 and 20 
 R @-@ 8 : Between 5 and 10 
 R @-@ 9 : Between 2 and 4 
 R @-@ 10 : Unique ( one known example ) 
 = Gulf Oil = 
 Gulf Oil was a major global oil company from the 1900s to the 1980s . The eighth @-@ largest American manufacturing company in 1941 and the ninth @-@ largest in 1979 , Gulf Oil was one of the so @-@ called Seven Sisters oil companies . Prior to its merger with Standard Oil of California , Gulf was one of the chief instruments of the Mellon family fortune ; both Gulf and Mellon Financial had their headquarters in Pittsburgh . 
 Gulf 's former headquarters , originally referred to as " the Gulf Building " ( now the Gulf Tower office condos ) , is an art @-@ deco skyscraper . The tallest building in Pittsburgh until 1970 , when it was eclipsed by the U.S. Steel Tower , it is capped by a step pyramid structure several stories high . Until the late 1970s , the entire top was illuminated , changing color with changes in barometric pressure to provide a weather indicator that could be seen for many miles . 
 Gulf Oil Corporation ( GOC ) ceased to exist as an independent company in 1985 , when it merged with Standard Oil of California ( <unk> ) , with both re @-@ branding as Chevron in the United States . Gulf Canada , Gulf 's main Canadian subsidiary , was sold the same year with retail outlets to Ultramar and Petro Canada and what became Gulf Canada Resources to Olympia & York . However , the Gulf brand name and a number of the constituent business divisions of GOC survived . Gulf has experienced a significant revival since 1990 , emerging as a flexible network of allied business interests based on partnerships , franchises and agencies . 
 Gulf , in its present incarnation , is a " new economy " business . It employs very few people directly and its assets are mainly in the form of intellectual property : brands , product specifications and scientific expertise . The rights to the brand in the United States are owned by Gulf Oil Limited Partnership ( <unk> ) , which operates over 2 @,@ 100 service stations and several petroleum terminals ; it is headquartered in Framingham , Massachusetts . The corporate vehicle at the center of the Gulf network outside the United States , Spain and Portugal is Gulf Oil International , a company owned by the <unk> Group . The company 's focus is primarily in the provision of downstream products and services to a mass market through joint ventures , strategic alliances , licensing agreements , and distribution arrangements . Gulf Oil International has its head office in the City of Westminster , London . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1901 – 82 = = = 
 The business that became Gulf Oil started in 1901 with the discovery of oil at Spindletop near Beaumont , Texas . A group of investors came together to promote the development of a modern refinery at nearby Port Arthur to process the oil . The largest investor was William Larimer Mellon of the Pittsburgh Mellon banking family . Other investors included many of Mellon 's Pennsylvania clients as well as some Texas <unk> . Mellon Bank and Gulf Oil remained closely associated thereafter . The Gulf Oil Corporation itself was formed in 1907 through the amalgamation of a number of oil businesses , principally the J.M. Guffey Petroleum and Gulf Refining companies of Texas . The name of the company refers to the Gulf of Mexico where Beaumont lies . 
 Output from Spindletop peaked at around 100 @,@ 000 barrels per day ( 16 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) just after it was discovered and then started to decline . Later discoveries made 1927 the peak year of Spindletop production , but Spindletop 's early decline forced Gulf to seek alternative sources of supply to sustain its substantial investment in refining capacity . This was achieved by constructing the 400 @-@ mile ( 640 @-@ km ) Glenn Pool pipeline connecting oilfields in Oklahoma with Gulf 's refinery at Port Arthur . The pipeline opened in September 1907 . Gulf later built a network of pipelines and refineries in the eastern and southern United States , requiring heavy capital investment . Thus , Gulf Oil provided Mellon Bank with a secure vehicle for investing in the oil sector . 
 Gulf promoted the concept of branded product sales by selling gasoline in containers and from pumps marked with a distinctive orange disc logo . A customer buying Gulf @-@ branded gasoline could be assured of its quality and consistent standard . ( In the early 20th century , non @-@ branded gasoline in the United States was often contaminated or of unreliable quality ) . 
 Gulf Oil grew steadily in the inter @-@ war years , with its activities mainly confined to the United States . The company was characterized by its vertically integrated business activities , and was active across the whole spectrum of the oil industry : exploration , production , transport , refining and marketing . It also involved itself in associated industries such as petrochemicals and automobile component manufacturing . It introduced significant commercial and technical innovations , including the first drive @-@ in service station ( 1913 ) , complimentary road maps , drilling over water at Ferry Lake , and the catalytic cracking refining process ( Gulf installed the world 's first commercial catalytic cracking unit at its Port Arthur , Texas , refinery complex in 1951 ) . Gulf also established the model for the integrated , international " oil major , " which refers to one of a group of very large companies that assumed influential and sensitive positions in the countries in which they operated . 
 In Colombia , Gulf purchased the Barco oil concession in 1926 . The government of Colombia revoked the concession the same year , but after much negotiation Gulf won it back in 1931 . However , during a period of over @-@ capacity , Gulf was more interested in holding the reserve than developing it . In 1936 Gulf sold Barco to the Texas Corporation , now Texaco . 
 Gulf had extensive exploration and production operations in the Gulf of Mexico , Canada , and Kuwait . The company played a major role in the early development of oil production in Kuwait , and through the 1950s and ' 60s apparently enjoyed a " special relationship " with the Kuwaiti government . This special relationship attracted unfavourable attention since it was associated with " political contributions " ( see below ) and support for anti @-@ democratic politics , as evidenced by papers taken from the body of a Gulf executive killed in the crash of a TWA aircraft at Cairo in 1950 . 
 In 1934 , the Kuwait Oil Company ( KOC ) was formed as a joint venture by British Petroleum and Gulf . Both British Petroleum and Gulf held equal shares in the venture . KOC pioneered the exploration for oil in Kuwait during the late 1930s . Oil was discovered at Burgan in 1938 but it was not until 1946 that the first crude oil was shipped . Oil production started from <unk> in 1955 and <unk> in 1959 . KOC started gas production in 1964 . It was the cheap oil and gas being shipped from Kuwait that formed the economic basis for Gulf 's diverse petroleum sector operations in Europe , the Mediterranean , Africa , and the Indian subcontinent . These last operations were coordinated by Gulf Oil Company , Eastern Hemisphere Ltd ( <unk> ) from their offices at 2 Portman Street in London W1 . 
 Gulf expanded on a worldwide basis from the end of the Second World War . The company leveraged its international drilling experience to other areas of the world , and by mid @-@ 1943 had established a presence in the oil fields of Venezuela as Mene Grande Oil Company . Much of the company 's retail sales expansion was through the acquisition of privately owned chains of filling stations in various countries , allowing Gulf outlets to sell product ( sometimes through ' matching ' arrangements ) from the oil that it was " lifting " in Canada , the Gulf of Mexico , Kuwait , and Venezuela . Some of these acquisitions were to prove less than resilient in the face of economic and political developments from the 1970s on . Gulf invested heavily in product technology and developed many speciality products , particularly for application in the maritime and aviation engineering sectors . It was particularly noted for its range of lubricants and greases . 
 Gulf Oil reached the peak of its development around 1970 . In that year , the company processed 1 @.@ 3 million barrels ( 210 @,@ 000 m3 ) of crude daily , held assets worth $ 6 @.@ 5 billion ( $ 39 @.@ 61 billion today ) , employed 58 @,@ 000 employees worldwide , and was owned by 163 @,@ 000 shareholders . In addition to its petroleum marketing interests , Gulf was a major producer of petrochemicals , plastics , and agricultural chemicals . Through its subsidiary , Gulf General Atomic Inc . , it was also active in the nuclear energy sector . Gulf abandoned its involvement in the nuclear sector after a failed deal to build atomic power plants in Romania in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 In 1974 , the Kuwait National Assembly took a 60 percent stake in the equity of KOC with the remaining 40 percent divided equally between BP and Gulf . The Kuwaitis took over the rest of the equity in 1975 , giving them full ownership of KOC . This meant that Gulf ( EH ) had to start supplying its downstream operations in Europe with crude bought on the world market at commercial prices . The whole GOC ( EH ) edifice now became highly marginal in an economic sense . Many of the marketing companies that Gulf had established in Europe were never truly viable on a stand @-@ alone basis . 
 Gulf was at the forefront of various projects in the late 1960s intended to adjust the world oil industry to developments of the time including closure of the Suez Canal after the 1967 war . In particular , Gulf undertook the construction of deep water terminals at Bantry Bay in Ireland and Okinawa in Japan capable of handling Ultra Large Crude Carrier ( ULCC ) vessels serving the European and Asian markets respectively . In 1968 , the Universe Ireland was added to Gulf 's tanker fleet . At 312 @,@ 000 long tons deadweight ( DWT ) , this was the largest vessel in the world and incapable of berthing at most normal ports . 
 Gulf also participated in a partnership with other majors , including Texaco , to build the Pembroke Catalytic Cracker refinery at Milford Haven and the associated Mainline Pipelines fuel distribution network . The eventual reopening of the Suez canal and upgrading of the older European oil terminals ( <unk> and <unk> ) meant that the financial return from these projects was not all that had been hoped for . The Bantry terminal was devastated by the explosion of a Total tanker , the Betelgeuse , in January 1979 ( <unk> Island Disaster ) and it was never fully reopened . The Irish government took over ownership of the terminal in 1986 and held its strategic oil reserve there . 
 In the 1970s , Gulf participated in the development of new oilfields in the UK North Sea and in Cabinda , although these were high @-@ cost operations that never compensated for the loss of Gulf 's interest in Kuwait . A mercenary army had to be raised to protect the oil installations in Cabinda during the Angolan civil war . The Angolan connection was another " special relationship " that attracted comment . In the late 1970s , Gulf was effectively funding a Soviet bloc regime in Africa while the US government was attempting to overthrow that regime by supporting the UNITA rebels led by Jonas Savimbi . 
 In 1975 , several senior Gulf executives , including chairman Bob Dorsey , were implicated in the making of illegal " political contributions " and were forced to step down from their positions . This loss of senior personnel at a critical time in Gulf 's fortunes may have had a bearing on the events that followed . 
 Gulf 's operations worldwide were struggling financially in the recession of the early 1980s , so Gulf 's management devised the " Big Jobber " strategic realignment in 1981 ( along with a program of selective <unk> ) to maintain viability . The Big Jobber strategy recognized that the day of the integrated , multi @-@ national oil major might be over , since it involved concentrating on those parts of the supply chain where Gulf had a competitive advantage . 
 = = = Marketing and promotions = = = 
 In the late 1930s , Gulf 's aviation manager , Maj. Alford J. Williams , had the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation construct two modified biplanes , cleaned @-@ up versions of the Grumman F3F Navy fighter , for promotional use by the company . Wearing Gulf Oil company colors and logos , the Grumman G @-@ 22 " <unk> II " , registered <unk> , was delivered in December 1936 , and in 1938 Maj. Williams flew it on a tour of Europe . A second scavenger pump and five drain lines were added to the engine installation that allowed the aircraft to be flown inverted for up to thirty minutes . This aircraft is now preserved in the National Air and Space Museum in Washington , D.C. A second airplane , the Grumman G @-@ 32 " <unk> III " , registered <unk> , was delivered on May 6 , 1938 . Impressed by the Army Air Force in November 1942 for use as a VIP transport and designated a UC @-@ 103 , it crashed in the southern Florida Everglades in early 1943 . 
 Gulf Oil was the primary sponsor for NBC News special events coverage in the 1960s , notably for coverage of the U.S. space program . The company used the connection to its advantage by offering giveaway or promotional items at its stations , including sticker sheets of space mission logos , a paper punch @-@ out lunar module model kit , and a book titled " We Came in Peace , " containing pictures of the Apollo 11 moon landing . Gulf was also a major sponsor of Walt Disney 's Wonderful World of Color , which also aired on NBC . Disney magazines and activity books were often given away with a gas fill @-@ up . Gulf was also noted for its " <unk> " road maps . 
 One particularly memorable Gulf advertisement carried by NBC during their coverage of the Apollo missions showed aerial and onboard views of the Universe Ireland with Tommy <unk> and the Clancy Brothers singing " Bringin ' Home the Oil " – a tribute to the opening of Gulf 's operations in Bantry Bay . 
 Gulf Oil was most synonymous for its association with auto racing , as it famously sponsored the John <unk> Automotive team in the 1960s and early ' 70s . The signature light blue and orange color scheme associated with its Ford GT40 and Porsche 917 is one of the most famous corporate racing colors and has been replicated by other racing teams sponsored by Gulf . Much of its popularity is attributed to the fact that in the 1971 film Le Mans , Steve McQueen 's character , Michael Delaney , drives for the Gulf team . As a result of McQueen 's increasing popularity following his death and the increasing popularity of the Heuer Monaco which he wore in the film , TAG Heuer released a limited edition of the watch with the Gulf logo and trademark color scheme . In the same era , Gulf Oil also sponsored Team McLaren during the Bruce McLaren days , which used a papaya orange color scheme with Gulf blue for lettering . 
 From 1963 to 1980 , Gulf Oil had a formal agreement with Holiday Inn , the world 's largest lodging chain , for which Holiday Inns in the U.S. and Canada would accept Gulf credit cards for food and lodging . In return , Gulf placed service stations on the premises of many Holiday Inn properties along major U.S. highways to provide one @-@ stop availability for gasoline , auto service , food and lodging . Many older Holiday Inns still have those original Gulf stations on their properties , some in operation and some closed , but few operate today as Gulf stations . 
 Gulf No @-@ Nox gasoline was promoted with a bucking horse leaving an imprint of two horseshoes . Several promotions centered on the two horseshoes . In 1966 bright orange 3 @-@ D plastic self @-@ adhesive horseshoes for car bumpers were given away . Another popular giveaway was during the 1968 election season , gold horseshoe lapel pins featuring either a Democratic donkey or a Republican elephant . 
 = = Demise = = 
 By 1980 , Gulf exhibited many of the characteristics of a giant corporation that had lost its way . It had a huge but poorly performing asset portfolio , associated with a depressed share price . The stock market value of Gulf started to drop below the break @-@ up value of its assets . Such a situation was bound to attract the interest of corporate raiders , although a corporation in the top 100 of the Fortune 500 was in the early 1980s thought immune to takeover risk . 
 Its undoing as an independent company began in 1982 when T. Boone Pickens , an Amarillo , Texas oilman and corporate raider ( or <unk> ) , and owner of Mesa Petroleum , made an offer for the comparatively larger ( but still considered " non @-@ major " oil company ) Cities Service Company ( more generally known by the name Citgo ) from Tulsa , Oklahoma , which was then trading in the low 20s . Pickens first privately offered $ 45 a share for a friendly takeover and then later made a $ 50 a share public offer when Cities ' CEO rejected the friendly offer . Gulf forestalled Mesa 's takeover attempt by offering $ 63 a share in a friendly offer which Cities ( by then trading at $ 37 ) accepted . Cities then bought out Pickens for $ 55 a share . Once Pickens was gone , Gulf reneged on its buyout offer , supposedly over a dispute regarding accuracy of Cities Service 's reserves , and the stock price of Cities plunged , triggering stockholder lawsuits as well as distrust for Gulf 's management on Wall Street and among financing investment banks who bet big in assisting Gulf to defeat Mesa only to be left broke when Gulf backed out . Cities Service was ultimately sold to Occidental Petroleum , and the retail operations were resold to Southland Corporation , the operators of 7 @-@ Eleven stores . Gulf 's termination of the Cities Service acquisition resulted in more than 15 years of shareholder litigation against Gulf ( and later Chevron ) . 
 With declining margins in the industry and left without Citgo 's reserves , Mesa and its investor partners kept hunting for a takeover target , only to discover while fighting Gulf for Citgo how increasingly top @-@ heavy its portfolio and declining reserves were undervaluing its overall assets . They subtly but quickly acquired 4 @.@ 9 percent of Gulf Oil 's stock by early fall 1983 , just shy of having to declare themselves and their intent at 5 percent to the SEC . In the ten days allowed to prepare the SEC filing , Mesa and its investor partners accelerated buying to 11 percent of the company 's stock , larger than the founding Mellon family 's share , by October 1983 . Gulf responded to Mesa 's interest by calling a shareholders ' meeting for late November 1983 and subsequently engaged in a proxy war on changing the corporation 's by @-@ laws to minimize arbitrage . Pickens made loud criticisms of the existing Gulf management and offered an alternative business plan intended to release shareholder value through a royalty trust that management argued would " slim down " Gulf 's market share . Pickens had acquired the reputation of being a corporate raider whose skill lay in making profits out of bidding for companies but without actually acquiring them . During the early 1980s alone , he made failed bids for Cities Service , General American Oil , Gulf , Phillips Petroleum and Unocal . The process of making such bids would promote a frenzy of asset divestiture and debt reduction in the target companies . This is a standard defensive tactic calculated to boost the current share price , although possibly at the expense of long @-@ term strategic advantage . The target shares would rise sharply in price , at which point Pickens would dispose of his interest at a substantial profit . 
 Gulf management and directors took the view that the Mesa bid represented an undervaluation of the Gulf business as a long @-@ term going concern and that it was not in the interest of Gulf shareholders . James Lee , Gulf 's CEO and chairman , even claimed during the November 1983 shareholders meeting to address the Mesa ownership that Pickens ' royalty trust idea was nothing more than a " get @-@ rich @-@ quick scheme " that would undermine the corporation 's profit potential in the coming decades . Gulf , therefore , sought to resist Pickens by various means , including <unk> as a Delaware corporation , voiding the ability of shareholders to cumulatively vote ( fearing that Pickens would use his shares to gain control of the board ) and listening to offers from Ashland Oil ( which would double Gulf 's price from its pre @-@ Mesa level ) , General Electric ( two years before it took over the media company NBC / RKO ) and finally Chevron to act as its white knight in late 1984 . Gulf divested many of its worldwide operating subsidiaries and then merged with Chevron by the spring of 1985 . The Mesa group of investors was reported to have made a profit of $ 760 million ( $ 1 @,@ 672 @.@ 1 million today ) when it assigned its Gulf shares to Chevron . Pickens has claimed that after realizing a more than doubling of stock appreciation for Gulf shareholders ( as well as its management that fought him at every turn ) , Mesa 's shares were the last to be paid out by Chevron . 
 The forced merger of Gulf and Chevron was controversial , with the U.S. Senate considering legislation to freeze oil industry mergers for a year — before the Reagan administration made it known it opposed government intervention in the matter and would veto any bill . However , Pickens and Lee ( Gulf 's CEO ) were summoned to testify before the Senate months before the merger was hammered out and the matter was referred to the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) . The FTC only approved the deal subject to strict conditions . Never before had a " small operator " successfully taken apart a Fortune 500 corporation , or in Gulf 's case a " Fortune 10 " corporation . The merger sent even deeper shock waves through the long @-@ time exclusive " Seven Sisters " club of major integrated oil companies that defined themselves as elevated from the " non @-@ major independents " . A board member of Exxon even admitted in the mid @-@ 1980s that " mostly all we talk about in board meetings anymore is T. Boone Pickens " . Chevron , to settle with the government antitrust requirements , sold some Gulf stations and a refinery in the eastern United States to British Petroleum ( BP ) and Cumberland Farms in 1985 as well as some of the international operations . 
 The effect on the Pittsburgh area was severe as close to 900 PhD and research jobs and 600 headquarters ( accounting , law , clerical ) jobs were transferred to California or cut , a payroll of $ 54 million ( $ 123 million today ) and corporate charity to 50 Western Pennsylvania organizations worth $ 2 million / year ( $ 4 @.@ 6 million / year today ) . These losses were mitigated some with the donation of Gulf Labs in suburban north Pittsburgh to the University of Pittsburgh to be used as a research business incubator along with $ 5 million ( $ 11 million today ) in maintenance and seed money . The " Gulf Labs " research complex consisted of 55 multi @-@ story buildings with 800 @,@ 000 square feet ( 74 @,@ 000 m2 ) on 85 acres ( 34 ha ) and including several chemical labs , petroleum production and refining areas and even a nuclear laboratory complete with reactor in 1985 and employed close to 2 @,@ 000 engineers and scientists operating with a $ 100 million budget ( $ 227 @.@ 8 million today ) from Gulf / Chevron . After its donation , it was renamed the University of Pittsburgh Applied Research Center or U @-@ PARC and opened to small technology , computer and engineering firms as well as graduate level research . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 BP , Chevron , Cumberland Farms and other companies that acquired former Gulf operations continued to use the Gulf name through the early 1990s . This caused consumer confusion in the US retail market as the parent companies would not accept each other 's credit cards . All former Gulf stations franchised by BP and Chevron in the United States have since been converted to those names . Gulf Oil Limited Partnership ( GOLP ) , based in Framingham , Massachusetts , has bought a license for North American rights to the Gulf brand from Chevron . Chevron still owned the Gulf brand , but was making almost no direct use of it . In January 2010 , GOLP bought the entire brand from Chevron and began a nationwide expansion campaign . GOLP operates a distribution network reaching from Maine to Ohio . Most Gulf @-@ branded filling stations in North America are owned by Cumberland Farms of Framingham , which owns a two @-@ thirds interest in GOLP . In addition there are some independently owned franchises still operating under the Gulf brand within North America , such as the American Refining Group , which is licensed by Chevron to blend and distribute Gulf @-@ branded lubricants . 
 Gulf Oil International ( GOI ) : [ 1 ] owns the rights to the Gulf brand outside the United States , Spain & Portugal . It is now owned by the <unk> Group . After they acquired a large share from the Taher family , a major Saudi Arabian family lead by Dr. Abdulhadi H. Taher ( former governor of the Saudi Petroleum and Mineral organization and board member of Aramco ) . GOI trades mainly in lubricants , oils , and greases . GOI is also involved in franchising the Gulf brand to operators in the petroleum and automotive sectors ; Gulf @-@ branded filling stations can be found in several countries including the UK , Belgium , Germany , Ireland , the Slovak & Czech Republics , the Netherlands , Jordan , Finland and Turkey . GOI has direct and indirect interests in a number of businesses that use the Gulf brand under license . 
 The Canadian exploration , production , and distribution arm of Gulf Oil was sold to Olympia and York in 1985 . From 1992 it continued as an independent oil company ( Gulf Canada Resources ) until its acquisition by Conoco in 2002 . 
 Most Gulf downstream operations in Europe were sold to the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation in early 1983 . The associated Gulf filling stations were converted to trade under the <unk> brand by 1988 . However , attempts to sell Gulf Oil ( Great Britain ) to <unk> failed because of irrevocable GOC guarantees given earlier in regard to bonds issued to finance the construction of refinery facilities in the UK . GO ( GB ) was taken over by Chevron and its stations continued to use the Gulf brand name and insignia until 1997 when the network was sold to Shell , although by this stage a fairly large proportion of Gulf stations were supplied by jobbers rather than Gulf Oil ( GB ) . Gulf completely withdrew from the UK in 1997 . This represented the end of the last major " downstream " use of the Gulf brand by Chevron . 
 = = Revival = = 
 GOI and GOLP continue to sell Gulf @-@ branded lubricants worldwide through a network of official licensed companies , joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiary companies . Many of these official Gulf distributors carry out local marketing and sponsorship which help to raise the profile of the brand . Of these wholly owned subsidiaries Gulf Oil Corporation India has raised the market profile of the Gulf brand in the Middle East . <unk> have emerged as one of leading lubricants brands in India and run many marketing sponsorships targeted at the ever @-@ growing youth sector in the country . 
 GOI licenses the Gulf brand and logo in the UK to the Bayford group , one of the largest independent fuel distributors . Starting in 2001 , a new Gulf network of independent stations is slowly reappearing across the UK . At present , many of these stations are notable for offering genuine leaded four @-@ star petrol , for which Bayford has a special dispensation to sell . At the same time , Gulf <unk> ( UK ) Ltd was set up to market Gulf products ( mostly manufactured by the Gulf Netherlands operation ) in the UK . This return by Gulf to the UK after a four @-@ year absence used the slogan " The Return of the Legend . " The post @-@ 2001 Gulf presence in the UK is a wholly network @-@ based operation . It involves almost no direct Gulf investment in fixed assets , corporate infrastructure , or manufacturing capability . This is a complete contrast to the pre @-@ 1997 presence . 
 In January 2010 , after using the name since 1986 , GOLP acquired all right , title and interest in the Gulf brand name in the United States and announced plans to expand the use of the Gulf brand beyond its parent company 's Northeastern United States base . Its promotions have included sponsorship of major sporting events in the area with advertisements for Gulf in New York City , Boston , Philadelphia , and Pittsburgh . To take one case as an illustrative example of the Gulf revival , after Texaco 's 2001 merger with Chevron , many former Texaco stations in Pittsburgh switched to Gulf since Chevron does not service the Greater Pittsburgh area . As a result , the Texaco brand name disappeared from the area in June 2004 when the <unk> rights agreement with Shell expired , with Shell itself expanding in the area by means other than Texaco but , on June 2006 Chevron gave exclusive rights to the Texaco brand name in the U.S. and sold some BP gas stations in the southeast which were Gulf gas stations . In New England , former Exxon stations have been rebranded as Gulf , in accordance with the consent decree that allowed the merger of Exxon and Mobil . Many of the former Exxon stations feature a rectangular logo that fit into the existing sign standards used by Exxon . Gulf refers to the look as its " sunrise " imaging . 
 The Gulf logo is still used around the world by various businesses . GOI uses it for their marketing activities to focus on the sponsorship of Le Mans race teams ( with the current team being Aston Martin Racing team ) This sponsorship is used across the world by Gulf distributors , alongside local activity demonstrating the GOI company ethos of " your local global brand " . In 2009 , the clothing store chain Old Navy began selling T @-@ shirts bearing the old Gulf logo , along with the former logos of Standard Oil and Chevron . 
 Between 1980 and 2000 , Gulf moved from being a monolithic , vertically integrated multinational corporation to being more of a network of allied business interests . This has given the entire Gulf enterprise a high degree of strategic and operational flexibility . It is a move that reflects fundamental change in the economics of international business . 
 Alliances represent yet another shift in the organization of economic transactions from organizational hierarchies to networks ; from mass to flexible production ; from large , vertically integrated organizations to disintegration and horizontal networks of economic units ; from " <unk> " to " post @-@ <unk> " companies . 
 In March 2016 Gulf MX Announced that will put their own Filling Stations in Mexico , its planned to begin operations on July of the Same Year to <unk> with the Local company ( <unk> ) ( as a Result of the Recent changes in the local laws in matter of Energy and Oil resources ) As said by Sergio De La Vega ( CEO of Gulf Mexico ) in order to improve a better service Gulf will make fidelity programs and dedicated Smartphone <unk> for customers ( improving fuel payment into the same , Fuel Administration and better experience with fidelity programs as another additional benefits benefits ) adding to modern Service Stations with more quality added services . 
 Adding to that , Gulf will offer franchises to the existing filling station owners to convert them into Gulf Trademark . 
 = = Case studies in current use of the Gulf brand = = 
 = = = Independent filling stations in the UK = = = 
 In 1970 , there were nearly 25 @,@ 000 filling stations in the UK , of which 10 @,@ 000 were ' independents ' ( typically , privately owned and supplied by a major or jobber while using a brand under license ) . By the end of 1999 , the number of filling stations had dropped to 13 @,@ 700 and to 9 @,@ 700 at the end of 2005 . In recent years , filling stations have been closing at a rate of 50 per month . Many of the smaller and independent stations have succumbed to competition from out @-@ of @-@ town supermarkets that undercut local enterprises through sheer volume of sales and shared overheads . 
 The Gulf brand in the UK is licensed by GOI to the Bayford group which specializes in operating service stations on minor trunk roads in rural areas . Bayford supplies about 185 Gulf @-@ branded filling stations in the UK , all of which are independently owned . The Gulf filling stations provide outlets for Gulf @-@ branded oils and lubricants . 
 The illustration shows a typical Bayford / Gulf filling station in the UK , still associated with a service garage , restaurant and retailing facilities . It is in an isolated location , five miles ( 8 km ) south of Wooler in the Cheviot Hills , catering to both local residents and passing tourist traffic . It is not vulnerable to competition from supermarkets and provides something of a local community center . 
 = = = Pennsylvania Turnpike = = = 
 For decades , Gulf operated filling stations on the Pennsylvania Turnpike toll highway system alongside the Howard Johnson 's restaurants at the Turnpike 's travel plazas ( which correspond to European motorway service areas ) . This began in 1950 with the opening of the Philadelphia Extension , and Gulf added more filling stations as the system was extended . The Standard Oil Company of Pennsylvania ( now part of Exxon ) had exclusive rights to provide filling station services on the sections of the system that opened prior to 1950 , principally the Irwin @-@ to @-@ Carlisle section . 
 In the 1980s , Sunoco was awarded the franchise to operate the filling stations at the Sideling Hill and now @-@ closed Hempfield travel plazas . This led to a bidding war among three of Pennsylvania 's most recognizable gasoline brands each time a travel plaza franchise came up for renewal . 
 Gulf had the opportunity to become the exclusive provider of filling stations at travel plazas along the Pennsylvania Turnpike after Exxon withdrew from the Turnpike in 1990 . Cumberland Farms ( owner of the Gulf brand in the northeastern U.S. ) was awarded a new contract with the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission , but the contract was sold to Sunoco two years later as part of the company 's bankruptcy proceedings . In June 1992 , all of the former Gulf filling stations on the Turnpike ( as with the Exxon ones before it ) converted to Sunoco . All of the travel plazas continue to sell Sunoco fuel today . 
 = = Gulf products = = 
 Most filling stations in Europe sell three types of fuel : unleaded , LRP , and diesel . Although these products lack any real brand differentiation , this has not always been the case . Until well into the 1970s , Gulf ( in common with other oil companies ) sold distinctive brands of petrol / gasoline including <unk> <unk> , Good Gulf regular , Gulf No @-@ Nox premium , and Gulf Super <unk> ( aka <unk> ) . Gulf petrol was sold using the slogans " Good Gulf Gasoline , " and " Gulf – the Gas with Guts . " Gulf service stations often supplied customers with pens and key rings bearing these slogans . For a few years , beginning in 1966 , Gulf stations in the U.S. gave away orange plastic " Extra Kick Horseshoes " to customers who filled their tanks with Gulf 's No @-@ Nox premium gasoline ( the novelty items were commonly mounted on bumpers ) . 
 GOI still produces and sells a wide range of branded oil based products including lubricants and greases of all kinds . These include products for a variety of applications ranging from metal working oils to refrigeration oils . Car engine oils include the Gulf Formula , Gulf MAX , and Gulf TEC ranges . Heavy duty diesel engine lubricants include the Gulf Supreme and Gulf <unk> ranges . 
 In the Summer of 2013 , Gulf Oil licensed the " Gulf " name for racing fuels in a return to the American racing scene for the 2014 competition season . [ 2 ] The fuels were announced at the Performance Racing Industry Show in Indianapolis , Indiana in December 2013 . The racing fuels support the World Racing League and the Formula Atlantic Championship in the United States . 
 = = CEOs = = 
 S.A. <unk> 1953 ? 
 Robert Rawls Dorsey 1969 ? <unk> 14 , 1976 ( resigned with 3 years on his contract ) 
 Jerry McAfee January 14 , 1976 – December 1 , 1981 
 James E. Lee December 1 , 1981 – 1985 
 <unk> Muhammad Farooq Nizami December 21 , 2014 – present ( Yanbu , KSA ) 
 = <unk> = 
 The iLoo ( short for Internet loo ) was a cancelled Microsoft project to develop a Wi @-@ Fi Internet @-@ enabled portable toilet . The iLoo , which was to debut at British summer festivals , was described as being a portable toilet with wireless broadband Internet , an adjustable plasma screen , a membrane wireless keyboard , a six @-@ channel speaker system , and toilet paper embossed with popular web site addresses . The iLoo was also to have an extra screen and keyboard on the outside , and was to be guarded . It was intended as the next in a series of successful initiatives by MSN UK which sought to introduce the internet in unusual locations , including MSN Street , MSN Park Bench and MSN Deckchair . 
 The project was announced by MSN UK on April 30 , 2003 , and was widely ridiculed before being declared a hoax by Microsoft on May 12 . On May 13 , another Microsoft press release stated that although the project had not been a hoax , it had been cancelled because it would do little to promote the MSN brand . There has since been speculation as to whether the project was cancelled for fear of being sued by Andrew Cubitt , who had invented the similarly named product " i @-@ Loo " . The iLoo was described as a public relations " debacle " by Online Journalism Review . 
 = = Description = = 
 The iLoo was designed to be a Wi @-@ Fi Internet @-@ enabled portable toilet that would allow users to surf the internet while using the loo . Internally , the facility would have a broadband connection via wireless 802.11b , a wireless waterproof keyboard , a swivel plasma screen running Windows XP Professional , a 6 @-@ channel surround @-@ sound system beneath the sink , toilet paper embossed with popular URLs , and a suction toilet . Externally , the facility would feature an MSN logo and have a " Hotmail station " with an additional plasma screen and keyboard for waiting consumers . A security guard was to be stationed near the unit to ensure that it was being properly used and to prevent the unit from being stolen . The iLoo was to debut " at a majority of the summer season festivals " . The iLoo was to be deployed only in Britain . 
 = = Public relations timeline = = 
 The project was announced on April 30 , 2003 in press release by MSN UK , MSN 's British subsidiary , as part of a " series of <unk> initiatives which look at the changing nature of how we use the web as it constantly evolves " . The press release stated that : 
 The UK ’ s most popular website <unk> is creating the world ’ s first ‘ Internet Loo ’ . The iLoo will be mobile and is part of MSN ’ s mission to allow instant logging on ‘ anytime and any place ’ . In time for the summer festival season , MSN is in the process of converting a portable loo to create a unique experience for surfers looking for an alternative to the bog @-@ standard festival loo experience . Users will be able to sit down , <unk> a wireless keyboard and conveniently access the first ever <unk> 
 The press release also stated that " MSN is also in talks with toilet paper manufacturers to produce special web paper for those in need of URL inspiration " . 
 News of the iLoo was widely circulated amongst mainstream media . The story became the most @-@ emailed story on Yahoo ! News on May 1 , 2003 , being emailed over 4000 times . The iLoo was widely derided and press coverage subjected MSN and Microsoft to heavy criticism . On May 10 , The Inquirer published a story in which Andrew Cubitt alleged that " Microsoft stole his iLoo idea " from his i @-@ Loo invention . On May 12 , Microsoft announced that the iLoo was a " hoax perpetrated by its British division " calling it an " April Fool 's joke " and issued an apology for the confusion . The Associated Press , however , stated that they had previously received confirmation of the project from two of Microsoft 's PR firms : Waggener <unk> Worldwide and Red Consultancy . The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer also stated that it received confirmation from Waggener <unk> and was even provided with a schematic drawing . Furthermore , April Fools was almost a month before , and Microsoft had never before released a fake press release . 
 On May 13 , 2003 , Microsoft retracted the denial , stating that the iLoo had been a legitimate demonstration project that was to be released in Britain for summer music festivals , but had been terminated by Microsoft executives in Redmond , Washington who believed the iLoo was inappropriate with the final decision made by MSN senior vice president David Cole . MSN product manager Lisa <unk> stated that the project " didn 't really map to our global branding objectives " . Microsoft again apologized for the miscommunication stating " the confusion over the legitimacy of this effort was caused by people moving too quickly and who misspoke before gathering all of the relevant information " . Prior to the cancellation , an iLoo prototype was in the " early stages of construction " . MSN allows regional units to design their own marketing campaigns , and the UK division had developed a reputation for innovative campaigns , in this case involving British toilet humour . The iLoo which was designed for the UK as part of a " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek marketing initiative " was " intended to be the next in line of a number of clever initiatives in the UK involving introducing the internet in interesting locations , including MSN Street , MSN Park Bench and MSN Deckchair " . The previous initiatives were well received . Microsoft stated that no employees were disciplined as a result of the debacle , although the company stated that it would conduct " internal discussions " . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Although the product was not publicly released , many questioned whether " Microsoft had lost its senses " and the product was widely derided . Critics contended that the product was a waste of money and doomed to fail . Concerns were raised about how the iLoo would serve to extend waiting lines , how hygienic it would be to share keyboards in a public loo , and what would happen if the keyboard were to be urinated upon . Critics also questioned whether users would spend enough time in the loo to make use of the internet facilities , noting that " most port @-@ a @-@ potty users stay only long enough to relieve themselves without having to inhale . " 
 The iLoo , given its toiletry @-@ related nature , subjected MSN and Microsoft to puns and jokes especially since Microsoft 's marketing slogan at the time was " where do you want to go today ? " with the PC being dubbed Pee @-@ C. The Herald Sun wrote that the " iLoo is , unquestionably , very good news – mainly to journalists with a bottomless pit of laboured bum jokes " while the Seattle Times wrote " now the company has a credibility problem as well as a red face . " Other newspapers issued humorous headlines : Microsoft technology headed for toilet from the San Francisco Chronicle , Toilet mixes zeroes with ones and twos from the Washington Post , and Microsoft 's Gone Potty from The Daily Mirror . 
 The product has since been studied as an example of a public relations disaster and an example of an internet hoax . Microsoft 's public relations response to the debacle is also considered to be one of the poorest in the company 's history , given Microsoft 's reputation for micro @-@ managing news releases , interviews and promotional events . 
 The iLoo 's negative publicity drowned out the launch of MSN Radio Plus on May 12 , 2003 . It has since inspired a number of spoofs . 
 = = i @-@ Loo controversy = = 
 After reading an article about the iLoo , Andrew Cubitt , inventor of the similarly named i @-@ Loo , wrote to The Inquirer stating that iLoo " sounds remarkably similar ... it now seems that the clever people at Microsoft have cottoned onto the idea and even call it the i @-@ Loo , the same as mine ! " Cubitt went on to say that " mine did everything that the Microsoft one is meant to do , but additionally printed information on toilet paper and didn 't use a keyboard for the interface due to hygiene reasons " . The i @-@ Loo was prototyped by Cubitt as part of his thesis for his 2001 university degree in Product Design and Engineering at Brunel University . In an interview with The Inquirer , he noted " As it was designed at the university , they own the partial rights to the product so they will be watching the Microsoft ' invention ' very closely . " 
 Microsoft never formally commented on Cubitt 's allegations and instead initially stated the iLoo was an April 's fool joke . As a result , Cubitt questioned whether this was " a very calculated ploy to destroy competition in its early stages , or is admitting they don 't even know what time of the month it is less embarrassing and ridding them of a potentially expensive situation ! " Cubitt went on to state that " as they have now discredited my idea as a joke , I will never be able to produce the idea " and as such was " consulting my law books now on defamatory statements " . Neither Cubitt , nor Brunel University have taken public legal action against Microsoft pertaining to the i @-@ Loo . 
 The i @-@ Loo was described as : 
 The i @-@ Loo internet toilet roll browser is a novel and unique product designed to make best use of the time you spend on the loo ! The product allows you to search the internet whilst sitting on the toilet and print out any web pages you are interested in on your toilet <unk> i @-@ Loo brings a whole new meaning to the word downloading . The unit is fixed in front of a toilet on the cubical [ sic ] wall . The product provides up to date information about new products , daily news and lottery results through an easy to navigate software package . Normal operation of the toilet and paper dispenser is evident . 
 The i @-@ Loo internet toilet roll browser was featured at the 2003 Daily Mail Ideal Home Show as part of the Future Concepts exhibition in Earls Court , London , where it was nominated for the MFI Bright Sparks 2003 awards . The i @-@ Loo , which was sponsored by <unk> Printers , received significant press coverage , and was featured on GMTV as well as various radio shows . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = William C. Chase = 
 Major General William Curtis Chase ( 9 March 1895 – 21 August 1986 ) was an American soldier and General in the first half of the 20th century . He is best known for his service in the South West Pacific Area during World War II and in the Occupation of Japan . 
 A graduate of Brown University , Chase enlisted in the Rhode Island National Guard in 1913 and served on the Mexican Border . Commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry in January 1917 , he served on the Western Front in World War I and in the Occupation of the Rhineland . Between the wars , he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth , later returning as an instructor . 
 Chase was promoted to Brigadier General in March 1943 on assuming command of the 1st Brigade , 1st Cavalry Division . He was chosen to lead the assault on the Admiralty Islands in February 1944 . He resisted the temptation to swiftly overrun the island , and thereby <unk> his forces , and formed a defensive perimeter that made good use of the terrain . From this position , he was able to defeat a series of counterattacks by the numerically superior Japanese garrison . 
 In February 1945 , Chase 's columns pushed into the northern outskirts of Manila , liberating some 3 @,@ 700 internees at the University of Santo Tomas which had been turned into an internment camp . He took over command of the 38th Infantry Division , which was confronted by enemy fortifications at Zig @-@ Zag Pass on the Bataan Peninsula that took a week of hard fighting to reduce . Chase assumed command of the 1st Cavalry Division on 1 August 1945 . He remained with it in the Occupation of Japan until he returned to the United States in January 1949 . Later , he was chief of staff of the Third Army at Fort McPherson and head of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Taiwan . Retiring from the Army , he earned a Master of Arts degree in history from Trinity University and taught political science at the University of Houston . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 William Curtis Chase was born in Providence , Rhode Island , on 9 March 1896 , the son of William Beecher Chase and his wife , Doris Evelyn née Curtis . He attended Brown University , graduating with a Bachelor of Arts with a Phi Beta Kappa Society key in 1916 . While at Brown , Chase enlisted in Battery A , 1st Rhode Island Volunteer Artillery of the Rhode Island National Guard ( later Battery A , 103rd Field Artillery ) in 1913 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On the afternoon of his graduation from Brown in 1916 , Chase , now a sergeant , joined A Battery at Quonset Point , Rhode Island , where it was mobilised for duty on the Mexican Border . The unit remained in the El Paso , Texas , area for a time , but saw no action . While there , Chase passed an examination for commissions in Regular Army . Chase was posted to Fort Leavenworth in January 1917 for a three month course for newly commissioned officers before being commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry . 
 Chase was assigned to the 3rd Cavalry , then based at Fort Sam Houston . Shortly after the United States declared war on Germany , he was promoted to first lieutenant and posted to the 6th Cavalry on the Mexican frontier . 
 Chase attended a machine gun course at Fort Sill , after which he was posted to the 11th Machine Gun Battalion , part of the 4th Division , in April 1918 . He served on the Western Front with the 4th Division , participating in the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel , but came down with jaundice and missed all but the last days of the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . He participated in the Occupation of the Rhineland before the 4th Division returned to the United States in July 1919 . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 On return , Chase was posted to the 16th Cavalry , then in the Rio Grande Valley , although it soon returned to Fort Sam Houston . In 1921 he was posted to Michigan State College for duty with the Reserve Officers ' Training Corps . There he met Dorothea Marie Wetherbee . They were married in 1921 . They never had children . 
 Chase attended the United States Army Cavalry School and United States Army Infantry School , followed by duty with the 14th Cavalry at Fort Sheridan , Illinois , from 1927 to 1929 . He then attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth . From 1931 to 1934 he served overseas with the 26th Cavalry ( Philippine Scouts ) at Fort Stotsenburg in the Philippines . Returning to the United States , he was posted as an Instructor in Tactics , first at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley and then , from 1938 to 1940 , at the Command and General Staff College . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1941 Chase , now a lieutenant colonel , was posted to VIII Corps , then commanded by Major General Walter Krueger . As such , he participated in the Louisiana Maneuvers . In December 1941 , he was posted to the Amphibious Force , Atlantic Fleet , then under the command of Major General Holland Smith . Based at Marine Corps Base Quantico , the Amphibious Force practiced Amphibious warfare tactics on Chesapeake Bay . 
 In 1942 , Chase assumed command of the 113th Cavalry , an Iowa National Guard unit . Initially a horse @-@ mechanized unit , the 113th Cavalry soon became fully mechanized . It moved from its original station at Fort Clark , Texas , to Camp Bowie and then to Fort Hood , where it provided school troops for the Tank Destroyer Center . 
 Chase was promoted to Brigadier General in March 1943 on assuming command of the 1st Brigade , 1st Cavalry Division . The division was then stationed at Fort Bliss but was already preparing to move to the South West Pacific . The 1st Cavalry Division had therefore been dismounted , but the division and brigade commanders and their staffs were still on horseback . The 1st Cavalry Division staged at Camp Stoneman . Chase departed from San Francisco on 3 July on the transport USAT George Washington . 
 The 1st Cavalry Division arrived in Australia and continued its training at Strathpine , Queensland . Training there was more vigorous than at Fort Bliss , and Chase broke his heel bone in a training accident . In December 1943 , the 1st Cavalry Division sailed for Oro Bay , where it staged for its next operation , the Admiralty Islands campaign . Chase was chosen to lead the assault . Here , his tactical expertise came to the fore . He resisted the temptation to overrun the island of Los Negros , and thereby <unk> his forces , and instead formed a defensive perimeter that made good use of the terrain . From this position , he was able to defeat a series of counterattacks by the numerically superior Japanese garrison . The crisis passed , Chase 's force was reinforced by the rest of the division , and the 1st Cavalry Division was then able to overrun the islands . Chase was awarded the Bronze Star for his role in the campaign . 
 The 1st Cavalry Division remained in the Admiralty Islands until October , when it boarded ships there for the invasion of Leyte , which it assaulted on 20 October 1944 . Chase 's 1st Brigade 's initial mission was to reconnoiter the hills on the west side of the Tacloban Valley and establish observation posts from which it could command the entrances to the valley . In November , he was ordered to cover the flank of X Corps ' advance up the Leyte Valley , and later into the Ormoc Valley . Chase had to move his brigade across mountainous , roadless , uncharted jungle in frequently appalling wet weather . The advance made slow progress against Japanese troops that fought tenaciously all the way . 
 The 1st Cavalry Division was down to half strength when it was withdrawn from the front line on Leyte for a brief rest in January 1945 , but few reinforcements arrived before it was ordered to move to Luzon , where it disembarked over the beaches at San Fabian on 27 January 1945 . General of the Army Douglas MacArthur ordered the 1st Cavalry Division 's commander , Major General Vern D. Mudge , to conduct a rapid advance on Manila . For this , Mudge formed three flying columns . Initially , Chase 's 1st Brigade 's mission was to follow one of the columns but on 1 February he was relieved of responsibility for the main body of the 1st Brigade and placed in command of all three flying columns . 
 On 3 February , Chase 's columns pushed into the northern outskirts of Manila and seized a vital bridge over the <unk> River , which separated them from the city proper . Chase , controlling his columns by radio , suffered slight burns to his hands when a Japanese truck exploded . A squadron of the 8th Cavalry , guided by two Filipino guerrillas reached the sprawling campus of the University of Santo Tomas which had been turned into an internment camp , liberating some 3 @,@ 700 internees . 
 A Japanese raiding party destroyed the bridge over <unk> River ; Chase 's security was not good enough . This prevented the main body of the 1st Cavalry Division from linking up with Chase 's force in Manila . Supplies were dispatched through the 37th Infantry Division 's zone until engineers could build a new bridge . For his advance on Manila , Chase was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . He was also awarded the Purple Heart for the burns to his hands . 
 On 7 February 1945 , Chase took over command of the 38th Infantry Division , which was then confronted by enemy fortifications at Zig @-@ Zag Pass on the Bataan Peninsula . It took Chase a week of hard fighting to reduce this position . A battalion of the 151st Infantry under Chase 's personal command landed at Mariveles on the southern tip of Bataan on 14 February . The 38th Infantry Division participated in the final actions on Corregidor . Units of the 38th Infantry Division assaulted and captured Caballo Island on 27 March , Fort Drum on El Fraile Island on 13 April , and Carabao Island on 16 April . Meanwhile , other elements of the 38th Infantry Division engaged enemy forces in the mountainous Fort Stotsenburg area . In the midst of these operations , Chase was promoted to Major General in March . 
 In late April 1945 , the 38th Infantry Division moved to the area east of Manila where it relieved the 6th Infantry Division . On 1 May , it began a series of probing attacks prior to an attack on 4 May aimed at capturing the Wawa Dam , an important part of Manila 's water supply . Chase had to reduce a series of strongly held Japanese positions . By the end of the month , the dam was secure and the Japanese Kobayashi Force was broken . 
 Chase assumed command of the 1st Cavalry Division on 1 August 1945 . At this time , the division was in the Lucena City area but slated for Operation Downfall , in which it would assault Ariake , Kagoshima . The end of the war precluded this . Instead , the 1st Cavalry Division participated in the Occupation of Japan . It embarked from Batangas on 25 August and disembarked in Tokyo Bay on 2 September , becoming the first US division in Tokyo . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Chase remained with the 1st Cavalry Division on occupation duties until December 1948 , when he temporarily assumed command of IX Corps . He finally returned to the United States in January 1949 , and became chief of staff of the Third Army at Fort McPherson in April 1949 . From 1951 to 1955 he headed the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Taiwan . He retired from the Army on 31 July 1955 . 
 Chase earned a Master of Arts degree in history from Trinity University . From 1957 to 1965 , he taught political science at the University of Houston . His wife Dorothea died in 1957 . In 1961 he married Mrs Hallie Barlow Olcott . Chase retired in 1965 , having reached the state of Texas ' mandatory retirement age . In 1974 , Chase joined a party of retired generals associated with General MacArthur on a visit to Australia as guests of Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring and Dame Mary Herring . In addition to Chase , Leif J. Sverdrup , Hugh John Casey , and <unk> A. Diller and their wives also made the trip . Chase published his memoirs , entitled Front Line General : The Commands of Maj. Gen. Wm . C. Chase , in 1975 . He died on 21 August 1986 and was buried at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery . 
 = <unk> injury = 
 <unk> injury ( TBI ) is damage to the tracheobronchial tree ( the airway structure involving the trachea and bronchi ) . It can result from blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck or chest , inhalation of harmful fumes or smoke , or aspiration of liquids or objects . 
 Though rare , TBI is a serious condition ; it may cause obstruction of the airway with resulting life @-@ threatening respiratory insufficiency . Other injuries accompany TBI in about half of cases . Of those people with TBI who die , most do so before receiving emergency care , either from airway obstruction , <unk> , or from injuries to other vital organs . Of those who do reach a hospital , the mortality rate may be as high as 30 % . 
 TBI is frequently difficult to diagnose and treat . Early diagnosis is important to prevent complications , which include stenosis ( narrowing ) of the airway , respiratory tract infection , and damage to the lung tissue . Diagnosis involves procedures such as bronchoscopy , radiography , and x @-@ ray computed tomography to visualize the tracheobronchial tree . Signs and symptoms vary based on the location and severity of the injury ; they commonly include dyspnea ( difficulty breathing ) , dysphonia ( a condition where the voice can be hoarse , weak , or excessively breathy ) , coughing , and abnormal breath sounds . In the emergency setting , tracheal intubation can be used to ensure that the airway remains open . In severe cases , surgery may be necessary to repair a TBI . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 The trachea and bronchi form the tracheobronchial tree . The trachea is situated between the lower end of the larynx and the center of the chest , where it splits into the two bronchi at a ridge called the carina . The trachea is stabilized and kept open by rings made of cartilage that surround the front and sides of the structure ; these rings are not closed and do not surround the back , which is made of membrane . The bronchi split into smaller branches and then to bronchioles that supply air to the alveoli , the tiny air @-@ filled sacs in the lungs responsible for absorbing oxygen . An arbitrary division can be made between the <unk> and cervical trachea at the thoracic inlet , an opening at the top of the thoracic cavity . Anatomical structures that surround and protect the tracheobronchial tree include the lungs , the esophagus , large blood vessels , the rib cage , the thoracic spine , and the sternum . Children have softer <unk> and a more elastic tracheobronchial trees than adults ; this elasticity , which helps protect the structures from injury when they are compressed , may contribute to the lower incidence of TBI in children . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Lesions can be transverse , occurring between the rings of the trachea , longitudinal or spiral . They may occur along the membranous part of the trachea , the main bronchi , or both . In 8 % of ruptures , lesions are complex , occurring in more than one location , with more than one type of lesion , or on both of the main bronchi and the trachea . Transverse tears are more common than longitudinal or complex ones . The laceration may completely transect the airway or it may go only partway around . Partial tears that do not go all the way around the circumference of the airway do not allow a lacerated airway to become completely detached ; tears that encircle the whole airway can allow separation to occur . <unk> may also be classified as complete or incomplete . In an incomplete lesion , a layer of tissue surrounding the bronchus remains intact and can keep the air in the airway , preventing it from leaking into the areas surrounding the airways . Incomplete lacerations may require closer scrutiny to detect and may not be diagnosed right away . 
 <unk> injuries are divided into those that are accompanied by a disruption of the pleura and those that are not ; in the former , air can leak from the hole in the airway and a pneumothorax can form . The latter type is associated with more minor signs ; pneumothorax is small if it occurs at all , and although function is lost in the part of the lung supplied by the injured bronchus , unaffected parts of the lungs may be able to compensate . 
 Most TBI that results from blunt trauma occurs within the chest . The most common tracheal injury is a tear near the carina or in the membranous wall of the trachea . In blunt chest trauma , TBI occurs within 2 @.@ 5 cm of the carina 40 – 80 % of the time . The injury is more common in the right main bronchus than the left , possibly because the former is near vertebrae , which may injure it . Also , the aorta and other tissues in the mid chest that surround the left main bronchus may protect it . Another possibility is that people with left main bronchus injuries are more likely to also have other deadly injuries and therefore die before reaching hospital , making them less likely to be included in studies that determine rates of injuries . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Signs and symptoms vary depending on what part of the tracheobronchial tree is injured and how severely it is damaged . There are no direct signs of TBI , but certain signs suggest the injury and raise a clinician 's suspicion that it has occurred . Many of the signs and symptoms are also present in injuries with similar injury mechanisms such as pneumothorax . <unk> and respiratory distress are found in 76 – 100 % of people with TBI , and coughing up blood has been found in up to 25 % . However , isolated TBI does not usually cause profuse bleeding ; if such bleeding is observed it is likely to be due to another injury such as a ruptured large blood vessel . The patient may exhibit dysphonia or have diminished breath sounds , and rapid breathing is common . Coughing may be present , and stridor , an abnormal , high @-@ pitched breath sound indicating obstruction of the upper airway can also occur . 
 Damage to the airways can cause subcutaneous emphysema ( air trapped in the subcutaneous tissue of the skin ) in the abdomen , chest , neck , and head . Subcutaneous emphysema , present in up to 85 % of people with TBI , is particularly indicative of the injury when it is only in the neck . Air is trapped in the chest cavity outside the lungs ( pneumothorax ) in about 70 % of TBI . Especially strong evidence that TBI has occurred is failure of a pneumothorax to resolve even when a chest tube is placed to rid the chest cavity of the air ; it shows that air is continually leaking into the chest cavity from the site of the tear . Air can also be trapped in the mediastinum , the center of the chest cavity ( pneumomediastinum ) . If air escapes from a penetrating injury to the neck , a definite diagnosis of TBI can be made . Hamman 's sign , a sound of crackling that occurs in time with the heartbeat , may also accompany TBI . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Injuries to the tracheobronchial tree within the chest may occur due to penetrating forces such as gunshot wounds , but are more often the result of blunt trauma . TBI due blunt forces usually results from high @-@ energy impacts such as falls from height and motor vehicle accidents ; the injury is rare in low @-@ impact mechanisms . Injuries of the trachea cause about 1 % of traffic @-@ related deaths . Other potential causes are falls from high places and injuries in which the chest is crushed . Explosions are another cause . 
 Gunshot wounds are the commonest form of penetrating trauma that cause TBI . Less commonly , knife wounds and shrapnel from motor vehicle accidents can also penetrate the airways . Most injuries to the trachea occur in the neck , because the airways within the chest are deep and therefore well protected ; however , up to a quarter of TBI resulting from penetrating trauma occurs within the chest . Injury to the cervical trachea usually affects the anterior ( front ) part of the trachea . 
 Certain medical procedures can also injure the airways ; these include tracheal intubation , bronchoscopy , and tracheotomy . The back of the trachea may be damaged during tracheotomy . TBI resulting from tracheal intubation ( insertion of a tube into the trachea ) is rare , and the mechanism by which it occurs is unclear . However , one likely mechanism involves an endotracheal tube catching in a fold of membrane and tearing it as it is advanced downward through the airway . When an endotracheal tube tears the trachea , it typically does so at the posterior ( back ) membranous wall . Unlike TBI that results from blunt trauma , most iatrogenic injuries to the airway involve longitudinal tears to the back of the trachea or tears on the side that pull the membranous part of the trachea away from the cartilage . Excessive pressure from the cuff of an endotracheal tube can reduce blood supply to the tissues of the trachea , leading to ischemia and potentially causing it to become ulcerated , infected , and , later , narrowed . 
 The mucosal lining of the trachea may also be injured by inhalation of hot gases or harmful fumes such as chlorine gas . This can lead to edema ( swelling ) , necrosis ( death of the tissue ) , scar formation , and ultimately stenosis . However , TBI due to inhalation , foreign body aspiration , and medical procedures is uncommon . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The structures in the tracheobronchial tree are well protected , so it normally takes a large amount of force to injure them . In blunt trauma , TBI is usually the result of violent compression of the chest . Rapid hyperextension of the neck , usually resulting from vehicle crashes , can also injure the trachea , and trauma to the neck can crush the trachea against the vertebrae . A crush injury of the larynx or cervical trachea can occur in head @-@ on collisions when the neck is hyperextended and strikes the steering wheel or dashboard ; this has been called a " dashboard injury " . The larynx and cervical trachea may also be injured in front @-@ on collisions by the seat belt . 
 Although the mechanism is not well understood , TBI due to blunt trauma is widely thought to be caused by any combination of three possible mechanisms : an increase in pressure within the airways , shearing , and pulling apart . The first type of injury , sometimes called an " explosive rupture " , may occur when the chest is violently compressed , for example when a driver strikes the steering wheel in a vehicle accident or when the chest is crushed . The pressure in the airways , especially the larger airways ( the trachea and bronchi ) , quickly rises as a result of the compression , because the glottis reflexively closes off the airways . When this pressure exceeds the elasticity of the tissues , they burst ; thus the membranous part of the trachea is more commonly affected by this mechanism of injury than cartilaginous portions . 
 The second mechanism may occur when the chest is suddenly decelerated , as occurs in vehicle accidents , producing a shearing force . The lungs are mobile in the chest cavity but their movement is more restricted near the hilum . Areas near the cricoid cartilage and carina are fixed to the thyroid cartilage and the pericardium respectively ; thus if the airways move , they can tear at these points of fixation . 
 The third mechanism occurs when the chest is compressed from front to back , causing it to widen from side to side . The lungs adhere to the chest wall because of the negative pressure between them and the pleural membranes lining the inside of the chest cavity ; thus when the chest widens , they are pulled apart . This creates tension at the carina ; the airway tears if this tensile force exceeds its elasticity . This mechanism may be the cause of injury when the chest is crushed . Most TBI are probably due to a combination of these three mechanisms . 
 When airways are damaged , air can escape from them and be trapped in the surrounding tissues in the neck ( subcutaneous emphysema ) and mediastinum ( pneumomediastinum ) ; if it builds up to high enough pressures there , it can compress the airways . Massive air leaks from a ruptured airway can also compromise the circulation by preventing blood from returning to the heart from the head and lower body ; this causes a potentially deadly reduction in the amount of blood the heart is able to pump out . Blood and other fluids can build up in the airways , and the injury can interfere with the <unk> of the airway and interfere with its continuity . However , even if the trachea is completely <unk> , the tissues surrounding it may hold it together enough for adequate air exchange to occur , at least at first . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Rapid diagnosis and treatment are important in the care of TBI ; if the injury is not diagnosed shortly after the injury , the risk of complications is higher . Bronchoscopy is the most effective method to diagnose , locate , and determine the severity of TBI , and it is usually the only method that allows a definitive diagnosis . Diagnosis with a flexible bronchoscope , which allows the injury to be visualized directly , is the fastest and most reliable technique . In people with TBI , bronchoscopy may reveal that the airway is torn , or that the airways are blocked by blood , or that a bronchus has collapsed , obscuring more distal ( lower ) bronchi from view . 
 Chest x @-@ ray is the initial imaging technique used to diagnose TBI . The film may not have any signs in an otherwise asymptomatic patient . Indications of TBI seen on radiographs include deformity in the trachea or a defect in the tracheal wall . <unk> may also show cervical emphysema , air in the tissues of the neck . X @-@ rays may also show accompanying injuries and signs such as fractures and subcutaneous emphysema . If subcutaneous emphysema occurs and the hyoid bone appears in an X @-@ ray to be sitting unusually high in the throat , it may be an indication that the trachea has been severed . TBI is also suspected if an endotracheal tube appears in an X @-@ ray to be out of place , or if its cuff appears to be more full than normal or to protrude through a tear in the airway . If a bronchus is torn all the way around , the lung may collapse outward toward the chest wall ( rather than inward , as it usually does in pneumothorax ) because it loses the attachment to the bronchus which normally holds it toward the center . In a person lying face @-@ up , the lung collapses toward the diaphragm and the back . This sign , described in 1969 , is called fallen lung sign and is pathognomonic of TBI ( that is , it is diagnostic for TBI because it does not occur in other conditions ) ; however it occurs only rarely . In as many as one in five cases , people with blunt trauma and TBI have no signs of the injury on chest X @-@ ray . CT scanning detects over 90 % of TBI resulting from blunt trauma , but neither X @-@ ray nor CT are a replacement for bronchoscopy . 
 At least 30 % of TBI are not discovered at first ; this number may be as high as 50 % . In about 10 % of cases , TBI has no specific signs either clinically or on chest radiography , and its detection may be further complicated by concurrent injuries , since TBI tends to occur after high @-@ energy accidents . Weeks or months may go by before the injury is diagnosed , even though the injury is better known than it was in the past . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Vehicle occupants who wear seat belts have a lower incidence of TBI after a motor vehicle accident . However , if the strap is situated across the front of the neck ( instead of the chest ) , this increases the risk of tracheal injury . Design of medical instruments can be modified to prevent iatrogenic TBI , and medical practitioners can use techniques that reduce the risk of injury with procedures such as tracheotomy . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Treatment of TBI varies based on the location and severity of injury and whether the patient is stable or having trouble breathing , but ensuring that the airway is patent so that the patient can breathe is always of paramount importance . Ensuring an open airway and adequate ventilation may be difficult in people with TBI . Intubation , one method to secure the airway , may be used to bypass a disruption in the airway in order to send air to the lungs . If necessary , a tube can be placed into the uninjured bronchus , and a single lung can be ventilated . If there is a penetrating injury to the neck through which air is escaping , the trachea may be intubated through the wound . Multiple unsuccessful attempts at conventional ( direct ) laryngoscopy may threaten the airway , so alternative techniques to visualize the airway , such as fiberoptic or video laryngoscopy , may be employed to facilitate tracheal intubation . If the upper trachea is injured , an incision can be made in the trachea ( tracheotomy ) or the cricothyroid membrane ( cricothyrotomy , or <unk> ) in order to ensure an open airway . However , cricothyrotomy may not be useful if the trachea is lacerated below the site of the artificial airway . Tracheotomy is used sparingly because it can cause complications such as infections and narrowing of the trachea and larynx . When it is impossible to establish a sufficient airway , or when complicated surgery must be performed , cardiopulmonary bypass may be used — blood is pumped out of the body , oxygenated by a machine , and pumped back in . If a pneumothorax occurs , a chest tube may be inserted into the pleural cavity to remove the air . 
 People with TBI are provided with supplemental oxygen and may need mechanical ventilation . Employment of certain measures such as Positive end @-@ expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) and ventilation at higher @-@ than @-@ normal pressures may be helpful in maintaining adequate oxygenation . However , such measures can also increase leakage of air through a tear , and can stress the sutures in a tear that has been surgically repaired ; therefore the lowest possible airway pressures that still maintain oxygenation are typically used . Mechanical ventilation can also cause pulmonary barotrauma when high pressure is required to ventilate the lungs . Techniques such as pulmonary toilet ( removal of secretions ) , fluid management , and treatment of pneumonia are employed to improve pulmonary compliance ( the elasticity of the lungs ) . 
 While TBI may be managed without surgery , surgical repair of the tear is considered standard in the treatment of most TBI . It is required if a tear interferes with ventilation ; if <unk> ( inflammation of the tissues in the mid @-@ chest ) occurs ; or if subcutaneous or mediastinal emphysema progresses rapidly ; or if air leak or large pneumothorax is persistent despite chest tube placement . Other indications for surgery are a tear more than one third the circumference of the airway , tears with loss of tissue , and a need for positive pressure ventilation . Damaged tissue around a rupture ( e.g. torn or scarred tissue ) may be removed in order to obtain clean edges that can be surgically repaired . <unk> of damaged tissue can shorten the trachea by as much as 50 % . Repair of extensive tears can include sewing a flap of tissue taken from the membranes surrounding the heart or lungs ( the pericardium and pleura , respectively ) over the sutures to protect them . When lung tissue is destroyed as a result of TBI complications , pneumonectomy or lobectomy ( removal of a lung or of one lobe , respectively ) may be required . <unk> is avoided whenever possible due to the high rate of death associated with the procedure . Surgery to repair a tear in the tracheobronchial tree can be successful even when it is performed months after the trauma , as can occur if the diagnosis of TBI is delayed . When airway stenosis results after delayed diagnosis , surgery is similar to that performed after early diagnosis : the stenotic section is removed and the cut airway is repaired . 
 = = Prognosis and complications = = 
 Most people with TBI who die do so within minutes of the injury , due to complications such as pneumothorax and insufficient airway and to other injuries that occurred at the same time . Most late deaths that occur in TBI are attributed to sepsis or multiple organ dysfunction syndrome ( <unk> ) . If the condition is not recognized and treated early , serious complications are more likely to occur ; for example , pneumonia and bronchiectasis may occur as late complications . Years can pass before the condition is recognized . Some TBI are so small that they do not have significant clinical manifestations ; they may never be noticed or diagnosed and may heal without intervention . 
 If granulation tissue grows over the injured site , it can cause stenosis of the airway , after a week to a month . The granulation tissue must be surgically excised . Delayed diagnosis of a bronchial rupture increases risk of infection and lengthens hospital stay . People with a narrowed airway may suffer dyspnea , coughing , wheezing , respiratory tract infection , and difficulty with clearing secretions . If the bronchiole is completely obstructed , atelectasis occurs : the alveoli of the lung collapse . Lung tissue distal to a completely obstructed bronchiole often does not become infected . Because it is filled with mucus , this tissue remains functional . When the secretions are removed , the affected portion of the lung is commonly able to function almost normally . However , infection is common in lungs distal to a partially obstructed bronchiole . Infected lung tissue distal to a stricture can be damaged , and wheezing and coughing may develop due to the narrowing . In addition to pneumonia , the stenosis may cause bronchiectasis , in which bronchi are dilated , to develop . Even after an airway with a stricture is restored to normal , the resulting loss of lung function may be permanent . 
 Complications may also occur with treatment ; for example a granuloma can form at the suture site . Also , the sutured wound can tear again , as occurs when there is excessive pressure in the airways from ventilation . However , for people who do receive surgery soon after the injury to repair the lesion , outcome is usually good ; the long @-@ term outcome is good for over 90 % of people who have TBI surgically repaired early in treatment . Even when surgery is performed years after the injury , the outlook is good , with low rates of death and disability and good chances of preserving lung function . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Rupture of the trachea or bronchus is the most common type of blunt injury to the airway . It is difficult to determine the incidence of TBI : in as many as 30 – 80 % of cases , death occurs before the person reaches a hospital , and these people may not be included in studies . On the other hand , some TBI are so small that they do not cause significant symptoms and are therefore never noticed . In addition , the injury sometimes is not associated with symptoms until complications develop later , further hindering estimation of the true incidence . However , autopsy studies have revealed TBI in 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 2 % of people who died after trauma . Of all neck and chest traumas , including people that died immediately , TBI is estimated to occur in 0 @.@ 5 – 2 % . An estimated 0 @.@ 5 % of <unk> patients treated in trauma centers have TBI . The incidence is estimated at 2 % in blunt chest and neck trauma and 1 – 2 % in penetrating chest trauma . <unk> injuries occur in 8 % of patients with penetrating injury to the neck , and TBI occurs in 2 @.@ 8 % of blunt chest trauma deaths . In people with blunt trauma who do reach a hospital alive , reports have found incidences of 2 @.@ 1 % and 5 @.@ 3 % . Another study of blunt chest trauma revealed an incidence of only 0 @.@ 3 % , but a mortality rate of 67 % ( possibly due in part to associated injuries ) . The incidence of iatrogenic TBI ( that caused by medical procedures ) is rising , and the risk may be higher for women and the elderly . TBI results about once every 20 @,@ 000 times someone is intubated through the mouth , but when intubation is performed <unk> , the incidence may be as high as 15 % . 
 The mortality rate for people who reach a hospital alive was estimated at 30 % in 1966 ; more recent estimates place this number at 9 % . The number of people reaching a hospital alive has increased , perhaps due to improved prehospital care or specialized treatment centers . Of those who reach the hospital alive but then die , most do so within the first two hours of arrival . The sooner a TBI is diagnosed , the higher the mortality rate ; this is likely due to other accompanying injuries that prove fatal . 
 Accompanying injuries often play a key role in the outcome . Injuries that may accompany TBI include pulmonary contusion and laceration ; and fractures of the sternum , ribs and clavicles . Spinal cord injury , facial trauma , traumatic aortic rupture , injuries to the abdomen , lung , and head are present in 40 – 100 % . The most common accompanying injury is esophageal perforation or rupture ( known as Boerhaave syndrome ) , which occurs in as many as 43 % of the penetrating injuries to the neck that cause tracheal injury . 
 = = History = = 
 Throughout most of history the mortality rate of TBI was thought to be 100 % . However , in 1871 a healed TBI was noted in a duck that had been killed by a hunter , thus demonstrating that the injury could be survived , at least in the general sense . This report , made by Winslow , was the first record in the medical literature of a bronchus injury . In 1873 , <unk> made one of the earliest reports of TBI in the medical literature : a 74 @-@ year @-@ old woman whose chest was crushed by a wagon wheel was found on autopsy to have an avulsion of the right bronchus . Long @-@ term survival of the injury was unknown in humans until a report was made of a person who survived in 1927 . In 1931 , a report made by Nissen described successful removal of a lung in a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl who had had narrowing of the bronchus due to the injury . Repair of TBI was probably first attempted in 1945 , when the first documented case of a successful suturing of a lacerated bronchus was made . Prior to 1950 , the mortality rate was 36 % ; it had fallen to 9 % by 2001 ; this improvement was likely due to improvements in treatments and surgical techniques , including those for injuries commonly associated with TBI . 
 = Word of God Speak = 
 " Word of God Speak " is a song by Christian rock band MercyMe . Written by Bart Millard and Pete Kipley , " Word of God Speak " uses sparse instrumentation , featuring only piano and strings to accompany Millard 's vocals . The lyrics to " Word of God Speak " reflect on the idea that it is impossible to speak of an infinite God with a limited vocabulary . 
 Released as the second single from MercyMe 's 2002 album Spoken For , Billboard magazine ranked the song at the top spot on their 2000s decade @-@ end Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . " Word of God Speak " spent 23 weeks atop the Billboard Christian Songs chart , a record for that chart ; it spent a total of 76 weeks on that chart altogether . It also topped the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , and peaked at No. 25 on the Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " also won the Dove Awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 MercyMe 's lead singer Bart Millard wrote " Word of God Speak " while touring in support of their single " I Can Only Imagine " . The travel was exhausting , and Millard commented in an interview that , on one of the nights on tour , he " went to bed just really frustrated ... It started feeling like everything I was saying was the same . I just thought , I have nothing else to say . So I went to bed with that on my mind " . After falling asleep , Millard woke up early in the morning and wrote several lines to the song in his journal before going back to sleep . Several weeks later , he was searching through his journal and found the notes again ; when he went to the band 's studio , he showed the notes to his producer , Pete Kipley . The two finished the lyrics to the song in less than thirty minutes , and recorded the piano track the same night ; they also brought in someone to compose a string track for the song . Millard wanted " Word of God Speak " to contain only piano , avoiding the big production that could assure the song success on the radio , as he felt the simple production would mirror the lyrics . 
 " Word of God Speak " was written by Bart Millard and Pete Kipley ; it was also produced by Kipley . It was recorded at several locations ; Luminous Sound in Dallas , Texas , The Sound Kitchen in Franklin , Tennessee , Indigo Room in Franklin , Tennessee , <unk> Sound Lab in <unk> Island , Georgia , The <unk> in Greenville , Texas , Mountain View Recorders in <unk> , New Mexico , and Playground Recording in Wylie , Texas . It was mastered by Richard Dodd at Vital Recordings , and mixed by Salvo at Salvo Mix . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Word of God Speak " is a contemporary Christian song with a length of three minutes and seven seconds . It is set in the key of C major and has a tempo of 69 beats per minute , with Millard 's vocal range spanning from C4 @-@ F5 . 
 The music to " Word of God Speak " is stripped down , featuring piano and vocals ; a string track is also present . The simple production was intended to mirror the lyrics of the song , which reflect on the concept that it is impossible to speak of an infinite God with the limited vocabulary of humanity . A critic , Russ Breimier , also noted the song reminds that " prayer and worship are not flowery orations " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 On his review of Spoken For , Russ Breimeier commented that " I particularly liked the brief " Word of God Speak , " which simply reminds us that prayer and worship aren 't about flowery orations ... This song is to prayer what " Heart of Worship " is to worship " . 
 " Word of God Speak " won the awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Word of God Speak " peaked at number one on the Billboard Christian Songs chart , and spent a record 23 weeks at the top of the chart , and a total of 76 weeks on the chart . On the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart , the song spent 21 weeks atop the chart , and spent 61 weeks on it in total . On the Radio & Records Christian AC chart , " Word of God Speak " spent 10 weeks at the top , and stayed on the chart for 46 weeks in total ; on the Radio & Records INSPO chart , the song spent nine weeks atop the chart , and spent 21 weeks on it in total . Additionally , the song peaked at No. 25 on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart , and spent 12 weeks on that chart in total . 
 " Word of God Speak " ranked at No. 5 on the 2004 year @-@ end Billboard Hot Christian Singles & Tracks Titles chart , and at No. 9 on the 2004 year @-@ end Billboard Hot Christian Adult Contemporary Titles chart . It ranked at No. 1 on both the 2000s decade @-@ end Christian Songs chart and the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian AC chart . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Word of God Speak " has been covered by several artists . In 2005 , actress Kristin Chenoweth covered the song on her album As I Am , and Christian rock band <unk> recorded a version of the song on their 2005 album Strong Tower . In 2004 , contemporary Christian band Big Daddy Weave recorded a version of the song that was included on the compilation album WOW Worship : Red . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD release 
 " I Can Only Imagine " – 4 : 08 ( Bart Millard ) 
 " Word of God Speak " – 3 : 07 ( Peter Kipley , Millard ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 ( Credits lifted from the album liner notes ) 
 MercyMe 
 Bart Millard – lead vocals 
 Jim Bryson – keys , recording 
 Additional performers 
 Roy G. Biv String Vibe - strings 
 Technical / Misc . 
 Csaba <unk> - recording 
 J. R. McNeely - recording 
 Lee Bridges - recording 
 Richard Dodd - mastering 
 Salvo - mixing 
 = James Bowie = 
 James " Jim " Bowie ( pronounced / <unk> / BOO @-@ ee ) ( c . 1796 – March 6 , 1836 ) was a 19th @-@ century American pioneer , who played a prominent role in the Texas Revolution , culminating in his death at the Battle of the Alamo . Stories of him as a fighter and frontiersman , both real and fictitious , have made him a legendary figure in Texas history and a folk hero of American culture . 
 Born in Kentucky , Bowie spent most of his life in Louisiana , where he was raised and where he later worked as a land speculator . His rise to fame began in 1827 on reports of the Sandbar Fight . What began as a duel between two other men deteriorated into a melée in which Bowie , having been shot and stabbed , killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife . This , and other stories of Bowie 's prowess with a knife , led to the widespread popularity of the Bowie knife . 
 Bowie 's reputation was cemented by his role in the Texas Revolution . After moving to Texas in 1830 , Bowie became a Mexican citizen and married Ursula Veramendi , the daughter of the Mexican vice governor of the province . His fame in Texas grew following his failed expedition to find the lost San Saba mine , during which his small party repelled an attack by a large Indian raiding party . At the outbreak of the Texas Revolution , Bowie joined the Texas militia , leading forces at the Battle of Concepción and the Grass Fight . In January 1836 , he arrived at the Alamo , where he commanded the volunteer forces until an illness left him bedridden . Bowie died with the other Alamo defenders on March 6 . Despite conflicting accounts of the manner of his death , the " most popular , and probably the most accurate " accounts maintain that he died in his bed after emptying his pistols into several Mexican soldiers . 
 = = Early years = = 
 According to his older brother John , James Bowie was born in Logan County , Kentucky , on March 10 , 1796 ( Historical marker : 36 ° 46 ' 25 " N 86 ° 42 ' 10 " W ) . Historian Raymond Thorp gave his birth date as April 10 , but Thorp did not provide any documentation for that date . Bowie 's surname was pronounced to rhyme with the French " Louis " ( / <unk> / BOO @-@ ee ) . ( Although some works refer to the alternate pronunciation / <unk> / BO @-@ ee . ) 
 Bowie was the ninth of ten children born to <unk> Ap @-@ Catesby Jones and John Bowie . His father had been wounded while fighting in the American Revolution , and in 1782 married the young woman who had nursed him back to health . The Bowies moved frequently , first settling in Georgia , before moving to Kentucky . At the time of Bowie 's birth , his father owned eight slaves , eleven head of cattle , seven horses , and one stud horse . The following year the family acquired 200 acres ( 80 ha ) along the Red River . They sold that property in 1800 and relocated to Missouri , before moving to Spanish Louisiana in 1802 , where they settled on <unk> Bayou in Rapides Parish . 
 The family moved again in 1809 , settling on Bayou <unk> in Louisiana before finding a permanent home in Opelousas in 1812 . The Bowie children were raised on the frontier and even as small children were expected to help clear the land and plant crops . All the children learned to read and write in English , but James and his elder brother Rezin could also read , write , and speak Spanish and French fluently . The children learned to survive on the frontier and how to fish and run a farm and plantation . James Bowie became proficient with pistol , rifle , and knife , and had a reputation for fearlessness . When he was a boy , one of his Indian friends even taught him to rope alligators . 
 In response to Andrew Jackson 's plea for volunteers to fight the British in the War of 1812 , James and Rezin enlisted in the Louisiana militia in late 1814 . The Bowie brothers arrived in New Orleans too late to participate in the fighting . After mustering out of the militia , Bowie settled in Rapides Parish , where he supported himself by sawing planks and lumber and floating them down the bayou for sale . In June 1819 , he joined the Long expedition , an effort to liberate Texas from Spanish rule . The group encountered little resistance and , after capturing Nacogdoches , declared Texas an independent republic . The extent of Bowie 's participation is unclear , but he returned to Louisiana before the invasion was repelled by Spanish troops . 
 = = Land speculator = = 
 Shortly before the senior Bowie died in 1818 or 1819 , he gave ten slaves as well as horses and cattle to both James and Rezin . For the next seven years , the brothers worked together to develop several large estates in Lafourche Parish and Opelousas . Louisiana 's population was growing rapidly , and the brothers hoped to take advantage of its rising land prices through speculation . Without the capital required to buy large tracts , they entered into a partnership with pirate Jean Lafitte in 1818 to raise money . By then , the United States had outlawed the importation of slaves , and most southern states allowed anyone who informed on a slave trader to receive half of what the imported slaves would earn at auction as a reward . Bowie made three trips to Lafitte 's compound on Galveston Island . On each occasion , he bought smuggled slaves and took them directly to a customhouse to inform on his own actions . When the customs officers offered the slaves for auction , Bowie purchased them and received back half the price he had paid , as allowed by the state laws . He then could legally transport the slaves and resell them at a greater market value in New Orleans or areas farther up the Mississippi River . Using this scheme , the brothers collected $ 65 @,@ 000 to be used for their land speculation . 
 In 1825 , the two brothers joined with their younger brother Stephen to buy Acadia , a plantation near Alexandria . Within two years , they had established the first steam mill in Louisiana to be used for grinding sugar cane . The plantation became known as a model estate , but on February 12 , 1831 , they sold it and 65 slaves for $ 90 @,@ 000 . With their profits , James and Rezin bought a plantation in Arkansas . 
 Bowie and his brother John were involved in a major court case in the late 1820s over land speculation . When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803 , it promised to honor all former land grant claims , and for the next 20 years efforts were made to establish who owned what land . In May 1824 , Congress authorized the superior courts of each territory to hear suits from those who claimed they had been overlooked . The Arkansas Superior Court received 126 claims in late 1827 from residents who claimed to have purchased land in former Spanish grants from the Bowie brothers . Although the Superior Court originally confirmed most of those claims , the decisions were reversed in February 1831 after further research showed that the land had never belonged to the Bowies and that the original land grant documentation had been forged . The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the reversal in 1833 . When the disgruntled purchasers considered suing the Bowies , they discovered that the documents in the case had been removed from the court ; left without evidence , they declined to pursue a case . 
 = = Bowie knife = = 
 Bowie became internationally famous as a result of a feud with Norris Wright , the sheriff of Rapides Parish . Bowie had supported Wright 's opponent in the race for sheriff , and Wright , a bank director , had been instrumental in turning down a Bowie loan application . After a confrontation in Alexandria one afternoon , Wright fired a shot at Bowie , after which Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife at all times . The knife he carried had a blade that was 9 @.@ 25 inches ( 23 @.@ 5 cm ) long and 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 cm ) wide . 
 The following year , on September 19 , 1827 , Bowie and Wright attended a duel on a sandbar outside of Natchez , Mississippi . Bowie supported duellist Samuel Levi Wells III , while Wright supported Wells 's opponent , Dr. Thomas Harris Maddox . The <unk> each fired two shots and , as neither man had been injured , resolved their duel with a handshake . Other members of the groups , who had various reasons for disliking each other , began fighting . Bowie was shot in the hip ; after regaining his feet he drew a knife , described as a butcher knife , and charged his attacker , who hit Bowie over the head with his empty pistol , breaking the pistol and knocking Bowie to the ground . Wright shot at and missed the prone Bowie , who returned fire and possibly hit Wright . Wright then drew his sword cane and impaled Bowie . When Wright attempted to retrieve his blade by placing his foot on Bowie 's chest and tugging , Bowie pulled him down and disemboweled Wright with his large knife . Wright died instantly , and Bowie , with Wright 's sword still protruding from his chest , was shot again and stabbed by another member of the group . The doctors who had been present for the duel removed the bullets and patched Bowie 's other wounds . 
 Newspapers picked up the story , which became known as the Sandbar Fight , and described in detail Bowie 's fighting prowess and his unusual knife . Witness accounts agreed that Bowie did not attack first , and the others had focused their attack on Bowie because " they considered him the most dangerous man among their opposition . " The incident cemented Bowie 's reputation across the South as a superb knife fighter . 
 There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same as what is now known as a Bowie knife , also called an Arkansas Toothpick . Multiple accounts exist of who designed and built the first Bowie knife . Some claim that Bowie designed it , while others attribute the design to noted knife makers of the time . In a letter to The Planter 's Advocate , Rezin Bowie claimed to have invented the knife , however , and many Bowie family members as well as " most authorities on the Bowie knife tend to believe it was invented by " Rezin . Rezin Bowie 's grandchildren , however , claimed that Rezin merely supervised his blacksmith , who was the creator of the knife . 
 After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie used his knife to defend himself , the Bowie knife became very popular . Many craftsmen and manufacturers made their own versions , and major cities of the Old Southwest had " Bowie knife schools " that taught " the art of cut , thrust , and parry . " His fame , and that of his knife , spread to England , and by the early 1830s many British manufacturers were producing Bowie knives for shipment to the United States . The design of the knife continued to evolve , but today a Bowie knife generally is considered to have a blade 8 @.@ 25 inches ( 21 @.@ 0 cm ) long and 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 3 @.@ 2 cm ) wide , with a curved point , a " sharp false edge cut from both sides " , and a cross @-@ guard to protect the user 's hands . 
 = = Establishment in Texas = = 
 In 1828 , after recovering from wounds suffered in the Sandbar Fight , Bowie decided to move to Coahuila y Texas , at that time a state in the Mexican federation . The 1824 Constitution of Mexico banned religions other than Roman Catholicism and gave preference to Mexican citizens in receiving land . Bowie was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith in San Antonio on April 28 , 1828 , sponsored by the alcalde ( chief administrator ) of the town , Juan Martín de Veramendi , and the wife of the administrator , Josefa Navarro . For the next 18 months , Bowie traveled through Louisiana and Mississippi . In 1829 , he became engaged to Cecilia Wells , who died in Alexandria , on September 29 , two weeks before they were to be married . 
 On January 1 , 1830 , Bowie left Louisiana for permanent residency in Texas . He stopped at Nacogdoches , at Jared E. Groce 's farm on the Brazos River , and in San Felipe , where Bowie presented a letter of introduction to Stephen F. Austin from Thomas F. McKinney , one of the Old Three Hundred colonists . On February 20 , Bowie took an oath of allegiance to Mexico and then proceeded to San Antonio de Bexar . At the time , the city was known as Bexar and had a population of 2500 , mostly of Mexican descent , and Bowie 's fluency in Spanish helped him establish himself in the area . Bowie was elected a commander , with the rank of colonel , of the Texas Rangers later that year . Although the Rangers would not be organized officially until 1835 , Stephen F. Austin had founded the group by employing 30 men to keep the peace and protect the colonists from attacks by hostile Indians . Other areas assembled similar volunteer militias , and Bowie commanded a group of the volunteers . 
 Bowie renounced his American citizenship and became a Mexican citizen on September 30 , 1830 , after promising to establish textile mills in the state of Coahuila y Tejas . To fulfill his promise , Bowie entered into partnership with Veramendi to build cotton and wool mills in Saltillo . With his citizenship assured , Bowie now had the right to buy up to 11 leagues of public land . He convinced 14 or 15 other citizens to apply for land in order to turn it over to him , giving him 700 @,@ 000 acres ( 280 @,@ 000 ha ) for speculation . Bowie may have been the first to induce settlers to apply for empresario grants , which could then be sold in bulk to speculators as Bowie had . The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation . 
 On April 25 , 1831 , Bowie married nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Maria Ursula de Veramendi , the daughter of his business partner , who had become the vice governor of the province . Several days before the ceremony , he signed a dowry contract promising to pay his new bride 15 @,@ 000 pesos ( approximately $ 15 @,@ 000 then , or $ 333 @,@ 000 today ) in cash or property within two years of the marriage . At the time , Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $ 223 @,@ 000 ( $ 4 @,@ 960 @,@ 000 today ) , mostly in land of questionable title . Bowie also lied about his age , claiming to be 30 rather than 35 . The couple built a house in San Antonio on land Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission . After a short time , however , they moved into the Veramendi Palace , living with Ursula 's parents , who supplied them with spending money . The couple had two children , Marie <unk> ( b . March 20 , 1832 ) and James Veramendi ( b . July 18 , 1833 ) . 
 Maria Ursula , her parents , and both children died in September 1833 from cholera . 
 = = Los <unk> Mine = = 
 Shortly after his marriage Bowie became fascinated with the story of the " lost " Los <unk> Mine ( also known as the lost San Saba Mine and the lost Bowie Mine ) , said to be northwest of San Antonio near the ruin of the Spanish Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba . According to legend , the mine had been operated by local Indians before being seized by the Spanish . After Mexico won independence from Spain , government interest in the mining potential waned . A number of native groups roamed the area , including Comanche , Lipan Apache , Tawakoni , and Tonkawa . Without government troops to keep hostile natives at bay , mining and mineral exploration were impossible . Some believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area , the Lipan took over the mine . 
 After obtaining permission from the Mexican government to mount an expedition into Indian territory to search for the legendary silver mine , Bowie , his brother Rezin , and ten others set out for San Saba on November 2 , 1831 . Six miles ( 10 km ) from their goal , the group stopped to negotiate with a large raiding party of Indians — reportedly more than 120 Tawakoni and Waco , plus another 40 Caddo . The attempts at parley failed and Bowie and his group fought for their lives for the next 13 hours . When the Indians finally retreated , Bowie reportedly had lost only one man , while more than 40 Indians had been killed and 30 were wounded . In the meantime , a party of friendly Comanche rode into San Antonio bringing word of the raiding party , which outnumbered the Bowie expedition by 14 to 1 . The citizens of San Antonio believed the members of the Bowie expedition must have perished , and Ursula Bowie began wearing widow 's weeds . 
 To the surprise of the town , the surviving members of the group returned to San Antonio on December 6 . Bowie 's report of the expedition , written in Spanish , was printed in several newspapers , further establishing his reputation . He set out again with a larger force the following month , but returned home empty @-@ handed after two and a half months of searching . 
 Bowie never talked of his exploits despite his increasing fame . Captain William Y. Lacey , who spent eight months living in the wilderness with Bowie , described him as a humble man who never used profanity or vulgarities . 
 = = Texas Revolution = = 
 = = = Texan rumblings = = = 
 Between 1830 and 1832 the Mexican Congress passed a series of laws that seemed to discriminate against Anglo colonists in the province of Coahuila y Tejas , increasing tension between the Anglo citizenry and Mexican officials . In response to the rumblings , Mexican troops established military posts in several locations within the province , including San Antonio de Béxar . Although much of the military supported the administration of President Anastasio Bustamante , Antonio López de Santa Anna led an insurrection against him in 1832 . Anglo colonists in Texas supported Santa Anna and General José Antonio Mexía , who led soldiers into Texas to oust commanders loyal to Bustamante . 
 After hearing that the Mexican army commander in Nacogdoches , José de las Piedras , had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms , Bowie cut short a visit to Natchez in July 1832 to return to Texas . On August 2 , 1832 , he joined a group of other Texans and marched into Nacogdoches to " present their demands " to Piedras . Before the group reached the building housing the town officials , they were attacked by a force of 100 Mexican cavalry . The Texans returned fire and the Battle of Nacogdoches began . After the cavalry retreated , they initiated a siege of the garrison . After a second battle , in which Piedras lost 33 men , the Mexican army evacuated during the night . Bowie and 18 companions ambushed the fleeing army and , after Piedras fled , marched the soldiers back to Nacogdoches . Bowie later served as a delegate to the Convention of 1833 , which formally requested that Texas become its own state within the Mexican federation . 
 Several months later , a cholera epidemic struck Texas . Fearing the disease would reach San Antonio , Bowie sent his pregnant wife and their daughter to the family estate in Monclova in the company of her parents and brother . The cholera epidemic instead struck Monclova , and between September 6 and September 14 , Ursula , their children , her brother , and her parents all died of the disease . Bowie , on business in Natchez , heard of his family 's deaths in November . From then on , he drank heavily and became " careless in his dress . " 
 The following year , the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in Texas , and Bowie returned to land speculation . He was appointed a land commissioner and tasked with promoting settlement in the area purchased by John T. Mason . His appointment ended in May 1835 when President Antonio López de Santa Anna abolished the Coahuila y Tejas government and ordered the arrest of all Texans ( including Bowie ) doing business in Monclova . Bowie was forced to flee Monclova and return to the Anglo areas of Texas . 
 The Anglos in Texas began agitating for war against Santa Anna , and Bowie worked with William B. Travis , the leader of the War Party , to gain support . Bowie visited several Indian villages in East Texas in an attempt to persuade the reluctant tribes to fight against the Mexican government . Santa Anna responded to the rumblings by ordering large numbers of Mexican troops to Texas . 
 = = = Battle of Concepción = = = 
 The Texas Revolution began on October 2 , 1835 , with the Battle of Gonzales . Stephen F. Austin formed an army of 500 men to march on the Mexican forces in San Antonio with the cannon that had precipitated the fight . The name " Texian Army " sometimes is applied to this militia . On October 22 , Austin asked Bowie , now a colonel in the volunteer militia , and James W. Fannin to scout the area around the missions of San Francisco de la Espada and San José y San Miguel de Aguayo to find supplies for the volunteer forces . The scouting party left with 92 men , many of them members of the New Orleans Grays who had just arrived in Texas . After discovering a good defensive position near Mission Concepción , the group requested that Austin 's army join them . 
 On the foggy morning of October 28 , Mexican General Domingo Ugartechea led a force of 300 infantry and cavalry soldiers and two small cannons against the Texian forces . Although the Mexican army was able to get within 200 yards ( 183 m ) , the Texian defensive position protected them from fire . As the Mexicans stopped to reload their cannon , the Texians climbed a bluff and picked off some of the soldiers . The stalemate ended shortly after Bowie led a charge to seize one of the Mexican cannons , at that time only 80 yards ( 73 m ) away . Ugartechea retreated with his troops , ending the Battle of Concepción . One Texian and ten Mexican troops had been killed . One of the men under Bowie 's command during the battle later praised him " as a born leader , never needlessly spending a bullet or imperiling a life , who repeatedly admonished ... Keep under cover boys , and reserve your fire ; we haven 't a man to spare . " 
 = = = Grass Fight and commission difficulties = = = 
 An hour after the battle ended , Austin arrived with the rest of the Texian army to begin a siege of San Antonio de Béxar , where General Martín Perfecto de Cós , the overall commander of Mexican forces in Texas , and his troops were garrisoned . Two days later , Bowie resigned from Austin 's army because he did not have an official commission in the army , and he disliked the " minor tasks of scouting and spying " . 
 On November 3 , 1835 , Texas declared itself an independent state , and a provisional government was formed with Henry Smith of Brazoria elected provisional governor . Austin requested to be relieved of his command of the army , and Sam Houston was named army chief . Edward Burleson was chosen as temporary commander of the troops in San Antonio . Bowie appeared before the council at some point and spoke for an hour , asking for a commission . The council refused Bowie 's request , likely because of lingering animosity over his land dealings . 
 Houston offered Bowie a commission as an officer on his staff , but Bowie rejected the opportunity , explaining that he wanted to be in the midst of the fighting . Instead , Bowie enlisted in the army as a private under Fannin . He distinguished himself again in the Grass Fight on November 26 . Cós had sent approximately 187 men to cut grass for his horses . As they returned to San Antonio , Bowie took 60 mounted men to intercept the party , which they believed carried valuable cargo . The Mexican troops quickened their pace in the hopes of reaching the safety of the city , but Bowie and his cavalry chased them . At the end of the fight , the Texians had two wounded men , but had captured many horses and mules . 
 Shortly after Bowie left San Antonio , Ben Milam led an assault on the city . In the ensuing fighting , the Texians suffered only a few casualties , while the Mexican army lost many troops to death and desertion . Cós surrendered and returned to Mexico , taking with him the last Mexican troops in Texas . Believing the war was over , many of the Texian volunteers left the army and returned to their families . In early January 1836 , Bowie went to San Felipe and asked the council to allow him to recruit a regiment . He again was turned down as he " was not an officer of the government nor army . " 
 = = = Battle at the Alamo = = = 
 After Houston received word that Santa Anna was leading a large force to San Antonio , Bowie offered to lead volunteers to defend the Alamo from the expected attack . He arrived with 30 men on January 19 , where they found a force of 104 men with a few weapons and a few cannons , but not many supplies and little gunpowder . Houston knew that there were not enough men to hold the fort in an attack and had given Bowie authority to remove the artillery and blow up the fortification . Bowie and the Alamo commander , James C. Neill , decided they did not have enough oxen to move the artillery , and they did not want to destroy the fortress . On January 26 , one of Bowie 's men , James Bonham , organized a rally which passed a resolution in favor of holding the Alamo . Bonham signed the resolution first , with Bowie 's signature second . 
 Through Bowie 's connections because of his marriage and his fluency in Spanish , the predominantly Mexican population of San Antonio often furnished him with information about the movements of the Mexican army . After learning that Santa Anna had 4 @,@ 500 troops and was heading for the city , Bowie wrote several letters to the provisional government asking for help in defending the Alamo , especially " men , money , rifles , and cannon powder " . In another letter , to Governor Smith , he reiterated his view that " the salvation of Texas depends in great measure on keeping Béxar out of the hands of the enemy . It serves as the frontier picquet guard , and if it were in the possession of Santa Anna , there is no stronghold from which to repel him in his march toward the Sabine . " The letter to Smith ended , " Colonel Neill and myself have come to the solemn resolution that we will rather die in these ditches than give it up to the enemy . " 
 On February 3 , Davy Crockett appeared with thirty Tennesseans . Neill went on furlough on February 11 to visit his sick family , leaving Travis , a member of the regular army , in command . Bowie was older than Travis with a better reputation and considered himself a colonel , thus outranking Travis , a lieutenant colonel . He refused to answer to Travis , who called an election for the men to choose their own commander . They chose Bowie , infuriating Travis . Bowie celebrated his appointment by getting very drunk and causing havoc in San Antonio , releasing all prisoners in the local jails and harassing citizens . Travis was disgusted , but two days later the men agreed to a joint command ; Bowie would command the volunteers , and Travis would command the regular army and the volunteer cavalry . 
 On February 23 , the bells of San Fernando sounded the alarm of the approach of the Mexicans . Travis ordered all the Texan forces into the Alamo . James Bowie hurried to gather provisions and herd cattle into the Alamo compound . Fearing for the safety of his wife 's relatives in San Antonio , Bowie invited her cousins <unk> Navarro and Juana Navarro Alsbury , as well as Alsbury 's 18 @-@ month @-@ old son , <unk> Perez Jr . , to stay inside the walls of the Alamo . Bowie also brought several black servants , some of whom worked at the Veramendi Palace , into the security of the Alamo fortress . Bowie had been ill , and two doctors , including the fort surgeon , were unable to diagnose his illness . Travis became the sole commander of the forces when Bowie was confined to bed . Santa Anna and his army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24 . The Mexican army raised a red flag to warn the defenders that no quarter would be given . 
 Bowie and Travis began sending out couriers with pleas for provisions and assistance . Travis sent Juan Seguin on Bowie 's horse , to recruit reinforcements on February 25 , and 32 additional men arrived . On February 26 , David Crockett reported that Bowie , though suffering from his affliction , continued to crawl from his bed around noon every day and presented himself to the Alamo 's inhabitants , which much boosted the morale of his comrades . Thirty @-@ five years after the Alamo fell , a reporter identified Louis " Moses " Rose as the only man to have " deserted " the Texian forces at the Alamo . According to the reporter 's version of Rose 's account , when Travis realized that the Mexican army would likely prevail , he drew a line in the sand and asked those willing to die for the cause to cross the line . At Bowie 's request Crockett and several others carried the cot over the line , leaving Rose alone on the other side . After its publication , several other eyewitnesses confirmed the account , but as Rose was deceased the story can only be authenticated by the word of the reporter , who admitted to embellishing other articles , " and thus many historians refuse to believe it . " 
 Bowie perished with the rest of the Alamo defenders on March 6 , when the Mexicans attacked . Most of the noncombatants in the fort , including Bowie 's relatives , survived . Santa Anna ordered the alcalde of San Antonio , Francisco Antonio Ruiz , to confirm the identities of Bowie , Travis , and Crockett . After first ordering that Bowie be buried , as he was too brave a man to be burned like a dog , Santa Anna later had Bowie 's body placed with those of the other Texians on the funeral pyre . 
 When Bowie 's mother was informed of his death , she calmly stated , " I 'll wager no wounds were found in his back . " Various eyewitnesses to the battle gave conflicting accounts of Bowie 's death . A newspaper article claimed that a Mexican soldier saw Bowie carried from his room on his cot , alive , after the conclusion of the battle . The soldier maintained that Bowie verbally castigated a Mexican officer in fluent Spanish , and the officer ordered Bowie 's tongue cut out and his still @-@ breathing body thrown onto the funeral pyre . This account has been disputed by numerous other witnesses , and it is thought to have been invented by the reporter . Other witnesses maintained that they saw several Mexican soldiers enter Bowie 's room , bayonet him , and carry him , alive , from the room . Various other stories circulated , with some witnesses claiming that Bowie shot himself and others saying he was killed by soldiers while too weak to lift his head . Alcalde Ruiz said that Bowie was found " dead in his bed . " According to Wallace O Chariton , The " most popular , and probably the most accurate " version is that Bowie died on his cot , " back braced against the wall , and using his pistols and his famous knife . " One year after the battle , Juan Seguin returned to the Alamo and gathered the remaining ashes from the funeral pyre . He placed these in a coffin inscribed with the names of Bowie , Travis , and Crockett . The ashes were interred at the Cathedral of San Fernando . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite his continual pronouncements of wealth , Bowie 's estate was found to be very small . His possessions were auctioned for only $ 99 @.@ 50 . His larger legacy is his position as " one of the legendary characters of the American frontier . " Bowie left a " frustratingly sparse paper trail " of his life , and for many " where history failed , the legends prevailed . " Although Bowie 's name and knife were well known during his lifetime , his legend grew after October 1852 , when DeBow 's Review published an article written by his brother John Jones Bowie called , " Early Life in the Southwest — The Bowies . " The article focused primarily on the exploits of Jim Bowie . Beginning with that article , " romanticized stories " about Bowie began appearing in national press . In many cases , " these stories were pure melodrama , with Bowie rescuing some naïve planter 's son or damsel in distress . " 
 Jim Bowie was inducted posthumously into the Blade Magazine Cutlery Hall of Fame at the 1988 Blade Show in Atlanta , Georgia , in recognition of the impact that his eponymous design made upon generations of knife makers and cutlery companies . 
 A number of films have depicted the events of the Battle of the Alamo , and Bowie has appeared as a character in each . 
 From 1956 to 1958 , Bowie was the subject of a CBS television series , The Adventures of Jim Bowie , which was primarily set in 1830s Louisiana , although later episodes ventured into the Mexican province of Texas . The show , which starred Scott Forbes as Jim Bowie , was based on the 1946 novel Tempered Blade . 
 Bowie also is the namesake of rock star David Bowie , who was born David Robert Hayward @-@ Jones . Jones changed his name in the 1960s because he feared his name was too similar to Davy Jones , a member of the already famous The Monkees . He chose the surname Bowie because he admired James Bowie and the Bowie knife , although his pronunciation uses the BO @-@ ee ( / <unk> / ) variant . 
 Bowie County in northeast Texas , and the city of Bowie in Montague County , Texas , were both named in honor of James Bowie . 
 = Hygrophorus agathosmus = 
 Hygrophorus agathosmus , commonly known as the gray almond waxy cap or the almond <unk> , is a species of fungus in the Hygrophoraceae family . It was first described by Elias Magnus Fries in 1815 ; Fries gave it its current name in 1838 . A widespread species , it is distributed in the United States , Europe , Africa , and India , and can be found growing under spruce and pine in mixed forests . The fruit bodies are characterized by a light grayish cap that measures up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , waxy gills , a dry stem , and the distinct odor of bitter almonds . An edible but bland @-@ tasting mushroom , extracts of the fruit bodies have been shown in laboratory tests to have antimicrobial activity against various bacteria that are pathogenic to humans . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and naming = = 
 The species was originally named Agaricus agathosmus by Swedish mycologist Elias Fries in 1815 ; he later moved it into the genus Hygrophorus in 1838 . In the interim , English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley named the species Agaricus <unk> in 1836 , although he too would later transfer the species to Hygrophorus in 1860 . In 1948 , Richard Dennis examined the type material , and concluded that the two names referred to the same species . Additional historical synonyms include Limacium <unk> var. <unk> ( Kummer , 1871 ) , and Limacium <unk> ( <unk> , 1877 ) . 
 In their 1963 monograph of the Hygrophorus of North America , American mycologists Lexemuel Ray Hesler and Alexander H. Smith classified H. agathosmus in the subsection <unk> , a grouping of related species characterized by a dry stem , and the absence of a gelatinous outer veil . 
 The specific epithet agathosmus is derived from the Greek word <unk> meaning “ good ” , and osme meaning “ scent ” . Hygrophorus agathosmus is commonly known as the gray almond waxy cap , or the almond <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 4 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , and initially convex with the edges rolled inwards . As it ages and the cap expands , it becomes flat , sometimes with the center slightly depressed , or sometimes with a slight central elevation . The color is a dull ashy gray , and when moist , the cap surface is sticky or tacky to the touch . It is smooth , although the edges can have a layer of minute , soft hairs . The flesh is soft , and whitish or watery gray . Hygrophorus agathosmus has a pronounced fragrant odor resembling cherry pits or bitter almonds ( occasionally the odor is weak ) . 
 The gills have an adnate attachment to the stem , but in maturity the attachment becomes adnate @-@ decurrent , meaning the gills start to extend down the length of the stem . The gills are white , but become grayish in maturity , close to distant ( 40 – 50 reach the stem ) , moderately narrow , rather thin . The stem is 4 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long by 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , whitish at first , and colored pale ashy in age . It is the same thickness throughout or somewhat narrowed toward the base . It is solid , dry or moist but has no gelatinous universal veil present . When young , the stem surface is evenly covered with tiny fibrils and a fine whitish powder ; over time it loses the hairs and the powder and becomes smooth . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 When viewed in mass , such as with a spore print , the spores appear to be white . Viewed with a light microscope , the basidiospores are 8 – 10 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm , ellipsoid , smooth , and yellowish in Melzer 's reagent . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are four @-@ spored and measure 48 – 65 long by 6 – 8 µm thick . Pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia ( specialized cystidia found on the gill faces and edges , respectively ) are absent in this species . The pileipellis ( cap cuticle ) is made of a broad ( 175 – 350 µm ) gelatinous zone , composed of loosely interwoven , slender ( 1 @.@ 5 – 4 µm ) hyphae ; the surface hyphae are a fuscous — a dark brownish @-@ gray color . This hyphal arrangement is called an ixocutis , in which the hyphal walls swell up and gelatinize , giving a translucence to the layer that stands out in contrast to the underlying flesh . The layer of <unk> hyphae is tenacious , and may be peeled off the cap as a film . Although clamp connections are found on the hyphae that make up the flesh of the gill , none are found in the cap flesh nor in the pileipellis . 
 = = = Edibility and antimicrobial activity = = = 
 Hygrophorus agathosmus is edible , but considered bland . A study of the antioxidant capacity of the mushroom was composed of at least five organic acids : oxalic , citric , malic , <unk> , and fumaric acids . Using a standard laboratory test to determine antimicrobial activity , Hygrophorus agathosmus was shown to inhibit the growth of various pathogenic bacteria , including Escherichia coli , Enterobacter <unk> , Salmonella typhimurium , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Staphylococcus aureus , Staphylococcus epidermidis , and Bacillus subtilis ; it also inhibits the growth of the yeast Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Hygrophorus pustulatus resembles H. agathosmus and has a similar almond odor . However , the fruit bodies of H. pustulatus are smaller , and it produces larger spores ( 11 – 14 µm long ) . Hygrophorus occidentalis , which grows under conifers or oak , has a sticky stem and less pronounced almond odor . Hygrophorus <unk> is also similar in appearance , but it lacks a distinctive odor , and has smaller spores than H. <unk> . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Hygrophorus agathosmus is an ectomycorrhizal fungus , and it has been isolated , cultivated , and maintained as pure cultures of vegetative fungal <unk> for artificial <unk> of planting stock in forest nurseries . Fruiting bodies are found scattered under spruce and pine and in mixed woods in the United States . The fungus is also found in Europe ( Czech Republic , Poland , Russia , Turkey , and the United Kingdom ) , Africa , and India . 
 = Could 've Been You = 
 " Could 've Been You " is a rock song first performed by American rock singer Bob Halligan and later popularized by American singer @-@ actress Cher . The song was written by Halligan and Arnie Roman for Halligan 's 1991 album , Window In The Wall . Cher 's cover version was produced by Peter Asher and released exclusively for the European market in early 1992 as the fourth single from Cher 's twenty @-@ first studio album , Love Hurts . Lyrically , " Could 've Been You " is a message from the song 's protagonist to his or her ex . 
 Cher 's version of " Could 've Been You " received positive reviews from critics and peaked at number thirty @-@ one on the UK Singles Chart . Cher promoted the song through appearances at Top of the Pops and Aspel and Company . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1991 , Bob Halligan released his album Window In The Wall under Atco Records . The only single released from the album was its lead track , " Could 've Been You " , which Halligan had co @-@ written with Arnie Roman . According to Halligan , Atco Records had been going through a " political upheaval " that year and his record " was one of several recordings that was allowed to slip gently into the night " . Halligan " dryly notes , ' [ " Could 've Been You " ] lasted three weeks at radio . It came out to the sound of one hand clapping ' " . 
 Later the same year , Cher covered " Could 've Been You " for her album Love Hurts . Her version was produced by Peter Asher , who had previously worked with Cher on her 1991 UK number one hit " The Shoop Shoop Song ( It 's in His Kiss ) " . The B @-@ side of the first UK 7 " single release was " One Small Step " , a duet with American singer @-@ songwriter Richard Page , while the B @-@ side of the second UK 7 " single was " Love and Understanding " . The second UK 7 " single and the Germany Maxi @-@ single were both released with the same cover , an image of Cher in a baby doll dress , while the first UK 7 " was released with the same photo cut to show only Cher 's legs . The whole photo was later reused for the cover of the Love Hurts tourbook . The UK 12 " single was the last released ; its cover has a transparent vinyl and shows Cher in a long , smooth black wig . In 1993 , " Could 've Been You " was rereleased as the B @-@ side of Cher 's " Whenever You 're Near " UK 7 " single . 
 Cher promoted " Could 've Been You " with a live performance on Top of the Pops on April 9 , 1992 , six days before the beginning of her first European tour , the Love Hurts Tour in Berlin , Germany . For the performance Cher wore a curly red wig and a suit with the jacket open to show a leather bra . On April 11 , 1992 , Cher appeared on the Aspel and Company show to perform the song and be interviewed by Michael Aspel . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Could 've Been You " received positive reviews from critics . Rock critic Jim Farber of Entertainment Weekly said of the album that " [ i ] t 's that much more fun in numbers like ' Could 've Been You ' , in which , seeking revenge , she gets to reach between the jerk 's legs and squeeze . " David Wild of the Guilford County , North Carolina News & Record called " Love and Understanding " , " Save Up All Your Tears " and " Could 've Been You " " strong tracks " that " show that she is still an effective pop singer " . The review of the Worcester , Massachusetts Telegram & Gazette newspaper noted " Cher attempts to display her sexual prowess on the song , ... a great vehicle for her , an ' in @-@ your @-@ face ' song directed to a former lover " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ two on the week of April 18 , 1992 . In its second week it peaked at number thirty @-@ one , dropping the next week to number forty @-@ three and then to number sixty in its fourth and final week on the chart . The song also entered the German Singles Chart in late May 1992 , spending seven weeks on the chart and peaked at number seventy @-@ five . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Artwork – Kevin Reagan 
 Management – Bill <unk> , John Kalodner 
 Photography – Herb Ritts 
 Producer – Peter Asher 
 Recorded and mixed by – Frank Wolf 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Battle of Kalavrye = 
 The Battle of Kalavrye ( also <unk> or Kalavryta ) was fought in 1078 between the Byzantine imperial forces of general ( and future emperor ) Alexios Komnenos and the rebellious governor of Dyrrhachium , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder . Bryennios had rebelled against Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) and had won over the allegiance of the Byzantine army 's regular regiments in the Balkans . Even after Doukas 's overthrow by Nikephoros III Botaneiates ( r . 1078 – 81 ) , Bryennios continued his revolt , and threatened Constantinople . After failed negotiations , Botaneiates sent the young general Alexios Komnenos with whatever forces he could gather to confront him . 
 The two armies clashed at Kalavrye on the Halmyros river in what is now European Turkey . Alexios Komnenos , whose army was considerably smaller and far less experienced , tried to ambush Bryennios 's army . The ambush failed , and the wings of his own army were driven back by the rebels . Alexios barely managed to break through with his personal retinue , but succeeded in regrouping his scattered men . At the same time , and despite having seemingly won the battle , Bryennios 's army fell into disorder after its own Pecheneg allies attacked its camp . Reinforced by Turkish mercenaries , Alexios lured the troops of Bryennios into another ambush through a feigned retreat . The rebel army broke and Bryennios was captured . 
 The battle is known through two detailed accounts , Anna Komnene 's Alexiad , and her husband Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger 's Material for History , on which Anna 's own account relies to a large degree . It is one of the few Byzantine battles described in detail , and hence a valuable source for studying the tactics of the Byzantine army of the late 11th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the defeat at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 against the Seljuk Turks and the overthrow of Romanos IV Diogenes ( r . 1068 – 71 ) , the Byzantine Empire experienced a decade of near @-@ continuous internal turmoil and rebellions . The constant warfare depleted the Empire 's armies , devastated Asia Minor and left it defenceless against the increasing encroachment of the Turks . In the Balkans , invasions by the Pechenegs and the Cumans devastated Bulgaria , and the Serbian princes renounced their allegiance to the Empire . 
 The government of Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) failed to deal with the situation effectively , and rapidly lost support among the military aristocracy . In late 1077 , two of the Empire 's leading generals , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder , the doux of Dyrrhachium in the western Balkans , and Nikephoros Botaneiates , the strategos of the Anatolic Theme in central Asia Minor , were proclaimed emperors by their troops . Bryennios set out from Dyrrhachium towards the imperial capital Constantinople , winning widespread support along the way and the loyalty of most of the Empire 's Balkan field army . He preferred to negotiate at first , but his offers were rebuffed by Michael VII . Bryennios then sent his brother John to lay siege to Constantinople . Unable to overcome its fortifications , the rebel forces soon retired . This failure led the capital 's nobility to turn to Botaneiates instead : in March 1078 Michael VII was forced to abdicate and retire as a monk , and Nikephoros Botaneiates was accepted into the city as emperor . 
 At first , Botaneiates lacked enough troops to oppose Bryennios , who in the meantime had consolidated his control over his native Thrace , effectively isolating the capital from the remaining imperial territory in the Balkans . Botaneiates sent an embassy under the <unk> Constantine Choirosphaktes , a veteran diplomat , to conduct negotiations with Bryennios . At the same time he appointed the young Alexios Komnenos as his Domestic of the Schools ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief ) , and sought aid from the Seljuk Sultan Suleyman , who sent 2 @,@ 000 warriors and promised even more . In his message to Bryennios , the aged Botaneiates ( 76 years old at his accession ) offered him the rank of Caesar and his nomination as heir to the throne . Bryennios agreed in principle , but added a few conditions of his own , and sent the ambassadors back to Constantinople for confirmation . Botaneiates , who likely had initiated negotiations only to gain time , rejected Bryennios 's conditions , and ordered Alexios Komnenos to campaign against the rebel . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Bryennios had camped at the plain of <unk> ( a name deriving from the Latin <unk> ) on the road to Constantinople . His army comprised 12 @,@ 000 mostly seasoned men from the regiments ( tagmata ) of Thessaly , Macedonia and Thrace , as well as Frankish mercenaries and the elite tagma of the Hetaireia . Alexios 's forces included 2 @,@ 000 Turkish horse @-@ archers , 2 @,@ 000 Chomatenoi from Asia Minor , a few hundred Frankish knights from Italy , and the newly raised regiment of the Immortals , which had been created by Michael VII 's chief minister <unk> and was intended to form the nucleus of a new army . Estimates of Alexios 's total force vary from 5 @,@ 500 – 6 @,@ 500 ( Haldon ) to some 8 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 ( Birkenmeier ) , but it is clear that he was at a considerable disadvantage against Bryennios ; not only was his force considerably smaller , but also far less experienced than Bryennios 's veterans . 
 Alexios 's forces set forth from Constantinople and camped on the shore of the river Halmyros — a small stream between Herakleia ( modern Marmara <unk> ) and Selymbria ( modern Silivri ) , modern <unk> Dere — near the fort of Kalavrye ( Greek : <unk> , modern <unk> ) . Curiously , and against established practice , he did not fortify his camp , perhaps so as not to fatigue or dishearten his men with an implicit admission of weakness . He then sent his Turkish allies to scout out Bryennios 's disposition , strength and intentions . Alexios 's spies easily accomplished their tasks , but on the eve of the battle some were captured and Bryennios too was informed of Alexios 's strength . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial dispositions and plans = = = 
 Bryennios arranged his army in the typical three divisions , each in two lines , as prescribed by the Byzantine military manuals . The right wing , under his brother John , was 5 @,@ 000 strong and comprised his Frankish mercenaries , Thessalian cavalry , the Hetaireia , and the <unk> regiment ( descendants of the veterans of George Maniakes 's campaign in Sicily and Italy ) . His left wing , 3 @,@ 000 men from Thrace and Macedonia , was placed under Katakalon Tarchaneiotes , and the centre , under Bryennios himself , comprised 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 men from Thessaly , Thrace and Macedonia . Again , according to standard doctrine , on his far left , about half a kilometer ( " two stadia " ) from the main force , he had stationed an outflanking detachment ( <unk> ) of Pechenegs . 
 Alexios deployed his smaller army in waiting near Bryennios 's camp , and divided it in two commands . The left , which confronted Bryennios 's strongest division , was commanded by himself and contained the Frankish knights to the right and the Immortals to the Franks ' left . The right command was under Constantine Katakalon , and comprised the Chomatenoi and the Turks . The latter , according to the Alexiad , were given the role of flank guard ( <unk> ) and tasked with observing and countering the Pechenegs . Conversely , on the extreme left Alexios formed his own flanking detachment ( apparently drawn from among the Immortals ) , concealed from enemy view inside a hollow . Given his inferiority , Alexios was forced to remain on the defensive . His only chance at success was that his out @-@ flankers , concealed by the broken terrain , would surprise and create enough confusion among Bryennios 's men for him and his strong left wing to break through their lines . 
 = = = Alexios 's army collapses = = = 
 As the rebel forces advanced towards his enemy 's line , Alexios 's flankers sprung their ambush . Their attack did indeed cause some initial confusion , but Bryennios ( or , according to the Alexiad , his brother John , who commanded the right wing ) rallied his men and led forth the second line . This counter @-@ attack broke Alexios 's flankers ; as they retreated in panic , they fell upon the Immortals , who also panicked and fled , abandoning their posts . Although they suffered some casualties from Bryennios 's pursuing men , most managed to escape well to the rear of Alexios 's army . 
 Alexios , who was fighting with his retinue alongside the Franks , did not immediately realize that his left wing had collapsed . In the meantime , on his right wing , the Chomatenoi , engaged with Tarchaneiotes 's men , were outflanked and attacked in the rear by the Pechenegs , who had somehow evaded Alexios 's Turkish flank @-@ guards . The Chomatenoi too broke and fled , and Alexios 's fate seemed sealed . At this point the Pechenegs failed to follow up their success , and instead turned back and began looting Bryennios 's own camp . After gathering what plunder they could , they left the battle and made for their homes . 
 Nevertheless , Bryennios 's victory seemed certain , for his wings began to envelop Alexios 's Franks in the centre . Realizing his position and despairing in the face of defeat ( and , as Bryennios the Younger records , because he had disobeyed imperial orders to wait for more Turkish reinforcements and feared punishment from Botaneiates ) , Alexios at first resolved to attempt an all @-@ or @-@ nothing attack on Bryennios himself to decapitate the enemy army , but was dissuaded by his servant . With only six of his men around him , he then managed to break through the surrounding enemy soldiers . Confusion reigned behind their lines as a result of the Pecheneg attack on the rebel camp , and in this tumult Alexios saw Bryennios 's imperial parade horse , with his two swords of state , being driven away to safety . Alexios and his men charged the escort , seized the horse , and rode away with it from the battlefield . 
 Having reached a hill behind his army 's original position , Alexios began to regroup his army from the units that had broken . He sent out messengers to rally his scattered men with news that Bryennios had been killed , showing his parade horse as evidence . At the same time , the promised Turkish reinforcements began arriving at the scene , lifting his men 's morale . All the while , on the battlefield , Bryennios 's army had closed around Alexios 's Franks , who dismounted and offered to surrender . In the process the rebel army had become totally disordered , with units mixed and their formations disordered . Bryennios 's reserves had been thrown in confusion by the Pecheneg attack , while his front lines relaxed , thinking that the battle was over . 
 = = = Alexios 's counter @-@ attack = = = 
 Having restored his surviving forces to order , and aware of the confusion in Bryennios 's forces , Alexios decided to counter @-@ attack . The plan he laid out made far greater use of the particular skills of his Turkish horse @-@ archers . He divided his force into three commands , of which two were left behind in ambush . The other , formed from the Immortals and the Chomatenoi under Alexios 's own command , was not arrayed in one continuous line , but broken up in small groups , intermingled with other groups of Turkish horse @-@ archers . This command would advance on the rebels , attack them , then feign retreat and draw them into the ambush . 
 The attack of Alexios 's division initially caught Bryennios 's men off guard , but , being veteran troops , they soon recovered and once again began to push it back . Retreating , Alexios 's troops , and especially the Turks , employed skirmishing tactics , attacking the enemy line and then withdrawing swiftly , thus keeping their opponents at bay and weakening the coherence of their line . Some among Alexios 's men chose to attack Bryennios , and the rebel general had to defend against several attacks himself . 
 When the battle reached the place of the ambush , Alexios 's wings , likened in the Alexiad to a " swarm of wasps " , attacked the rebel army on the flanks firing arrows and shouting loudly , spreading panic and confusion among Bryennios 's men . Despite the attempts of Bryennios and his brother John to rally them , their army broke and fled , and other units , which were following behind , did likewise . The two brothers tried to put up a rear @-@ guard defence , but they were overcome and captured . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle marked the end of Bryennios 's revolt , although Nikephoros Basilakes gathered up much of Bryennios 's defeated army and attempted to claim the throne for himself . He too was defeated by Alexios Komnenos , who then proceeded to expel the Pechenegs from Thrace . The elder Bryennios was blinded on Botaneiates 's orders , but the emperor later took pity on him and restored him his titles and his fortune . After Alexios Komnenos seized the throne himself in 1081 , Bryennios was further honoured with high dignities . He even held command during Alexios 's campaigns against the Pechenegs , and defended Adrianople from a rebel attack in 1095 . His son or grandson , Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger , was married to Alexios 's daughter Anna Komnene . He became a prominent general of Alexios 's reign , eventually raised to the rank of Caesar , and a historian . 
 = Down to Earth ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Down to Earth " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , included as a track on his debut release , My World , released on November 17 , 2009 . It was written by Bieber , who was assisted by Carlos and Steven Battey of The Jackie Boyz , as well as the song 's producers , Mason " MdL " Levy , and Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia . " Down to Earth " is a teen pop song , with lyrics that were inspired by the divorce of Bieber 's parents . It also contains lyrical content about growing up . The song received positive reviews from critics , who embraced the song as a shift in the puppy love content of the album . After the release of My World , due to digital sales , the song charted in the lower regions of charts in the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Down to Earth " was written by Bieber , Mason " MdL " Levy , Carlos and Steven Battey of The Jackie Boyz , and Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia . It was recorded at Icon Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , and it was mixed at Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood , California . The track was one of three songs on the standard edition of My World that Bieber co @-@ wrote . In an interview in the November 14 , 2009 issue of Billboard , Bieber explained the meaning behind the song stating , 
 " It 's a ballad about the feelings I had when my parents split up and how I helped my family get through it . I think a lot of kids have had their parents split up , and they should know that it wasn 't because of something they did . I hope people can relate to it . " 
 " Down to Earth " is a down @-@ tempo pop song with a length of four minutes and five seconds , which includes influences of teen pop . Written in common time , with a tempo of 80 beats per minute , the song is composed in the key of D major . Bieber 's vocals span from the low note of B3 to the high note of D5 . It follows a simple chord progression of G @-@ D @-@ A @-@ Bm . Monica Herrera of Billboard noted that lines such as " So we fight through the hurt , and we cry and cry and cry and cry / Then we live and we learn , and we try " revealed a " deeper side " to the singer . Bieber performed the song while accompanying Taylor Swift on the United Kingdom leg of the Fearless Tour , as well as his own My World Tour . During the latter performance , Bieber sits on a stool , accompanied by only a piano background . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mark Hirsh of The Boston Globe noted " Down to Earth " was the essential track from My World . Allison Stewart of the Washington Post listed the song was one of her recommended tracks from the album . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that " Down to Earth " and " One Less Lonely Girl " were " <unk> beautiful and earnest . " Although Ashante Infantry of Toronto Star said a turn @-@ off of the song was the " Mafia " tag by the production team , Midi Mafia , at the beginning of the song , she called " Down to Earth " one of the best tracks on the album . After praising Bieber 's delivery of " poignant lines " in the song , Monica Herrera of Billboard said " it 's hardly a stretch to imagine Bieber racking up more hits in the next decade to come . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending December 5 , 2009 , due to digital sales after the release of My World , " Down to Earth " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 . The song debuted at number forty @-@ three on the Hot Digital Songs chart in the US , and therefore consecutively appeared at number seventy @-@ nine on the Hot 100 . In Canada , it debuted at number sixty @-@ one . It dropped off both charts the following week . In both territories it was also the highest non @-@ previously released song from My World to appear on the charts . In the United Kingdom , after the release of My World , " Down to Earth " appeared at number 149 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Justin Bieber , Kevin Risto , Waynne Nugent , Mason Levy , Carlos Battey , Steven Battey 
 Production - Midi Mafia , MdL 
 Vocal recording - Chris Krauss 
 Vocal production - Kevin Risto 
 Guitar - Tim Stewart 
 Mixing - Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler and Dave Pensado , assisted by Giancarlo Lino . 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = Paddy Moran ( ice hockey ) = 
 Patrick Joseph Alexander " Paddy " Moran ( March 11 , 1877 – January 14 , 1966 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . Moran played all but one of his 16 seasons for the Quebec Hockey Club , from 1901 to 1917 ; in the 1909 – 10 season , Moran played for the All @-@ Montreal and the Haileybury Comets . Moran was noted for protecting the area in front of his net by aggressively using his stick , and <unk> at opposing players while chewing tobacco . He won two Stanley Cups with Quebec in 1912 and 1913 . Moran was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moran began playing ice hockey at the age of 15 , with a local Quebec team . At age 17 , Moran changed schools as his school was one of the few in Quebec City not to have an ice hockey team . At the age of 19 , Moran helped his new club , the Crescents , win the Intermediate Championship . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Moran began his playing career with the Quebec Hockey Club in the Canadian Amateur Hockey League ( CAHL ) . Over four seasons , Moran appeared in 30 games , winning 19 of them . For the 1905 – 06 season , the Quebec Hockey Club joined the Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association ( ECAHA ) . Over the next four years , Moran appeared in 38 games , but won only 11 of them , while his lowest goals @-@ against average in a season during that span was 6 @.@ 79 . In the 1909 – 10 season , Moran joined the Montreal All @-@ Stars from the Canadian Hockey Association ( CHA ) and as the league folded , he then joined the Haileybury Comets of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) . In his only season with the Comets , Moran posted a 3 – 8 record over 11 games , letting in 79 goals . 
 For the 1910 – 11 season , Moran rejoined Quebec . That year , Quebec finished last in the league , winning only four games , and letting in 97 goals against . In the 1911 – 12 season , Moran went 10 – 8 over 18 games , with a 4 @.@ 26 goals @-@ against average . They won the O 'Brien Cup and the Stanley Cup after finishing with the best record in the league . In the Stanley Cup challenge against the Moncton Victorias of the Maritime Professional Hockey League ( <unk> ) , Quebec won the first game 9 – 3 , and the second game 8 – 0 . Moran finished with a 1 @.@ 50 goals @-@ against average , while Jack McDonald and Joe Malone combined for 14 out of the 17 Quebec goals as Quebec won the Stanley Cup . 
 The next season , Moran went 16 – 4 in the regular season in 20 games , with one shutout and a 3 @.@ 70 goals @-@ against average . Quebec repeated as O 'Brien Cup winners , and had a Stanley Cup challenge once more , playing against the Sydney Miners of the <unk> . Quebec repeated as champions , winning the three @-@ game series 2 – 0 . In the first game , Quebec won 14 – 3 , as Malone scored nine goals , while in the second one , Quebec emerged with a slimmer margin of victory , winning 6 – 2 . 
 Moran finished his career with the Bulldogs , retiring after the NHA 's last season . He played four more seasons , during which he played 69 games , winning 34 of them . Over his career , Moran 's teams often had losing records , or they had a winning percentage barely over 50 % . Some hockey legends often recalls that he was the best goaltender of them all . He was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1958 , with the help of Senator Chubby Power , once a teammate . He is still the earliest goaltender in HHOF , starting his senior hockey venture in 1901 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Moran was a stand @-@ up style goaltender . At 5 ft 11 in ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) and 180 lb ( 82 kg / 12 st 12 lb ) , he was considered a big goaltender for his era . In Moran 's era , goaltenders were not allowed to drop down to the ice to make saves , so his style suited him well . Moran was especially noted for his aggressive defense of the area in front of his net . He used his stick to slash opposing players within reach . Moran often chewed tobacco while on the ice , and another favorite tactic of his was to <unk> at opposing players . Moran 's stick work was described as attempts to " slash [ other players ' ] heads off with lightning strokes of his blade " . Moran often wore oversized sweaters , claiming that they kept him warm in the cold arenas ; however , he kept it unbuttoned , and often used it to catch shots . 
 = = Post @-@ retirement = = 
 Moran retired after the 1916 – 17 season , at the age of 39 . He was proud to have built his own house with his ice hockey earnings , which cost CAN $ 4 @,@ 000 . In 1919 , Moran became a custom house builder , and continued in this career for at least 35 years . In 1944 at age 66 , Moran was interviewed about his playing days , along with contemporary goaltender Percy LeSueur , who is noted for his Stanley Cup wins in 1909 and 1911 with the Ottawa Senators . Later in his life , Moran became an avid follower of the Quebec Aces . He was inducted into the Quebec Hockey Hall of Fame . In 1958 , Moran was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . He died on January 14 , 1966 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Stanley Cup Finals = = = 
 = Typhoon Halong ( 2002 ) = 
 Typhoon Halong , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Inday , passed just south of Guam one week after Typhoon Chataan struck the island and left heavy damage . The seventh named storm of the season , Halong developed near the same location as Chataan on July 5 near the Marshall Islands . For much of its duration , the storm moved toward the northwest , gradually intensifying . Early on July 10 , Halong passed just south of Guam as a tropical storm , producing high waves and gusty winds on the island . The storm disrupted relief efforts from Chataan , causing additional power outages but little damage . 
 After affecting Guam , Halong quickly strengthened and reached its peak winds on July 12 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , while the Japan Meteorological Agency estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Subsequently , the typhoon weakened greatly while curving to the northeast , although it still passed near Okinawa with strong winds that left widespread power outages . Halong struck southeastern Japan , dropping heavy rainfall and producing strong winds that left $ 89 @.@ 8 million ( ¥ 10 @.@ 3 billion 2002 JPY ) in damage . There was one death in the country and nine injuries . Halong became extratropical on July 16 and dissipated the next day . The typhoon influenced the monsoon trough in the Philippines , contributing to flooding and deaths in the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early July , a circulation with an area of convection developed along the monsoon trough near Enewetak Atoll . The system remained nearly stationary , tracking slowly to the southwest . Gradually organizing , the system developed into a tropical depression on July 6 over the Marshall Islands . Without having issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 10W at 0000 UTC on July 7 . Late that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Halong near the island of Chuuk in the Federated States of Micronesia . By that time , the storm was moving west @-@ northwestward , steered by a ridge to the north . Halong slowly intensified , although it continued to develop deep convection that wrapped into the center . Early on July 9 , the JMA upgraded the storm to a severe tropical storm . At 1200 UTC that day , the JTWC upgraded Halong to typhoon status about 405 km ( 250 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Guam . 
 While moving toward Guam , Halong became better organized , developing an eye and well @-@ defined rainbands . After a brief turn more toward the west , the storm passed about 140 km ( 85 mi ) south of the southern tip of Guam at 0200 UTC on July 10 ; at the time , the JTWC estimated 1 ‑ minute sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , although the JMA had maintained Halong as a tropical storm until upgrading to a typhoon at 1800 UTC that day . An approaching trough increased shear over Halong , and a weak ridge to the north restricted outflow ; this briefly prevented significant intensification after the convection decreased . Late on July 11 , the thunderstorms increased , and restrengthening resumed . Late on July 12 , the JMA assessed Halong as reaching peak 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Around that time , the typhoon entered the area of the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) , which gave it the local name Typhoon Inday . Early on July 13 , the JTWC upgraded Halong to a super typhoon after the storm developed a well @-@ defined eye 63 km ( 39 mi ) in diameter . Shortly thereafter , the agency estimated peak 1 ‑ minute sustained winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) . 
 At its peak intensity , Typhoon Halong had gale @-@ force winds that extended 415 km ( 260 mi ) northeast of the center . It was continuing to the northwest toward Okinawa , and threatened to strike the island at near peak intensity . However , the typhoon began rapidly weakening due to increasing wind shear , and the eye quickly deteriorated . At around 1200 UTC on July 14 , Halong made landfall on Okinawa with 10 ‑ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Around that time , the typhoon moved through a weakness in the ridge , turning to the north and later accelerating to the northeast . The combination of cool , dry air , and the persistent wind shear removed the convection from the center by early on July 15 , weakening Halong to tropical storm status . Later that day , the JTWC discontinued advisories while the storm was approaching Japan , and the agency classified Halong as extratropical . The JMA continued tracking the storm , and Halong struck both the Izu and Bōsō peninsulas along Honshu . Late on July 16 , the JMA classified Halong as extratropical , and shortly thereafter the storm dissipated over the Kuril Islands . The extratropical remnants of Halong moved out of the basin late on July 19 , just prior dissipating . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Only a week after Typhoon Chataan struck Guam and left $ 60 million in damage , Typhoon Halong also threatened the island , although it veered to the south in the day before it would have struck . Due to the storm , all flights were canceled in Guam and the Northern Marianas Islands , and officials advised residents in low @-@ lying areas to evacuate . While passing to the south , Halong produced waves as high as 6 m ( 20 ft ) in Inarajan . The waves left beach erosion along Guam 's southern coast , and were higher than during Chataan 's passage . The typhoon produced peak sustained winds of 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) , with gusts to 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) ; both observations were recorded at Guam 's National Weather Service . Damage on the island was estimated at $ 40 @,@ 000 . The storm disrupted work to repair damage from Chataan . Portions of the island , including Guam Memorial Hospital , had their power restored after Chataan , only to lose electricity during Halong . The additional damage caused by Halong contributed to Governor Carl T.C. Gutierrez declaring the island as a state of emergency on July 22 , which activated the Guam National Guard . 
 While passing northeast of the Philippines , Halong enhanced the monsoon , and combined with the effects from previous typhoons Rammasun and Chataan , as well as Severe Tropical Storm Nakri , there were 85 deaths , with 45 people injured in the Philippines . About ten of the deaths were estimated to have been caused by Halong . The combined damage in the country totaled $ 10 @.@ 3 million ( ₱ 522 million 2002 PHP ) . 
 In Japan , Halong dropped heavy rainfall that peaked at 362 mm ( 14 @.@ 3 in ) in Nagano Prefecture . The highest rainfall in Okinawa was 258 mm ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) . Near Tokyo , a station recorded winds of 112 km / h ( 69 mph ) , although winds gusted to 183 km / h ( 114 mph ) at Kadena Air Base on Okinawa . In the Ryukyu Islands of Japan , including Okinawa , Halong left more than 48 @,@ 800 houses without power due to the strong winds . Officials canceled bus service in Naze , Kagoshima during the storm . Throughout the country , the typhoon destroyed six houses and damaged 223 others to varying degrees . Halong also flooded 301 houses , forcing about 4 @,@ 000 people to evacuate their homes , many along rivers . Officials canceled 54 airline flights , 10 of them international , and due to the storm , 171 schools were closed . In Sendai , Halong damaged roads in 550 locations and railroads in seven locations . Nine levees were breached , and there were at least 270 landslides . Damage totaled $ 89 @.@ 8 million ( ¥ 10 @.@ 3 billion 2002 JPY ) across the country , mostly from agriculture . During its passage , the typhoon injured nine people , one of them severely , and there was one death . 
