 Following the discovery of the recession of the nebulae by Edwin Hubble in 1929 , Einstein abandoned his static model of the universe , and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos , the Friedman @-@ Einstein model of 1931 and the Einstein @-@ <unk> model of 1932 . In each of these models , Einstein discarded the cosmological constant , claiming that it was " in any case theoretically unsatisfactory " . 
 In many Einstein biographies , it is claimed that Einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his " biggest blunder " . The astrophysicist Mario Livio has recently cast doubt on this claim , suggesting that it may be exaggerated . 
 In late 2013 , a team led by the Irish physicist Cormac O <unk> discovered evidence that , shortly after learning of Hubble 's observations of the recession of the nebulae , Einstein considered a steady @-@ state model of the universe . In a hitherto overlooked manuscript , apparently written in early 1931 , Einstein explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter , a process he associated with the cosmological constant . As he stated in the paper , " In what follows , I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation ( 1 ) that can account for <unk> 's [ sic ] facts , and in which the density is constant over time " ... " If one considers a physically bounded volume , particles of matter will be continually leaving it . For the density to remain constant , new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space . " 
 It thus appears that Einstein considered a Steady State model of the expanding universe many years before Hoyle , Bondi and Gold . However , Einstein 's steady @-@ state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea . 
 = = = Modern quantum theory = = = 
 Einstein was displeased with quantum theory and quantum mechanics ( the very theory he helped create ) , despite its acceptance by other physicists , stating that God " is not playing at dice . " Einstein continued to maintain his disbelief in the theory , and attempted unsuccessfully to disprove it until he died at the age of 76 . In 1917 , at the height of his work on relativity , Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser . This article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with Planck 's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode . This paper was enormously influential in the later development of quantum mechanics , because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws . Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie 's work , and supported his ideas , which were received skeptically at first . In another major paper from this era , Einstein gave a wave equation for de Broglie waves , which Einstein suggested was the Hamilton – Jacobi equation of mechanics . This paper would inspire Schrödinger 's work of 1926 . 
 = = = Bose – Einstein statistics = = = 
 In 1924 , Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose , based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles . Einstein noted that Bose 's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles , and submitted his translation of Bose 's paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik . Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications , among them the Bose – Einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures . It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra @-@ cooling equipment built at the NIST – <unk> laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder . Bose – Einstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons . Einstein 's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University . 
 = = = Energy momentum pseudotensor = = = 
 General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime , so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum . Noether 's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance , but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry . The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether 's <unk> do not make a real tensor for this reason . 
 Einstein argued that this is true for fundamental reasons , because the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates . He maintained that the non @-@ covariant energy momentum pseudotensor was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field . This approach has been echoed by Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz , and others , and has become standard . 
 The use of non @-@ covariant objects like <unk> was heavily criticized in 1917 by Erwin Schrödinger and others . 
 = = = Unified field theory = = = 
 Following his research on general relativity , Einstein entered into a series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity . In 1950 , he described his " unified field theory " in a Scientific American article entitled " On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation " . Although he continued to be lauded for his work , Einstein became increasingly isolated in his research , and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful . In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces , Einstein ignored some mainstream developments in physics , most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces , which were not well understood until many years after his death . Mainstream physics , in turn , largely ignored Einstein 's approaches to unification . Einstein 's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity motivates modern quests for a theory of everything and in particular string theory , where geometrical fields emerge in a unified quantum @-@ mechanical setting . 
 = = = Wormholes = = = 
 Einstein collaborated with others to produce a model of a wormhole . His motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations , in line with the program outlined in the paper " Do Gravitational Fields play an Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary Particles ? " . These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches . 
 If one end of a wormhole was positively charged , the other end would be negatively charged . These properties led Einstein to believe that pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way . 
 = = = Einstein – Cartan theory = = = 
 In order to incorporate spinning point particles into general relativity , the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part , called the torsion . This modification was made by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s . 
 = = = Equations of motion = = = 
 The theory of general relativity has a fundamental law — the Einstein equations which describe how space curves , the geodesic equation which describes how particles move may be derived from the Einstein equations . 
 Since the equations of general relativity are non @-@ linear , a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields , like a black hole , would move on a trajectory which is determined by the Einstein equations themselves , not by a new law . So Einstein proposed that the path of a singular solution , like a black hole , would be determined to be a geodesic from general relativity itself . 
 This was established by Einstein , Infeld , and Hoffmann for <unk> objects without angular momentum , and by Roy Kerr for spinning objects . 
 = = = Other investigations = = = 
 Einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned . These pertain to force , superconductivity , gravitational waves , and other research . 
 = = = Collaboration with other scientists = = = 
 In addition to longtime collaborators Leopold Infeld , Nathan Rosen , Peter Bergmann and others , Einstein also had some one @-@ shot collaborations with various scientists . 
 = = = = Einstein – de Haas experiment = = = = 
 Einstein and De Haas demonstrated that magnetization is due to the motion of electrons , nowadays known to be the spin . In order to show this , they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a torsion pendulum . They confirmed that this leads the bar to rotate , because the electron 's angular momentum changes as the magnetization changes . This experiment needed to be sensitive , because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small , but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization . 
 = = = = Schrödinger gas model = = = = 
 Einstein suggested to Erwin Schrödinger that he might be able to reproduce the statistics of a Bose – Einstein gas by considering a box . Then to each possible quantum motion of a particle in a box associate an independent harmonic oscillator . <unk> these oscillators , each level will have an integer occupation number , which will be the number of particles in it . 
 This formulation is a form of second quantization , but it predates modern quantum mechanics . Erwin Schrödinger applied this to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas . Schrödinger urged Einstein to add his name as co @-@ author , although Einstein declined the invitation . 
 = = = = Einstein refrigerator = = = = 
 In 1926 , Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd co @-@ invented ( and in 1930 , patented ) the Einstein refrigerator . This absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input . On 11 November 1930 , U.S. Patent 1 @,@ 781 @,@ 541 was awarded to Albert Einstein and Leó Szilárd for the refrigerator . Their invention was not immediately put into commercial production , and the most promising of their patents were acquired by the Swedish company Electrolux . 
 = = = Bohr versus Einstein = = = 
 The Bohr – Einstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr who were two of its founders . Their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science . Their debates would influence later interpretations of quantum mechanics . 
 = = = Einstein – Podolsky – Rosen paradox = = = 
 In 1935 , Einstein returned to the question of quantum mechanics . He considered how a measurement on one of two entangled particles would affect the other . He noted , along with his collaborators , that by performing different measurements on the distant particle , either of position or momentum , different properties of the entangled partner could be discovered without disturbing it in any way . 
 He then used a hypothesis of local realism to conclude that the other particle had these properties already determined . The principle he proposed is that if it is possible to determine what the answer to a position or momentum measurement would be , without in any way disturbing the particle , then the particle actually has values of position or momentum . 
 This principle distilled the essence of Einstein 's objection to quantum mechanics . As a physical principle , it was shown to be incorrect when the Aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed Bell 's theorem , which had been promulgated in 1964 . 
 = = Non @-@ scientific legacy = = 
 While traveling , Einstein wrote daily to his wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters Margot and Ilse . The letters were included in the papers bequeathed to The Hebrew University . Margot Einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public , but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death ( she died in 1986 ) . Albert Einstein had expressed his interest in the profession of plumber and was made an honorary member of the Plumbers and Steamfitters Union . Barbara Wolff , of The Hebrew University 's Albert Einstein Archives , told the BBC that there are about 3 @,@ 500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955 . 
 Corbis , successor to The Roger Richman Agency , licenses the use of his name and associated imagery , as agent for the university . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the period before World War II , The New Yorker published a vignette in their " The Talk of the Town " feature saying that Einstein was so well known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain " that theory " . He finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries . He told his <unk> " Pardon me , sorry ! Always I am mistaken for Professor Einstein . " 
 Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels , films , plays , and works of music . He is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent @-@ minded professors ; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated . Time magazine 's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was " a cartoonist 's dream come true " . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Einstein received numerous awards and honors and in 1922 he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics " for his services to Theoretical Physics , and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect . " None of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel , so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to Einstein in 1922 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 The following publications by Albert Einstein are referenced in this article . A more complete list of his publications may be found at List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein . 
 = The Onyx Hotel Tour = 
 The Onyx Hotel Tour was the fifth concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears . It showcased her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) and visited North America and Europe . A tour to promote the album was announced in December 2003 . Its original name was the In the Zone Tour , but Spears was sued for trademark infringement and banned from using the name . Spears felt inspired to create a show with a hotel theme which she later mixed with the concept of an onyx stone . The stage , inspired by Broadway musicals , was less elaborate than her previous tours . The setlist was composed mostly by songs from In the Zone as well as some of her past songs reworked with different elements of jazz , blues and Latin percussion . Tour promoter Clear Channel Entertainment marketed the tour to a more adult audience than her previous shows while sponsor MTV highly promoted the tour on TV shows and the network 's website . 
 The tour was divided into seven segments : Check @-@ In , Mystic Lounge , Mystic Garden , The Onyx Zone , Security Cameras , Club and the encore . Check @-@ In displayed performances with dance and advanced in the hotel theme . Mystic Lounge featured an homage to Cabaret and other musicals , while remixing some of Spears 's early hits . Mystic Garden displayed a jungle @-@ inspired stage . The Onyx Zone displayed a ballad performance with acrobats . Security Cameras was the raciest part of the show , with Spears and her dancers emulating different sexual practices . Club displayed a performance with urban influences . The encore consisted of a system malfunction interlude and Spears performed wearing a red ensemble . The tour received mixed reviews from contemporary critics , who praised it for being an entertaining show while criticizing it for looking " more [ like ] a spectacle than an actual concert " . 
 The Onyx Hotel Tour was commercially successful , grossing $ 34 million . In March , Spears suffered a knee injury onstage which forced her to reschedule two shows . In June , Spears fell and hurt her knee again during a music video shoot . She underwent arthroscopic surgery and the remainder of the tour was canceled . In 2005 , Spears sued her insurance companies for denying her a reimbursement for the cancellation . Showtime broadcast live the March 28 , 2004 show at the American Airlines Arena , in a special titled Britney Spears Live From Miami . Backstage footage was included in the reality show Britney & Kevin : Chaotic . 
 = = Background = = 
 On December 2 , 2003 , Spears announced through her official website US concerts to support her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . The tour would kick off on March 2 in San Diego , California , at iPayOne Center . However , Spears released a statement saying , " I 'm especially looking forward to bringing my tour to new markets and performing in front of fans that may not have had the opportunity to see any of my previous tours . " On January 12 , 2004 , four dates were announced in Glasgow , Manchester , London and Birmingham , her first UK dates in four years . After the beginning of the North American leg , Spears announced a summer leg in the United States in June as well as a European leg starting on April 27 in London and ending on June 5 at Rock in Rio Lisboa . It was also rumored to visit Latin America and Asia later in the year . The Onyx Hotel Tour was originally going to be called In the Zone Tour . On February 17 , 2004 , a San Diego clothing manufacturer of the same name sued Spears for $ 10 million and banned her from using the trademark . On May 17 , 2004 , a hotel named Onyx Hotel opened in Boston , Massachusetts . Kimpton Hotels & Restaurant Group had come up with the name two years before the tour was developed . Spears and the Kimpton group decided to promote the hotel by featuring a room named The Britney Spears Foundation Room . It was designed by Spears 's mother , Lynne , reflecting Spears 's personality and taste . The room opened six weeks later and a portion of the fee was destined to the Britney Spears Foundation . 
 = = Development = = 
 The show was majorly inspired by Broadway musicals , primarily focused on Grand Hotel , which was directed by Tommy Tune and portrayed a day in the life of the Berlin Grand Hotel in 1928 . Spears said the hotel theme was inspired by having traveled so much , and was merged with the onyx stone concept . The tour was described as a " unique , mysterious hotel powered by an onyx stone , where guests who enter shine their own light into the gemstone and make their fantasies come to life . It 's a vibrant , whimsical place where wondrous dreams are realized , and the darkest of secrets are revealed " . Spears also stated about the tour , 
 " I would love my audience to walk out of the auditorium feeling like they had the most magical experience of their life . The onyx stone is kind of symbolic of what guides me in my life , like there 's a bigger picture in everything , and there 's something that guides you where you need to go , from point A to point B " . 
 Kevin Tancharoen was chosen as the tour director . He said about the development of the tour , " Coming from a movie lovers ' background , I wanted to make it seem like a film . A little Joel Schumacher meets Tim Burton " . He further explained that the onyx stone symbolized untapped desire . The stage was less elaborate than her previous tour , Dream Within a Dream Tour , with no runway extended towards the audience , in order to keep the show faithful to the New York theatre theme . There were three video screens above the stage . Also present were several LED columned @-@ shaped video screens in the stage . The setlist was mostly composed from songs from In the Zone ( " Early Mornin ' " and " Brave New Girl " being the only songs of the album to not be on the tour ) . Other songs included were " Boys " , " I 'm A Slave 4 U , " and " Overprotected " from Britney ( 2001 ) . Also included were three of her early hits , " ... Baby One More Time " , ( You Drive Me ) Crazy and " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , reworked with elements of jazz and blues . The promotional photos for the tour were by Markus <unk> and Indrani . Tour promoter Clear Channel Entertainment marketed the tour to an entirely different demographic than her previous tours , changing from families and children to a more adult audience . The show was also targeted to the gay market . Promotional campaigns included were Flash animated e @-@ mails targeted to two million people who fitted the audience description . The tour was also advertised in several radio stations and TV shows for those audiences , such as The O.C. MTV was chosen as the tour sponsor . The sponsorship was extended to advertisements in the tickets and interactive promotions in MTV.com , such as exclusive downloads , streaming video and ticket and <unk> auctions benefiting the Britney Spears Foundation . Three episodes of TRL were dedicated to a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes special . Vice president of music marketing and promotion Joe Armenia talked about the sponsorship , 
 " There are not that many artists that appeal to every territory with an MTV channel , but Britney Spears is one of the select few . We have been waiting for the opportunity to make a global splash , and the Britney tour is it . For the better part of the rest of the year , we ’ ll be on the road with Britney . This is more support than we ’ ve ever given an artist in the U.S. , let alone all over the world . We love the association with Britney ; she has always been a core part of this channel and our fans love Britney " . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show began with a skit where a flamboyant master of ceremonies welcomed spectators to the Onyx Hotel . After this , he took an onyx and threw into the video screens , causing a virtual chandelier to fall into the floor . Spears briefly appeared in the screens , as her dancers descended to the stage . She entered standing on top of a small bus dressed in a black catsuit , where she performed " Toxic " . She descended to the stage for the breakdown and then performed " Overprotected " . She took a break to talk to the audience , before going into " Boys " , which featured the male dancers pushing her while she was standing in luggage carts . " Showdown " featured rainbow @-@ colored lighting effects and was the last song of the first act . A video interlude followed featuring Spears and her friends outside a club . While she was leaving , she noticed a woman dressed in 1930s fashion . She followed her and the woman asked Spears to enter the " Mystic Lounge " . Spears reappeared wearing a corset to perform " ... Baby One More Time " . She performed " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " with a vintage microphone and joined by her background singers . Spears and her dancers performed " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " , which contained elements of Latin percussion . After this , she talked to the audience and usually referenced her wedding with childhood friend Jason Alexander . She also introduced her band before leaving the stage . 
 In the next section , there was a video interlude of Spears wearing a flowered @-@ themed dress and entering the " Mystic Garden " . As the video ended , she appeared on @-@ stage sitting at a leaf @-@ covered piano . She talked to the audience before performing " Everytime " . Her dancers joined her to perform " The Hook Up " and a jungle inspired mix of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . The show continued with another video interlude featuring a spoof of paranormal @-@ themed shows , " The Onyx Zone " , with the master of ceremonies doing a Rod Serling impression and introducing " The Shadow Room " . Spears reappeared sitting on a swing to perform " Shadow " . During the performance , Spears was lifted into the air above a M @-@ shaped blue ribbon , with performers twirling in the fabric . The performance ended with Spears leaving the stage while the dancers performed to a ballet interlude in flesh colored costumes . The next section began with a video projection of two guards watching Spears in her room through security cameras . Spears appeared on a smaller stage wearing a white robe and performed " Touch of My Hand " in a transparent bathtub . During the performance , she took the robe off to reveal a nude body suit with crystals that resembled her " Toxic " music video outfit . She left the stage briefly to a wardrobe change and reappeared on the mini platform where she descended to the main stage on a pole , wearing pink lingerie and performed " Breathe on Me " on a bed with one of her male dancers . She then put on a white trench coat and performed " Outrageous " , the last song of the act . 
 In the next act , Spears and her dancers wore street clothes and performed " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " . After this , she introduced her band and dancers and left the stage . The encore began with a system malfunction where a female voice counted down as the screens sketched Britney 's outline , which then rose to reveal Spears at the top of a staircase . After this , " Me Against the Music " ( Rishi Rich 's Desi Kulcha Remix ) began and Spears appeared on stage wearing a red ensemble . The show ended with Spears and her dancers on the staircase where the screen is lowered and Spears made her exit as shower of confetti was shot towards the audience . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The tour received mixed reviews from critics . Gene Stout of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer called it a " throbbing , special @-@ effects extravaganza " . Aline Mendelsohn of The Orlando Sentinel noted influence from Janet Jackson in the show 's choreography and suggestive themes , which had attracted many headlines due to the " heightened sensitivity of the post @-@ Janet Jackson era . " MTV UK highlighted the comparisons with early Madonna tours such as The Girlie Show World Tour and added that " [ the show ] is a theatrical extravaganza , complete with camp compere , sexy dancers , glitzy costumes and extravagant set pieces and its all fabulously raunchy " . Bill Dean of The Ledger reported that the tour was " big sloppy and sex @-@ filled " . He also added , " Her presence remains captivating . [ ... ] Perhaps even <unk> , the Onyx tour 's most significant role may be foretelling a future in Broadway or film musicals " . Neil Strauss of The New York Times claimed " her show was more a theater @-@ and @-@ dance spectacle than an actual concert , with the staging equal parts Cirque de Soleil [ sic ] and the redeveloped Times Square . [ ... ] At times the show seemed more like a Las Vegas tribute to Ms. Spears than a concert by Ms. Spears herself " . 
 Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly believed that " In Britney , Paul Verhoeven 's fantastic notion of the showgirl as superstar has become incarnate . But every showgirl needs a show . The Onyx Hotel tour hardly counts as one , with its arbitrary mishmash of Madonna @-@ esque sex @-@ bomb skits and Cirque du Soleil surrealism " . The Seattle Times 's Pamela Sitt said it " was high on spectacle and low on substance , veering crazily from burlesque to fairy tale to peep show " . Doug Elfman of the Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal stated that the tour " is an unfocused bore of false sexuality , horrible songs , trite choreography , unfocused themes and less ambition than a house cat that sits around licking itself all day " . Darryl Morden of msnbc.com commented , " at times it was entertaining but overall came off as a variation on the same show she 's been doing for several years " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Tickets sold slower than her previous tours . This was attributed to the change in audience , since her new demographic tended to be " typically a last second ticket purchaser " . A month before the tour began , seven dates were already sold out , including the Fresno and Toronto shows . Tour merchandise grossed $ 4 million on the North American leg alone , with an average of between $ 150 @,@ 000 and $ 170 @,@ 000 per night . This made Spears the highest grossing merchandise female artist since she began touring in 1999 , with a total gross of more than $ 30 million . On July 16 , 2004 , the tour was listed as the eight highest grossing tour of the first semester of 2004 , grossing $ 19 million . The tour ended up grossing $ 34 million . 
 = = Moline injury = = 
 On March 18 , 2004 , during the Moline , Illinois show at The MARK of the Quad Cities , Spears fell during the performance of " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " and injured her knee . She left the stage and returned shortly after wearing a white robe , apologizing to the audience for not being able to deliver the encore performance . A physician examined Spears and indicated that it was not related to a previous knee injury in 1999 during a dance rehearsal . The Rosemont , Illinois show at Allstate Arena , scheduled for March 19 , was cancelled . Spears 's label Jive Records asked fans to hold on to their tickets until further notice . The Flint Journal reported that the Auburn Hills , Michigan show at The Palace of Auburn Hills was also cancelled . Both shows were rescheduled to the end of the leg in April . 
 = = Cancellation and lawsuit = = 
 On June 8 , 2004 , Spears was shooting the music video for " Outrageous " in Manhattan , when she fell and injured her left knee . She was taken immediately to a local hospital , where doctors performed an MRI scan and found floating cartilage . The following day , Spears underwent arthroscopic surgery . She was forced to remain six weeks with a thigh brace , followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation , which caused any future concerts to be canceled . Jive Records issued a statement saying Spears planned to revisit the cities in the future . On February 4 , 2005 , Spears filed suit in New York State Supreme Court against eight insurance companies that denied her a reimbursement of $ 9 @.@ 8 million . The insurers refused because they claimed Spears did not fully inform them of the 1999 knee injury in the insurance form . Attorney Jonathan <unk> who defended Spears on the case said , 
 " These are the same insurers who had provided her with policies on [ several ] tours and they had cleared her and were aware of the previous injury . The alleged omission related to a question whereby Ms. Spears was asked if in the past five years she had had any surgery . Ms. Spears , in all prior circumstances , had indicated she had , but at the time she was going through this application she did answer ' no . ' It had not been a full five years , but four years and eleven months since the surgery [ in 1999 ] and even if she had answered in the affirmative , our contention is that it makes no difference " . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 On March 28 , 2004 , it was announced that Showtime would broadcast live the Miami show at the American Airlines Arena , in a special titled Britney Spears Live from Miami . It was directed by Hamish Hamilton . A concert promotional video and pictures were shot , in which Spears donned 1920 's and 1930s hairstyles . She also wore a long black Roberto Cavalli dress , which was auctioned on eBay ; proceeds went to the Britney Spears Foundation . On April 13 , 2004 , it was reported by MTV that Spears was planning a reality show titled " OnTourage " to document the backstage of the European leg , in a similar way to Madonna 's Truth or Dare . However the show was scrapped with the tour 's cancellation , and the recorded footage was used for the reality show Britney and Kevin : Chaotic . The concert for Rock in Rio Lisboa festival in Lisbon , Portugal , was broadcast live on June 5 , 2004 . 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 Kelis ( North America ) ( select venues ) 
 Skye Sweetnam ( Europe & North America ) ( select venues ) 
 JC Chasez ( Europe ) ( select venues ) 
 Wicked Wisdom ( Europe ) ( select venues ) 
 = = Setlist = = 
 " Toxic " 
 " Overprotected " ( The Darkchild Remix ) 
 " Boys " ( The Co @-@ Ed Remix ) 
 " Showdown " 
 " ... Baby One More Time " ( Jazz Version ) 
 " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " 
 " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " 
 " Everytime " 
 " The Hook Up " 
 " I 'm a Slave 4 U " 
 " Shadow " 
 " Touch of My Hand " 
 " Breathe on Me " 
 " Outrageous " 
 " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " 
 " Me Against the Music " ( Rishi Rich 's Desi Kulcha Remix ) 
 " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " and " Touch of My Hand " were cut from the Rock in Rio setlist . 
 Source : 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 Festivals and other miscellaneous performances 
 A Rock in Rio Lisboa 
 Cancellations and rescheduled shows 
 = = = Box office score data = = = 
 = Remember Last Night ? = 
 Remember Last Night ? is a 1935 American mystery comedy film directed by James Whale . The film , based on the novel The Hangover Murders , is about the investigation of the murder of one of a group of friends . The survivors are unable to recall the events of the night of the murder because they were all too drunk . Remember Last Night ? features an ensemble cast headed by Edward Arnold , Constance Cummings , and Robert Young . 
 Whale convinced Universal Studios head Carl Laemmle , Jr. to buy the screen rights to the novel so Whale could avoid directing Dracula 's Daughter , as he wished not to direct another horror film so soon after shooting Bride of Frankenstein . Initial drafts of the screenplay were deemed unsuitable under the Production Code because of the focus on excessive drinking . The novel 's original title was also unsuitable because of the word " hangover " . Following revisions , the film was approved and was released on November 4 , 1935 to mixed reviews and poor box office results . 
 = = Plot = = 
 To celebrate their six @-@ month anniversary , Long Island socialites Tony and Carlotta Milburn arrange a wild drinking party with friends , culminating in a stop at the restaurant owned by Faronea . They are unaware that Faronea is conspiring with Baptiste Bouclier , the chauffeur of party host Vic Huling , to kidnap Vic . The next morning the <unk> awake hung over to find Vic dead from a gunshot through the heart and his wife Bette missing . Tony calls his friend , district attorney Danny Harrison to investigate . Bette arrives with Billy Arliss at whose home she had slept . Because of their excessive drinking , no one can remember anything about what had happened the night before . As circumstantial evidence mounts against Tony , he calls in hypnotist Professor Karl Jones to help everyone try to recover their memories . Just as the professor is about to reveal the murderer , he is murdered . 
 Next to be killed is restaurateur Faronea . After Tony and Carlotta eavesdrop on him conferring with an accomplice at his restaurant , Faronea discovers them . Tony bluffs that he knows about the kidnapping plot and the accomplice murders Faronea . The couple returns home to find Bouclier murdered in his quarters . Friend Jake Whitridge responds to a frantic telephone call from Billy . Tony and Danny arrive , as they had planned with Billy , moments after Jake . Jake attacks Billy and knocks him out . When he regains consciousness Billy attempts to shoot Jake but Tony saves him . After the various spouses arrive , Tony announces he has solved the mystery . 
 Billy borrowed money from Vic on behalf of Jake , using a false name . Jake altered the check to be for $ 150 @,@ 000 instead of $ 50 @,@ 000 and Vic forced Billy to reveal he had borrowed the money for Jake . Jake shot Vic at Jake 's home and brought his body to the party , where everyone assumed he was just passed out . Jake paid Bouclier to remain quiet , which is why Bouclier had to kill Professor Jones . Bouclier , Faronea 's accomplice , killed Faronea after Tony spoke to him about the kidnapping plot . Jake then shot Bouclier . Danny places Jake under arrest and extracts a pledge from Tony and Carlotta to quit drinking . They agree and drink a toast to it . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Edward Arnold as Danny Harrison 
 Robert Young as Tony Milburn 
 Constance Cummings as Carlotta Milburn , Tony 's wife 
 George Meeker as Vic Huling 
 Sally <unk> as Bette Huling , Vic 's wife 
 Reginald Denny as Jake Whitridge 
 Louise Henry as Penny Whitridge , Jake 's wife 
 Gregory Ratoff as Faronea 
 Robert Armstrong as Flannagan , the <unk> ' mechanic 
 Monroe Owsley as Billy Arliss 
 Jack La Rue as Baptiste Bouclier , Vic 's chauffeur ( as Jack LaRue ) 
 Edward Brophy as Maxie , Harrison 's assistant 
 Gustav von Seyffertitz as Professor Karl Jones 
 Rafaela <unk> as Mme. Bouclier ( as Rafael <unk> ) 
 Arthur Treacher as Clarence Phelps , the butler 
 E. E. Clive as Coroner 's Photographer 
 = = Production = = 
 Universal Studios head Carl Laemmle , Jr. was eager for James Whale , fresh from his great success with Bride of Frankenstein , to direct Dracula 's Daughter . Whale was idle , waiting for Irene Dunne to finish work on Magnificent Obsession so she could begin work on Whale 's Show Boat . Wary of directing two horror films in a row , Whale instead convinced Laemmle to buy the rights to a mystery novel called The Hangover Murders . Whale argued that the same sort of audiences who went to horror films also went to mystery films and pointed to the hit Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer film The Thin Man as evidence that a picture based on the novel would be a success . Laemmle agreed to buy the rights for $ 5 @,@ 000 , only after extracting a promise from Whale that he would direct Dracula 's Daughter next . 
 The Production Code Administration , which had gone into effect just weeks after the release of The Thin Man and which restricted the drinking of alcohol on @-@ screen , disapproved of the project even before a script was written . PCA head Joseph Breen forbade the use of the word " hangover " in the title . Laemmle agreed and in mid @-@ August temporarily retitled the project Wild Night before settling on Remember Last Night ? in response to a survey of exhibitors . Breen dispatched two representatives to meet with Whale , Laemmle and studio censor Harry <unk> in an effort to reduce or eliminate the film 's reliance on drinking . The two men realized that most of the alcohol use was required for the plot – and thus allowable under the Production Code – and Whale promised to keep the novel 's ending in which Tony and Carlotta agree to quit drinking . 
 Harry <unk> and Doris Malloy put together a 34 @-@ page treatment which Laemmle approved in April . The pair completed their draft on May 20 , 1935 . Whale had Dan <unk> re @-@ write the dialogue and the draft was ready for submission to the PCA on July 15 . When Breen reviewed the draft , his objections centered on the excessive alcohol use . " We take this opportunity of pointing out to you , in regard to the matter of the treatment of drinking in this story , that , generally speaking , it is presented in a light , facetious , acceptable , amusing , and desirable mode of behavior . It is upon this that we feel rejection may be reasonably based . " A revised script with the drinking toned down slightly was submitted on July 24 , the same day Whale started shooting . Remember Last Night ? was budgeted at $ 385 @,@ 000 . Whale inserted lines that made fun of horror pictures , a genre with which he no longer wished to be associated . Carlotta is shown jumping on a diving board flapping a towel and exclaiming " Look , I 'm Dracula 's Daughter ! " and in another scene she says " I feel like the Bride of Frankenstein ! " Shooting wrapped on September 14 . Whale was nine days over schedule and $ 75 @,@ 000 over budget . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Remember Last Night ? was cleared by the PCA on September 24 , 1935 and following previews in October , opened on November 4 . Financially the film was a failure that according to Laemmle lost money for the studio . Critical reception was mixed . The Hollywood Reporter called the film " a murder mystery to kid all murder mysteries " and " a riot of comedy spots superimposed on a riot of crime detecting " . Whale , the reviewer found , " let himself go in a riotous directorial splurge " . Although less effusive , The New York Times praised the film as " good minor fun " and noted the likeable pairing of Young and Cummings . Ed Brophy , Edward Arnold and Arthur Treacher were also singled out for praise . However , the Times concluded that Remember Last Night ? should be enjoyed " in moderation " as the " <unk> behavior of the <unk> in the film " may make the viewer come away " with the feeling that one or two additional murders among the madcap principals would have made Long Island a still better place to live in " . Variety was strongly disapproving of the film . " The women are more <unk> than the men , and two of the wives are on the make . It 's all faintly unwholesome . " 
 Local censorship boards made numerous cuts to the film . The long drinking party scene was cut , as was part of a 30 @-@ second kiss between Tony and Carlotta that opened the film . Censors also cut a line of dialogue delivered by Louise Henry in response to Carlotta 's declaration that the Marines had landed : " There 'll be atrocities – I want to be first ! " The film was never re @-@ released , has never been released in any home video format and is rarely shown on television . Modern critical response has therefore been light , although Tom Milne of Time Out New York dubbed the film a " Delightful screwball parody of the detective thriller ... Whale 's use of <unk> , non @-@ sequiturs and unexpected stresses creates what is virtually a blueprint for the style developed by Robert Altman in and after MASH . " The Los Angeles Times , reviewing the film for a 1999 retrospective of Whale 's work , found it to be " an amusing trifle , tossed off with considerable wit and skill by Whale " and " pretty good fun if you ’ re in the mood for a chic , brittle period piece " . 
 = Music of Baltimore = 
 The music of Baltimore , the largest city in Maryland , can be documented as far back as 1784 , and the city has become a regional center for Western classical music and jazz . Early Baltimore was home to popular opera and musical theatre , and an important part of the music of Maryland , while the city also hosted several major music publishing firms until well into the 19th century , when Baltimore also saw the rise of native musical instrument manufacturing , specifically pianos and woodwind instruments . African American music existed in Baltimore during the colonial era , and the city was home to vibrant black musical life by the 1860s . Baltimore 's African American heritage to the start of the 20th century included ragtime and gospel music . By the end of that century , Baltimore jazz had become a well @-@ recognized scene among jazz fans , and produced a number of local performers to gain national reputations . The city was a major stop on the African American East Coast touring circuit , and it remains a popular regional draw for live performances . Baltimore has produced a wide range of modern rock , punk and metal bands and several indie labels catering to a variety of audiences . 
 Music education throughout Maryland conforms to state standards , implemented by the Baltimore City Public School System . Music is taught to all age groups , and the city is also home to several institutes of higher education in music . The Peabody Institute 's Conservatory is the most renowned music education facility in the area , and has been one of the top nationally for decades . The city is also home to a number of other institutes of higher education in music , the largest being nearby Towson University . The Peabody sponsors performances of many kinds , many of them classical or chamber music . Baltimore is home to the Baltimore Opera and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra , among other similar performance groups . Major music venues in Baltimore include the nightclubs and other establishments that offer live entertainment clustered in Fells Point and Federal Hill . 
 = = History = = 
 The documented history of music in Baltimore extends to the 1780s . Little is known about the cultural lives of the Native Americans who formerly lived along the Chesapeake Bay , prior to the founding of Baltimore . In the colonial era , opera and theatrical music were a major part of Baltimorean musical life , and Protestant churches were another important avenue for music performance and education . Baltimore rose to regional performance as an industrial and commercial center , and also become home to some of the most important music publishing firms in colonial North America . In the 19th century , Baltimore grew greatly , and its documented music expanded to include an abundance of African American music , and the city 's denizens played a crucial role in the development of gospel music and jazz . Musical institutions based in Baltimore , including the Peabody Institute and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra , became fixtures in their respective fields , music education and Western classical music . Later in the 20th century , Baltimore produced notable acts in the fields of rock , R & B and hip hop . 
 = = = Colonial era to 1800 = = = 
 Local music in Baltimore can be traced back to 1784 , when concerts were advertised in the local press . These concert programs featured compositions by locals Alexander Reinagle and Raynor Taylor , as well as European composers like Frantisek Kotzwara , Ignaz Pleyel , Carl <unk> von <unk> , Giovanni Battista <unk> and Johann Sebastian Bach . Opera first came to Baltimore in 1752 , with the performance of The Beggar 's Opera by a touring company . It was soon followed by La <unk> <unk> by Giovanni Battista <unk> , the American premier of that work , and the 1772 performance of Comus by John Milton , performed by the American Company of Lewis Hallam . This was soon followed by the creation of the first theatre in Baltimore , funded by Thomas Wall and Adam Lindsay 's Maryland Company of Comedians , the first resident theatrical company in the city , which had been established despite a ban on theatrical entertainment by the Continental Congress in 1774 . Maryland was the only state to so openly flout the ban , giving special permission to the Maryland Company in 1781 , to perform both in Baltimore and Annapolis . Shakespearean and other plays made up the repertoire , often with wide @-@ ranging modifications , including the addition of songs . The managers of the Maryland Company had some trouble finding qualified musicians to play in the theatre 's orchestra . The Maryland Company and the American Company performed sporadically in Baltimore until the early 1790s , when the Philadelphia Company of Alexander Reinagle and Thomas <unk> began dominating , based out of their Holliday Street Theater . 
 Formal singing schools were the first well @-@ documented musical institution in Baltimore . They were common in colonial North America prior to the Revolutionary War , but were not established in Baltimore until afterwards , in 1789 . These singing schools were taught by instructors known as masters , or singing masters , and were often itinerant ; they taught vocal performance and techniques for use in Christian psalmody . The first singing school in Baltimore was founded in the courthouse , in 1789 , by Ishmael Spicer , whose students would include the future John Cole . 
 = = = = Publishing = = = = 
 The first tunebook published in Maryland was the Baltimore Collection of Church Music by Alexander Ely in 1792 , consisting mostly of hymns , with some more complex pieces described as anthems . In 1794 , Joseph Carr established a shop in Baltimore , along with his sons Thomas and Benjamin , who ran shops in New York and Philadelphia . The Carrs would be the most successful publishing firm until around the start of the 19th century ; however , they remained prominent until the company folded in 1821 , and the Carrs were responsible for the first sheet music publication of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " in 1814 , arranged by Thomas Carr himself , and they also published European instrumentals and stage pieces , as well as works by Americans like James Hewitt and Alexander Reinagle . Much of this music was collected , in serial format , in the Musical Journal for the Piano Forte , which spanned five volumes and was the largest collection of secular music in the country . 
 In the late 18th century , Americans like William Billings were establishing a bold , new style of vocal performance , markedly distinct from European traditions . John Cole , an important publisher and tune collector in Baltimore , known for pushing a rarefied European outlook on American music , responded with the tunebook Beauties of Psalmody , which denigrated the new techniques , especially <unk> . Cole continued publishing tunebooks up to 1842 , and soon began operating his own singing school . Besides Cole , Baltimore was home to other major music publishers as well . These included Wheeler Gillet , who focused on dignified , European @-@ style music like Cole did , and Samuel Dyer , who collected more distinctly American @-@ styled songs . The tunebooks published in Baltimore included instructional notes , using a broad array of music education techniques then common . Ruel Shaw , for example , used a system derived from the work of Heinrich Pestalozzi , interpreted by the American Lowell Mason . Though the <unk> system was widely used in Baltimore , other techniques were tried , such as that developed by local singing master James M. Deems , based on the Italian <unk> system . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 19th @-@ century Baltimore had a large African American population , and was home to a vibrant black musical life , especially based around the region 's numerous Protestant churches . The city also boasted several major music publishing firms and instrument manufacturing companies , specializing in pianos and woodwind instruments . Opera , choral and other classical performance groups were founded during this era , many of them becoming regionally prominent and established a classical tradition in Baltimore . The Holliday Street Theatre and the Front Street Theatre hosted both touring and local productions throughout the early 19th century . Following the Civil War , however , a number of new theatres opened , including the Academy of Music , Ford 's Grand Opera House and the Concordia Opera House , owned by the Concordia Music Society . Of these , Ford 's was perhaps the most successful , home to no fewer than 24 different opera companies . By the start of the 20th century , however , the New York Theatrical Syndicate had grown to dominate the industry throughout the region , and Baltimore became a less common stop for touring companies . 
 = = = = African American music = = = = 
 During the 19th century , Maryland had one of the largest populations of free African Americans , totalling one fifth of all free blacks in the country . Baltimore was the center for African American culture and industry , and was home to many African American craftsmen , writers and other professionals , and some of the largest black churches in the country . Many African Americans institutions in Baltimore assisted the less fortunate with food and clothing drives , and other charitable work . The " first instance of mass black assertiveness after the Civil War " in the country occurred in Baltimore in 1865 , after a meeting of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows in Battle Monument Square , marking the anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation . Another African American celebration occurred five years later , celebrating the right to vote , guaranteed to African Americans by the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . Many bands played , including brass and cornet bands . 
 Baltimore 's Eubie Blake , born in 1883 , became a musician at an early age , hired as a house musician at a brothel , run by Aggie Shelton . He perfected his improvisational piano style , which used ragtime riffs , and eventually completed " The Charleston Rag " , in 1899 . With compositions like that , Blake pioneered what would eventually become known as the stride style by the end of the 1890s ; stride later became more closely associated with New York City . With his own technique , characterized by playing the syncopation with his right hand and a steady beat with the left , and became one of the most successful ragtime performers of the East Coast , performing with prominent cabaret entertainers Mary Stafford and Madison Reed . 
 = = = = = Church music = = = = = 
 Black churches in Maryland hosted many musical , as well as political and educational , activities , and many African American musicians got their start performing in churches , including Anne Brown , Marian Anderson , Ethel Ennis and Cab Calloway , in the 20th century . Doctrinal disputes did not prevent musical cooperation , which included both sacred and secular music . Church choirs frequently worked together , even across denominational divides , and church @-@ goers often visited other establishments to see visiting performers . Organists were a major part of African American church music in Baltimore , and some organists became well known , Baltimore 's including Sherman Smith of Union Baptist , Luther Mitchell of Centennial Methodist and Julia Calloway of Sharon Baptist . Many churches also offered music education , beginning as early as the 1870s with St. Francis Academy . 
 Charles Albert Tindley , born in 1851 in Berlin , Maryland , would become the first major composer of gospel music , a style that drew on African American spirituals , Christian hymns and other folk music traditions . Tindley 's earliest musical experience likely included tarrying services , a musical tradition of the Eastern Shore of Maryland , wherein Christian worshipers prayed and sang throughout the night . He became an itinerant preacher as an adult , working at churches throughout Maryland , Delaware and New Jersey , then settled down as a pastor in Philadelphia , eventually opening a large church called Tindley Temple United Methodist Church . 
 = = = = Publishing = = = = 
 Though John Cole and the Carrs were among the first major music publishers in Baltimore , the city was home to a vibrant publishing tradition in the 19th century , aided by the presence of A. Hoen & Co . , one of the biggest lithography firms of the era , who illustrated many music publications . Other prominent music publishers in Baltimore in this era included George Willig , Arthur Clifton , Frederick <unk> , James Boswell , Miller and Beecham , W. C. Peters , Samuel Carusi and G. Fred Kranz . Peters was well known nationally , but first established a Baltimore @-@ based firm in 1849 , with partners whose names remain unknown . His sons eventually joined the field , and the company , then known as W. C. Peters & Co . , published the Baltimore Olio and Musical Gazette , which contained concert news , printed music , educational and biographical essays and articles . The pianist @-@ composer Charles Grobe was among the contributors . 
 = = = = Instrument manufacture = = = = 
 Baltimore was also home to the piano @-@ building businesses of William Knabe and Charles Steiff . Knabe emigrated to the United States in 1831 , and he founded the firm , with Henry <unk> , in 1837 . It began manufacturing pianos in 1839 . The company became one of the most prominent and respected piano manufacturers in the country , and was the dominant corporation in the Southern market . The company floundered after a fire destroyed a factory , and the aftermath of the Civil War lessened demand in the Southern area where Knabe 's sales were concentrated . By the end of the 19th century , however , Knabe 's sons , Ernest and William , had re @-@ established the firm as one of the leading piano companies in the country . They built sales in the west and north , and created new designs that made Knabe & Co. the third best @-@ selling piano manufacturer in the country . The pianos were well regarded enough that the Japanese government chose Knabe as its supplier for schools in 1879 . After the death of William and Ernest Knabe , the company went public . In the 20th century , Knabe 's company became absorbed into other corporations , and the pianos are now manufactured by <unk> , a Korean producer . 
 Heinrich Christian Eisenbrandt , originally of Göttingen , Germany , settled in Baltimore in 1819 , going on to manufacture brass and woodwind instruments of high quality . His output included several brass instruments , <unk> , flutes , oboes , bassoons , clarinets with between five and sixteen keys , and at least one drum and basset @-@ horn . Eisenbrandt owned two patents for brass instruments , and was once praised for " great improvements made in the valves " of the <unk> . His flutes and clarinets won him a silver medal at the London Great Exhibition of 1851 , and he also earned high marks for those instruments and the <unk> at several Metropolitan Mechanics Institute exhibitions . The Smithsonian Institution now possesses one of Eisenbrandt 's clarinets , adorned with jewels , and the Shrine to Music Museum at the University of South Dakota is in possession of a drum and several clarinets made by Eisenbrandt . He is also known to have made a cornet which uses a key mechanism that he had patented . Eisenbrandt died in 1861 , and his son , H. W. R. Eisenbrandt , continued the business until at least 1918 . 
 = = = = Classical music = = = = 
 The Peabody Orchestra , formed in 1866 , was the first professional orchestra in Baltimore . The Orchestra premiered many works in its early years , including some by Asger <unk> , a prominent Danish composer who became director of the Orchestra . Ross <unk> founded the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra before 1890 , when the Orchestra first performed , and the Peabody Orchestra ceased to exist . <unk> 's orchestra , however , lasted only until 1899 . 
 Traveling opera companies visited Baltimore throughout the 19th century , performing pieces like Norma , Faust and La sonnambula , with performances by well @-@ known singers like Jenny Lind and Clara Kellogg . Institutions from outside Baltimore also presented opera within the city , including the Chicago Lyric Opera and the Metropolitan Opera . 
 In the early 19th century , choral associations became common in Maryland , and Baltimore , buoyed by the immigration of numerous Germans . These groups were formed for the purpose of instruction in choral music , eventually performing oratorios . The popularity of these choral associations helped to garner support among the local population for putting music education in the city 's public schools . The Baltimore Oratorio Society , the Liederkranz and the Germania Männerchor were the most important of these associations , and their traditions were maintained into the 20th century by organizations like the Bach Choir , Choral Arts Society , Handel Society and the Baltimore Symphony Chorus . 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 Singing schools in Baltimore were few in number until the 1830s . Singing masters began incorporating secular music into their curriculum , and divested themselves from sponsoring churches , in the early part of the 1830s . Attendance increased drastically , especially after the founding of two important institutions : the Academy , established in 1834 by Ruel Shaw , and the Musical Institute , founded by John Hill Hewitt and William Stoddard . The Academy and the Institute quickly became rivals , and both gave successful performances . Some Baltimore singing masters used new terminology to describe their programs , as the term singing school was falling out of favor ; Alonzo Cleaveland founded the Glee School during this era , focusing entirely on secular music . In contrast , religious musical instruction by the middle of the 19th century remained based around itinerant singing masters who taught for a period of time , then continued to new locations . 
 The introduction of music into Baltimore public schools in 1843 caused a slow decline in the popularity of private youth singing instruction . In response to the growing demand for printed music in schools , publishers began offering collections with evangelical tunes , directed at rural schools . Formal , adult musical institutions , like the Haydn Society and the Euterpe Musical Association , grew in popularity following the Civil War . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Early in the 20th century , Baltimore 's most famous musical export was the duo of Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle , who found national fame in New York . Blake in particular became a ragtime legend , and innovator of the stride style . Later , Baltimore became home to a vibrant jazz scene , producing a number of famous performers , such as the phenomenal jazz musician Paul <unk> . Use of the Hammond B @-@ 3 organ later became an iconic part of Baltimore jazz . In the middle of the 20th century , Baltimore 's major music media include Chuck Richards , a popular African American radio personality on WBAL , and Buddy Deane , host of a popular eponymous show in the vein of American Bandstand , which was an iconic symbol of popular music in Baltimore for a time . African American vocal music , specifically doo @-@ wop , also established an early home in Baltimore . More recently , Baltimore was home to a number of well @-@ known rock , pop , R & B , punk , and hip hop performers . 
 = = = = Classical music = = = = 
 Most of the major musical organizations in Baltimore were founded by musicians who trained at the Peabody Institute 's Conservatory of Music . These include Baltimore Choral Arts , Baltimore Opera Company ( BOC ) , and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra ( BSO ) . These organizations all have excellent reputations and sponsor numerous performances throughout the year . Baltimore has produced a number of well @-@ known modern composers of classical and art music , most famously including Philip Glass , a minimalist composer . Glass grew up in the 1940s , working in his father 's record store in East Baltimore , selling African American records , then known as race music . He was there exposed to Baltimore jazz and rhythm and blues . 
 Though the Baltimore Opera Company can be traced back to the 1924 founding of the Martinet Opera School , the direct antecedent of the Company was founded in 1950 , with Rosa <unk> , a well @-@ known soprano , as artistic director . In the following decade the Company modernized , receiving new funding from , among other sources , the Ford Foundation , which led to professionalization and the hiring of a full @-@ time production manager and the stabilization on a program consisting of three operas every season ; this schedule has since been expanded to four performances . In 1976 , the Company commissioned <unk> de Castro for the American Bicentennial , composed by Thomas <unk> with a libretto by Bernard Stambler ; the opera 's debut was a great success and an historic moment for American opera . 
 The Baltimore Symphony Orchestra of the 19th century had floundered in 1899 , was replaced by a new orchestra organized by the Florestan Club , which included author H. L. Mencken ; the Club ensured that the orchestra would be the first municipally funded company in the country . The reformed Baltimore Symphony Orchestra began in 1916 , under the leadership of Gustav <unk> , who conducted the orchestra until 1930 . In 1942 , the orchestra was reorganized as a private institution , led by Reginald Stewart , director of both the Orchestra and the Peabody , who arranged for Orchestra members to receive faculty appointments at the Peabody Conservatory , which helped attract new talent . The Orchestra claims that Joseph Meyerhoff , President of the Orchestra beginning in 1965 , and his music director , Sergiu <unk> began the modern history of the BSO and " ensured the creation of an institution , which has become the undisputed leader of the arts community throughout the State of Maryland " . Meyerhoff and <unk> established regular performances and a more professional atmosphere for the Orchestra . Under the next music director , David Zinman , the Orchestra recorded for major record labels , and went on several international tours , becoming the first Orchestra to tour in the Soviet bloc . 
 The Baltimore Chamber Music Society , founded by Hugo <unk> and Rudolph Rothschild in 1950 , has commissioned a number of renowned works and is known for a series of controversial concerts featuring mostly 20th @-@ century composers . The Baltimore Women 's String Symphony Orchestra was led by Stephen Deak and Wolfgang Martin from 1936 to 1940 , a time when women were barred from the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra , though they were allowed in the Baltimore Colored Symphony Orchestra . 
 In the early 20th century , Baltimore was home to several African American classically oriented music institutions which drew on a rich tradition of symphonic music , chamber concerts , oratorios , documented in large part by the Baltimore Afro @-@ American , a local periodical . Inspired by A. Jack Thomas , who had been appointed conductor of the city 's municipally supported African American performance groups , Charles L. Harris led the Baltimore Colored Chorus and Symphony Orchestra from 1929 to 1939 , when a strike led to the company 's dissolution . Thomas had been one of the first black bandleaders in the U.S. Army , was director of the music department at Morgan College , and was the founder of Baltimore 's interracial Aeolian Institute for higher musical education . Charles L. Harris , as leader of the Baltimore Colored City Band , took his group to black neighborhoods across Baltimore , playing marches , waltzes and other music , then switch to jazz @-@ like music with an upbeat tempo , meant for dancing . Some of Harris ' musicians also played in early jazz clubs , though the musical establishment at the time did not readily accept the style . Fred Huber , Director of Municipal Music for Baltimore , exerted powerful control over the repertoire of these bands , and forbade jazz . T. Henderson Kerr , a prominent black bandleader , emphasized in his advertising that his group did not play jazz , while the prestigious Peabody Institute debated whether jazz was music at all . The Symphony Orchestra produced renowned pianist Ellis Larkins and cellist W. Llewellyn Wilson , also the music critic for the Afro @-@ American . Harris eventually replaced Harris as conductor of the Orchestra and has since become a city musical fixture who is said to have , at one point , taught every single African American music teacher in Baltimore . 
 After World War 2 , William Marbury , then Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Peabody Institute , began the process of integrating that institution , which had denied entrance to several well @-@ regarded African American performers based solely on their race , including Anne Brown and Todd Duncan , who had been the first black performer with the New York City Opera when he was forced to study with Frank Bibb , a member of the Peabody faculty , outside the Conservatory . The director of the Peabody soon ended segregation , both at the Conservatory and at the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra , which was conducted by its first African American , A. Jack Thomas , at his request . The Peabody was officially integrated in 1949 , with support from mayor Howard W. Jackson . Paul A. Brent , who graduated in 1953 , was the first to matriculate , and was followed by Audrey Cyrus McCallum , who was the first to enter the Peabody Preparatory . Musical integration was a gradual process that lasted until at least 1966 , when the unions for African American and white musicians merged to form the Musicians ' Association of Metropolitan Baltimore . Baltimore is the hometown of African American classical opera tenor Steven Cole . 
 = = = = African American popular music = = = = 
 In the field of 20th @-@ century popular music , Baltimore first was a major center for the development of East Coast ragtime , producing the legendary performer and composer Eubie Blake . Later , Baltimore became a hotspot for jazz , and a home for such legends in the field as Chick Webb and Billie Holiday . The city 's jazz scene can be traced to the early part of the 20th century , when the style first spread across the country . Locally , Baltimore was home to a vibrant African American musical tradition , which included funereal processions , beginning with slow , mournful tunes and ending with lively ragtime numbers , very similar to the New Orleans music that gave rise to jazz . 
 Pennsylvania Avenue ( often known simply as The Avenue ) and Fremont Avenue were the major scenes for Baltimore 's black musicians from the 1920s to the 1950s , and was an early home for Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle , among others . Baltimore had long been a major stop on the black touring circuit , and jazz musicians frequently played on Pennsylvania Avenue on the way to or from engagements in New York . Pennsylvania Avenue attracted African Americans from as far away as North Carolina , and was known for its vibrant entertainment and nightlife , as well as a more seedy side , home to prostitution , violence , ragtime and jazz , which were perceived as unsavory . The single most important venue for outside acts was the Royal Theatre , which was one of the finest African American theaters in the country when it was opened as the Douglass Theater , and was part of the popular performing circuit that included the Earle in Philadelphia , the Howard in Washington , D.C. , the Regal in Chicago and the Apollo Theater in New York ; like the Apollo , the audience at the Royal Theater was known for cruelly receiving those performers who didn 't live up to their standards . Music venues were segregated , though not without resistance - a 1910 tour featuring Bert Williams resulted in an African American boycott of a segregated theater , hoping the threat of lost business from the popular show would cause a change in policy . Pennsylvania Avenue was also a center for black cultural and economic life in Baltimore , and was home to numerous schools , theaters , churches and other landmarks . The street 's nightclubs and other entertainment venues were most significant however , including the Penn Hotel , the first African American @-@ owned hotel in Baltimore ( built in 1921 ) . Even the local bars and other establishments that didn 't feature live music as a major feature generally had a solo pianist or organist . The first local bar to specialize in jazz was Club Tijuana . Major music venues at this time included Ike Dixon 's Comedy Club , <unk> , <unk> 's , <unk> 's Tavern , The New Albert Dreamland , the Ritz , and most importantly , the Sphinx Club . The Sphinx Club became one of the first minority @-@ owned nightclubs in the United States when it opened in 1946 , founded by Charles Phillip Tilghman , a local businessman . 
 The Baltimore Afro @-@ American was a prominent African American periodical based in Baltimore in the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 20th century , and the city was home to other black music media . Radio figures of importance included Chuck Richards on WBAL . 
 = = = = = Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle = = = = = 
 Baltimore 's Eubie Blake was one of the most prominent ragtime musicians on the East Coast in the early 20th century , and was known for a unique style of piano @-@ playing that eventually became the basis for stride , a style perfected during World War I in Harlem . Blake was the most well known figure in the local scene , and helped make Baltimore one of the ragtime centers of the East Coast , along with Philadelphia and Washington , D.C. He then joined a medicine show , performing throughout Maryland and Pennsylvania before moving to New York in 1902 to play at the Academy of Music there . Returning to Baltimore , Blake played at The Saloon , a venue owned by Alfred Greenfield patronized by " colorful characters and ' working ' girls " ; The Saloon was the basis for his well @-@ known " Corner of Chestnut and Low " . He then played at Annie Gilly 's sporting house , another rough establishment , before becoming well known enough to play throughout the city and win a number of national piano concerts . 
 In 1915 , Blake was hired to work at Riverview Park , with Noble Sissle , a singer , whom Blake approached about a songwriting partnership . Their first collaboration was " It 's All Your Fault " , premiered by Sophie Tucker at the Maryland Theater . Their success grew quickly , and they soon had numerous songs performed across the country , including on Broadway , most famously " Baltimore Buzz " , " Gypsy Blues " and " Love Will Find a Way " . In 1921 , however , the duo received their greatest acclaim with the musical Shuffle Along , the first piece to bring African American jazz and humor to Broadway . The widespread acclaim for Shuffle Along led to changes in the theatre industry nationwide , producing demand for African American performers and leading to newly integrated theatrical companies across the country . When Shuffle Along came to Baltimore 's Ford 's Theater , Blake struggled to reserve a seat for his mother , because Ford 's remained strictly segregated by race . 
 = = = = = Jazz = = = = = 
 Baltimore had developed a local jazz scene by 1917 , when the local black periodical , the Baltimore Afro @-@ American noted its popularity in some areas . Two years later , black bandleader T. Henderson Kerr boasted that his act included " no jazz , no shaky music , no vulgar or suggestive dancing " . Local jazz performers played on Baltimore Street , in an area known as The Block , located between Calvert and Gay Streets . Jazz audiences flocked to music venues in the area and elsewhere , such as the amusement parks around Baltimore ; some of the more prominent venues included the Richmond Market Armory , the Old Fifth Regiment Armory , the Pythian Castle Hall and the Galilean Fisherman Hall . By the 1930s , however , The Ritz was the largest club on Pennsylvania Avenue , and was home to Sammy Louis ' band , who toured to great acclaim throughout the region . 
 The first group in Baltimore to self @-@ apply the jazz label was led by John Ridgely , and known as either the John Ridgely <unk> or the Ridgely 400 Society Jazz Band , which included pianist Rivers Chambers . Ridgely organized the band in 1917 , and they played daily at the Maryland Theater in the 1920s . The two most popular of the early jazz performers in Baltimore , however , were Ernest Purviance and Joseph T. H. Rochester , who worked together , as the Drexel Ragtime <unk> , starting a dance fad known as the " <unk> She <unk> She " . As the Drexel Jazz <unk> , they remained popular into the 1920s . 
 The Royal Theatre was the most important jazz venue in Baltimore for much of the 20th century , and produced one of the city 's musical leaders in Rivers Chambers , who led the Royal 's band from 1930 to 1937 . Chambers was a multi @-@ instrumentalist who founded the Rivers Chambers Orchestra after leaving The Royal , and became a " favorite of Maryland 's high society " . As bandleader of The Royal , Chambers was succeeded by the classically trained Tracy McCleary , whose band , the Royal Men of Rhythm , included Charlie Parker at one point . Many of The Royal 's band members would join with touring acts when they came through Baltimore ; many had day jobs in the defense industry during World War 2 , including McCleary himself . The shortage of musicians during the war led to a relaxation in some aspects of segregation , including in The Royal 's band , which began hiring white musicians soon after the war . McCleary would be The Royal 's last conductor , however , while Chambers ' orchestra became a fixture in Baltimore , and came to include as many as thirty musicians , who would sometimes divide into smaller groups for performances . Chambers had collected many musicians from around the country , like Tee Loggins from Louisiana . Other performers with his Orchestra included trumpeter Roy McCoy , saxophonist Elmer Addison and guitarist Buster Brown , who was responsible for the Orchestra 's most characteristic song , " They Cut Down That Old Pine Tree " , which the Rivers Chambers Orchestra would continue to play for more than fifty years . 
 Baltimore 's early jazz pioneers included Blanche Calloway , one of the first female jazz bandleaders in the United States , and sister to jazz legend Cab Calloway . Both the <unk> , like many of Baltimore 's prominent black musicians , studied at Frederick Douglass High School with William Llewellyn Wilson , himself a renowned performer and conductor for the first African American symphony in Baltimore . Baltimore was also home to Chick Webb , one of jazz 's most heralded drummers , who became a musical star despite being born hunchbacked and crippled at the age of five years . Later Baltimoreans in jazz include Elmer Snowden , and Ethel Ennis . After Pennsylvania Avenue declined in the 1950s , Baltimore 's jazz scene changed . The Left Bank Jazz Society , an organization dedicated to promoting live jazz , began holding a weekly series of concerts in 1965 , featuring the biggest names in the field , including Duke Ellington and John Coltrane . The tapes from these recordings became legendary within the jazz aficionados , but they did not begin to be released until 2000 , due to legal complications . 
 Baltimore is known for jazz saxophonists , having produced recent performers like Antonio Hart , Ellery <unk> , Gary Bartz , Mark Gross , Harold Adams , Gary Thomas and Ron Diehl . The city 's style combines the experimental and intellectual jazz of Philadelphia and elsewhere in the north with a more emotive and freeform Southern tradition . The earliest well @-@ known Baltimore saxophonists include Arnold Sterling , Whit Williams , Andy Ennis , Brad Collins , Carlos Johnson , Vernon H. <unk> , Jr . ; the most famous , however , was Mickey Fields . Fields got his start with a jump blues band , The <unk> , in the early 1950s , and his saxophone @-@ playing became the most prominent part of the band 's style . Despite a national reputation and opportunities , Fields refused to perform outside the region and remains a local legend . 
 In the 1960s , the Hammond B @-@ 3 organ became a critical part of the Baltimore jazz scene , led by virtuoso Jimmy Smith . The Left Bank Jazz Society also played a major role locally , hosting concerts and promoting performers . The popularity of jazz , however , declined greatly by the beginning of the 20th century , with an aging and shrinking audience , though the city continued producing local performers and hosting a vibrant jazz scene . 
 = = = = = Doo wop = = = = = 
 Baltimore was home to a major doo wop scene in the middle of the 20th century , which began with The Orioles , who are considered one of the first doo wop groups to record commercially . By the 1950s , Baltimore was home to numerous African American vocal groups , and talent scouts scoured the city for the next big stars . Many bands emerged from the city , including The Cardinals and The Plants . Some doo wop groups were connected with street gangs , and some members were active in both scenes , such as Johnny Page of The Marylanders . Competitive music and dance was a part of African American street gang culture , and with the success of some local groups , pressure mounted , leading to territorial rivalries among performers . Pennsylvania Avenue served as a rough boundary between East and West Baltimore , with the East producing The Swallows and The Cardinals , as well as The Sonnets , The <unk> , The Honey Boys , The <unk> and The <unk> , while the West was home to The Orioles and The Plants , as well as The <unk> and The Four Buddies . 
 It was The Orioles , however , who first developed the city 's vocal harmony sound . Originally known as The Vibra @-@ <unk> , The Orioles were led by Sonny Til when they recorded " It 's Too Soon to Know " , their first hit and a song that is considered the first doo wop recording of any kind . Doo wop would go on to have a formative influence on the development of rock and roll , and The Orioles can be considered the earliest rock and roll band as a result . The Orioles would continue recording until 1954 , launching hits like " In the Chapel in the Moonlight " , " Tell Me So " and " Crying in the Chapel " . 
 = = = = = Soul = = = = = 
 Baltimore is less well known for its soul music than other major African @-@ American urban areas , such as Philadelphia . However , it was home to a number of soul record labels in the 1960s and 1970s , including Ru @-@ Jac ( born 1963 ) , whose artists included Joe Quarterman , Arthur Conley , Gene & Eddie , Winfield Parker , The <unk> , Jessie Crawford , The Dynamic Corvettes and Fred Martin . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Soul venues in Baltimore in that period included The Royal and Carr 's beach in Annapolis , one of the few beaches black people could use . [ 4 ] 
 = = = = Punk , rock , metal and the modern scene = = = = 
 Though they rose to prominence in Boston and New York City respectively , new wave musicians Ric Ocasek and David Byrne are both natives of the Baltimore area . Frank Zappa , Tori Amos , Cass Elliot ( The Mamas & the Papas ) , and Adam <unk> ( Counting Crows vocalist ) are also from Baltimore . 
 Notable Baltimore @-@ area rock acts from the 1970s and 1980s include Crack The Sky , The <unk> , Kix , Face Dancer , Jamie <unk> , and DC Star . 
 Also , Epic recording Artist Tony Sciuto " Island Nights " who was also a member of Australia 's Little River Band , Player and ABC <unk> 's ( Jesse and the Rippers ) was raised in <unk> Heights ( Hampden ) area . Sciuto also has written songs for Tina Turner , Don Johnson , <unk> Thomas and more . 
 Baltimore 's hardcore punk scene has been overshadowed by that of Washington , D.C. , but included locally renowned bands like Law & Order , Bollocks , OTR , and Fear of God ; many of these bands played at bars like the Marble Bar , Terminal 406 and the illegal space Jules ' Loft , which author Steven Blush described as the " apex of the Baltimore ( hardcore ) scene " in 1983 and 1984 . The 1980s also saw the development of a local new wave scene led by the bands Ebeneezer & the <unk> , The Accused / Mission / When Thunder Comes , Thee <unk> , The Vamps , AR @-@ 15 , Alter Legion , and Null Set . Later in the decade , emo bands like Reptile House and Grey March had some success and recorded with Ian MacKaye in DC . 
 Some early Baltimore punk musicians moved onto other local bands by the end of the 1990s , while local mainstays Lungfish and Fascist Fascist becoming regionally prominent . The <unk> magazine has identified several major trends in local Baltimorean music , including the rise of psychedelic @-@ folk singer @-@ songwriters like Entrance and the house / hip hop dance fusion called Baltimore club , pioneered by DJs like Rod Lee . More recently , Baltimore 's modern music scene has produced performers like Jason Dove , Cass McCombs , Ponytail , Animal Collective , Spank Rock , Rye Rye , Double Dagger , <unk> , Mary Prankster , Beach House , Lower Dens , Future Islands , Wye Oak , The Seldon Plan , Dan Deacon , Ed Schrader 's Music Beat , Sick <unk> , The <unk> , Witch Hat , Dope Body , <unk> , and Adventure , many of whom are associated with the New Weird America movement , and thus is the city itself . 
 In 2009 , Baltimore produced its own indigenous rock opera theatrical company , the all @-@ volunteer Baltimore Rock Opera Society , which operates out of Charles Village . The group has so far put on two rock operas , one in 2009 and the other in 2011 . They both have featured original scores . 
 = = Media and organizations = = 
 Baltimore 's indigenous music media includes The City Paper , The Baltimore Sun , and Music Monthly , which frequently advertise local music shows and other events . The Baltimore Blues Society also distributes one of the more well renowned blues periodicals in the country . The Baltimore Afro @-@ American , a local periodical , was one of the most important media in 20th @-@ century Baltimore , and documented much of that city 's African American musical life . Recently , a number of new media sites have risen to prominence including Aural States ( Best Local Music Blog 2008 ) , Government Names , <unk> Shank and <unk> ( Best Online Arts Community 2007 ) . 
 Baltimore is home to a number of non @-@ profit music organization , most famously including the Left Bank Jazz Society , which hosts concerts and otherwise promotes jazz in Baltimore . Another organization to grace its way into the Baltimore scene is Vivre Musicale . The latter organization 's mission is to give young artists performance opportunities in and out of Baltimore . These non @-@ profits play a greater role in the city 's musical life than similar organization do in most other American cities . The organization Jazz in Cool Places also works within that genre , presenting performers in architecturally significant locations , such as in a club full of Tiffany windows . The Society for the Preservation of American Roots Music also puts on jazz and blues concerts at its Roots Cafe . 
 = = Venues = = 
 Many of Baltimore 's nightclubs and other local music venues are in Fells Point and Federal Hill . One music field guide points to Fell 's Point 's Cat 's Eye Pub , Full Moon Saloon , Fletcher 's Bar , and Bertha 's as particularly notable , in addition to a number of others , most famously including the Sportsmen 's Lounge , which was a major jazz venue in the 1960s , when it was owned by football player Lenny Moore . 
 Many of the most legendary music venues in Baltimore have been shut down , including most of the shops , churches , bars and other destinations on the legendary Pennsylvania Avenue , center for the city 's jazz scene . The Royal Theater , once one of the premiere destinations for African American performers on the East Coast , is marked only by a simple plaque , the theater itself having been demolished in 1971 . A statue of Billie Holiday remains on Pennsylvania Avenue , however , between Lafayette and Lanvale , with a plaque that reads I don 't think I 'm singing . I feel like I am playing a horn . I try to improvise . What comes out is what I feel . 
 There are six major concert halls in Baltimore . The Lyric Opera House is modeled after the Concertgebouw , in Amsterdam , and was reopened after several years of renovations in 1982 , the same year the Joseph Meyerhoff Symphony Hall opened . Designed by Pietro Belluschi , The Meyerhoff Symphony Hall is a permanent home for the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra . Belluschi also designed the Kraushaar Auditorium at Goucher College , which opened in 1962 . The Joseph and Rebecca Meyerhoff Auditorium , located at the Baltimore Museum of Art , also opened in 1982 , and hosts concerts by the Baltimore Chamber Music Society . Johns Hopkins University 's Shriver Hall and the Peabody 's Miriam A. Friedberg are also important concert venues , the latter being the oldest still in use . 
 = = Education = = 
 In the public school system of Baltimore city , music education is a part of each grade level to high school , at which point it becomes optional . Beginning in first grade , or approximately six years old , Baltimore students begin to learn about melody , harmony and rhythm , and are taught to echo short melodic and rhythmic patterns . They also begin to learn about different musical instruments and distinguish between different kinds of sounds and types of songs . As students progress through the grades , teachers go into more detail and require more proficiency in elementary musical techniques . Students perform rounds in second grade , for example , while movement ( i.e. dance ) enters the curriculum in third grade . Beginning in middle school in the sixth grade , students are taught to make mature aesthetic judgements , and to understand and respond to a variety of forms of music . In high school , students may choose to take courses in instrumentation or singing , and may be exposed to music in other areas of the curriculum , such as in theater or drama classes . 
 Public school instruction in music in Baltimore began in 1843 . Prior to that , itinerant and professional singing masters were the dominant form of formal music education in the state . Music institutions like the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra sometimes have programs aimed at youth education , and other organizations have a similar focus . The Eubie Blake Center exists to promote African American culture , and music , to both youth and adults , through dance classes for all age groups , workshops , clinics , seminars and other programs . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 Baltimore 's most famous institute of higher music education is the Peabody Institute 's Conservatory of Music , founded in 1857 though instruction did not begin until 1868 . The original grant from George Peabody funded an Academy of Music , which became the Conservatory in 1872 . Lucien Southard was the first director of the Conservatory . In 1977 , the Conservatory became affiliated with Johns Hopkins University . 
 The Baltimore region is home to other institutions of musical education , including Towson University , Goucher College and Morgan State University , each of which both instruct and present concerts . Coppin State University , which offers a minor in music , Morgan State University , which offers Bachelor of Fine Arts and Master of Arts degrees in music , and Bowie State University , which offers undergraduate programs in music and music technology . 
 The Arthur <unk> Library collects primary sources relating to music in Baltimore , as do the archives maintained by the Peabody and the Maryland Historical Society . Johns Hopkins University is home to the Milton S. Eisenhower Library , whose Lester S. Levy Collection is one of the most important collections of American sheet music in the country , and contains more than 40 @,@ 000 pieces , including original printings of works by Carrie Jacobs @-@ Bond such as " A Perfect Day " ( song ) . 
 = Battle of Staten Island = 
 The Battle of Staten Island was a raid by Continental Army troops under Major General John Sullivan against British forces on Staten Island on August 22 , 1777 , during the American Revolutionary War . After British Lieutenant General William Howe sailed with most of his army from New York in July , the Americans recognized that the British position on Staten Island was vulnerable , and planned an attack . 
 Sullivan 's raid was well @-@ executed , but it suffered from a shortage of boats to effect the crossing , and one of its detachments was misled by its guide to the front of the enemy position rather than its rear . As a result , Sullivan did not take as many prisoners as expected , and had about 200 of his own men taken prisoner due in part to the lack of boats . Although Sullivan was accused of mismanaging the raid , a court martial held later in 1777 exonerated Sullivan of all charges . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1776 the British forces of General William Howe withdrew from Boston after Major General George Washington fortified high ground threatening the city and its harbor . With this army augmented by reinforcements from Europe , General Howe captured New York City , forcing Washington to retreat all the way across New Jersey . At the end of 1776 , Washington crossed the Delaware River and surprised German troops at Trenton , New Jersey , and eventually regained control of most of the state . The two armies then settled into winter quarters , although there was much skirmishing before the 1777 campaign got underway . 
 On July 23 , 1777 , following months of preparation and some preliminary maneuvers in New Jersey , General Howe and his brother , Admiral Richard Howe , launched a fleet carrying most of the New York @-@ based army south pursuant to their plan to capture the American capital , Philadelphia , by landing the army at the upper end of Chesapeake Bay and marching north . 
 General Washington , although he was notified promptly of the fleet 's departure , was unaware of its destination . He heard on August 10 that the fleet appeared to be moving south of Philadelphia , possibly heading for Charleston , South Carolina . As a result , he prepared to move north to assist General Horatio Gates defend the Hudson River against Lieutenant General John Burgoyne 's march south from Quebec . On August 21 he was alerted that the fleet had been spotted one week earlier at the mouth of Chesapeake Bay . Realizing the danger to Philadelphia , he immediately issued orders to move the entire army south with all speed . His orders to Major General John Sullivan , who commanded the front line defenses in eastern New Jersey , were to rejoin the main army " with all convenient speed " . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Sullivan , in the meantime , had learned that the departure of Howe 's army had left Staten Island vulnerable , and planned and put into execution a raid against British targets there . He had learned that although the bulk of British regulars were near the northern end of the island , about 700 New Jersey Loyalist militia were scattered along the western shore , facing the New Jersey mainland . His plan was to cross two groups onto the island from points in Elizabethtown ( present @-@ day Elizabeth , New Jersey ) , capture prisoners from the isolated militia outposts , and destroy supplies . They would then go to the Old Blazing Star Ferry ( between present @-@ day Carteret , New Jersey and Rossville , Staten Island ) to return to the mainland . 
 British defenses on the island , under the overall command of Brigadier General John Campbell , consisted of the regular army elements from the 52nd Foot , regiments of so @-@ called " Hessians " from the German states of Waldeck and Ansbach , and the Loyalist New Jersey militia known as Skinner 's Brigade under the command of Cortlandt Skinner . Campbell 's men ( including the German troops ) numbered about 900 , and were stationed near the northeastern tip of the island . Skinner 's men , numbering about 400 according to Campbell 's report , were stationed at outposts along the western shore between Dexter 's Ferry and Ward 's Point . 
 General Sullivan , at his base in Hanover , New Jersey , ordered his commanders on August 20 to prepare their troops for a march the next day . Sources do not describe the precise composition of the troops chosen , but most of them were drawn from Sullivan 's division , which consisted of the First and Second Maryland Brigades . These brigades comprised the regiments of the Maryland Line ; additional troops chosen for the operation included companies from the 2nd Canadian Regiment and a company of New Jersey militia . On the afternoon of August 21 two columns numbering about 1 @,@ 000 in all left the camp . One column was led by Brigadier General William Smallwood , and the other , headed by Sullivan , consisted of troops led by a French officer who had been given a Continental Army brigadier 's commission , the Chevalier Philippe Hubert <unk> de Borre . After reaching Elizabethtown late that evening , they rested for a few hours , and began crossing early the next morning . One detachment , led by Colonel Matthias Ogden , crossed opposite Fresh Kills and rowed partway up the kill , in order to approach their target , the militia brigade of Elisha Lawrence , from its rear . The remaining troops crossed near Palmer 's run on the north side of the island , where they split into three groups . Smallwood and Sullivan led most of their columns away to attack specific targets , each leaving a regiment behind to cover their line of retreat . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Ogden attacked Lawrence 's outpost at dawn , surprising and routing the militia company . After a few minutes of battle he had taken 80 prisoners , and he moved on to the outpost of Lieutenant Colonel Edward Vaughan Dongan , commanding the 3rd battalion of Skinner 's Brigade . Dongan 's men put up stiff resistance , even though he was felled with a mortal wound . This prompted Ogden to retreat toward the Old Blazing Star . After waiting there as long as he thought prudent , Ogden crossed his men back to the mainland before Sullivan and Smallwood arrived . 
 Sullivan moved to attack Skinner 's 5th battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Barton , at the New Blazing Star Ferry , but these troops were alert , and fled when Sullivan 's forces advanced on them . Although Sullivan had placed troops to intercept men who tried to get away , many of Barton 's men escaped , crossing over to the Jersey shore or hiding in the woods and swamps of the area . Sullivan took 40 prisoners , including Barton . Some of his men advanced on Skinner 's headquarters , but the force there was too strong , and the Americans retreated . 
 General Smallwood 's column was led by its guide to the front of the Loyalist battalion of Abraham van Buskirk , instead of its rear . He ordered the attack anyway , and Buskirk 's men fled until they were rallied by General Skinner , and the tables were then turned on the Americans . They beat a hasty retreat , although they had time to destroy camp supplies and equipment , and managed to seize a battle standard . 
 Smallwood and Sullivan joined forces near Richmond , a village in the center of the island , and made their way to the Old Blazing Star . Sullivan sent for the boats to speed the crossing , but they never arrived , so he began crossing the troops and prisoners using the three boats that Ogden had commandeered to cross earlier . As they did this , Skinner and his company approached , accompanied by the forces of Campbell , the 52nd , and the Waldeck and Anspach regiments . Sullivan ordered the companies of Majors Stewart and Tillard to cover the retreat . Numbering roughly 80 men , they successfully held off the accumulated British forces until all other American troops had crossed to the mainland , repulsing several determined attempts to break through their line . Although some of this covering line managed to escape , a number of men were killed , and a sizable number surrendered after they ran out of ammunition and the British began firing grape shot at them . 
 The British loss was given by the Loyalist publication Gaine 's Mercury of September 1 , 1777 as 5 killed , 7 wounded and 84 missing . Sir Henry Clinton wrote that the British took 259 prisoners in the engagement , whereas historian Douglas Southall Freeman gives the number of men captured as 150 . Twenty @-@ one of the American prisoners were officers , one of whom was wounded ; the ranking officer captured was Lieutenant Colonel Edward Antill . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Sullivan 's forces marched south after the battle , and were able to join Washington 's defensive arrangements south of Philadelphia in time to participate in the key Battle of Brandywine on September 11 . General Sullivan was later subjected to a court martial over accusations that he mismanaged the expedition in a variety of ways . The court exonerated him of all charges . 
 = Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag = 
 " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " is the fourth episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It premiered on Fox in the United States on November 8 , 2009 . The episode follows anthropomorphic dog Brian as he dates a middle @-@ aged woman named Rita , after he is stood up by her daughter . He eventually becomes reluctant to continue their relationship , however , after he discovers several health concerns that she endures and is continually harassed by his family . The episode premiered during an " all @-@ Seth MacFarlane " schedule , preceding the live @-@ action episode Seth and Alex 's Almost Live Comedy Show . 
 The episode was written by series regular Tom Devanney and directed by Pete Michels . It received very mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 38 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Hart Bochner , James Burkholder , Aimee Garcia , Jack Samson , Stacey Scowley , Debra Skelton , Reginald VelJohnson , Nana Visitor , Tico Wells , Mae Whitman and Bruce Willis , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15 , 2010 . The episode is dedicated to Patrick Swayze . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a visit to a closing video store during a DVD sale , Peter decides to buy Road House and , after watching it , decides to start roundhouse kicking everything in sight including his family . While driving with Brian using his feet , Peter crashes into a young woman 's car , leading Brian to assure she is okay . The woman apologizes to Brian , and he asks her out . She accepts , but when he comes to her house to pick her up , her mother Rita says she has just left with somebody else . Brian keeps talking to Rita and finds himself attracted to her . After dating for several weeks , they sneak into the Griffin home late one night , but the family finds out the next morning and ridicule Rita behind her back . Brian attempts to convince the family that Rita is a wonderful , charming woman despite the fact that she 's significantly older than he is , and invites her to dinner to prove his point . It doesn 't go well : they demand that she reveal her age , and she breaks down and admits that she 's 50 . Infuriated with the Griffins , Brian goes to console Rita , and proposes to her . Feeling guilty for how they treated him , the Griffins give Brian their blessings . 
 Rita breaks her hip while she and Brian are having sex . Peter warns Brian that their relationship will not last much longer now that he must run errands for her . Brian goes out to pick up medicine for bedridden Rita , but is distracted by the sight of a group of young women entering a bar . One of them offers to have sex with Brian in the bathroom , after which he returns with her medicine . Realizing that he still loves Rita , he admits his infidelity . However , Rita decides he is far too young for her and breaks off their engagement . A regretful Brian understands that it is for the best and leaves her . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was directed by former The Simpsons artist Pete Michels , and written by Tom Devanney , shortly after the conclusion of the seventh production season . Both are series regulars for the show , who joined in its third and fourth season , respectively . Prior to providing minor voice @-@ over roles for the series , actress Nana Visitor portrays the episode 's featured character , Rita . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane and David Zuckerman serving as staff writers for the episode . 
 " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . 
 In addition to Visitor and the regular cast , actor Hart Bochner , James Burkholder , actress Aimee Garcia , Jack Samson , actress Stacey Scowley , Debra Skelton , Reginald VelJohnson , actor Tico Wells , actress Mae Whitman and actor Bruce Willis , guest starred in the episode in both voice and live @-@ action appearances . Recurring guest voice actors Alexandra Breckenridge , writer Steve Callaghan , voice actor Ralph Garman , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring guest cast members Adam West and Patrick Warburton also made appearances in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant decline from the previous week 's show , and despite being heavily promoted as an " all @-@ Seth MacFarlane " night , the episode received a Nielsen Rating of 4 @.@ 3 / 7 in the 18 – 49 demographic , and was viewed in 7 @.@ 38 million homes . 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics . Ahsan Haque of IGN gave it a 6 @.@ 5 / 10 , saying that the " episode felt very formulaic and a bit of a wasted opportunity " Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club gave it a B , saying , " it 's weird to see a Family Guy episode that has something approaching an actual story [ ... ] and even the cutaway gags were more muted than usual . " In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Ramsey Isler of IGN listed " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " as " remarkably unfunny , with lazy and unoriginal writing . " 
 = Kepler @-@ 11f = 
 Kepler @-@ 11f is an exoplanet ( extrasolar planet ) discovered in the orbit of the sun @-@ like star Kepler @-@ 11 by NASA 's Kepler spacecraft , which searches for planets that transit ( cross in front of ) their host stars . Kepler @-@ 11f is the fifth planet from its star , orbiting one quarter of the distance ( .25 AU ) of the Earth from the Sun every 47 days . It is the furthest of the first five planets in the system . Kepler @-@ 11f is the least massive of Kepler @-@ 11 's six planets , at nearly twice the mass of Earth ; it is about 2 @.@ 6 times the radius of Earth . Along with planets d and e and unlike the two inner planets in the system , Kepler @-@ 11f has a density lower than that of water and comparable to that of Saturn . This suggests that Kepler @-@ 11f has a significant hydrogen – helium atmosphere . The Kepler @-@ 11 planets constitute the first system discovered with more than three transiting planets . Kepler @-@ 11f was announced to the public on February 2 , 2011 after follow @-@ up investigations at several observatories . Analysis of the planets and study results were published the next day in the journal Nature . 
 = = Name and discovery = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 , known as KOI @-@ 157 when it was first flagged for a transit event , is the planet 's host star , and it is included in the planet 's name to denote that . Because Kepler @-@ 11f was discovered with five other planets , the planets of Kepler @-@ 11 were sorted by distance from the host star ; thus , since Kepler @-@ 11f is the fifth planet from its star , it was given the letter " f . " The name " Kepler " is derived from the Kepler satellite , a NASA Earth @-@ trailing spacecraft that constantly observes a small patch of sky between the constellations Cygnus and Lyra for stars that are transited by , in particular , terrestrial planets . As these planets cross in front of their host stars with respect to Earth , a small and periodic dip in the star 's brightness occurs ; this dip is noted by the spacecraft and tagged for future study . Scientists then analyze the transit event more carefully to verify if the planet actually exists and to gather information on the planet 's orbit and composition ( if possible ) . 
 Follow @-@ up observations were conducted at observatories at the W.M. Keck Observatory 's Keck 1 telescope in Hawaii ; the Shane and Hale telescopes in California ; the Harlan J. Smith and Hobby @-@ Eberly telescopes in Texas ; telescopes at the WIYN ( including MMT ) and Whipple observatories in Arizona ; and the Nordic Optical Telescope in the Canary Islands . The Spitzer Space Telescope was also used . According to NASA , Kepler @-@ 11 's system is the most compact and the flattest system yet discovered , surpassing even the Solar System . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 is a G @-@ type star , much like the Sun is , and is located 613 parsecs away in the Cygnus constellation . It has 95 % the mass and 110 % the radius of the Sun . Its mass and radius , combined with an approximate iron content ( metallicity ) of 0 and effective temperature of 5680 K , makes the star very similar to the Sun , though slightly more diffuse and slightly cooler . However , the star is approximately 1 @.@ 74 times the age of the Sun , and is estimated to have existed for eight billion years . Kepler @-@ 11 has six known planets in orbit : Kepler @-@ 11b , Kepler @-@ 11c , Kepler @-@ 11d , Kepler @-@ 11e , Kepler @-@ 11f , and Kepler @-@ 11g . Kepler @-@ 11 's five inner planets orbit closely to their host star , and their orbits would fit within that of Mercury 's . 
 With an apparent magnitude of 14 @.@ 2 , Kepler @-@ 11 cannot be seen with the naked eye . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11f is , at 2 @.@ 3 times the mass of Earth , the least massive of the six planets discovered in the orbit of Kepler @-@ 11 , although the planet 's mass may range from 1 @.@ 1 to 4 @.@ 5 , or from approximately that of Earth 's mass to that of Kepler @-@ 10b , a rather large confidence interval . Its radius is the second smallest of the six planets discovered in the system at 2 @.@ 61 times the radius of Earth . Kepler @-@ 11f has a density of about 0 @.@ 7 g / cm3 , comparable to that of the Solar System 's least dense planet , Saturn . Kepler @-@ 11f is the fifth planet from Kepler @-@ 11 , orbiting its host star every 46 @.@ <unk> days at a distance of 0 @.@ 25 AU . Its orbital eccentricity is unknown . In comparison , Mercury orbits the Sun every 87 @.@ 97 days at a distance of 0 @.@ 387 AU . Kepler @-@ 11f has an orbital inclination of 89 @.@ 4 ° ; it can be seen almost edge @-@ on with respect to Earth . Its surface equilibrium temperature is 544 K , over twice the surface equilibrium temperature of Earth and about two @-@ thirds the surface temperature of Venus . 
 Kepler @-@ 11f 's low density , characteristic of the outer planets of the system , suggests that a large hydrogen – helium atmosphere is present on these planets , classifying it as " gas dwarf " due to its small size and mass . This low density is not shared by the planets Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c because the solar wind has reduced their atmospheres to a thin layer . The planets accreted such large atmospheres because they formed within the first few million years of the system 's existence , when a protoplanetary disk was still present . 
 = Jack Sparrow = 
 Captain Jack Sparrow is a fictional character and the main protagonist in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series . The character was created by screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio , and is portrayed by Johnny Depp , who based his characterization on Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards and cartoon character Pepé Le Pew . He first appears in the 2003 film Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl . He later appears in the sequels Dead Man 's Chest ( 2006 ) , At World 's End ( 2007 ) , On Stranger Tides ( 2011 ) , and Dead Men Tell No Tales ( 2017 ) . 
 In the films , Sparrow is one of the nine pirate lords in the Brethren Court , the Pirate Lords of the Seven Seas . He can be treacherous and survives mostly by using wit and negotiation rather than by force , opting to flee most dangerous situations and to fight only when necessary . Sparrow is introduced seeking to regain his ship , the Black Pearl , from his mutinous first mate , Hector Barbossa . Later he attempts to escape his blood debt to the legendary Davy Jones while battling the East India Trading Company . The character 's role expanded as the films progressed . 
 The Pirates of the Caribbean series was inspired by the Disney theme park ride of the same name , and when the ride was revamped in 2006 , the character of Jack Sparrow was added to it . He headlines the Legend of Captain Jack Sparrow attraction at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , and is the subject of spin @-@ off novels , including a children 's book series Pirates of the Caribbean : Jack Sparrow , which chronicles his teenage years . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = The Curse of the Black Pearl = = = 
 Captain Jack Sparrow first appears in The Curse of the Black Pearl ( 2003 ) when he arrives in Port Royal in Jamaica to commandeer a ship . Despite rescuing Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) , the daughter of Governor Weatherby Swann ( Jonathan Pryce ) , from drowning , he is jailed for piracy . That night , a cursed pirate ship called the Black Pearl attacks Port Royal and Elizabeth is kidnapped . The Black Pearl 's captain , Hector Barbossa ( Geoffrey Rush ) , desperately seeks one last gold coin to break an ancient Aztec curse that he and his crew are under . A blacksmith named Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) frees Sparrow to aid him in rescuing Elizabeth . They commandeer the HMS Interceptor and recruit a motley crew in Tortuga in Haiti before heading to Isla de Muerta , where Elizabeth is held captive . Along the way , Will learns that Sparrow was the Black Pearl 's captain until Barbossa led a mutiny ten years earlier and took over the ship , marooning Sparrow on an island to die . Sparrow tells Turner that his father was a pirate known as " Bootstrap " Bill Turner . 
 The rescue attempt goes awry and Barbossa maroons Jack and Elizabeth on the same island he had stranded Sparrow before . Elizabeth creates a signal fire from rum barrels and they are rescued by the British Royal Navy . Sparrow cuts a deal with Commodore James Norrington ( Jack Davenport ) to lead Norrington to the Black Pearl . Norrington refuses until Elizabeth , desperate to save Will , spontaneously accepts Norrington 's earlier marriage proposal . Right before the film 's climactic battle with the pirates at Isla de Muerta , Sparrow swipes a cursed coin from the treasure chest , making himself immortal and capable of dueling Barbossa . He shoots his rival with the pistol he has carried for ten years just as Will breaks the curse , killing Barbossa . Despite having assisted the Navy , Sparrow is sentenced to hang . 
 At Sparrow 's execution in Port Royal , Will saves Sparrow , but they are quickly captured . Elizabeth intervenes , declaring her love for Will who is pardoned , while Sparrow escapes by tumbling off a sea wall . The Black Pearl and her new crew arrive in time to retrieve him , and he becomes captain once more . Impressed by the wily pirate , Norrington allows him one day 's head start before giving chase . 
 = = = Dead Man 's Chest = = = 
 A year following the events of the first film , Sparrow searches for the Dead Man 's Chest , which contains the heart of Captain Davy Jones ( Bill Nighy ) . Sparrow made a bargain with Jones to raise the sunken Black Pearl and make Sparrow captain for thirteen years . Now the debt is due , and Sparrow must either serve one hundred years aboard the Flying Dutchman , or be dragged to Davy Jones 's Locker by the Kraken . If he can find the Dead Man 's Chest Sparrow can free his soul and control Jones and the seas . 
 Adding to Sparrow 's woes , Lord Cutler Beckett ( Tom Hollander ) of the East India Trading Company has a personal score to settle with Sparrow . Beckett wants the chest and forces Will Turner to search for Sparrow and his magic compass . Turner locates Sparrow and his crew on Pelegosto , held captive by cannibals who intend to eat Sparrow . They escape , and voyage to Tia Dalma ( later revealed to be the Goddess , Calypso , bound in human form as Dalma , and former lover of Jones ) . Dalma immediately sees destiny in Will , and provides Sparrow with a jar of dirt - Jones can only set foot on land once every 10 years , and since land is where Sparrow is safe , Dalma suggests with the dirt that he takes land with him . 
 Sparrow strikes a new deal with Jones to deliver one hundred souls in exchange for his own . Jones agrees but keeps Turner as a " good faith payment " . Sparrow is recruiting sailors in Tortuga when he encounters Elizabeth Swann and James Norrington , the latter having succumbed to alcohol . Sparrow convinces Elizabeth that Turner can be freed by using the magic compass to find the chest . The duo head for Isla Cruces and find Will , who escaped Jones 's ship and has stolen the key to the Chest . Turner wants to stab Jones 's heart and free his father from Jones 's servitude , while Norrington plots to restore his career by delivering the heart to Beckett . Sparrow wants it to convince Jones to call off the Kraken . 
 Norrington escapes with the heart amid a battle with Jones 's crew , and Jones summons the Kraken . Realizing Sparrow is the target , Elizabeth traps him aboard the Black Pearl as the crew abandons the ship , and kisses him while she handcuffs him to the mast . Then , the monster devours Sparrow and drags the ship and his soul to Davy Jones 's Locker . The surviving crew seeks refuge with Tia Dalma ( Naomie Harris ) , a magic woman , who produces a captain she says can rescue Sparrow : it was her doing that brought Barbossa back to life . 
 = = = At World 's End = = = 
 With Davy Jones 's heart in his possession and the Flying Dutchman under his command , Cutler Beckett begins exterminating all pirates . To combat Beckett , the nine pirate lords of the Brethren Court convene at Shipwreck Cove . Only Jack Sparrow is missing , killed and sent to Davy Jones 's Locker at the end of the previous film . Sparrow , as Pirate Lord of the Caribbean , must attend , as he did not <unk> to a designated heir his " piece of eight " , a pirate lord 's marker . The collective " nine pieces of eight " are needed to free sea goddess Calypso to defeat Beckett . With Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) and Will Turner , Barbossa leads Sparrow 's crew to Davy Jones 's Locker using stolen navigational charts from the pirate lord Sao Feng ( Chow Yun @-@ fat ) . After the crew locate him , Sparrow deciphers a clue on the charts allowing them to escape the Locker . 
 At the Brethren Court , Elizabeth has succeeded Captain Sao Feng as a Pirate Lord and is elected " Pirate King " after Sparrow breaks a stalemate vote . Sparrow is briefly reunited with his father , Captain Teague ( Keith Richards ) . During a parley with Beckett and Jones , Sparrow is traded for Turner , whom Jones and Beckett had captured . When Sparrow negotiates with Beckett in the extended version of the film , it is revealed that he once sailed the Black Pearl under Beckett 's command , but deserted after refusing to carry slave cargo . The Black Pearl battles the Flying Dutchman during a maelstrom created by Calypso , during which Sparrow steals Jones 's heart to become immortal . When Jones mortally wounds Turner , Sparrow instead chooses to save Turner by helping him stab the heart , which kills Jones and makes Turner the Dutchman 's captain . Together , the Pearl and the Dutchman destroy Beckett 's ship . At the end , Barbossa again commandeers the Pearl and Sao Feng 's charts , stranding Sparrow and Gibbs in Tortuga . Sparrow , however , had removed the chart 's crucial center portion , and sets sail in a dinghy , armed with his magical compass and the chart to search for the Fountain of Youth . 
 = = = On Stranger Tides = = = 
 After failing to find the Fountain of Youth , Sparrow arrives in London only to learn someone is gathering a crew by using his name . While searching for the imposter , he saves Gibbs from being hanged but is captured by the Royal Guards . They present him to King George II . Sparrow is surprised to learn Captain Barbossa is now a privateer in the Royal Navy . Sparrow refuses to negotiate with them to locate the Fountain of Youth and escapes . Soon he crosses paths with his impersonator , an old flame named Angelica ( Penélope Cruz ) . She <unk> him to serve aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge , the ship captained by her father Blackbeard ( Ian McShane ) , who forces Sparrow to search for the Fountain of Youth . 
 Sparrow fails in his attempt to take over the ship in a mutiny against Blackbeard and save the naive Angelica from her evil father . After encountering dangerous mermaids , Barbossa , and the Spanish Navy , Sparrow locates the Fountain of Youth . When Angelica is wounded , he tricks Blackbeard into sacrificing himself to save her , and Angelica blames Sparrow for her father 's death . Sparrow and Angelica acknowledge their feelings for one another , but Sparrow maroons Angelica on an island , believing she may avenge her father 's death . Gibbs , meanwhile , has retrieved the shrunken Black Pearl from Blackbeard 's collection of shrunken ships in the hope of restoring it to normal size . Though he has forfeited his opportunity for immortality , Sparrow settles for being famous as the one who found the Fountain of Youth . Following the film 's end credits , Angelica 's voodoo doll of Sparrow has drifted to the island that she is marooned on . 
 = = = Dead Men Tell No Tales = = = 
 Sparrow will return in the fifth film , portrayed once again by Johnny Depp coming May 26 , 2017 . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 When writing the screenplay for The Curse of the Black Pearl , Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio envisioned Captain Jack Sparrow as a supporting character in the vein of Bugs Bunny and Groucho Marx . The producers saw him as a young Burt Lancaster . Director Gore Verbinski admitted , " The first film was a movie , and then Jack was put into it almost . He doesn 't have the obligations of the plot in the same ways that the other characters have . He meanders his way through , and he kind of affects everybody else . " Sparrow represents an ethical pirate , with Captain Barbossa as his corrupt foil . His true motives usually remain masked , and whether he is honorable or evil depends on the audience 's perspective . This acts as part of Will Turner 's arc , in which Sparrow tells him a pirate can be a good man , like his father . 
 Following the success of The Curse of the Black Pearl , the challenge to creating a sequel was , according to Verbinski , " You don 't want just the Jack Sparrow movie . It 's like having a garlic milkshake . He 's the spice and you need a lot of straight men ... Let 's not give them too much Jack . It 's like too much dessert or too much of a good thing . " Although Dead Man 's Chest was written to propel the trilogy 's plot , Sparrow 's state @-@ of @-@ mind as he is pursued by Davy Jones becomes increasingly edgy , and the writers concocted the cannibal sequence to show that he was in danger whether on land or at sea . Sparrow is perplexed over his attraction to Elizabeth Swann , and attempts to justify it throughout the film . 
 At World 's End was meant to return it tonally to a character piece . Sparrow , in particular , is tinged with madness after extended solitary confinement in Davy Jones 's Locker , and now desires immortality . Sparrow struggles with what it takes to be a moral person , after his honest streak caused his doom in the second film . This is mainly shown by his increasingly erratic behaviour and Jack 's hallucinations which appeared to be simply his deranged mind in the beginning where dozens of " Jack Sparrows " appeared to crew the ship in his solitary exile , but later the hallucinations grew more important and there were mainly two " Jacks " constantly arguing about which path to follow : the immortality or the mortality . The last hallucination took place while Jack was imprisoned on the Dutchman where his honest streak won ( possibly due to not liking his sea creature @-@ like " future " which comedically dropped his brain and searched for it around the Brig ) . By the end of At World 's End Sparrow is sailing to the Fountain of Youth , an early concept for the second film . Rossio said in 2007 that a fourth film was possible , and producer Jerry Bruckheimer expressed interest in a spin @-@ off . Gore Verbinski concurred that " all of the stories set in motion by the first film have been resolved . If there ever were another Pirates of the Caribbean film , I would start fresh and focus on the further adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow . " 
 On Stranger Tides was first announced on September 28 , 2008 , during a Disney event at the Kodak Theater . Verbinski did not return to direct the fourth installment and was replaced by Rob Marshall . The movie uses elements from Tim Powers ' novel of the same name , particularly Blackbeard and the Fountain of Youth , but the film is not a straight adaptation of the novel . 
 = = = Johnny Depp = = = 
 Looking to do a family film , Johnny Depp visited the Walt Disney Studios in 2001 when he heard of plans to adapt the Pirates of the Caribbean ride into a film . Depp was excited by the possibility of reviving an old Hollywood genre , and found the script met his quirky sensibilities : the crew of the Black Pearl were not in search of treasure but trying to return it to lift a curse on them , and the traditional mutiny had already occurred . Depp was cast on June 10 , 2002 . Producer Jerry Bruckheimer felt Depp would give the film an edge that could draw teenage and adult audiences despite Disney 's reputation for soft children 's fare . 
 At the first read @-@ through , Depp surprised the cast and crew by portraying the character in an off @-@ kilter manner . He researched 18th @-@ century pirates and , seeing parallels with modern rock stars , modeled his performance on Keith Richards . Richards later appeared in two cameos as Jack 's father , Captain Teague , in At World 's End and On Stranger Tides . Verbinski and Bruckheimer had confidence in Depp , partly because Orlando Bloom would play the traditional Errol Flynn @-@ type character . Depp improvised the film 's final line , " Now , bring me that horizon " , which the writer called his favorite line . Disney executives were initially confused by Depp 's performance , questioning whether the character was drunk or gay . While watching the rushes , Disney CEO Michael Eisner proclaimed Depp was ruining the film . Depp 's response to Disney executives was they could trust him with his choices or let him go . Many industry insiders questioned Depp 's casting , as he was an unconventional actor not known for working within the traditional studio system . 
 Depp 's performance won acclaim from film critics . Alan Morrison found it " <unk> over @-@ the @-@ top ... In terms of physical precision and verbal delivery , it 's a master @-@ class in comedy acting . " Roger Ebert praised Depp for drawing away from the character as written and found Depp 's performance " original in its every atom . There has never been a pirate , or for that matter a human being , like this in any other movie ... his behavior shows a lifetime of rehearsal " . Depp won a Screen Actor 's Guild award for his performance , and was nominated for a Golden Globe and the Academy Award for Best Actor , the first in his career . Film School Rejects argued the film made Depp as much a movie star as he was a character actor . 
 Depp 's return in Dead Man 's Chest was the first time he had ever made a sequel . Drew McWeeny wrote , " Remember how cool Han Solo was in Star Wars the first time you saw it ? And then remember how much cooler he seemed when Empire came out ? This is that big a jump . " Depp received an MTV Movie Award and a Teen Choice Award for Dead Man 's Chest , and was nominated for an Empire Award and another Golden Globe . For his performance in At World 's End , Depp won an MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance , as well as a People 's Choice Award , a Kids ' Choice Award , and another Teen Choice Award . He has signed on to reprise the role for future sequels . 
 = = = Make @-@ up and costumes = = = 
 Depp wears a <unk> wig in a rock @-@ and @-@ roll approach to a pirate aesthetic . He wears a red bandanna and numerous objects in his hair , influenced by Keith Richards ' habit of collecting souvenirs from his travels ; Sparrow 's decorations include his " piece of eight " . Sparrow wears kohl around his eyes , which was inspired by Depp 's study of nomads , whom he compared to pirates , and he wore contacts that acted as sunglasses . Sparrow has several gold teeth , two of which belong to Depp , although they were applied during filming . Depp initially forgot to have them removed after shooting The Curse of the Black Pearl , and wore them throughout the shooting of the sequels . Like all aspects of Depp 's performance , Disney initially expressed great concern over Depp 's teeth . Sparrow wears his goatee in two braids . Initially wire was used in them , but the wires were abandoned because they made the braids stick up when Depp lay down . Sparrow has numerous tattoos , and has been branded a pirate on his right arm by Cutler Beckett , underneath a tattoo of a sparrow . 
 Depp collaborated with costume designer Penny Rose on his character 's appearance , <unk> a tricorne as Sparrow 's signature leather hat ; to make Sparrow 's unique , the other characters did not wear leather hats . A rubber version was used for the scene in Dead Man 's Chest when the hat floats on water . Depp liked to stick to one costume , wearing one lightweight silk tweed frock coat throughout the series , and he had to be coaxed out of wearing his boots for a version without a sole or heel in beach scenes . The official line is that none of the costumes from The Curse of the Black Pearl survived , which allowed the opportunity to create tougher linen shirts for stunts . However , one remains which has been displayed in an exhibition of screen costumes in Worcester , England . It was a nightmare for Rose to track down the same makers of Sparrow 's sash in Turkey . Rose did not want to silkscreen it , as the <unk> piece had the correct worn feel . Sparrow wears an additional belt in the sequels , because Depp liked a new buckle which did not fit with the original piece . 
 Sparrow 's weapons are genuine 18th century pieces : his sword dates to the 1740s and his pistol is from the 1760s . Both were made in London . Depp used two pistols on set , one of rubber . Both survived production of the first film . Sparrow 's magic compass also survived into the sequels , though director Gore Verbinski had a red arrow added to the dial as it became a more prominent prop . As it does not act like a normal compass , a magnet was used to make it spin . Sparrow wears four rings , two of which belong to Depp . Depp bought the green ring in 1989 and the gold ring is a replica of a 2400 @-@ year @-@ old ring Depp gave to the crew , though the original was later stolen . The other two are props to which Depp gave backstories : the gold @-@ and @-@ black ring is stolen from a Spanish widow Sparrow seduced and the green dragon ring recalls his adventures in the Far East . Among Depp 's additional ideas was the necklace made of human toes that Sparrow wears as the Pelegosto prepare to eat him , and the sceptre was based on one a friend of Depp 's owned . 
 During the course of the trilogy , Sparrow undergoes physical transformations . In The Curse of the Black Pearl , Sparrow curses himself to battle the undead Barbossa . Like all the actors playing the Black Pearl crew , Depp had to shoot scenes in costume as a reference for the animators , and his shots as a skeleton were shot again without him . Depp reprised the scene again on a motion capture stage . In At World 's End , Sparrow hallucinates a version of himself as a member of Davy Jones 's crew , adhered to a wall and encrusted with barnacles . Verbinski oversaw that the design retained Sparrow 's distinctive look , and rejected initial designs which portrayed him as over 100 years old . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 According to screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio , Sparrow is a trickster who uses wit and deceit to attain his goals , preferring to end disputes verbally instead of by force . He walks with a slightly drunken swagger and has slurred speech and flailing hand gestures . Sparrow is shrewd , calculating , and eccentric . He fools Norrington and his crew to set sail on the royal ship Interceptor , which compels the admiration of Lieutenant Groves as he concedes : " That 's got to be the best pirate I have ever seen " . Norrington himself acquiesces to this praise : " So it would seem " , in sharp contrast to what he had previously proclaimed : " You are without doubt the worst pirate I have ever heard of " . In the third film , while he leaves Beckett 's ship stranded and makes off , Lieutenant Groves asks him : " Do you think he plans it all out , or just makes it up as he goes along ? " 
 Though a skilled swordsman , Sparrow prefers to use his superior intelligence during combat , exploiting his environment to turn the tables on his foes , reasoning " Why fight when you can negotiate ? " He uses strategies of non @-@ violent negotiation and turning his enemies against each other . He invokes <unk> and tempts his enemies away from their murderous intentions , encouraging them to see the bigger picture , as he does when he persuades Barbossa to delay returning to mortal form so he can battle the Royal Navy . He often uses complex wordplay and vocabulary to confound his enemies , and it is suggested that his pacifism may be one reason Barbossa and the crew of the Black Pearl mutinied . 
 The character is portrayed as having created , or at least contributed to , his own reputation . When Gibbs tells Will that Sparrow escaped from a desert island by strapping two sea turtles together , Sparrow embellishes the story by claiming the rope was made from hair from his own back , while in reality , Sparrow escaped the island by bartering with rum traders . The video game Pirates of the Caribbean : The Legend of Jack Sparrow bases itself on these tall tales , including the sacking of Nassau port without firing a shot . Depp has likened pirates to rock stars in that their fame preceded them . Sparrow insists on being addressed as " Captain " and often gives the farewell , " This is the day you will always remember as the day that you almost caught Captain Jack Sparrow ! " which is sometimes humorously cut off . When Norrington accuses him of being the worst pirate he has ever heard of , Sparrow replies , " But you have heard of me . " In a deleted scene from The Curse of the Black Pearl Sparrow ponders being " the immortal Captain Jack Sparrow " , and during At World 's End he again is interested in immortality , although his father , Captain Teague , warns it can be a terrible curse . Sparrow ponders being " Captain Jack Sparrow , the last pirate , " as the East India Trading Company purges piracy . 
 Despite his many heroics , Sparrow is a pirate and a morally ambiguous character . When agreeing to trade 100 souls , including Will , to Davy Jones in exchange for his freedom , Jones asks Sparrow whether he can , " condemn an innocent man — a friend — to a lifetime of servitude in your name while you roam free ? " After a hesitation Sparrow merrily replies , " Yep ! I 'm good with it ! " He carelessly runs up debts with <unk> , Davy Jones , and the other pirate lords . Sao Feng , pirate lord of Singapore , is particularly hateful towards him . In a cowardly moment , Sparrow abandons his crew during the Kraken 's attack , but underlying loyalty and morality compel him to return and save them . Sparrow claims to be a man of his word , and expresses surprise that people doubt his truthfulness ; there is no murder on his criminal record . 
 Depp partly based the character on Pepé Le Pew , a womanizing skunk from Looney Tunes . Sparrow claims to have a " tremendous intuitive sense of the female creature " , although his conquests are often left with a sour memory of him . Former flames , Scarlett and Giselle , usually slap him or anyone looking for him . His witty charm easily attracts women , and even has Elizabeth questioning her feelings . Verbinski noted phallic connotations in Sparrow 's relationship with his vessel , as he grips the ship 's wheel . The Black Pearl is described as " the only ship which can outrun the Flying Dutchman " . The Freudian overtones continue in the third film when Sparrow and Barbossa battle for captaincy of the Black Pearl , showing off the length of their telescopes , and in a deleted scene , they fight over the steering wheel . Sparrow claims his " first and only love is the sea , " and describes his ship as representing freedom . Davy Jones 's Locker is represented as a desert , symbolizing his personal hell . 
 = = Impact on pop culture = = 
 When Dead Man 's Chest grossed over $ 1 billion worldwide , Ian Nathan attributed this to Sparrow 's popularity : " Pirates , the franchise , only had to turn up . There was a powerful holdover from the cheeky delights of its debut , something we hadn 't felt since the Clone Wars called it a day . " Empire in 2006 declared Depp 's performance the seventy @-@ fourth " thing that rocked our world " and later named him the eighth greatest movie character of all time . In 2015 , a new poll of the 100 greatest film characters of all time placed him as the fourteenth greatest . A survey of more than 3 @,@ 000 people showed Jack Sparrow was the most popular Halloween costume of 2006 , and a 2007 poll held by the Internet Movie Database showed Sparrow to be the second most popular live action hero after Indiana Jones . In a 2007 Pearl & Dean poll , Jack Sparrow was listed as Depp 's most popular performance . 
 Todd Gilchrist feels Sparrow is the only element of the films that will remain timeless . According to Sharon <unk> , the character 's popularity can be attributed to his being a " scoundrel whose occasional bouts of conscience allow viewers to go with the flaws because , as played to the larger @-@ than @-@ life hilt by Depp , he owns every scene he is in " . Film history professor Jonathan Kuntz attributed Sparrow 's popularity to the increased questioning of masculinity in the 21st century , and Sparrow 's personality contrasts with action @-@ adventure heroes in cinema . Leonard Maltin concurs that Sparrow has a carefree attitude and does not take himself seriously . Mark Fox noted Sparrow is an escapist fantasy figure for women , free from much of the responsibility of most heroes . Sparrow is listed by IGN as one of their ten favorite film outlaws , as he " lives for himself and the freedom to do whatever it is that he damn well pleases . Precious few film characters have epitomized what makes the outlaw such a romantic figure for audiences as Captain Jack Sparrow has . " Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , " best @-@ of " list , saying , " Part Keith Richards rift , part <unk> lounge lizard , Johnny Depp 's <unk> pirate was definitely one of the most dazzling characters of the decade . " In June 2010 , Sparrow was named one of Entertainment Weekly 's 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Jack Sparrow also appears in video games and books spun off the Pirates of the Caribbean media franchise , among them Kingdom Hearts II , where he is voiced by James Arnold Taylor . Pirates of the Caribbean : The Complete Visual Guide gives a backstory to Sparrow in which he was born on a pirate ship during a typhoon in the Indian Ocean and was trained to fence by an Italian . Books following Sparrow 's adventures before the events of the film include a twelve @-@ book series focusing on his teenage years entitled Pirates of the Caribbean : Jack Sparrow , and a five @-@ books Pirates of the Caribbean : Legends of the Brethren Court series . In 2011 , Ann C. Crispin wrote a novel titled Pirates of the Caribbean : The Price of Freedom , which follows Jack 's adventures as a merchant captain for the East India Trading Company . 
 In 2011 , comedy group the Lonely Island , in collaboration with ballad singer Michael Bolton , released a song named for Jack . 
 = Jefferson nickel = 
 The Jefferson nickel has been the five @-@ cent coin struck by the United States Mint since 1938 , when it replaced the Buffalo nickel . From 1938 until 2004 , the copper @-@ nickel coin 's obverse featured a profile depiction of founding father and third U.S. President Thomas Jefferson by artist Felix Schlag ; the obverse design used in 2005 was also in profile , though by Joe Fitzgerald . Since 2006 Jefferson 's portrayal , newly designed by Jamie Franki , faces forward . The coin 's reverse is still the Schlag original , although in 2004 and 2005 the piece bore commemorative designs . 
 First struck in 1913 , the Buffalo nickel had long been difficult to coin , and after it completed the 25 @-@ year term during which it could only be replaced by Congress , the Mint moved quickly to replace it with a new design . The Mint conducted a design competition in early 1938 , requiring that Jefferson be depicted on the obverse , and Jefferson 's house Monticello on the reverse . Schlag won the competition , but was required to submit an entirely new reverse and make other changes before the new piece went into production in October 1938 . 
 As nickel was a strategic war material during World War II , nickels coined from 1942 to 1945 were struck in a copper @-@ silver @-@ manganese alloy which would not require adjustment to vending machines . They bear a large mint mark above the depiction of Monticello on the reverse . In 2004 and 2005 , the nickel saw new designs as part of the Westward Journey nickel series , and since 2006 has borne Schlag 's reverse and Franki 's obverse . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The design for the Buffalo nickel is well regarded today , and has appeared both on a commemorative silver dollar and a bullion coin . However , during the time it was struck ( 1913 – 1938 ) , it was less well liked , especially by Mint authorities , whose attempts to bring out the full design increased an already high rate of die breakage . By 1938 , it had been struck for 25 years , thus becoming eligible to be replaced by action of the Secretary of the Treasury rather than by Congress . The Mint , which is part of the Department of the Treasury , moved quickly and without public protest to replace the coin . 
 In late January 1938 , the Mint announced an open competition for the new nickel design , with the winner to receive a prize of $ 1 @,@ 000 . The deadline for submissions was April 15 ; Mint Director Nellie Tayloe Ross and three sculptors were to be the judges . That year saw the bicentennial of the birth of the third U.S. President , Thomas Jefferson ; competitors were to place a portrait of Jefferson on the obverse , and a depiction of his house , Monticello , on the reverse . 
 By mid @-@ March , few entries had been received . This seeming lack of response proved to be misleading , as many artists planned on entering the contest and would submit designs near the deadline . On April 20 , the judges viewed 390 entries ; four days later , Felix Schlag was announced as the winner . Schlag had been born in Germany and had come to the United States only nine years previously . Either through a misunderstanding or an oversight , Schlag did not include his initials in the design ; they would not be added until 1966 . The bust of Jefferson on the obverse closely resembles his bust by sculptor Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon , which is to be found in Boston 's Museum of Fine Arts . 
 In early May , it was reported that the Mint required some changes to Schlag 's design prior to coining . Schlag 's original design showed a three @-@ quarters view of Monticello , including a tree . Officials disliked the lettering Schlag had used , a more modernistic style than that used on the eventual coin . The tree was another source of official displeasure ; officials decided it was a palm tree and incorrectly believed Jefferson could not have been growing such a thing . A formal request for changes was sent to Schlag in late May . The sculptor was busy with other projects and did not work on the nickel until mid @-@ June . When he did , he changed the reverse to a plain view , or head @-@ on perspective , of Monticello . Art historian Cornelius Vermeule described the change : 
 Official taste eliminated this interesting , even exciting , view , and substituted the mausoleum of Roman profile and blurred forms that masquerades as the building on the finished coin . On the trial reverse the name " Monticello " seemed scarcely necessary and was therefore , logically , omitted . On the coin as issued it seems essential lest one think the building portrayed is the vault at Fort Knox , a state archives building , or a public library somewhere . 
 The designs were submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts for their recommendation in mid @-@ July ; the version submitted included the new version of Monticello but may not have included the revised lettering . The Commission approved the designs . However , Commission chairman Charles Moore asked that the positions of the mottos on the reverse be switched , with the country name at the top ; this was not done . After the Fine Arts Commission recommendation , the Secretary of the Treasury , Henry Morgenthau , approved the design . 
 On August 21 , the Anderson ( Indiana ) Herald noted : 
 [ T ] he Federal Fine Arts Commission ... didn 't like the view of Thomas Jefferson 's home , Monticello , so they required the artist to do another picture of the front of the house . They did not like the lettering on the coin . It wasn 't in keeping , but they forgot to say what it wasn 't in keeping with ... There is no more reason for imitating the Romans in this respect [ by using Roman @-@ style lettering on the coin ] than there would be for modeling our automobiles after the chariot of Ben Hur 's day . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = 1938 – 1945 : Early minting ; World War II changes = = = 
 Production of the Jefferson nickel began at all three mints ( Philadelphia , Denver , and San Francisco ) , on October 3 , 1938 . By mid @-@ November , some twelve million had been coined , and they were officially released into circulation on November 15 ; more than thirty million would be struck in 1938 . According to contemporary accounts , the Jefferson nickel was initially hoarded , and it was not until 1940 that it was commonly seen in circulation . 
 In 1939 , the Mint recut the hub for the nickel , sharpening the steps on Monticello , which had been fuzzy in initial strikings . Since then , a test for whether a nickel is particularly well struck has been whether all six steps appear clearly , with " full step " nickels more collectable . 
 With the entry of the United States into World War II , nickel became a critical war material , and the Mint sought to reduce its use of the metal . On March 27 , 1942 , Congress authorized a nickel made of 50 % copper and 50 % silver , but gave the Mint the authority to vary the proportions , or add other metals , in the public interest . The Mint 's greatest concern was in finding an alloy which would use no nickel , but still satisfy counterfeit detectors in vending machines . An alloy of 56 % copper , 35 % silver and 9 % manganese proved suitable , and this alloy began to be coined into nickels from October 1942 . In the hopes of making them easy to sort out and withdraw after the war , the Mint struck all " war nickels " with a large mint mark appearing above Monticello . The mint mark P for Philadelphia was the first time that mint 's mark had appeared on a US coin . The prewar composition and smaller mint mark ( or no mint mark for Philadelphia ) were resumed in 1946 . In a 2000 article in The Numismatist , Mark A. Benvenuto suggested that the amount of nickel saved by the switch was not significant to the war effort , but that the war nickel served as a ubiquitous reminder of the sacrifices that needed to be made for victory . 
 Within the war nickel series collectors recognize two additions , one official , the other counterfeit . Some 1943 @-@ P nickels are <unk> . Here a die for the previous year was reused , allowing a " 2 " to be visible under the " 3 " . In addition , a number of 1944 nickels are known without the large " P " mintmark . These were produced in 1954 by Francis LeRoy Henning , who also made counterfeit nickels with at least four other dates . 
 = = = 1946 – 2003 : Later production of original designs = = = 
 When it became known that the Denver Mint had struck only 2 @,@ 630 @,@ 030 nickels in 1950 , the coins ( catalogued as 1950 @-@ D ) began to be widely hoarded . Speculation in them increased in the early 1960s , but prices decreased sharply in 1964 . Because they were so widely pulled from circulation , the 1950 @-@ D is readily available today . A number of reverse dies with an S mint mark , intended for the San Francisco Mint , were created in 1955 ; they were not used as that mint struck no nickels that year and subsequently closed , and the unused dies were sent for use at Denver , where the S mint mark was <unk> with a D. 1949 and 1954 are other years where one mintmark was punched over another . 
 Proof coins , struck at Philadelphia , had been minted for sale to collectors in 1938 and continued through 1942 . In the latter year proofs were struck in both the regular and " war nickel " compositions , after which they were discontinued . Sales of proof coins began again in 1950 and continued until 1964 , when their striking was discontinued during the coin shortage . In 1966 a small change was made to the design to add the initials of the designer ( FS ) to the obverse , underneath Jefferson 's portrait . In commemoration of that change , two proof 1966 nickels with the initials were struck and presented to him . Special mint sets , of lower quality than proof coins , were struck from 1965 to 1967 . Proof coin sales resumed in 1968 , with coins struck at the reopened San Francisco facility . Coins struck at any mint between 1965 and 1967 lack mint marks . Beginning in 1968 , mint marks were again used , but were moved to the lower part of the obverse , to the right of Jefferson 's bust . From 1971 , no nickels were struck for circulation in San Francisco — the 1971 @-@ S was the first nickel struck in proof only since 1878 . In both 1994 and 1997 matte proof nickels , with distinctive grainy surfaces , were struck in small numbers at the Philadelphia mint for inclusion in commemorative coin sets . 
 During the late twentieth century the Mint repeatedly modified the design . In 1982 , the steps were sharpened in that year 's redesign . The 1987 modification saw the sharpening of Jefferson 's hair and the details of Monticello — since 1987 , well @-@ struck nickels with six full steps on the reverse have been relatively common . In 1993 , Jefferson 's hair was again sharpened . 
 = = = 2003 – present : Westward Journey nickel series ; redesign of obverse = = = 
 In June 2002 , Mint officials were interested in redesigning the nickel in honor of the upcoming bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition . They contacted the office of Representative Eric Cantor ( Republican @-@ Virginia ) . Cantor had concerns about moving Monticello , located in his home state , off the nickel , and sponsored legislation which would allow the Mint to strike different designs in 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 , and again depict Monticello beginning in 2006 . The resultant act , the " American 5 @-@ Cent Coin Design Continuity Act of 2003 " , was signed into law on April 23 , 2003 . Under its terms , the Treasury Secretary could vary the nickel 's designs in honor of the 200th anniversary of the Expedition and of the Louisiana Purchase , but the nickel would again feature Jefferson and Monticello beginning in 2006 . Under Cantor 's legislation , every future five @-@ cent coin will feature Jefferson and Monticello . 
 In November 2003 , the Mint announced the first two reverse designs , to be struck with Schlag 's obverse in 2004 . The first , designed by United States Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Norman E. Nemeth , depicts an adaptation of the Indian Peace Medals struck for Jefferson . The second , by Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Alfred <unk> , depicts a keelboat like that used by the Expedition . 
 The 2005 nickels presented a new image of the former President , designed by Joe Fitzgerald based on Houdon 's bust of Jefferson . The word " Liberty " was taken from Jefferson 's handwritten draft for the Declaration of Independence , though to achieve a capital L , Fitzgerald had to obtain one from other documents written by Jefferson . The reverse for the first half of the year depicted an American bison , recalling the Buffalo nickel and designed by Jamie Franki . The reverse for the second half showed a coastline and the words " Ocean in view ! O ! The Joy ! " , from a journal entry by William Clark , co @-@ leader of the Expedition . Clark had actually written the word as " <unk> " , but the Mint modernized the spelling . 
 The obverse design for the nickel debuting in 2006 was designed by Franki . It depicts a forward @-@ facing Jefferson based on an 1800 study by Rembrandt Peale , and includes " Liberty " in Jefferson 's script . According to Acting Mint Director David <unk> , " The image of a forward @-@ facing Jefferson is a fitting tribute to [ his ] vision . " The reverse beginning in 2006 was again Schlag 's Monticello design , but newly sharpened by Mint engravers . As Schlag 's obverse design , on which his initials were placed in 1966 , is no longer used , his initials were placed on the reverse to the right of Monticello . 
 In 2009 , a total of only 86 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 nickels were struck for circulation . The figure increased in 2010 to 490 @,@ 560 @,@ 000 . The unusually low 2009 figures were caused by a lack of demand for coins in commerce due to poor economic conditions . 
 = Giant otter = 
 The giant otter ( Pteronura brasiliensis ) is a South American carnivorous mammal . It is the longest member of the Mustelidae , or weasel family , a globally successful group of predators , reaching up to 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) . Atypical of mustelids , the giant otter is a social species , with family groups typically supporting three to eight members . The groups are centered on a dominant breeding pair and are extremely cohesive and cooperative . Although generally peaceful , the species is territorial , and aggression has been observed between groups . The giant otter is diurnal , being active exclusively during daylight hours . It is the noisiest otter species , and distinct vocalizations have been documented that indicate alarm , aggressiveness , and reassurance . 
 The giant otter ranges across north @-@ central South America ; it lives mostly in and along the Amazon River and in the Pantanal . 
 Its distribution has been greatly reduced and is now discontinuous . Decades of poaching for its velvety pelt , peaking in the 1950s and 1960s , considerably diminished population numbers . The species was listed as endangered in 1999 and wild population estimates are typically below 5 @,@ 000 . The Guianas are one of the last real strongholds for the species , which also enjoys modest numbers — and significant protection — in the Peruvian Amazonian basin . It is one of the most endangered mammal species in the <unk> . Habitat degradation and loss is the greatest current threat . The giant otter is also rare in captivity ; in 2003 , only 60 animals were being held . 
 The giant otter shows a variety of adaptations suitable to an amphibious lifestyle , including exceptionally dense fur , a wing @-@ like tail , and webbed feet . The species prefers freshwater rivers and streams , which are usually seasonally flooded , and may also take to freshwater lakes and springs . It constructs extensive campsites close to feeding areas , clearing large amounts of vegetation . The giant otter subsists almost exclusively on a diet of fish , particularly characins and catfish , but may also eat crabs , turtles , snakes and small caiman . It has no serious natural predators other than humans , although it must compete with other species , including the neotropical otter and caiman species , for food resources . 
 = = Naming = = 
 The giant otter has a handful of other names . In Brazil it is known as <unk> , from the <unk> word ari <unk> , meaning water jaguar ( Portuguese : onça d <unk> ) . In Spanish , river wolf ( Spanish : <unk> de <unk> ) and water dog ( Spanish : <unk> de agua ) are used occasionally , though the latter has many other meanings ) and may have been more common in the reports of explorers in the 19th and early 20th centuries . All three names are in use in South America , with a number of regional variations . " Giant otter " translates literally as nutria <unk> and <unk> <unk> in Spanish and Portuguese , respectively . Among the Achuar people , they are known as <unk> , and among the <unk> as <unk> . The genus name , Pteronura , is derived from the Ancient Greek words pteron / <unk> ( feather or wing ) and ura / ουρά ( tail ) , a reference to its distinctive , wing @-@ like tail . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The otters form the <unk> subfamily within the mustelids and the giant otter is the only member of the genus Pteronura . Two subspecies are currently recognized by the canonical Mammal Species of the World , P. b. brasiliensis and P. b. paraguensis . Incorrect descriptions of the species have led to multiple synonyms ( the latter subspecies is often P. b. <unk> in the literature ) . P. b. brasiliensis is distributed across the north of the giant otter range , including the Orinoco , Amazon , and Guianas river systems ; to the south , P. b. paraguensis has been suggested in Paraguay , Uruguay , southern Brazil , and northern Argentina , although it may be extinct in the last three of these four . The World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) considers the species ' presence in Argentina and Uruguay uncertain . In the former , investigation has shown thinly distributed population remnants . P. b. paraguensis is supposedly smaller and more gregarious , with different dentition and skull morphology . Carter and Rosas , however , rejected the subspecific division in 1997 , noting the classification had only been validated once , in 1968 , and the P. b. paraguensis type specimen was very similar to P. b. brasiliensis . Biologist Nicole Duplaix calls the division of " doubtful value " . 
 An extinct genus , <unk> , is believed to be ancestral to the present species , having migrated to the New World during the Pliocene or early Pleistocene . The giant otter shares the South American continent with three of the four members of the Lontra genus of otters : the neotropical river otter , the southern river otter , and the marine otter . It seems to have evolved independently of Lontra in South America , despite the overlap . The smooth @-@ coated otter ( <unk> <unk> ) of Asia may be its closest extant relative ; similar behaviour , vocalizations , and skull morphology have been noted . Both species also show strong pair bonding and paternal engagement in rearing cubs . 
 Phylogenetic analysis by <unk> and Wayne in 1998 found the giant otter has the highest divergence sequences within the otter subfamily , forming a distinct clade that split away 10 to 14 million years ago . They noted that the species may be the basal divergence among the otters or fall outside of them altogether , having split even before other mustelids , such as the ermine , polecat , and mink . Later gene sequencing research on the mustelids , from 2005 , places the divergence of the giant otter somewhat later , between five and 11 million years ago ; the corresponding phylogenetic tree locates the Lontra divergence first among otter genera , and Pteronura second , although divergence ranges overlap . 
 = = Biology and behavior = = 
 The giant otter is large , gregarious , and diurnal . Early travellers ' reports describe noisy groups surrounding explorers ' boats , but little scientific information was available on the species until Duplaix 's groundbreaking work in the late 1970s . Concern over this endangered species has since generated a body of research . 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 The giant otter is clearly distinguished from other otters by morphological and behavioral characteristics . It has the greatest body length of any species in the mustelid family , although the sea otter may be heavier . Males are between 1 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 7 m ( 4 @.@ 9 and 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length from head to tail and females between 1 and 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 @.@ 3 and 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . The animal 's well @-@ muscled tail can add a further 70 cm ( 28 in ) to the total body length . Early reports of skins and living animals suggested exceptionally large males of up to 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) ; intensive hunting likely reduced the occurrence of such massive specimens . Weights are between 26 and 32 kg ( 57 and 71 lb ) for males and 22 and 26 kg ( 49 and 57 lb ) for females . The giant otter has the shortest fur of all otter species ; it is typically chocolate brown , but may be reddish or fawn , and appears nearly black when wet . The fur is extremely dense , so much so that water cannot penetrate to the skin . Guard hairs trap water and keep the inner fur dry ; the guard hairs are approximately 8 millimeters ( one @-@ third of an inch ) in length , about twice as long as the fur of the inner coat . Its velvety feel makes the animal highly sought after by fur traders and has contributed to its decline . Unique markings of white or cream fur color the throat and under the chin , allow individuals to be identified from birth . Giant otters use these marks to recognize one another , and upon meeting other otters , they engage in a behavior known as " <unk> " , displaying their throats and upper chests to each other . 
 Giant otter muzzles are short and sloping and give the head a ball @-@ shaped appearance . The ears are small and rounded . The nose ( or rhinarium ) is completely covered in fur , with only the two slit @-@ like nostrils visible . The giant otter 's highly sensitive whiskers ( vibrissae ) allow the animal to track changes in water pressure and currents , which aids in detecting prey . The legs are short and stubby and end in large webbed feet tipped with sharp claws . Well suited for an aquatic life , it can close its ears and nose while underwater . 
 At the time of Carter and Rosas ' writing , vision had not been directly studied , but field observations show the animal primarily hunts by sight ; above water , it is able to recognize observers at great distances . The fact that it is exclusively active during the day further suggests its eyesight should be strong , to aid in hunting and predator avoidance . In other otter species , vision is generally normal or slightly myopic , both on land and in water . The giant otter 's hearing is acute and its sense of smell is excellent . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The giant otter is an especially noisy animal , with a complex repertoire of vocalizations . All otters produce vocalizations , but by frequency and volume , the giant otter may be the most vocal . Duplaix identified nine distinct sounds , with further subdivisions possible , depending on context . Quick <unk> barks or explosive snorts suggest immediate interest and possible danger . A wavering scream may be used in bluff charges against intruders , while a low growl is used for aggressive warning . <unk> and coos are more reassuring within the group . Whistles may be used as advance warning of <unk> intent between groups , although evidence is limited . Newborn pups squeak to elicit attention , while older young whine and wail when they begin to participate in group activities . An analysis published in 2014 cataloged 22 distinct types of vocalization in adults and 11 in neonates . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The giant otter is a highly social animal and lives in extended family groups . Group sizes are anywhere from two to 20 members , but likely average between three and eight . ( Larger figures may reflect two or three family groups temporarily feeding together . ) The groups are strongly cohesive : the otters sleep , play , travel , and feed together . 
 Group members share roles , structured around the dominant breeding pair . The species is territorial , with groups marking their ranges with latrines , gland secretions , and vocalizations . At least one case of a change in alpha relationship has been reported , with a new male taking over the role ; the mechanics of the transition were not determined . Duplaix suggests a division between " residents " , who are established within groups and territories , and nomadic and solitary " transients " ; the categories do not seem rigid , and both may be a normal part of the giant otter life cycle . One tentative theory for the development of sociality in mustelids is that locally abundant , but unpredictably dispersed , prey causes groups to form . 
 Aggression within the species ( " intraspecific " conflict ) has been documented . Defense against intruding animals appears to be cooperative : while adult males typically lead in aggressive encounters , cases of alpha females guarding groups have been reported . One fight was directly observed in the Brazilian Pantanal in which three animals violently engaged a single individual near a range boundary . In another instance in Brazil , a carcass was found with clear indications of violent assault by other otters , including bites to the snout and genitals , an attack pattern similar to that exhibited by captive animals . While not rare among large predators in general , intraspecific aggression is uncommon among otter species ; Ribas and Mourão suggest a correlation to the animal 's sociability , which is also rare among other otters . A capacity for aggressive behavior should not be overstated with the giant otter . Researchers emphasize that even between groups , conflict avoidance is generally adopted . Within groups , the animals are extremely peaceful and cooperative . Group hierarchies are not rigid and the animals easily share roles . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 Giant otters build dens , which are holes dug into riverbanks , usually with multiple entrances and multiple chambers inside . They give birth within these dens during the dry season . In Cantão State Park , otters dig their reproductive dens on the shores of oxbow lakes starting around July , when waters are already quite low . They give birth between August and September , and the young pups emerge for the first time in October and November , which are the months of lowest water and fish concentrations in the dwindling lakes and channels are at their peak . This makes it easier for the adults to catch enough fish for the growing young , and for the pups to learn how to catch fish . The entire group , including <unk> adults , which are usually older siblings to that year 's pups , collaborates to catch enough fish for the young . 
 Details of giant otter reproduction and life cycle are scarce , and captive animals have provided much of the information . Females appear to give birth year round , although in the wild , births may peak during the dry season . The estrous cycle is 21 days , with females receptive to sexual advances between three and 10 days . Study of captive specimens has found only males initiate copulation . At Tierpark Hagenbeck in Germany , long @-@ term pair bonding and individualized mate selection were seen , with copulation most frequently taking place in water . Females have a gestation period of 65 to 70 days , giving birth to one to five pups , with an average of two . Research over five years on a breeding pair at the Cali Zoo in Colombia found the average interval between litters was six to seven months , but as short as 77 days when the previous litter did not survive . Other sources have found greater intervals , with as long as 21 to 33 months suggested for otters in the wild . 
 Mothers give birth to furred and blind cubs in an underground den near the river shore and fishing sites . Males actively participate in rearing cubs and family cohesion is strong ; older , juvenile siblings also participate in rearing , although in the weeks immediately after birth , they may temporarily leave the group . Pups open their eyes in their fourth week , begin walking in their fifth , and are able to swim confidently between 12 and 14 weeks old . They are weaned by nine months and begin hunting successfully soon after . The animal reaches sexual maturity at about two years of age and both male and female pups leave the group permanently after two to three years . They then search for new territory to begin a family of their own . 
 The giant otter is very sensitive to human activity when rearing its young . No institution , for example , has successfully raised giant otter cubs unless parents were provided sufficient privacy measures ; the stress caused by human visual and acoustic interference can lead to neglect , abuse and infanticide , as well as decreased lactation . In the wild , it has been suggested , although not systematically confirmed , that tourists cause similar stresses : disrupted lactation and denning , reduced hunting , and habitat abandonment are all risks . This sensitivity is matched by a strong protectiveness towards the young . All group members may aggressively charge intruders , including boats with humans in them . 
 The longest documented giant otter lifespan in the wild is eight years . In captivity , this may increase to 17 , with an unconfirmed record of 19 . The animal is susceptible to a variety of diseases , including canine parvovirus . Parasites , such as the larvae of flies and a variety of intestinal worms , also afflict the giant otter . Other causes of death include accidents , gastroenteritis , infanticide , and epileptic seizures . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 The giant otter is an apex predator , and its population status reflects the overall health of riverine ecosystems . It feeds mainly on fish , including cichlids , characins ( such as piranha ) , and catfish . One full @-@ year study of giant otter scats in Amazonian Brazil found fish present in all fecal samples . Fish from the order Perciformes , particularly cichlids , were seen in 97 % of scats , and <unk> , such as characins , in 86 % . Fish remains were of medium @-@ sized species that seem to prefer relatively shallow water , to the advantage of the probably visually oriented giant otter . Prey species found were also sedentary , generally swimming only short distances , which may aid the giant otter in predation . Hunting in shallow water has also been found to be more rewarding , with water depth less than 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) having the highest success rate . The giant otter seems to be opportunistic , taking whatever species are most locally abundant . If fish are unavailable , it will also take crabs , snakes , and even small caimans and anacondas . 
 The species can hunt singly , in pairs , and in groups , relying on sharp eyesight to locate prey . In some cases , supposed cooperative hunting may be incidental , a result of group members fishing individually in close proximity ; truly coordinated hunting may only occur where the prey cannot be taken by a single giant otter , such as with small anacondas and juvenile black caiman . The giant otter seems to prefer prey fish that are generally immobile on river bottoms in clear water . Prey chase is rapid and tumultuous , with lunges and twists through the shallows and few missed targets . The otter can attack from both above and below , swiveling at the last instant to clamp the prey in its jaws . Giant otters catch their own food and consume it immediately ; they grasp the fish firmly between the forepaws and begin eating noisily at the head . Carter and Rosas have found captive adult animals consume around 10 % of their body weight daily — about 3 kilograms ( 7 lb ) , in keeping with findings in the wild . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 The species is amphibious , although primarily terrestrial . It occurs in freshwater rivers and streams , which generally flood seasonally . Other water habitats include freshwater springs and permanent freshwater lakes . Four specific vegetation types occur on one important creek in Suriname : riverbank high forest , floodable mixed marsh and high swamp forest , floodable low marsh forest , and grass islands and floating meadows within open areas of the creek itself . Duplaix identified two critical factors in habitat selection : food abundance , which appears to positively correlate to shallow water , and low sloping banks with good cover and easy access to preferred water types . The giant otter seems to choose clear , black waters with rocky or sandy bottoms over silty , saline , and white waters . 
 Giant otters use areas beside rivers for building dens , campsites , and latrines . They clear significant amounts of vegetation while building their campsites . One report suggests maximum areas 28 m ( 92 ft ) long and 15 m ( 49 ft ) wide , well @-@ marked by scent glands , urine , and feces to signal territory . Carter and Rosas found average areas a third this size . Giant otters adopt communal latrines beside campsites , and dig dens with a handful of entrances , typically under root systems or fallen trees . One report found between three and eight campsites , clustered around feeding areas . In seasonally flooded areas , the giant otter may abandon campsites during the wet season , dispersing to flooded forests in search of prey . Giant otters may adopt preferred locations perennially , often on high ground . These can become quite extensive , including " backdoor " exits into forests and swamps , away from the water . Otters do not visit or mark every site daily , but usually patrol all of them , often by a pair of otters in the morning . 
 Research generally takes place in the dry season and an understanding of the species ' overall habitat use remains partial . An analysis of dry season range size for three otter groups in Ecuador found areas between 0 @.@ 45 and 2 @.@ 79 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 17 and 1 @.@ 08 sq mi ) . <unk> presumed habitat requirements and availability would differ dramatically in the rainy season : estimating range sizes of 1 @.@ 98 to as much as 19 @.@ 55 square kilometers ( 0 @.@ 76 to 7 @.@ 55 sq mi ) for the groups . Other researchers suggest approximately 7 square kilometres ( 2 @.@ 7 sq mi ) and note a strong inverse correlation between sociality and home range size ; the highly social giant otter has smaller home range sizes than would be expected for a species of its mass . Population densities varied with a high of 1 @.@ 2 / km2 ( 3 @.@ 1 / sq mi ) reported in Suriname and with a low of 0 @.@ 154 / km2 ( 0 @.@ 40 / sq mi ) found in Guyana . 
 = = = Predation and competition = = = 
 Adult giant otters living in family groups have no known serious natural predators , however there are some accounts of black caimans in Peru and yacare caimans in the Pantanal preying on giant otters . In addition solitary animals and young may be vulnerable to attacks by the jaguar , cougar , and anaconda , but based on historical reports , not direct observation . Pups are more vulnerable , and may be taken by caiman and other large predators , although adults are constantly mindful of stray young , and will harass and fight off possible predators . When in the water , the giant otter faces danger from animals not strictly preying upon it : the electric eel and stingray are potentially deadly if stumbled upon , and piranha may be capable of at least taking bites out of a giant otter , as evidenced by scarring on individuals . 
 Even if without direct predation , the giant otter must still compete with other predators for food resources . Duplaix documented interaction with the neotropical otter . While the two species are sympatric ( with overlapping ranges ) during certain seasons , there appeared to be no serious conflict . The smaller neotropical otter is far more shy , less noisy , and less social ; at about a third the weight of the giant otter , it is more vulnerable to predation , hence , a lack of conspicuousness is to its advantage . The neotropical otter is active during twilight and darkness , reducing the likelihood of conflict with the diurnal giant otter . Its smaller prey , different denning habits , and different preferred water types also reduce interaction . 
 Other species that prey upon similar food resources include the caimans and large fish that are themselves piscivores . <unk> , such as the electric eel , and the large <unk> catfish are among aquatic competitors . Two river dolphins , the tucuxi and boto , might potentially compete with the giant otter , but different spatial use and dietary preferences suggest minimal overlap . Furthermore , <unk> observed associations between giant otters and the Amazon river dolphins , and suggested that dolphins may benefit by fish fleeing from the otters . The spectacled caiman is another potential competitor , but Duplaix found no conflict with the species in Suriname . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN listed the giant otter as " endangered " in 1999 ; it had been considered " vulnerable " under all previous listings from 1982 when sufficient data had first become available . It is regulated internationally under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) : all trade in specimens and parts is illegal . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 The animal faces a variety of critical threats . Poaching has long been a problem . Statistics show between 1959 and 1969 Amazonian Brazil alone accounted for 1 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 pelts annually . The species was so thoroughly decimated , the number dropped to just 12 in 1971 . The implementation of CITES in 1973 finally brought about significant hunting reductions , although demand did not disappear entirely : in the 1980s , pelt prices were as high as US $ 250 on the European market . The threat has been exacerbated by the otters ' relative fearlessness and tendency to approach human beings . They are extremely easy to hunt , being active through the day and highly inquisitive . The animal 's relatively late sexual maturity and complex social life makes hunting especially disastrous . 
 More recently , habitat destruction and degradation have become the principal dangers , and a further reduction of 50 % is expected in giant otter numbers within the 20 years after 2004 ( about the span of three generations of giant otters ) . Typically , loggers first move into rainforest , clearing the vegetation along riverbanks . Farmers follow , creating depleted soil and disrupted habitats . As human activity expands , giant otter home ranges become increasingly isolated . Subadults leaving in search of new territory find it impossible to set up family groups . Specific threats from human industry include unsustainable mahogany logging in parts of the giant otter range , and concentrations of mercury in its diet of fish , a byproduct of gold mining . Water pollution from mining , fossil fuel extraction , and agriculture is a serious danger ; concentrations of pesticides and other chemicals are magnified at each step in the food chain , and can poison top predators such as the giant otter . 
 Other threats to the giant otter include conflict with fishermen , who often view the species as a nuisance ( see below ) . Ecotourism also presents challenges : while it raises money and awareness for the animals , by its nature it also increases human effect on the species , both through associated development and direct disturbances in the field . A number of restrictions on land use and human intrusion are required to properly maintain wild populations . Schenck et al . , who undertook extensive fieldwork in Peru in the 1990s , suggest specific " no @-@ go " zones where the species is most frequently observed , offset by observation towers and platforms to allow viewing . Limits on the number of tourists at any one time , fishing prohibitions , and a minimum safe distance of 50 metres ( 164 ft ) are proposed to offer further protection . 
 = = = Distribution and population = = = 
 The giant otter has lost as much as 80 % of its South American range . While still present in a number of north @-@ central countries , giant otter populations are under considerable stress . The IUCN lists Bolivia , Brazil , Colombia , Ecuador , French Guiana , Guyana , Paraguay , Peru , Suriname , and Venezuela as current range countries . Given local extinctions , the species ' range has become discontinuous . Total population numbers are difficult to estimate . An IUCN study in 2006 suggested 1 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 otters remain . Populations in Bolivia were once widespread but the country became a " black spot " on distribution maps after poaching between the 1940s and 1970s ; a relatively healthy , but still small , population of 350 was estimated in the country in 2002 . The species has likely been extirpated from southern Brazil , but in the west of the country , decreased hunting pressure in the critical Pantanal has led to very successful recolonization ; an estimate suggests 1 @,@ 000 or more animals in the region . 
 In 2006 , most of this species lived in the Brazilian Amazon and its bordering areas . A significant population lives in the wetlands of the central Araguaia River , and in particular within Cantão State Park , which , with its 843 oxbow lakes and extensive flooded forests and marshlands , is one of the best habitat patches for this species in Brazil . 
 Suriname still has significant forest cover and an extensive system of protected areas , much of which protects the giant otter . Duplaix returned to the country in 2000 and found the giant otter still present on the <unk> Creek , a " jewel " of biodiversity , although increased human presence and land use suggests , sooner or later , the species may not be able to find suitable habitat for campsites . In a report for World Wildlife Fund in 2002 , Duplaix was emphatic about the importance of Suriname and the other Guianas : 
 Other countries have taken a lead in designating protected areas in South America . In 2004 , Peru created one of the largest conservation areas in the world , Alto <unk> National Park , with an area similar in size to Belgium . The park harbors many endangered plants and animals , including the giant otter , and holds the world record for mammal diversity . Bolivia designated wetlands larger than the size of Switzerland as a freshwater protected area in 2001 ; these are also home to the giant otter . 
 = = Interactions with indigenous peoples = = 
 Throughout its range , the giant otter interacts with indigenous groups , who often practice traditional hunting and fishing . A study of five indigenous communities in Colombia suggests native attitudes toward the animal are a threat : the otters are often viewed as a nuisance that interferes with fishing , and are sometimes killed . Even when told of the importance of the species to ecosystems and the danger of extinction , interviewees showed little interest in continuing to coexist with the species . Schoolchildren , however , had a more positive impression of the animal . 
 In Suriname , the giant otter is not a traditional prey species for human hunters , which affords some protection . ( One researcher has suggested the giant otter is hunted only in desperation due to its horrible taste . ) The animal sometimes drowns in nets set across rivers and machete attacks by fishermen have been noted , according to Duplaix , but " tolerance is the rule " in Suriname . One difference in behavior was seen in the country in 2002 : the normally inquisitive giant otters showed " active avoidance behavior with visible panic " when boats appeared . Logging , hunting , and pup seizure may have led groups to be far more wary of human activity . 
 Local people sometimes take pups for the exotic pet trade or as pets for themselves , but the animal rapidly grows to become unmanageable . Duplaix relates the story of an Arawak Indian who took two pups from their parents . While revealing of the affection held for the animals , the seizure was a profound blow to the breeding pair , which went on to lose their territory to competitors . 
 The species has also appeared in the folklore of the region . It plays an important role in the mythology of the Achuar people , where giant otters are seen as a form of the <unk> , or water spirits : they are a sort of " water people " who feed on fish . They appear in a fish poisoning legend where they assist a man who has wasted his sexual energy , creating the anacondas of the world from his distressed and extended genitals . The Bororo have a legend on the origin of tobacco smoking : those who used the leaf improperly by swallowing it were punished by being transformed into giant otters ; the Bororo also associate the giant otter with fish and with fire . A <unk> legend has it that the giant otter exchanged places with the jaguar : the story says jaguar formerly lived in the water and the giant otter came to the land only to eat . The indigenous <unk> peoples from Amazonian Peru believed in a world of water where <unk> runa reigned as mother of the water and was charged with caring for fish and animals . Giant otters served as <unk> runa 's canoes . A <unk> creation story suggests that the practice of otter fishing may have been prevalent in the past . 
 = .bv = 
 .bv is the Internet country code top @-@ level domain ( ccTLD ) reserved for the uninhabited Norwegian dependent territory of Bouvet Island . The domain name registry and sponsor is Norid , but .bv is not open for registration . .bv was designated on 21 August 1997 and was placed under the .no registry Norid . Norwegian policy states that .no is sufficient for those institutions connected to Bouvet Island , and therefore the domain is not open to registration . It is Norwegian policy not to commercialize domain resources , so there are no plans to sell .bv. Should the domain later come into use , it will be under the regulation of the Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority and follow the same policy as .no. 
 = = History = = 
 Bouvet Island is an uninhabited volcanic island in the South Atlantic Ocean . It was claimed by Norway in 1927 . The domain was allocated on 21 August 1997 , at the same time .sj was allocated for Svalbard and Jan Mayen . The allocation occurred because the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority ( IANA ) assigns ccTLDs to all entities with an ISO 3166 code , for which Bouvet Island is designated BV . 
 In June 2015 , Norwegian computer scientist Håkon Wium Lie and the Socialist Left Party proposed using the .bv domain , along with .sj , as online free havens . The proposal aims at protecting both the Norwegian authorities and foreign dissidents from surveillance . 
 In March 2012 , Norid began an initial collaboration with the Dutch domain registry <unk> , with the purpose of examining the possibility of utilizing the .bv domain on the Dutch market . BV is the most common form of limited company in the Netherlands , which could have made .bv a popular domain . The collaboration ended in June 2016 , when The Ministry of Transport and Communications advised that dispensation from certain parts of the Norwegian Domain Regulations , which would have opened for the sale of the .bv domain , should not be granted . 
 = = Policy = = 
 Management of .bv lies with Trondheim @-@ based Norid , which is also the domain name registry for .no and the unused .sj. Norid is a limited company owned by Uninett , which is owned by the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research . The legal right to manage the domains is twofold , based both on an agreement with the IANA and regulations via the Telecommunication Act which is supervised by the Lillesand @-@ based Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority . 
 The policy for the use of .bv is regulated by the Regulation Concerning Domain Names Under Norwegian Country Code Top @-@ level Domains , also known as the Domain Regulation . This regulation also regulates Norway 's other two ccTLDs , .no and .sj. Should .bv eventually come into use , the same rules and procedures as those currently regarding .no would be used for .bv. The domain remains reserved for potential future use . 
 = Tupolev Tu @-@ 75 = 
 The Tupolev Tu @-@ 75 was a military transport variant of the Tu @-@ 4 bomber , as was a similar airliner , the Tu @-@ 70 , both using a new , purpose @-@ designed fuselage . The first Soviet military machine of this class , it was equipped with a rear fuselage loading ramp . It was not placed into production because the VVS decided it would be cheaper to modify its existing Tu @-@ 4s for the transport mission and to use its existing Lisunov Li @-@ 2 and Ilyushin Il @-@ 12 transports . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The Tupolev OKB began work in September 1946 on a military transport version of the Tupolev Tu @-@ 70 airliner and this was confirmed by the Council of Ministers on 11 March 1947 with state trials to begin in August 1948 . To expedite the process the maximum use was made of the components of the Tu @-@ 70 . Its engines were the uprated Shvetsov ASh @-@ 73TKFN or <unk> fuel @-@ injected version . A new , narrower fuselage was designed which included a rear cargo hatch , a vehicle loading ramp and paratroop exit doors . Three gun turrets , dorsal , ventral and tail , were to be adapted from the Tu @-@ 4 , although they were not fitted on the prototype . It had a crew of six , three gunners , a radio @-@ operator , a navigator and two pilots . 
 The aircraft was intended for three different roles ; transport , parachute transport and aerial ambulance . In the first role it was designed to carry two ASU @-@ 76 assault guns , two STZ <unk> artillery tractors , six or seven GAZ @-@ <unk> jeeps or five 85 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) guns without their prime movers or any combination of equipment up to 12 @,@ 000 kg ( 26 @,@ 000 lb ) . To facilitate the loading of cargo a winch was mounted on the ceiling of the cargo hold with a capacity of 3 @,@ 000 kg ( 6 @,@ 600 lb ) . It could carry either 120 troops , 96 fully loaded paratroopers or 64 standard parachute loads . As an aerial ambulance it could carry 31 stretchers and four medical attendants . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Construction of the first prototype was quite prolonged ; the aircraft was not finished until November 1949 , with its first flight taking place on 21 January 1950 . It finished its manufacturer 's trials the following May , but Tupolev decided not to submit it for the State acceptance trials as the Soviet Air Force had already decided that it would be cheaper to rely on its existing transports and to modify Tu @-@ 4 bombers for the cargo role . The prototype was used by the MAP ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> – Ministry of Aviation Industry ) until it crashed in October 1954 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Gunston 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 6 
 Length : 35 @.@ 61 m ( 116 ft 10 in ) 
 Wingspan : 43 @.@ 83 m ( 145 ft 2 ⅛ in ) 
 Height : 9 @.@ 05 m ( 29 ft 8 ¼ in ) 
 Wing area : 167 @.@ 2 m ² ( 1800 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 37 @,@ 810 kg ( 83 @,@ 355 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 56 @,@ 660 kg ( 124 @,@ 912 lb ) 
 Useful load : 12 @,@ 000 kg ( 26 @,@ 455 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 65 @,@ 400 kg ( 144 @,@ 180 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Shvetsov ASh @-@ 73TKFN 18 @-@ cylinder two @-@ row radial engine , 1976 kW ( 2650 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 545 km / h ( 339 mph ) 
 Cruise speed : km / h ( knots , mph ) 
 Stall speed : km / h ( knots , mph ) 
 Range : <unk> km ( <unk> mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 9500 m ( 31 @,@ 170 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : m / s ( ft / min ) 
 Wing loading : kg / m ² ( lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : W / kg ( hp / lb ) 
 Armament 
 7 x 20 mm Berezin B @-@ 20 cannon ( planned ) 
 = Dupont Circle Fountain = 
 The Dupont Circle Fountain , formally known as the Rear Admiral Samuel Francis Dupont Memorial Fountain , is a fountain located in the center of Dupont Circle in Washington , D.C. It honors Rear Admiral Samuel Francis Du Pont , a prominent American naval officer and member of the Du Pont family . The fountain replaced a statue of Du Pont that was installed in 1884 . Designed by Henry Bacon and sculpted by Daniel Chester French , the fountain was dedicated in 1921 . Prominent guests at the dedication ceremony included First Lady Florence Harding , Secretary of War John W. Weeks and Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby . 
 The fountain is one of eighteen Civil War monuments collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The marble fountain , which is adorned with three allegorical sculptures , rests on a concrete base and is surrounded by an open plaza . The fountain and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1871 , the United States Army Corps of Engineers began constructing Dupont Circle , which at the time was called Pacific Circle since it was the western boundary of the city 's residential areas . On February 25 , 1882 , Congress renamed the circle and authorized a memorial to Samuel Francis Du Pont ( 1803 – 1865 ) to honor his services during the Mexican – American War and Civil War . He played a large role in the modernization of the Navy , and during the Civil War he was responsible for making the Union blockade effective against the Confederacy , though his failed attempt to attack Charleston in 1863 tarnished his career record . The bronze statue was sculpted by Launt Thompson and dedicated on December 20 , 1884 , at a cost of $ 20 @,@ 500 . Attendees at the ceremony included President Chester A. Arthur , Senator Thomas F. Bayard , Admiral David Dixon Porter and General Philip Sheridan . The circle was landscaped with exotic plants and hundreds of trees . 
 In the early 20th century , members of the prominent Du Pont family wanted a memorial of greater artistic value and lobbied for a replacement . The family had always disliked the statue and by 1909 , the base of the statue had begun to sink and tilt , resulting in jokes being made that Du Pont and sailors were alcoholics . Senator Willard Saulsbury , Jr . ' s wife , who was a niece of Du Pont , led efforts to replace the statue . The family asked that no government funds be used for the new memorial and that the Commission of Fine Arts ( CFA ) approve the design . On February 26 , 1917 , Congress approved the replacement of the statue and insisted on construction beginning within three years . 
 The Du Pont family chose architect Henry Bacon and sculptor Daniel Chester French to design a fountain that reflected the Beaux @-@ Arts and neoclassical styles that were popular in the neighborhood at the time , such as the Patterson Mansion , located on the northeast edge of the circle . Bacon is best known for designing the Lincoln Memorial while French 's best known work is the statue of Abraham Lincoln inside the memorial . French 's other works in Washington , D.C. include the Butt @-@ Millet Memorial Fountain , the First Division Monument and the Thomas Gallaudet Memorial . The total cost of the commission was $ 77 @,@ 521 . The CFA approved the design in 1917 and work began on the fountain shortly thereafter . 
 Congress wanted recognition for its earlier attempt to honor Du Pont , so the inscription on the fountain had to include the fact that a statue erected by Congress was replaced . An early model included plans for a fountain emitting water at the top , but this wasn 't incorporated into the final design . The fountain was carved by the Piccirilli Brothers , who also carved French 's statue of Abraham Lincoln at the Lincoln Memorial . The contractor was the George A. Fuller Company , whose other projects include the Flatiron Building and the Plaza Hotel in New York City . In 1920 , the statue was moved to Rockford Park in Wilmington , Delaware , the hometown of the Du Pont family . Later that year , the fountain was installed using pipes that were placed in 1877 for a potential fountain that had never been built . After the installation , mature trees and thick vegetation were planted in the surrounding park . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The fountain was formally dedicated the afternoon of May 17 , 1921 . The ceremony , which was supervised by Lieutenant Colonel Clarence O. Sherrill , was described as " simple , yet impressive . " A temporary stand decorated with flags and shields was built for prominent guests including First Lady Florence Harding , Secretary of War John W. Weeks and Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby . Chairs were placed along the walkways surrounding the fountain and sailors served as ushers for the event . While invited guests were being seated , the Navy Band performed music . Following the concert , members of the public were allowed to enter the area and soon filled the surrounding park . 
 The invocation was given by Episcopal bishop Alfred Harding followed by presentation of the colors while the band performed " The Stars and Stripes Forever " . The cloth screens concealing the fountain were then removed by Du Pont 's granddaughter , Sophie Du Pont Ford , and the band performed the national anthem and " Narcissus " by Ethelbert Nevin . The fountain was formally presented by Rear Admiral Purnell Frederick Harrington , who had served alongside Du Pont . Weeks received the fountain as a gift from the Du Pont family on behalf of the government . A speech was then given by Denby who praised Du Pont 's services to his country . He stated : " Du Pont 's hereditary background had justified the hope so <unk> fulfilled in that officer 's career , while his service as a midshipman on the then active Constitution must have proved an inspiration for his later activities . " Denby also praised Du Pont 's attitude toward his fellow sailors and his willingness to put the country 's needs above his own . He concluded his speech by noting how proud the Navy was of the new memorial and expressed hopes that it would always be well maintained . Following Denby 's speech , three young girls that were descendants of Du Pont , Ann Andrews , Emily Du Pont and Mary Harvey , placed laurel wreaths in the fountain water . The ceremony concluded with the band performing " Columbia , the Gem of the Ocean . " 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The fountain was a frequent target for vandals who would repeatedly break off fingers or hands from the sculptures . New hands were later carved and attached to the sculptures . In 1948 , the fountain was temporarily removed when a streetcar underpass was built beneath Dupont Circle . When it was moved back to its original location two years later , the fountain 's pumping system was replaced . When the new system was installed , workers forgot to connect the pipes to the fountain . The issue was corrected the following year and the fountain became operational . 
 The fountain is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . It is one of the few Civil War monuments that is a not an equestrian sculpture . The others are the Stephenson Grand Army of the Republic Memorial , Nuns of the Battlefield , the Peace Monument , and statues of Admiral David G. Farragut , Brigadier General Albert Pike and General John A. Rawlins . The fountain is designated a contributing property to the Massachusetts Avenue Historic District , listed on the NRHP on October 22 , 1974 , and the Dupont Circle Historic District , listed on the NRHP on July 21 , 1978 . In the late 1990s , the fountain was restored by sculptor Constantine <unk> . The fountain and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The fountain sits in the center of Dupont Circle , a park , traffic circle and neighborhood in the northwest quadrant of Washington , D.C. The park is located at the convergence of 19th Street , P Street , Connecticut Avenue , Massachusetts Avenue and New Hampshire Avenue NW . 
 The double @-@ tiered , white marble fountain rests on a concrete base . The upper basin of the fountain , which is approximately 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high and 11 @.@ 6 feet ( 3 @.@ 5 m ) wide and weighs 15 tons , is supported by a 8 @-@ ton shaft adorned with three allegorical figures , the Arts of Ocean Navigation . The figures , which are approximately 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall and 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) wide and weigh 12 tons , represent the Sea , the Stars and the Wind . The Sea is represented by a female figure with long hair holding a boat in her right hand while caressing a seagull on her shoulder with her left hand . Her left foot rests on a dolphin . The Stars is a nude female figure with long hair holding a globe in her left hand and is faced downward . The Wind is a nude male figure draped with a ship sail . He is holding a conch shell with his left hand to use as a horn and is facing right . The water pours over the upper basin into a large lower basin that is approximately 1 @.@ 8 feet ( 0 @.@ 55 m ) tall . The inscription on the outer rim of the lower basin states : " THIS <unk> <unk> <unk> A <unk> ERECTED BY THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES IN <unk> OF HIS DISTINGUISHED <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> UNITED STATES NAVY 1803 - 1865 . " The circular concrete base features four sets of three steps that lead to the surrounding plaza . Six radial paths corresponding to the surrounding streets lead from the plaza to the edges of the park . 
 = Calafia = 
 Calafia is a warrior queen who ruled over a kingdom of Black women living on the mythical Island of California . The character of Queen Calafia was created by Spanish writer Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo who first introduced her in his popular novel entitled Las <unk> de Esplandián ( The Adventures of Esplandián ) , written around 1500 . 
 In the novel , Calafia is a pagan who is convinced to raise an army of women warriors and sail away from California with a large flock of trained griffins so that she can join a Muslim battle against Christians who are defending Constantinople . In the siege , the griffins harm enemy and friendly forces , so they are withdrawn . Calafia and her ally Radiaro fight in single combat against the Christian leaders , a king and his son the knight Esplandián . Calafia is bested and taken prisoner , and she converts to Christianity . She marries a cousin of Esplandián and returns with her army to California for further adventures . 
 The name of Calafia was likely formed from the Arabic word khalifa ( religious state leader ) which is known as caliph in English and <unk> in Spanish . Similarly , the name of Calafia 's monarchy , California , likely originated from the same root , fabricated by the author to remind the 16th @-@ century Spanish reader of the <unk> , a centuries @-@ long fight between Christians and Muslims which had recently concluded in Spain . The character of Calafia is used by Rodríguez de Montalvo to portray the superiority of chivalry in which the attractive virgin queen is conquered , converted to Christian beliefs and married off . The book was very popular for many decades — Hernán Cortés read it — and it was selected by author Miguel de Cervantes as the first of many popular and assumed harmful books to be burnt by characters in his famous novel Don Quixote . 
 Calafia , also called Califia , has been depicted as the Spirit of California , and has been the subject of modern @-@ day sculpture , paintings , stories and films ; she often figures in the myth of California 's origin , symbolizing an untamed and bountiful land prior to Europeans taking the land by force . 
 = = Character = = 
 In the book The Adventures of Esplandián , after many pages of battles and adventures , the story of Calafia is introduced as a curiosity , an interlude in the narrative . Calafia is introduced as a regal black woman , courageous , strong of limb and large of person , full in the bloom of womanhood , the most beautiful of a long line of queens who ruled over the mythical realm of California . She is said to be " desirous of achieving great things " ; she wanted to see the world and plunder a portion of it with superior fighting ability , using her army of women warriors . She commanded a fleet of ships with which she demanded tribute from surrounding lands , and she kept an aerial defense force of griffins , fabulous animals which were native to California , trained to kill any man they found . 
 Calafia meets Radiaro , a Moslem warrior who convinces her that she should join him in retaking Constantinople from the Christian armies holding it . Calafia , in turn , convinces her people to take their ships , weapons , armor , riding beasts , and 500 griffins , and sail with her to Constantinople to fight the Christians , though she has no concept of what it means to be Moslem or Christian . Her subjects arm themselves with weapons and armor made of gold , as there is no other metal in California . They fill their ships with supplies and hasten to sea . 
 Landing near Constantinople , Calafia meets with other Moslem warrior leaders who were unable to remove King Amadis and his Christian allies from the city , and she tells them all to hold back and watch her manner of combat — she says they will be amazed . The next morning , she and her women warriors mount their " fierce beasts " wearing gold armor " adorned with the most precious stones " , advancing to invest the city . Calafia orders the griffins forward and they , hungry from the long sea voyage , fly out and maul the city 's defenders . <unk> their hunger , the griffins continue to snatch Christian men in their claws and carry them high in air only to drop them to their deaths . The city 's defenders cower and hide from the griffins . Seeing this , Calafia passes word to her Moslem allies that they are free to advance and take the city . The griffins , however , cannot tell Moslem from Christian ; they can only tell man from woman . The griffins begin snatching Moslem soldiers and carrying them aloft , dropping and killing them . Calafia questions her pagan faith , saying , " O ye idols in whom I believe and worship , what is this which has happened as favorably to my enemies as to my friends ? " She orders her woman warriors to take the city 's battlements and they fight well , taking many injuries from arrows and quarrels piercing the soft gold metal of their armor . Calafia orders her allies forward to assist the Californians in battle , but the griffins pounce again , killing Moslem men . She directs the griffin trainers to call them off , and the griffins return to roost in the ships . 
 This inauspicious beginning weighed heavily on Calafia . To restore their honor she directed her forces to fight alongside those of her allies , with the griffins kept in the ships . Terrific battles raged along the city 's walls but the attackers were repulsed . Calafia led a picked group of women warriors to attack a city gate , one held by <unk> , the half @-@ brother of King Amadis . <unk> charged out of the gate against Calafia ; upon meeting their two lances were broken but the warriors remained standing . They struck at each other with sword and knife , and a general melee ensued , Calafia throwing knights from their horses and taking great blows on her shield . Two more knights charge forward from the city , nobles named Talanque ( a nephew of King Amadis ) and <unk> , a prince of Ireland . These men nearly swamp Calafia in blows , and she can only be pulled back to friendly forces by her sister <unk> who attacks the two knights " like a mad lioness " . The day 's battle left many dead including 200 of Calafia 's women . 
 The story continues with the arrival of several more Christian princes and their armies . Radiaro and Calafia issue a challenge to two Christian warriors to engage them in single combat for the purpose of deciding the battle . King Amadis and his son Esplandián accept the challenge . The black @-@ skinned warrior woman chosen as messenger tells Calafia that Esplandián is the most handsome and elegant man that has ever existed . Calafia determines that she must see the man herself before engaging him in combat . She stays awake all night wondering whether to wear royal robes or warrior 's armor . Deciding in favor of a thick golden toga embroidered with jewels , topped by a golden hood , she rode to meet her enemies , escorted by 2 @,@ 000 women warriors . After being seated among the Christian kings , she immediately recognized Esplandián from his great beauty , and fell in love with him . She tells him she will meet him on the field of battle and , if they should live , that she wishes to speak further with him . Esplandián considers Calafia an infidel , an abomination of the rightfully subservient position of woman in relation to man , and he makes no response . 
 The next day , Calafia duels with King Amadis , and Radiaro duels with Esplandián . With <unk> , his betrothed , looking on , Esplandián masters Radiaro with a flurry of weapon thrusts . Calafia and Amadis trade blows until he disarms her and knocks her helmet off . Both Calafia and <unk> surrender to the Christians . While being held prisoner , Calafia acknowledges the astonishing beauty of <unk> , daughter of the Constantinople emperor and the intended bride of Esplandián , and resolves not to interfere with their union . She accepts Christianity as the one true faith , saying , " I have seen the ordered order of your religion , and the great disorder of all others , I have seen that it is clear that the law which you follow must be the truth , while that which we follow is lying and falsehood . " She marries Talanque , a large and handsome knight who fought with her outside the city gate ; similarly , her sister <unk> marries <unk> , Talanque 's companion in arms . The women return to California with their husbands to establish a new dynasty complete with both sexes , as a Christian nation . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The first voyage of Christopher Columbus in the late 15th century sparked a new interest in the search for " Terrestrial Paradise " , a legendary land of ease and riches , with beautiful women wearing gold and pearls . Spanish author Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo drew upon reports from the New World to add interest to his fantasy world of chivalry and battle , of riches , victory and loss , of an upside @-@ down depiction of traditional sex roles . Around the year 1500 in his novel The Adventures of Esplandián , he writes : 
 Know ye that at the right hand of the Indies there is an island called California , very close to that part of the Terrestrial Paradise , which was inhabited by black women without a single man among them , and they lived in the manner of Amazons . They were robust of body with strong passionate hearts and great virtue . The island itself is one of the wildest in the world on account of the bold and craggy rocks . 
 The explorer Hernán Cortés and his men were familiar with the book ; Cortés quoted it in 1524 . As governor of Mexico he sent out an expedition of two ships , one guided by the famous pilot Fortún Ximénez who led a mutiny , killing the expedition 's leader , Diego Becerra , and a number of sailors faithful to Becerra . After the mutiny , Ximénez continued sailing north by northwest and , in early 1534 , landed at what is known today as La Paz , Baja California Sur . Ximénez , who reported pearls found , believed the land was a large island . He and his escort of sailors were killed by natives when they went ashore for water . The few remaining sailors brought the ship and its story back to Cortés . There is some dispute whether the land was named at this time — no record exists of Ximénez giving it a name . In 1535 , Cortés led an expedition back to the land , arriving on May 1 , 1535 , a day known as Santa Cruz de Mayo , and in keeping with methods of contemporary discoverers , he named it Santa Cruz . It is not known who first named the area California but between 1550 and 1556 , the name appears three times in reports about Cortés written by Giovanni Battista Ramusio . However , the name California also appears in a 1542 journal kept by explorer Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo , who used it casually , as if it were already popular . In 1921 , California historian Charles E. Chapman theorized that Ximénez named the new land California but the name was not accepted by Cortés because Ximénez was a mutineer who killed Becerra , a kinsman of Cortés . Despite this , the name became the one used popularly by Spaniards , the only name used by non @-@ Spaniards , and by 1770 , the entire Pacific coast controlled by Spain was officially known as California . The Spanish speaking people who lived there were called Californios . 
 For many years , the Rodríguez de Montalvo novel languished in obscurity , with no connection known between it and the name of California . In 1864 , a portion of the original was translated by Edward Everett Hale for The Antiquarian Society , and the story was printed in the Atlantic Monthly magazine . Hale supposed that in inventing the names , Rodríguez de Montalvo held in his mind the Spanish word <unk> , the term for a leader of the Moslem people . Hale 's joint derivation of Calafia and California was accepted by many , then questioned by a few scholars who sought further proof , and offered their own interpretations . George Davidson wrote in 1910 that Hale 's theory was the best yet presented , but offered his own addition . In 1917 , Ruth Putnam printed an exhaustive account of the work performed up to that time . She wrote that both Calafia and California most likely came from the Arabic word khalifa which means ruler or leader . The same word in Spanish was <unk> , easily made into California to stand for " land of the caliph " , or Calafia to stand for " female caliph " . Putnam discussed Davidson 's 1910 theory based on the Greek word <unk> ( meaning beautiful ) but discounted it as exceedingly unlikely , a conclusion that Dora Beale Polk agreed with in 1995 , calling the theory " far @-@ fetched " . Putnam also wrote that The Song of Roland held a passing mention of a place called Califerne , perhaps named thus because it was the caliph 's domain , a place of infidel rebellion . Chapman elaborated on this connection in 1921 : " There can be no question but that a learned man like Ordóñez de Montalvo was familiar with the Chanson de Roland ... This derivation of the word ' California ' can perhaps never be proved , but it is too plausible — and it may be added too interesting — to be overlooked . " Polk characterized this theory as " imaginative speculation " , adding that another scholar offered the " interestingly plausible " suggestion that Roland 's Califerne is a corruption of the Persian Kar @-@ i @-@ <unk> , a mythological " mountain of Paradise " where griffins lived . In 1923 , Prosper <unk> , Dean of Literature at the University of Poitiers , wrote that a fortified capital city in 11th century Algeria was built and defended by the Beni @-@ Iferne tribe of Berber people . This city was called Kalaa @-@ Iferne or Kal @-@ Iferne by the Arabs , and was certainly known at the time in Spain ; today it is the ruins known as Beni Hammad Fort . <unk> said the Arab name of this fortress city likely inspired Roland and later Rodríguez de Montalvo , such that Kal @-@ Iferne became first Califerne and then California . John William Templeton describes how Hernan Cortes ' expedition in search of Calafia had Africans as a third of his crew , including his second @-@ in @-@ command , Juan Garrido . Templeton says that Calafia is exemplary of a genre of literature from the 14th to the 16th centuries that featured black women as powerful , wealthy and beautiful . Historian Jack Forbes wrote that the Spanish were quite experienced in being ruled by Africans given the Moorish occupation from 710 to 1490 . 
 = = Legends of an island of women warriors = = 
 Rodríguez de Montalvo 's description of Calafia , her people and her country was based upon many centuries of stories of Amazons , groups of woman warriors who fought like men . As well , the story of an island paradise filled with gold and pearls was a recurring theme that Rodríguez de Montalvo was familiar with . In seeking new land , Spanish explorers were often led onward after hearing about a land of gold , or a land ruled by women . California historian Lynn Townsend White , Jr wrote that they considered the as @-@ yet undiscovered California " a land of Orient with fantastic attributes " . The novel about Esplandián and Calafia 's domain had a strong influence on the searching Conquistadors , who believed they might find a nation of women and riches somewhere at the edge of the known world . 
 In Greek mythology , Amazons are described as a nation of female warriors who live in kingdoms outside of recognized civilization , women who fight with Greek warriors . They appear in many Greek tales including those by Homer , and they are usually killed or otherwise subdued by male warriors . Male hostility to the woman warriors is expressed by Dictys of Crete who wrote that an Amazon queen " transgressed the boundaries of nature and of her sex . " Niketas Choniates , a medieval Greek historian , wrote about women warriors who fought alongside men in the Second Crusade , riding horses " unashamedly astride " ( rather than modestly sidesaddle ) , dressed as men and maintaining a very warlike appearance . Jacques de Vitry , a Bishop of Acre , and a historian of the Crusades , wrote about Amazons who fought who were stronger than men because their vitality was not " consumed in frequent copulation . " In some stories , women warriors fought alongside Moslem men and in others they allied themselves to Christian armies . 
 Some of the tales of Amazons describe them as having dark skin . In Africa , King Musa I of Mali was protected by black female royal guards on his famous and influential hajj to Mecca in 1332 . Johann <unk> wrote in 1440 about a group of non @-@ Caucasian Tatar Amazons , Mongol <unk> led by a vengeful princess . Columbus returned to Spain with the story of an island in the Lesser Antilles called " <unk> " ( perhaps modern Martinique ) that was inhabited only by women , a tale told to him by many of the natives of the West Indies . Columbus did not call the <unk> women " Amazons " , but the comparison was drawn by his contemporaries . 
 When encountering natives in the New World , Spanish explorers were occasionally told of a tribe composed entirely of women . One such tale was related to Cortés about a group of Amazons supposedly living in a province called <unk> . Juan de Grijalva was told of Amazons during his 1518 expedition through the Tabasco region of Mexico . Nuño de Guzmán followed tales of a nation of women who lived in riches on or near the sea , women with whiter skin who were accounted goddesses by the natives . He described how they used bows and arrows , and lived in many towns . Polk characterized Guzmán as driven by lust for sex and riches — his greed and sadism were well known . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Spanish novelist Vicente Blasco Ibáñez wrote a book entitled La reina Calafia ( Queen Calafia ) in 1924 . A 1926 portrayal of Queen Calafia and her Amazons is found in a mural in the Room of the Dons at the Mark Hopkins Hotel in San Francisco . It was created for the opening of the hotel in 1926 by Maynard Dixon and Frank Von Sloun , and has been called " the first embodiment of Queen Califia " though criticized as showing her " haughty and aloof " . In 1937 , Lucille Lloyd unveiled her triptych mural " Origin and Development of the Name of the State of California " , also known as " California Allegory " , which was displayed at the State Building in Los Angeles until 1975 when the building was demolished for safety reasons . The paintings were archived , and in 1991 they were restored and mounted in the California Room of the state capitol , room <unk> , renamed the John L. Burton Hearing Room . The regal central figure shows Califia dressed in proto @-@ Mexican finery , holding a spear in her left hand and examining a gyroscope in her right . The publication of Our Roots Run Deep , the Black Experience in California , Vol . 1 was the lead story in the Sunday Examiner and Chronicle on Feb. 1 , 1992 as reporter Greg Lewis pointed out the book 's depiction of the Queen Calafia story as particularly noteworthy . An exhibition featuring Queen Calafia followed in 1995 at the Historic State Capital Museum in Sacramento with subsequent showings in the 6th Floor Gallery of the San Francisco Main Library and the Los Angeles Central Library . In 1998 , the California Council on Humanities funded the seminar The Black Queen : Primary Sources in California History to promote additional primary source research in California African @-@ American history . The mural of Queen Calafia is featured at the top of the new African @-@ American Freedom Trail brochure produced by <unk> : Education @-@ Arts @-@ Heritage and San Francisco Travel in November 2013 . 
 In November 1975 , the Plaza de Toros Calafia was completed , a bullfighting arena in the city of Mexicali , the capital of the Mexican state of Baja California . The arena is also known as la reina Calafia ( Queen Calafia ) . At an outdoor park in Escondido , California , the sculptor Niki de Saint Phalle built her multiple @-@ piece " Queen <unk> Magic Circle " , dedicated in October 2003 after her death . The central character of Queen Califia is presented wearing gold glass armor atop a stylized giant bird . The final work on the sculpture garden was overseen by de Saint Phalle 's granddaughter and by her assistants and technical advisers . 
 Los Angeles Times columnist Jack Smith owned a sailboat that he named " Calafia . " The sailboat would occasionally be written about in his columns . 
 In 2004 , the African American Historical and Cultural Society Museum in San Francisco assembled a Queen Califia exhibit , curated by John William Templeton , featuring works by artists such as <unk> Wright and James Gayles ; artistic interpretations of Calafia . The show displayed a 1936 treatment of Lucille Lloyd 's " California Allegory " triptych , with Queen Califia as the central figure . Templeton said that " Califia is a part of California history , and she also reinforces the fact that when Cortes named this place California , he had 300 black people with him . " Templeton pointed out that Columbus had a black navigator and that Africans were seen by Europeans as being culturally advanced in the 15th century . William E. Hoskins , director of the museum , said that very few people know the story of Queen Califia . He said , " One of the things we 're trying to do is let people have the additional insight and appreciation for the contributions of African Americans to this wonderful country and more specifically to the state of California " , adding that " the Queen Califia exhibit is particularly poignant . " 
 Califia makes an appearance in the 2015 video game Code Name : S.T.E.A.M. , appearing as a member of Abraham Lincoln 's strike force . 
 = = = Disneyland = = = 
 Golden Dreams was a 23 @-@ minute film and multimedia experience showing the history of California through several recreated scenes , narrated by Whoopi Goldberg as Califia , the Queen of California . A bust of Goldberg attired in queenly raiment was the target of a projected image showing Goldberg narrating the story — the sculpture appeared to come to life . The attraction , at Disney California Adventure Park at the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim , California , opened with the park on February 8 , 2001 . It closed to the general public on September 7 , 2008 , and was open only to school groups until March 2009 . It was demolished in July 2009 to make way for the construction of a dark ride called The Little Mermaid : Ariel 's Undersea Adventure . 
 = Romulus Augustulus = 
 Romulus Augustus ( Latin : Romulus Augustus ; born c . AD 461 – died after AD 476 , and was apparently still alive as late as 507 ) was an emperor ( alleged usurper ) reigning over the Western Roman Empire from 31 October AD 475 until 4 September AD 476 . His deposition by Odoacer traditionally marks the end of the Western Roman Empire , the fall of ancient Rome , and the beginning of the Middle Ages in Western Europe . 
 He is mostly known by his nickname " Romulus Augustulus " , though he ruled officially as Romulus Augustus . The Latin suffix <unk> is a diminutive ; hence , Augustulus effectively means " Little Augustus " . 
 The historical record contains few details of Romulus 's life . He was proclaimed as emperor by his father Orestes , the magister militum ( master of soldiers ) of the Roman army after forcing Emperor Julius Nepos to leave Italy . Romulus , little more than a child , acted as a figurehead for his father 's rule and reigned for only ten months . His legitimacy and authority were disputed beyond Italy and Romulus was soon deposed by Odoacer , who had defeated and executed Orestes . Odoacer sent Romulus to live in the Castellum <unk> in Campania , after which he disappears from the historical record . 
 = = Life = = 
 Romulus ' father Orestes was a Roman citizen , originally from Pannonia , who had served as a secretary and diplomat for Attila the Hun and later rose through the ranks of the Roman army . The future emperor was named Romulus after his maternal grandfather , a nobleman from <unk> in Noricum . Many historians have noted the coincidence that the last western emperor bore the names of both Romulus , the legendary founder and first king of Rome , and Augustus , the first emperor . 
 Orestes was appointed Magister militum by Julius Nepos in 475 . Shortly after his appointment , Orestes launched a rebellion and captured Ravenna , the capital of the Western Roman Empire since 402 , on 28 August 475 . Nepos fled to Dalmatia , where his uncle had ruled a semi @-@ autonomous state in the 460s . Orestes , however , refused to become emperor , " from some secret motive " , said historian Edward Gibbon . Instead , he installed his son on the throne on 31 October 475 . 
 The empire Augustus ruled was a shadow of its former self and had shrunk significantly over the previous 80 years . Imperial authority had retreated to the Italian borders and parts of southern Gaul : Italia and Gallia Narbonensis , respectively . The Eastern Roman Empire treated its western counterpart as a client state . The Eastern Emperor Leo , who died in 474 , had appointed the western emperors Anthemius and Julius Nepos , and Constantinople never recognized the new government . Neither Zeno nor Basiliscus , the two generals fighting for the eastern throne at the time of Romulus ' accession , accepted him as ruler . 
 As a proxy for his father , Romulus made no decisions and left no monuments , though coins bearing his name were minted in Rome , Milan , Ravenna , and Gaul . Several months after Orestes took power , a coalition of Heruli , <unk> and <unk> mercenaries demanded that he give them a third of the land in Italy . When Orestes refused , the tribes revolted under the leadership of the <unk> chieftain Odoacer . Orestes was captured near Piacenza on 28 August 476 and swiftly executed . 
 Odoacer advanced on Ravenna , capturing the city and the young emperor . Romulus was compelled to abdicate the throne on 4 September 476 . This act has been cited as the end of the Western Roman Empire , although Romulus ' deposition did not cause any significant disruption at the time . Rome had already lost its hegemony over the provinces , Germans dominated the Roman army and Germanic generals like Odoacer had long been the real powers behind the throne . Italy would suffer far greater devastation in the next century when Emperor Justinian I reconquered it . 
 After the abdication of Romulus , the Roman Senate , on behalf of Odoacer , sent representatives to the Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno , whom it asked to formally reunite the two halves of the Empire : " the west … no longer required an emperor of its own : one monarch sufficed for the world " . He was also asked to make Odoacer a patrician , and administrator of Italy in Zeno 's name . Zeno pointed out that the Senate should rightfully have first requested that Julius Nepos take the throne once more , but he nonetheless agreed to their requests . Odoacer then ruled Italy in Zeno 's name . 
 = = Later life = = 
 The ultimate fate of Romulus is a mystery . The Anonymus Valesianus wrote that Odoacer , " taking pity on his youth " ( he was about 16 ) , spared Romulus ' life and granted him an annual pension of 6 @,@ 000 solidi before sending him to live with relatives in Campania . Jordanes and Marcellinus Comes say Odoacer exiled Romulus to Campania but do not mention any financial support from the Germanic king . 
 The sources do agree that Romulus took up residence in the Castel dell <unk> ( <unk> Villa ) in Naples , now a castle but originally built as a grand sea @-@ side house by Lucullus in the 1st century BC , fortified by Valentinian III in the mid @-@ 5th century . From here , contemporary histories fall silent . In the History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , Edward Gibbon notes that the disciples of Saint <unk> of Noricum were invited by a " Neapolitan lady " to bring his body to the villa in 488 ; Gibbon conjectures from this that Augustulus " was probably no more . " The villa was converted into a monastery before 500 to hold the saint 's remains . 
 Cassiodorus , then a secretary to Theodoric the Great , wrote a letter in 507 to a " Romulus " confirming a pension . Thomas Hodgkin , a translator of Cassiodorus ' works , wrote in 1886 that it was " surely possible " the Romulus in the letter was the same person as the last western emperor . The letter would match the description of Odoacer 's coup in the Anonymus Valesianus , and Romulus could have been alive in the early sixth century . But Cassiodorus does not supply any details about his correspondent or the size and nature of his pension , and Jordanes , whose history of the period abridges an earlier work by Cassiodorus , makes no mention of a pension . 
 = = = Last emperor = = = 
 As Romulus was an alleged usurper , Julius Nepos claimed to hold legally the title of the emperor when Odoacer took power . However , few of Nepos ' contemporaries were willing to support his cause after he ran away to Dalmatia . Some historians regard Julius Nepos , who ruled in Dalmatia until being murdered in 480 , as the last lawful Western Roman Emperor . 
 Following Odoacer 's coup , the Roman Senate sent a letter to Zeno stating that " the majesty of a sole monarch is sufficient to pervade and protect , at the same time , both the East and the West " . While Zeno told the Senate that Nepos was their lawful sovereign , he did not press the point , and he accepted the imperial insignia brought to him by the senate . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The 2007 film The Last Legion , and the novel on which it is based , includes a heavily fictionalized account of the reign and subsequent life of Romulus Augustus ; escaping captivity with the aid of a small band of loyal Romans , he reaches Britain , where he eventually becomes Uther Pendragon . 
 The Marvel Comics character was known as <unk> has the " real name " of " Romulus Augustus " , and originates in ancient Rome . 
 The play Romulus the Great ( 1950 ) , by Friedrich Dürrenmatt , an " <unk> Historische <unk> " ( unhistorical historical comedy ) about the reign of " Romulus Augustus " and the end of the Roman Empire in the West . 
 = Geoff Smith ( footballer ) = 
 Geoffrey " Geoff " Smith ( 14 March 1928 – 19 October 2013 ) was an English professional footballer who played 253 league games for Bradford City as a goalkeeper , including 200 consecutive appearances . When he retired , he held club records for the number of clean sheets in a season and total clean sheets . 
 Smith was born in Cottingley , Bradford , West Riding of Yorkshire , moved to nearby Keighley with his family before serving in Malaya in the British Army at the end of his teens . His first trial at Bradford City was unsuccessful but after playing amateur football for Lancashire Combination League sides Nelson and Rossendale United , he was signed by Bradford 's new manager Ivor Powell in 1952 . He was at Bradford City for seven seasons and played in every league game between the final match of the 1953 – 54 season and October 1958 . He eventually retired in 1959 . After his football career , Smith and his wife ran two different off @-@ licences for the remainder of their working life . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born in Cottingley on the outskirts of Bradford , West Riding of Yorkshire , on 14 March 1928 . He had a brother Jack and during their childhood , the Smith family moved to Keighley , where Smith first played football for St Anne 's Church . At the age of 18 , Smith was called up to the army . He served in an infantry unit in Malaya for two years before he returned to Keighley . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Smith resumed his football career back at home with Keighley Central Club . A goalkeeper , he was still playing for Keighley Central in 1948 when he was offered a trial with his local Football League side Bradford City , who were at the time in the Third Division North . His trial was unsuccessful and he was released . Instead , Smith joined Lancashire Combination League side Nelson . He was still living in Keighley , and travelled to Nelson by bus with his brother Jack , who had previously played for Leeds United but had been released when Major Frank Buckley took over as manager and instead also joined Nelson . Smith played for Nelson for three years at a time when the club were competing at the top of the Lancashire Combination and sought re @-@ election back into the Football League . However , Smith initially gave up the game when Nelson could no longer afford to pay him . He was not long out of the game before he signed Rossendale United , a member of the Lancashire Combination 's Second Division . Smith said the journey by bus was a difficult one so he bought a motorbike . However , like Nelson , Rossendale could not afford to pay him , and after another two years , Smith gave up the game once again . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 In December 1952 , on the advice of Smith 's friend Roy Brook , who was in Bradford 's second team , new Bradford City manager Ivor Powell invited Smith back to City for another trial and he played for the reserves against Gainsborough Trinity and Notts County . This time , Smith 's trial was successful and Bradford City – still a Third Division North side – signed him on amateur forms . Smith had played only seven games for the reserves in the Midland League and was still unpaid when he was given his first @-@ team debut against Scunthorpe United on 17 January 1953 coming into the side for Brendan McManus , whom Smith said was " having a rough time " . It was not a good start for Smith , with City losing 4 – 0 , but he followed this with a clean sheet in his second game against Stockport County and kept his place in the side for the remainder of the season , playing 19 games , before he signed part @-@ time professional terms in July 1953 . He had previously worked part @-@ time as a lorry driver , earning £ 4 10s ( £ 4 @.@ 50 ) working 48 hours per week as a lorry driver , but the club did not want him driving around the country and offered him £ 10 per week plus a £ 4 win bonus . To supplement his playing contract , the club gave Smith a job looking after their Valley Parade ground . 
 During the mid @-@ season break , McManus left City to join Frickley Athletic . Instead , Powell signed Jimmy Gooch from Preston North End as his replacement . Gooch , aged 32 , was more experienced than Smith and so took over as first @-@ choice goalkeeper at the start of the 1953 – 54 season playing the first 20 games . Smith was called up to the first @-@ team in November for a 1 – 1 draw with Hartlepools United . He remained in the side and played all but two games for the rest of the season , coming back into the team for the final league game of the season against Gateshead as City finished fifth . He kept 11 clean sheets , which included equalling a club best five in consecutive matches as City won a record nine straight games , during which they conceded just one goal . 
 Gooch left City after just one season to join Watford leaving Smith to take over the " number one " shirt . For the next four seasons , Smith , who became a full @-@ time professional , played every single first @-@ team game for City which eventually led to him making 200 consecutive league appearances – it was a run that coincided with one of 246 league and FA Cup games by full back George Mulholland . However , for three seasons , City could not match the fifth place gained in 1953 – 54 and they remained a Third Division North side . In 1957 – 58 , under Powell 's replacement as manager Peter Jackson , City finished in third place but missed out on the title by nine points to Scunthorpe United . During the season , Smith set a new club record of 18 clean sheets , one which was later equalled by Steve Smith and Eric McManus . 
 The following season , Smith 's run of consecutive games came to an end against Reading in October 1958 , with Jim McCusker coming into the side to replace him for two games . Smith 's number of consecutive appearances is third on the club 's list behind Mulholland 's 231 games and Charlie Bicknell . He played 26 further games in the 1958 – 59 season , in which the club finished 11th in the <unk> @-@ formed Third Division . The season proved to be Smith 's final season for City as he decided to retire aged 31 . His last game was a 2 – 1 defeat , once again versus Reading , on 28 February 1959 . When the season finished , Smith had played a total of 270 games for the club , 253 of which came in the league , keeping a club record 70 clean sheets . His record stood until it was broken by Paul Tomlinson in the 1990s . When Smith retired , the club granted him and Mulholland each a sum of money rather than the proceeds of a benefit match . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith met his wife Margaret at a <unk> at St Anne 's Social Club , in Keighley , in 1944 , when they were both teenagers . They married after Smith returned from his two years in the army on 26 August 1950 at Holy Trinity Church , in Keighley . Together , they had two daughters . Smith had been a motor mechanic before his football career , and after he retired from playing , he and his wife ran an off @-@ licence store in Cross Roads for 25 years and a newsagents in Keighley for another five years . Smith played bowls and golf in his retirement , playing for Skipton Vets in the former sport . 
 Smith died on 19 October 2013 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Anne of Denmark = 
 Anne of Denmark ( Danish : Anna ; 12 December 1574 – 2 March 1619 ) was Queen consort of Scotland , England , and Ireland as the wife of King James VI and I. 
 The second daughter of King Frederick II of Denmark , Anne married James in 1589 at age 15 and bore him three children who survived infancy , including the future Charles I. She demonstrated an independent streak and a willingness to use factional Scottish politics in her conflicts with James over the custody of Prince Henry and his treatment of her friend Beatrix Ruthven . Anne appears to have loved James at first , but the couple gradually drifted and eventually lived apart , though mutual respect and a degree of affection survived . 
 In England , Anne shifted her energies from factional politics to patronage of the arts and constructed her own magnificent court , hosting one of the richest cultural salons in Europe . After 1612 , she suffered sustained bouts of ill health and gradually withdrew from the centre of court life . Though she was reported to have been a Protestant at the time of her death , evidence suggests that she may have converted to Catholicism sometime in her life . 
 Historians have traditionally dismissed Anne as a lightweight queen , frivolous and self @-@ indulgent . However , recent <unk> acknowledge Anne 's assertive independence and , in particular , her dynamic significance as a patron of the arts during the Jacobean age . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Anne was born on 12 December 1574 at the castle of Skanderborg on the Jutland Peninsula in the Kingdom of Denmark . Her birth came as a blow to her father , King Frederick II of Denmark , who was desperately hoping for a son . But her mother , Sophie of Mecklenburg @-@ Güstrow , was only 17 ; three years later she did bear Frederick a son , the future Christian IV of Denmark . 
 With her older sister , Elizabeth , Anne was sent to be raised at Güstrow in Germany by her maternal grandparents , the Duke and Duchess of Mecklenburg . Compared with the roving Danish court , where King Frederick was notorious for gargantuan meals , heavy drinking and restless behaviour ( including marital infidelity ) , Güstrow provided Anne with a frugal and stable life during her early childhood . Christian was also sent to be brought up at Güstrow but two years later , in 1579 , the <unk> ( Danish Privy Council ) successfully requested his removal to Denmark , and Anne and Elizabeth returned with him . 
 Anne enjoyed a close , happy family upbringing in Denmark , thanks largely to Queen Sophie , who nursed the children through their illnesses herself . Suitors from all over Europe sought the hands of Anne and Elizabeth in marriage , including James VI of Scotland , who favoured Denmark as a kingdom reformed in religion and a profitable trading partner . 
 James ' other serious possibility , though 8 years his senior , was Catherine , sister of the Huguenot King Henry III of Navarre ( future Henry IV of France ) , who was favoured by Elizabeth I of England . Scottish ambassadors had at first concentrated their suit on the oldest daughter , but Frederick betrothed Elizabeth to Henry Julius , Duke of Brunswick , promising the Scots instead that " for the second [ daughter ] Anna , if the King did like her , he should have her . " 
 = = = Betrothal and proxy marriage = = = 
 The constitutional position of Sophie , Anne 's mother , became difficult after Frederick 's death in 1588 , when she found herself in a power struggle with the <unk> for control of King Christian . As a matchmaker , however , Sophie proved more diligent than Frederick and , overcoming sticking points on the amount of the dowry and the status of Orkney , she sealed the agreement by July 1589 . Anne herself seems to have been thrilled with the match . On 28 July 1589 , the English spy Thomas Fowler reported that Anne was " so far in love with the King 's Majesty as it were death to her to have it broken off and hath made good proof divers ways of her affection which his <unk> is apt in no way to <unk> . " Fowler 's insinuation , that James preferred men to women , would have been hidden from the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Anne , who devotedly embroidered shirts for her fiancé while three hundred tailors worked on her wedding dress . 
 Whatever the truth of the rumours , James required a royal match to preserve the Stuart line . " God is my witness " , he explained , " I could have abstained longer than the weal of my country could have permitted , [ had not ] my long delay bred in the breasts of many a great jealousy of my inability , as if I were a barren stock . " On 20 August 1589 , Anne was married by proxy to James at Kronborg Castle , the ceremony ending with James ' representative , George Keith , 5th Earl Marischal , sitting next to Anne on the bridal bed . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Anne set sail for Scotland within 10 days , but her fleet was beset by a series of <unk> finally being forced back to the coast of Norway , from where she travelled by land to Oslo for refuge , accompanied by the Earl Marischal and others of the Scottish and Danish embassies . 
 On 12 September , Lord Dingwall had landed at Leith , reporting that " he had come in company with the Queen 's fleet three hundred miles , and was separated from them by a great storm : it was feared that the Queen was in danger upon the seas . " Alarmed , James called for national fasting and public prayers , kept watch on the Firth of Forth for Anne 's arrival , wrote several songs , one comparing the situation to the plight of Hero and Leander , and sent a search party out for Anne , carrying a letter he had written to her in French : " Only to one who knows me as well as his own reflection in a glass could I express , my dearest love , the fears which I have experienced because of the contrary winds and violent storms since you embarked ... " . Informed in October that the Danes had abandoned the crossing for the winter , and in what Willson calls " the one romantic episode of his life , " James sailed from Leith with a three @-@ hundred @-@ strong retinue to fetch his wife personally , arriving in Oslo on 19 November after travelling by land from Flekkefjord via Tønsberg . According to a Scottish account , he presented himself to Anne , " with boots and all " , and , disarming her protests , gave her a kiss in the Scottish fashion . 
 Anne and James were formally married at the Old Bishop 's Palace in Oslo on 23 November 1589 , " with all the splendour possible at that time and place . " So that both bride and groom could understand , Leith minister David Lindsay conducted the ceremony in French , describing Anne as " a Princess both godly and beautiful ... she giveth great contentment to his Majesty . " A month of celebrations followed ; and on 22 December , cutting his entourage to fifty , James visited his new relations at Kronborg Castle in Elsinore , where the newlyweds were greeted by Queen Sophie , twelve @-@ year @-@ old King Christian IV , and Christian 's four regents . The couple moved on to Copenhagen on 7 March and attended the wedding of Anne 's older sister Elizabeth to Henry Julius , Duke of Brunswick , sailing two days later for Scotland in a patched up " Gideon " . They arrived in the Water of Leith on 1 May . Five days later , Anne made her state entry into Edinburgh in a solid silver coach brought over from Denmark , James riding alongside on horseback . 
 = = = Coronation = = = 
 Anne was crowned on 17 May 1590 in the Abbey Church at Holyrood , the first Protestant coronation in Scotland . During the seven @-@ hour ceremony , her gown was opened by the Countess of Mar for presiding minister Robert Bruce to pour " a bonny quantity of oil " on " parts of her breast and arm " , so anointing her as queen . ( Kirk ministers had objected vehemently to this element of the ceremony as a pagan and Jewish ritual , but James insisted that it dated from the Old Testament . ) The king handed the crown to Chancellor Maitland , who placed it on Anne 's head . She then affirmed an oath to defend the true religion and worship of God and to " withstand and despise all <unk> superstitions , and whatsoever ceremonies and rites contrary to the word of God " . 
 = = Relationship with James = = 
 By all accounts , James was at first entranced by his bride , but his infatuation evaporated quickly and the couple often found themselves at loggerheads , though in the early years of their marriage , James seems always to have treated Anne with patience and affection . Between 1593 and 1595 , James was romantically linked with Anne Murray , later Lady Glamis , whom he addressed in verse as " my mistress and my love " ; and Anne herself was also occasionally the subject of scandalous rumours . In Basilikon Doron , written 1597 – 1598 , James described marriage as " the greatest earthly <unk> or <unk> , that can come to a man " . 
 From the first moment of the marriage , Anne was under pressure to provide James and Scotland with an heir , but the passing of 1591 and 1592 with no sign of a pregnancy provoked renewed Presbyterian libels on the theme of James ' fondness for male company and whispers against Anne " for that she proves not with child " . As a result , there was great public relief when on 19 February 1594 Anne gave birth to her first child , Henry Frederick . 
 = = = Custody of Prince Henry = = = 
 Anne soon learned that she would have no say in her son 's care . James appointed as head of the nursery his former nurse Helen Little , who installed Henry in James ' own oak cradle . Most distressingly for Anne , James insisted on placing Prince Henry in the custody of John Erskine , Earl of Mar at Stirling Castle , in keeping with Scottish royal tradition . 
 In late 1594 , she began a furious campaign for custody of Henry , recruiting a faction of supporters to her cause , including the chancellor , John Maitland of Thirlestane . Nervous of the lengths to which Anne might go , James formally charged Mar in writing never to surrender Henry to anyone except on orders from his own mouth , " because in the surety of my son consists my surety , " nor to yield Henry to the Queen even in the event of his own death . Anne demanded the matter be referred to the Council , but James would not hear of it . After public scenes in which James reduced her to rage and tears over the issue , Anne became so bitterly upset that in July 1595 she suffered a miscarriage . Thereafter , she outwardly abandoned her campaign , but it was thought permanent damage had been done to the marriage . In August 1595 , John Colville wrote : " There is nothing but lurking hatred disguised with cunning dissimulation betwixt the King and the Queen , each intending by slight to overcome the other . " 
 Anne saw a belated opportunity to gain custody of Henry in 1603 when James left for London with the Earl of Mar to assume the English throne following the death of Elizabeth I. Pregnant at the time , Anne descended on Stirling with a force of " well @-@ supported " nobles , intent on removing the nine @-@ year @-@ old Henry , whom she had hardly seen for five years ; but Mar 's mother and brother would allow her to bring no more than two attendants with her into the castle . The obduracy of Henry 's keepers sent Anne into such a fury that she suffered another miscarriage : according to David Calderwood , she " went to bed in anger and parted with child the tenth of May . " 
 When the Earl of Mar returned with James ' instructions that Anne join him in the Kingdom of England , she informed James by letter that she refused to do so unless allowed custody of Henry . This " forceful maternal action , " as historian Pauline Croft describes it , obliged James to climb down at last , though he reproved Anne for " <unk> womanly apprehensions " and described her behaviour in a letter to Mar as " <unk> . " After a brief convalescence from the miscarriage , Anne duly travelled south with Prince Henry , their progress causing a sensation in England . Lady Anne Clifford recorded that she and her mother killed three horses in their haste to see the Queen , and that when James met Anne near Windsor , " there was such an infinite number of lords and ladies and so great a Court as I think I shall never see the like again . " 
 = = = Marital frictions = = = 
 Observers regularly noted incidents of marital discord between Anne and James . The so @-@ called Gowrie conspiracy of 1600 , in which the young Earl of Gowrie , John Ruthven , and his brother Alexander Ruthven were killed by James ' attendants for a supposed assault on the King , triggered the dismissal of their sisters Beatrix and Barbara Ruthven as ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting to Anne , with whom they were " in chiefest credit . " The Queen , who was five months pregnant , refused to get out of bed unless they were reinstated and stayed there for two days , also refusing to eat . When James tried to command her , she warned him to take care how he treated her because she was not the Earl of Gowrie . James placated her for the moment by paying a famous acrobat to entertain her , but she never gave up , and her stubborn support for the Ruthvens over the next three years was taken seriously enough by the government to be regarded as a security issue . In 1602 , after discovering that Anne had smuggled Beatrix Ruthven into Holyrood , James carried out a cross @-@ examination of the entire household ; in 1603 , he finally decided to grant Beatrix Ruthven a pension of £ 200 . 
 A briefer confrontation occurred in 1613 when Anne shot and killed James ' favourite dog during a hunting session . After his initial rage , James smoothed things over by giving her a £ 2 @,@ 000 diamond in memory of the dog , whose name was Jewel . In 1603 , James fought with Anne over the proposed composition of her English household , sending her a message that " his Majesty took her continued perversity very <unk> . " In turn , Anne took exception to James ' drinking : in 1604 she confided to the French envoy that " the King drinks so much , and conducts himself so ill in every respect , that I expect an early and evil result . " 
 = = = Separate life = = = 
 In London , Anne adopted a cosmopolitan lifestyle , while James preferred to escape the capital , most often at his hunting lodge in Royston . Anne 's chaplain , Godfrey Goodman , later summed up the royal relationship : " The King himself was a very chaste man , and there was little in the Queen to make him <unk> ; yet they did love as well as man and wife could do , not conversing together . " Anne moved into Greenwich Palace and then Somerset House , which she renamed Denmark House . After 1607 , she and James rarely lived together , by which time she had borne seven children and suffered at least three miscarriages . After narrowly surviving the birth and death of her last baby , Sophia , in 1607 , Anne 's decision to have no more children may have widened the gulf between her and James . 
 The death of Prince Henry in 1612 at the age of eighteen , probably from typhoid , and the departure for Heidelberg of the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Princess Elizabeth in April 1613 , after marrying Elector Frederick V of the Palatine , further weakened the family ties binding Anne and James . Henry 's death hit Anne particularly hard ; the Venetian ambassador was advised not to offer condolences to her " because she cannot bear to have it mentioned ; nor does she ever recall it without abundant tears and sighs " . From this time forward , Anne 's health deteriorated , and she withdrew from the centre of cultural and political activities , staging her last known masque in 1614 and no longer maintaining a noble court . Her influence over James visibly waned as he became openly dependent on powerful favourites . 
 = = = Reaction to favourites = = = 
 Although James had always adopted male favourites among his courtiers , he now encouraged them to play a role in the government . Anne reacted very differently to the two powerful favourites who dominated the second half of her husband 's English reign , Robert Carr , Earl of Somerset , and George Villiers , the future Duke of Buckingham . She detested Carr , but she encouraged the rise of Villiers , whom James knighted in her bedchamber ; and she developed friendly relations with him , calling him her " dog " . Even so , Anne found herself increasingly ignored after Buckingham 's rise and became a lonely figure towards the end of her life . 
 = = Religion = = 
 A further source of difference between Anne and James was the issue of religion ; for example , she abstained from the Anglican communion at her English coronation . Anne had been brought up a Lutheran , but she may have discreetly converted to Catholicism at some point , a politically embarrassing scenario which alarmed ministers of the Scottish Kirk and caused suspicion in Anglican England . 
 Queen Elizabeth had certainly been worried about the possibility and sent messages to Anne warning her not to listen to papist counsellors and requesting the names of anyone who had tried to convert her ; Anne had replied that there was no need to name names because any such efforts had failed . Anne drew criticism from the Kirk for keeping Henrietta Gordon , wife of the exiled Catholic George Gordon , Marquess of Huntly , as a confidante ; after Huntly 's return in 1596 , the St Andrews minister David Black called Anne an atheist and remarked in a sermon that " the Queen of Scotland was a woman for whom , for fashion 's sake , the clergy might pray but from whom no good could be hoped . " 
 When former intelligencer Sir Anthony Standen was discovered bringing Anne a rosary from Pope Clement VIII in 1603 , James imprisoned him in the Tower for ten months . Anne protested her annoyance at the gift , but eventually secured Standen 's release . 
 Like James , Anne later supported a Catholic match for both their sons , and her correspondence with the potential bride , the Spanish Infanta , Maria Anna , included a request that two friars be sent to Jerusalem to pray for her and the King . The papacy itself was never quite sure where Anne stood ; in 1612 , Pope Paul V advised a nuncio : " Not considering the inconstancy of that Queen and the many changes she had made in religious matters and that even if it might be true that she might be a Catholic , one should not take on oneself any judgement . " 
 = = Court and politics = = 
 In Scotland , Anne sometimes exploited court factionalism for her own ends , in particular by supporting the enemies of the Earl of Mar. As a result , James did not trust her with secrets of state . Henry Howard , active in the highly secret diplomacy concerning the English succession , subtly reminded James that though Anne possessed every virtue , Eve was corrupted by the serpent . In practice , Anne was little interested in high politics unless they touched on the fate of her children or friends . 
 In England , Anne largely turned from political to social and artistic activities . Though she participated fully in the life of James ' court and maintained a court of her own , often attracting those not welcomed by James , she rarely took political sides against her husband . Whatever her private difficulties with James , she proved a diplomatic asset to him in England , conducting herself with discretion and graciousness in public . Anne played a crucial role , for example , in conveying to ambassadors and foreign visitors the prestige of the Stuart dynasty and its Danish connections . 
 The Venetian envoy , Nicolo <unk> , wrote this description of Anne in 1606 : 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 Anne has traditionally been regarded with condescension by historians , who have emphasised her triviality and extravagance . Along with James , she tended to be dismissed by a historical tradition , beginning with the anti @-@ Stuart historians of the mid @-@ 17th century , which saw in the self @-@ indulgence and vanity of the Jacobean court the origins of the English civil war . Historian David Harris Willson , in his 1956 biography of James , delivered this damning verdict : " Anne had little influence over her husband . She could not share his intellectual interests , and she confirmed the foolish contempt with which he regarded women . Alas ! The king had married a stupid wife . " The 19th century biographer Agnes Strickland condemned Anne 's actions to regain custody of Prince Henry as irresponsible : " It must lower the character of Anne of Denmark in the eyes of everyone , both as a woman and queen , that she ... preferred to indulge the mere instincts of maternity at the risk of involving her husband , her infant , and their kingdom , in the strife and misery of unnatural warfare . " 
 However , the reassessment of James in the past two decades , as an able ruler who extended royal power in Scotland and preserved his kingdoms from war throughout his reign , has been accompanied by a re @-@ evaluation of Anne as an influential political figure and assertive mother , at least for as long as the royal marriage remained a reality . John Leeds <unk> argues in his cultural biography of Anne that her political interventions in Scotland were more significant , and certainly more troublesome , than previously noticed ; and Clare McManus , among other cultural historians , has highlighted Anne 's influential role in the Jacobean cultural flowering , not only as a patron of writers and artists but as a performer herself . 
 = = Patron of the arts = = 
 Anne shared with James the fault of extravagance , though it took her several years to exhaust her considerable dowry . She loved dancing and pageants , activities often frowned upon in Presbyterian Scotland , but for which she found a vibrant outlet in Jacobean London , where she created a " rich and hospitable " cultural climate at the royal court , became an enthusiastic playgoer , and sponsored lavish masques . Sir Walter Cope , asked by Robert Cecil to select a play for the Queen during her brother Ulrik of Holstein 's visit , wrote , " Burbage is come and says there is no new play the Queen has not seen but they have revived an old one called Love 's Labour 's Lost which for wit and mirth he says will please her exceedingly . " Anne 's masques , scaling unprecedented heights of dramatic staging and spectacle , were avidly attended by foreign ambassadors and dignitaries and functioned as a potent demonstration of the English crown 's European significance . Zorzi <unk> , the Venetian ambassador , wrote of the Christmas 1604 masque that " in everyone 's opinion no other Court could have displayed such pomp and riches " . 
 Anne 's masques were responsible for almost all the courtly female performance in the first two decades of the seventeenth century and are regarded as crucial to the history of women 's performance . Anne sometimes performed with her ladies in the masques herself , occasionally offending members of the audience . In The Vision of the Twelve Goddesses of 1604 , she played Pallas Athena , wearing a tunic that some observers regarded as too short ; in The Masque of Blackness of 1605 , Anne performed while six months pregnant , she and her ladies causing scandal by appearing with their skin painted as " <unk> " . Letter writer Dudley Carleton reported that when the Queen afterwards danced with the Spanish ambassador , he kissed her hand " though there was danger it would have left a mark upon his lips " . Anne commissioned the leading talents of the day to create these masques , including Ben Jonson and Inigo Jones . 
 Jones , a gifted architect steeped in the latest European taste , also designed the Queen 's House at Greenwich for Anne , one of the first true Palladian buildings in England ; and the Dutch inventor Salomon de Caus laid out her gardens at Greenwich and Somerset House . Anne particularly loved music and patronised the lutenist and composer John Dowland , previously employed at her brother 's court in Denmark , as well as " more than a good many " French musicians . 
 Anne also commissioned artists such as Paul van Somer , Isaac Oliver , and Daniel <unk> , who led English taste in visual arts for a generation . Under Anne , the Royal Collection began once more to expand , a policy continued by Anne 's son , Charles . Historian Alan Stewart suggests that many of the phenomena now seen as peculiarly Jacobean can be identified more closely with Anne 's patronage than with James , who " fell asleep during some of England 's most celebrated plays " . 
 = = Death = = 
 By late 1617 , Anne 's bouts of illness had become debilitating ; the letter writer John Chamberlain recorded : " The Queen continues still ill disposed and though she would fain lay all her infirmities upon the gout yet most of her physicians fear a further inconvenience of an ill habit or disposition through her whole body . " In January 1619 , royal physician Sir Theodore de Mayerne instructed Anne to saw wood to improve her blood flow , but the exertion served to make her worse . James visited Anne only three times during her last illness , though Prince Charles often slept in the adjoining bedroom at Hampton Court Palace and was at her bedside during her last hours , when she had lost her sight . With her until the end was her personal maid , Anna Roos , who had arrived with her from Denmark in 1590 . Queen Anne died aged 44 on 2 March 1619 , of a dangerous form of dropsy . 
 Despite his neglect of Anne , James was emotionally affected by her death . He did not visit her during her dying days or attend her funeral , being himself sick , the symptoms , according to Sir Theodore de Mayerne , including " fainting , sighing , dread , incredible sadness ... " . The inquest discovered Anne to be " much wasted within , specially her liver " . After a prolonged delay , she was buried in King Henry 's Chapel , Westminster Abbey , on 13 May 1619 . The catafalque , designed by Maximilian Colt , placed over her grave was destroyed during the civil war . 
 As he had done before he ever met her , James turned to verse to pay his respects : 
 So did my Queen from hence her court remove 
 And left off earth to be enthroned above . 
 She 's changed , not dead , for sure no good prince dies , 
 But , as the sun , sets , only for to rise . 
 = = Children = = 
 Anne gave birth to seven children who survived beyond childbirth , four of whom died in infancy or early childhood ; she also suffered at least three miscarriages . Her second son succeeded James as King Charles I. Her daughter Elizabeth was the " Winter Queen " of Bohemia and the grandmother of King George I of Great Britain . 
 Henry Frederick , Prince of Wales ( 19 February 1594 – 6 November 1612 ) . Died , probably of typhoid fever , aged 18 . 
 miscarriage ( July 1595 ) . 
 Elizabeth ( 19 August 1596 – 13 February 1662 ) . Married 1613 , Frederick V , Elector Palatine . Died aged 65 . 
 Margaret ( 24 December 1598 Dalkeith Palace – March 1600 Linlithgow Palace ) . Died aged fifteen months . Buried at Holyrood Abbey . 
 Charles I of England ( 19 November 1600 – 30 January 1649 ) . Married 1625 , Henrietta Maria . Executed aged 48 . 
 Robert , Duke of Kintyre ( 18 January 1602 – 27 May 1602 ) . Died aged four months . 
 miscarriage ( 10 May 1603 ) . 
 Mary ( 8 April 1605 Greenwich Palace – 16 December 1607 <unk> , Surrey ) . Died aged two . 
 Sophia ( 22 June 1606 – 23 June 1606 ) . Born and died at Greenwich Palace . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = Fictional portrayal = = 
 Anne was portrayed in Pocahontas II : Journey to a New World . Finola Hughes was the voice actress for her . 
 = Monaco Grand Prix = 
 The Monaco Grand Prix ( French : Grand Prix de Monaco ) is a Formula One motor race held each year on the Circuit de Monaco . Run since 1929 , it is widely considered to be one of the most important and prestigious automobile races in the world and , with the Indianapolis 500 and the 24 Hours of Le Mans , forms the Triple Crown of Motorsport . The circuit has been called " an exceptional location of glamour and prestige " . 
 The race is held on a narrow course laid out in the streets of Monaco , with many elevation changes and tight corners as well as a tunnel , making it one of the most demanding tracks in Formula One . In spite of the relatively low average speeds , it is a dangerous place to race and often involves the intervention of a safety car . It is the only Grand Prix that does not adhere to the FIA 's mandated 305 @-@ kilometre ( 190 @-@ mile ) minimum race distance . 
 The event was part of the pre @-@ Second World War European Championship and was included in the first World Championship of Drivers in 1950 . It was designated the European Grand Prix two times , 1955 and 1963 , when this title was an honorary designation given each year to one Grand Prix race in Europe . Graham Hill was known as " Mr. Monaco " due to his five Monaco wins in the 1960s . Brazil 's Ayrton Senna won the race more times than any other driver , with six victories , winning five races consecutively between 1989 and 1993 . Fernando Alonso is the only driver to have won the race in consecutive years for different constructors , winning for Renault in 2006 and McLaren in 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Like many European races , the Monaco Grand Prix predates the current World Championship . The principality 's first Grand Prix was organised in 1929 by Antony Noghès , under the auspices of Prince Louis II , through the Automobile Club de Monaco ( ACM ) . Alexandre Noghès , Antony 's father , was founding president of the ACM , originally named Sport Vélocipédique Monégasque . The ACM made their first foray into motorsport by holding the Rallye Automobile Monte Carlo in 1911 . In 1928 the club applied to the Association Internationale des Automobiles Clubs Reconnus ( AIACR ) , the international governing body of motorsport , to be upgraded from a regional French club to full national status . Their application was refused due to the lack of a major motorsport event held wholly within Monaco 's boundaries . The rally could not be considered as it mostly used the roads of other European countries . 
 In order to attain full national status , Noghès proposed the creation of an automobile Grand Prix in the streets of Monte Carlo . Noghès obtained the official support of Prince Louis II . Noghès also gained support for his plans from Monegasque Louis Chiron , a top @-@ level driver in European Grand Prix racing . Chiron thought that the topography of the location would be well suited to setting up a race track . 
 The first race , held on 14 April 1929 , was won by William Grover @-@ Williams driving a Bugatti . 
 The first Grand Prix Automobile de Monaco was an invitation @-@ only event , but not all of those invited decided to attend . The leading Maserati and Alfa Romeo drivers decided not to compete , but Bugatti was well represented . Mercedes sent their leading driver Rudolf Caracciola to drive a Mercedes SSK . Caracciola drove a fighting race , bringing his SSK up to second position at the end of the race , despite starting in fifteenth . The race was won by " Williams " ( pseudonym of William Grover @-@ Williams ) driving a Bugatti Type 35B painted dark green . Another driver who competed using a pseudonym was " Georges Philippe " , the Baron Philippe de Rothschild . Chiron was unable to compete , having a prior commitment to compete in the Indianapolis 500 on the same day . 
 However , Chiron did compete the following year , when he was beaten by René Dreyfus and his Bugatti and finished second , and took victory in the 1931 race driving a Bugatti . As of 2015 , he remains the only native of Monaco to have won the event . 
 = = = Pre @-@ war = = = 
 The race quickly grew in importance . Because of the large number of races which were being termed ' Grands Prix ' , the AIACR formally recognised the most important race of each of its affiliated national automobile clubs as International Grands Prix , or Grandes <unk> , and in 1933 Monaco was ranked as such alongside the French , Belgian , Italian , and Spanish Grands Prix . That year 's race was the first Grand Prix where grid positions were decided , as they are now , by practice time rather than the established method of balloting . The race saw Achille Varzi and Tazio Nuvolari exchange the lead many times before being settled in Varzi 's favour on the final lap when Nuvolari 's car caught fire . The race became a round of the new European Championship in 1936 , when stormy weather and a broken oil line led to a series of crashes , eliminating the Mercedes @-@ <unk> of Chiron , Fagioli , and von Brauchitsch , as well as Bernd Rosemeyer 's <unk> C for newcomer Auto Union ; Rudolf Caracciola , proving the truth of his nickname , Regenmeister ( Rainmaster ) , went on to win . In 1937 , von Brauchitsch duelled Caracciola before coming out on top . It was the last prewar Grand Prix at Monaco , for in 1938 , the demand for ₤ 500 ( about US $ 2450 ) in appearance money per top entrant led AIACR to cancel the event , while looming war overtook it in 1939 , and the Second World War ended organised racing in Europe until 1945 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war Grand Prix = = = 
 Racing in Europe started again on 9 September 1945 at the Bois de Boulogne Park in the city of Paris , four months and one day after the end of the war in Europe . In 1946 a new premier racing category , Grand Prix , was defined by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , the successor of the AIACR , based on the pre @-@ war <unk> class . A Monaco Grand Prix was run to this formula in 1948 , won by the future world champion Nino Farina in a Maserati <unk> . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 = = = = Early championship days = = = = 
 The 1949 event was cancelled due to the death of Prince Louis II ; it was included in the new Formula One World Drivers ' Championship the following year . The race provided future five @-@ time world champion Juan Manuel Fangio with his first win in a World Championship race , as well as third place for the 51 @-@ year @-@ old Louis Chiron , his best result in the World Championship era . However , there was no race in 1951 , and in 1952 , a year in which the world drivers ' championship was run for less powerful Formula Two cars , the race was run to sports car rules instead and did not form part of the World Championship . 
 Since 1955 , the Monaco Grand Prix has continuously been part of the Formula One World Championship . That year , Maurice Trintignant won in Monte Carlo for the first time and Chiron again scored points and at 56 became the oldest driver to compete in a Formula One Grand Prix . It was not until 1957 , when Fangio won again , that the Grand Prix saw a double winner . Between 1954 and 1961 Fangio 's former Mercedes colleague , Stirling Moss , went one better , as did Trintignant , who won the race again in 1958 driving a Cooper . The 1961 race saw Moss fend off three works Ferrari <unk> in a year @-@ old privateer Rob Walker Racing Team Lotus 18 , to take his third Monaco victory . 
 = = = = Graham Hill 's era = = = = 
 Britain 's Graham Hill won the race five times in the 1960s and became known as " King of Monaco " and " Mr. Monaco " . He first won in 1963 , and then won the next two years . In the 1965 race he took pole position and led from the start , but went up an escape road on lap 25 to avoid hitting a slow backmarker . Re @-@ joining in fifth place , Hill set several new lap records on the way to winning . The race was also notable for Jim Clark 's absence ( he was doing the Indianapolis 500 ) , and for Paul Hawkins ' Lotus ending up in the harbour . A similar incident was included in the 1966 film Grand Prix . Hill 's teammate , Briton Jackie Stewart , won in 1966 and New Zealander Denny Hulme won in 1967 , but Hill won the next two years , the 1969 event being his final Formula One championship victory , by which time he was a double Formula One world champion . 
 = = = = Track alterations , safety , and increasing business interests = = = = 
 By the start of the 1970s , efforts by Jackie Stewart saw a few events cancelled because of safety concerns . For the 1969 event , Armco barriers were placed at specific points for the first time in the circuit 's history ; before that , the circuit 's conditions were ( aside from the removal of people 's production cars parked on the side of the road ) virtually identical to everyday civilian use . If a driver went off , he would crash into whatever was next to the track ( buildings , trees , lamp posts , glass windows , and even a train station ) ; and in Alberto Ascari and Paul Hawkins ' cases , the harbour water , because the concrete road the course used had no Armco to protect the drivers from going off the track and into the Mediterranean . The circuit gained more Armco in specific points for the next 2 races , and by 1972 , the circuit was almost completely Armco @-@ lined . And for the first time in its history , the Monaco circuit was altered that year ; the pits were moved next to the waterfront straight between the chicane and Tabac and the chicane was moved further forward right before Tabac and was the junction point between the pits and the course . The course was changed again for the 1973 race ; the Rainier III Nautical Stadium was constructed where the straight that went behind the pits was and the circuit introduced a twisty section that went around the new swimming pool . This created space for a whole new pit facility ; and in 1976 the course was altered yet again ; the Sainte Devote corner was made slower and a chicane was placed right before the pit straight . 
 For the next two races , By the early 1970s , as Brabham team owner Bernie Ecclestone started to marshal the collective bargaining power of the Formula One Constructors Association ( FOCA ) , Monaco was prestigious enough to become an early bone of contention . Historically the number of cars permitted in a race was decided by the race organiser , in this case the ACM , which had always set a low number of around 16 . In 1972 Ecclestone was starting to negotiate deals which relied on FOCA guaranteeing at least 18 entrants for every race . A stand @-@ off over this issue left the 1972 race in jeopardy until the ACM gave in and agreed that 26 cars could participate – the same number permitted at most other circuits . Two years later , in 1974 , the ACM managed to get the numbers back down to 18 . 
 Because of its tight confines , slow average speeds and punishing nature , Monaco has often thrown up unexpected results . In the 1982 race René Arnoux led the first 15 laps , before retiring . Alain Prost then led until four laps from the end , when he spun off on the wet track , hit the barriers and lost a wheel , giving Riccardo Patrese the lead . Patrese himself spun with only a lap and a half to go , letting Didier Pironi through to the front , followed by Andrea de Cesaris . On the last lap , Pironi ran out of fuel in the tunnel , but De Cesaris also ran out of fuel before he could overtake . In the meantime Patrese had bump @-@ started his car and went through to score his first Grand Prix win . 
 In 1983 the ACM became entangled in the disagreements between Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile ( FISA ) and FOCA . The ACM , with the agreement of Bernie Ecclestone , negotiated an individual television rights deal with ABC in the United States . This broke an agreement enforced by FISA for a single central negotiation of television rights . Jean @-@ Marie Balestre , president of FISA , announced that the Monaco Grand Prix would not form part of the Formula One world championship in 1985 . The ACM fought their case in the French courts . They won the case and the race was eventually reinstated . 
 = = = = Prost / Senna era = = = = 
 For the decade from 1984 to 1993 the race was won by only two drivers , arguably the two best drivers in Formula One at the <unk> Frenchman Prost and Brazilian Ayrton Senna . Prost , already a winner of the support race for Formula Three cars in 1979 , took his first Monaco win at the 1984 race . The race started 45 minutes late after heavy rain . Prost led briefly before Nigel Mansell overtook him on lap 11 . Mansell crashed out five laps later , letting Prost back into the lead . On lap 27 , Prost led from Ayrton Senna 's <unk> and Stefan Bellof 's Tyrrell . Senna was catching Prost and Bellof was catching both of them . However , on lap 31 , the race was controversially stopped with conditions deemed to be undriveable . Later , FISA fined the clerk of the course , Jacky Ickx , $ 6 @,@ 000 and suspended his licence for not consulting the stewards before stopping the race . The drivers received only half of the points that would usually be awarded , as the race had been stopped before two thirds of the intended race distance had been completed . 
 Prost won 1985 after polesitter Senna retired with a blown Renault engine in his Lotus after <unk> it at the start , and Michele Alboreto in the Ferrari retook the lead twice , but he went off the track at Sainte @-@ Devote , where Brazilian Nelson Piquet and Italian Riccardo Patrese had a huge accident only a few laps previously and oil and debris littered the track . Prost passed Alboreto , who retook the Frenchman , and then he punctured a tire after running over bodywork debris from the Piquet / Patrese accident , which dropped him to 4th . He was able to pass his Roman countrymen Andrea De Cesaris and Elio de Angelis , but finished 2nd behind Prost . The French Prost dominated 1986 after starting from pole position , a race where the Nouvelle Chicane had been changed on the grounds of safety . 
 Senna holds the record for the most victories in Monaco , with six , including five consecutive wins between 1989 and 1993 , as well as eight podium finishes in ten starts . His 1987 win was the first time a car with an active suspension had won a Grand Prix . He managed to win this race after Briton Nigel Mansell in a Williams @-@ Honda went out with a broken exhaust . His win was very popular with the people of Monaco , and when he was arrested on the Monday following the race , for riding a motorcycle without wearing a helmet , he was released by the officers after they realised who he was . Senna dominated 1988 , and was able to get ahead of his teammate Prost while the Frenchman was held up for most of the race by Austrian Gerhard Berger in a Ferrari . By the time Prost got past Berger , he pushed as hard as he could and set a lap some 6 seconds faster than Senna <unk> at which the Brazilian panicked ; he then set 2 fastest laps , and while pushing as hard as possible , he bit the barrier at the <unk> corner and crashed into the Armco separating the road from the Mediterranean . Senna was so upset that he went back to his Monaco flat and was not heard from again ; Prost went on to win for the fourth time . Senna dominated 1989 while Prost was stuck behind backmarker has @-@ been Rene Arnoux and others ; the Brazilian also dominated 1990 and 1991 . At the 1992 event Nigel Mansell , who had won all five races held to that point in the season , took pole and dominated the race in his Williams <unk> @-@ Renault . However , with seven laps remaining , Mansell suffered a loose wheel nut and was forced into the pits , emerging behind Ayrton Senna 's McLaren @-@ Honda , who was on worn tyres . Mansell , on fresh tyres , set a lap record almost two seconds quicker than Senna 's and closed from 5 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 9 seconds in only two laps . The pair duelled around Monaco for the final four laps but Mansell could find no way past , finishing just two tenths of a second behind the Brazilian . Senna had a poor start to the 1993 event , he crashed in practice and qualified 3rd behind pole @-@ sitter Prost and the German rising star Michael Schumacher . The Brazilian Senna was again fortuitous to win in 1993 after getting to the first corner in third behind Prost and Schumacher . Prost had to serve a time penalty for jumping the start and Schumacher retired with <unk> active suspension problems , and Senna won in front of the late Graham Hill 's son Damon . It was Senna 's fifth win at Monaco , equalling Graham Hill 's record . After Senna took his sixth win at the 1993 race , breaking Graham Hill 's record for most wins at the Monaco Grand Prix , runner @-@ up Damon Hill commented that " If my father was around now , he would be the first to congratulate Ayrton . " 
 = = = = Modern times = = = = 
 The 1994 race was an emotional and tragic affair ; it came 2 weeks after the tragic race at Imola where Austrian Roland Ratzenberger and Senna both died from massive head injuries from on @-@ track accidents on successive days . But during the Monaco event , Austrian Karl Wendlinger had an appalling accident in his Sauber in the tunnel ; he went into a coma and was to miss the rest of the season ; some feared for his life . But the German Schumacher won the 1994 Monaco event easily . The 1996 race saw Michael Schumacher take pole position before crashing out on the first lap after being overtaken by Damon Hill . Hill led the first 40 laps before his engine expired in the tunnel . Jean Alesi took the lead but suffered suspension failure 20 laps later . Olivier Panis , who started in 14th place , moved into the lead and stayed there until the end of the race , being pushed all the way by David Coulthard . It was Panis ' only win , and the last for his Ligier team . Only three cars crossed the finish line , but seven were classified . 
 Seven @-@ time world champion Schumacher would eventually win the race five times , matching Graham Hill 's record . Schumacher also holds the current lap record with a 1 : 14 @.@ 439 , set in 2004 . In his appearance at the 2006 event , he attracted criticism when , while provisionally holding pole position and with the qualifying session drawing to a close , he stopped his car at the Rascasse hairpin , blocking the track and obliging competitors to slow down . Although Schumacher claimed it was the unintentional result of a genuine car failure , the FIA disagreed and he was sent to the back of the grid . 
 In July 2010 , Bernie Ecclestone announced that a 10 @-@ year deal had been reached with the race organisers , keeping the race on the calendar until at least 2020 . 
 = = Circuit = = 
 The Circuit de Monaco consists of the city streets of Monte Carlo and La Condamine , which includes the famous harbour . It is unique in having been held on the same circuit every time it has been run over such a long period — only the Italian Grand Prix , which has been held at Autodromo Nazionale Monza during every Formula One regulated year except 1980 , has a similarly lengthy and close relationship with a single circuit . 
 The race circuit has many elevation changes , tight corners , and a narrow course that makes it one of the most demanding tracks in Formula One racing . As of 2015 , two drivers have crashed and ended up in the harbour , the most famous being Alberto Ascari in 1955 . Despite the fact that the course has had minor changes several times during its history , it is still considered the ultimate test of driving skills in Formula One , and if it were not already an existing Grand Prix , it would not be permitted to be added to the schedule for safety reasons . Even in 1929 , ' La Vie Automobile ' magazine offered the opinion that " Any respectable traffic system would have covered the track with < < Danger > > sign posts left , right and centre " . 
 Triple Formula One champion Nelson Piquet was fond of saying that racing at Monaco was " like trying to cycle round your living room " , but added that " a win here was worth two anywhere else " . 
 Notably , the course includes a tunnel . The contrast of daylight and gloom when entering / exiting the tunnel presents " challenges not faced elsewhere " , as the drivers have to " adjust their vision as they emerge from the tunnel at the fastest point of the track and brake for the chicane in the daylight . " . The fastest @-@ ever lap was set by Kimi Räikkönen in qualifying for the 2006 Grand Prix , at 1m 13 @.@ 532 . 
 = = = Viewing areas = = = 
 During the Grand Prix weekend spectators crowd around the Monaco Circuit . There are a number of temporary grandstands built around the circuit , mostly around the harbour area . The rich and famous arrive on their boats and the yachts in the harbour fill with spectators . Balconies around Monaco become viewing areas for the race too . Many hotels and residents cash in on the birds eye views of the race . Grand Prix organizers Automobile Club de Monaco officially voted the Ermanno Palace Penthouse the ‘ Best view of the Monaco Grand Prix ’ . 
 = = Organization = = 
