 " Snakehead " is the ninth episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode followed the Fringe team 's investigation into horrible deaths caused by large parasitic worms erupting from their victims ' mouths . The case soon leads them to a Chinese gang and a black market of immunodeficiency medicinal drugs . 
 Co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox wrote the episode , while Paul Holahan served as its director . Andrew Orloff , the episode 's visual effects supervisor , strived to makes the parasitic worms look as real as possible with the help of the actors and camera angles . It featured one @-@ time guest stars Tzi Ma , Colby Paul , Ingrid Torrance and Jack Yang . 
 " Snakehead " first aired on December 3 , 2009 to an estimated 6 @.@ 94 million viewers in the United States . Reviews of the episode were generally negative , as multiple critics expressed their dissatisfaction that little was learned about the series ' overall mythology . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Dorchester , a damaged cargo ship from China washes ashore ; all of the crew members seem to be infected with squid @-@ like creatures which soon erupt from their mouths , effectively killing their hosts . Other survivors flock to a contact house in Boston 's Chinatown , only to suffer the same fate in the presence of a man ( Tzi Ma ) . While investigating the crime scene shore , the Fringe team discover a healthy young Chinese woman , who tells them all of the passengers but her were given pills for their perceived seasickness , and that another ship is expected in two days . In the lab , Walter ( John Noble ) posits the creatures are gigantic parasitic worms , a modified version of <unk> <unk> , that needs hosts for their gestation period , hence the distribution of parasitic pills . One of the still @-@ living worms bites Walter , boosting his white blood cell count and making him suddenly feel better . 
 The Fringe team discovers a Triad gang member and ties to several shell companies the gang has set up in the US . They interview Elizabeth Jarvis ( Ingrid Torrance ) , one of the companies ' large investors , but she seems unaware of her investment 's criminal background . While at her house , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) observes signs of obsessive compulsive and <unk> characteristics such as large quantities of hand sanitizer . Walter informs him the worm has a medicinal purpose , not a narcotic one as they previously believed . These two discoveries lead Peter and Olivia ( Anna Torv ) back to Jarvis ' house , and they learn that her son ( Colby Paul ) has an immunodeficiency disorder . To allow him to be able to go outside , his mother and doctor have been giving him an injection to his spleen once a month , though he is unaware of the medicine 's origins . 
 Meanwhile , an invigorated Walter ventures out to Chinatown to find a herbalist for his research ; unaware of the clerk 's connection to the case , Walter casually mentions the giant worms . Walter manages to lose Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) , who was sent to follow him out of worry for his ability to travel alone . She goes back to the lab , but is attacked by Triad gang members intent on getting back the remaining worms . Unaware of this , a distraught Walter becomes lost and wastes all his bus money on wrong phone numbers , causing Peter to have to pick him up . Olivia talks to Jarvis , who finally admits to being aware of the medicine . She tells Olivia the whereabouts of the incoming ship , but they find it already empty . Peter and Walter return to the herbalist shop and discover the remaining passengers . The FBI storms in and the survivors are sent to the hospital for care . Feeling remorseful about the trouble he caused , Walter injects himself with a tracking implant and gives Peter the transponder . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Snakehead " was written by co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox , who had also written the season 's third episode , " Fracture " . The episode gave television director Paul Holahan his first directional credit for the series . The episode featured one @-@ time guest appearances by actors Tzi Ma as Ming Che , Colby Paul as Matt Jarvis , Ingrid Torrance as Elizabeth Jarvis , and Jack Yang as Tao Chen . 
 The episode 's visual effects supervisor , Andrew Orloff of Zoic Studios tried to make the parasitic worms look as real as possible . He explained , " ... we just don 't have any shots that seemed staged for the camera or any hint of being a visual effect . One of the big effects , like the parasite that crawls out of the guy 's mouth , are interacting with actor 's performances and they 're shot with a very loose camera style and we have to have the tentacles of this creature coming out of the guy 's mouth and all the deformations that are in his stomach and in his throat and in his chest . " Orloff continued , " And we had to create a proprietary workflow here of what we 're calling performance transfer of tracking 2D points , and putting those 2D tracked points onto the formation of 3D inter @-@ geometry . So we 're transferring not just the camera motion but also the performance of the actors on set onto 3D pieces of geometry so we can deform them and warp them and have our effects interact with them because the mandate is all about making it look as natural as possible , so that means a lot of optical tricks and atmosphere put in as seamlessly as possible . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Snakehead " first aired on December 3 , 2009 in the United States . It was watched by an estimated 6 @.@ 94 million viewers , earning a 4 @.@ 2 / 7 household ratings share and a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 ratings share for the 18 – 49 demographic . Fringe aired against repeats of Grey 's Anatomy and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , helping the series earn a 25 percent ratings increase since the season premiere . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception for the episode was generally negative . MTV writer Josh Wigler noted the week 's Fringe case for " delivering an absolutely grotesque mystery of the week — even if the actual plot surrounding the worms was thin and unimportant in the long run " . He believed the best part of the episode was John Noble 's performance , as " he kills you with laughter just as easily as he kills you with tears , " but disliked the focus on Astrid , believing the focus would have been better spent on Olivia . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly called the case " pretty X @-@ Files @-@ ish " and Walter 's storyline " the true heart of the hour . " Other critics also spotlighted Noble 's acting . AOL TV 's Jane Boursaw believed the worms were " seriously freaky " and the opening scene " cringe " <unk> . Writing for the magazine New York , critic Tim Grierson called the focus on Walter the episode 's best moments , but wrote that after the audience " adjusted to the ew factor , the plot wasn 't all that interesting . The story line about rich , ailing Americans paying Chinese gangsters for miracle cures appeared to be a ripped @-@ from @-@ the @-@ headlines commentary on hot @-@ button issues like human trafficking and illegal immigration , but the execution just seemed silly . " 
 Conversely , Noel Murray of The Onion 's A.V. Club graded " Snakehead " with a B + , explaining the focus on Walter was a " smart choice by the Fringe team thematically " . Murray continued , " Ordinarily I 'd be griping that this episode was yet another mythology @-@ free time @-@ waster , with a plot that — two @-@ foot @-@ long parasites aside — could be passed along to any other procedural show currently on the air . But I really enjoyed ' Snakehead , ' both because of the way the story reflected who Walter is and because of all the little touches of character development and scene @-@ setting . 
 Though not appearing as depicted , the species is a real @-@ world hookworm that infects a large number of Earth 's population , which as said in the episode , has been used by some as an alternative treatment for asthma and other allergies . Popular Mechanics published an article assessing the episode 's science ; they concluded that the worms depicted in " Snakehead " -- " hybrid parasites , a new species bio @-@ engineered from an intestinal hookworm " -- cannot grow as quickly nor as large in real life , though it is possible for hosts to die from " parasitic asphyxiation " . A George Washington University Medical School doctor noted that some scientists are researching the healing potential of parasitic worms . 
 = Monticolomys = 
 Monticolomys is a genus of rodents within the subfamily Nesomyinae of the family Nesomyidae , and is closely related to Macrotarsomys . The only species , Monticolomys koopmani , also known as the Malagasy mountain mouse or Koopman 's montane voalavo , is found in the highlands of eastern Madagascar . A small mouse @-@ like rodent , M. koopmani is dark brown on the upperparts and dark gray below . It has small , rounded , densely haired ears and broad feet with well @-@ developed pads . The long tail lacks a tuft at the tip . The skull is delicate and lacks crests and ridges on its roof . 
 First collected in 1929 , Monticolomys koopmani was not formally described until 1996 , but it is now known to have a broad distribution . Active during the night , it occurs in both montane forest and human @-@ disturbed grasslands and feeds on fruits and seeds . A scansorial animal , it climbs trees but also lives on the ground . Although habitat destruction may pose a threat , it is classified as " Least Concern " on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A specimen of Monticolomys koopmani was captured in 1929 during the Mission Zoologique Franco @-@ Anglo @-@ Américaine to Madagascar , but the rodents obtained by the expedition were never studied in detail . It was not until the 1970s that Karl Koopman and Guy Musser recognized that the animal — whose skin had landed at the American Museum of Natural History in New York , while the skull was at the Muséum national d 'histoire naturelle in Paris — represented an otherwise unknown species . However , they never published their results . In 1993 , Steven Goodman rediscovered the species on Madagascar and in 1996 he and Michael Carleton finally published a formal description . They named the animal Monticolomys koopmani , as the sole member of a new genus . The generic name Monticolomys means " mountain @-@ dwelling mouse " and refers to the animal 's montane habitat , and the specific name koopmani honors Karl Koopman for his many contributions to mammalian systematics . Common names in use for the animal include " Koopman 's Montane Voalavo " and " Malagasy Mountain Mouse " . 
 The indigenous rodents of Madagascar , the Nesomyinae , prior to the discovery of Monticolomys comprised seven very distinctive genera — so distinct from each other that some have found it difficult to accept that they are closely related . Monticolomys , however , does not follow this pattern , in that it is similar and closely related to the gerbil @-@ like genus Macrotarsomys of western Madagascar . This relationship was originally proposed by Goodman and Carleton based on morphology , and was strongly supported by a DNA sequence analysis ( based on the cytochrome b gene ) published in 1999 . While this study provided some weak support for a relationship between the Macrotarsomys – Monticolomys clade and the giant jumping rat , Hypogeomys , a later study based on the IRBP gene instead placed Macrotarsomys – Monticolomys sister to a clade containing four other nesomyine genera — Eliurus , Voalavo , Gymnuromys , and Brachytarsomys . 
 = = Description = = 
 Monticolomys koopmani is a small , mouse @-@ like rodent , and quite different in appearance from most other nesomyines . It has a thick , soft fur , which appears dark brown on the upperparts . The cover hairs ( which comprise most of the fur ) are tricolored : for the basal two thirds of their length , they are plumbeous gray ; the middle is ochraceous ; and the tip is dark brown to black . The longer guard hairs , which are most common towards the middle of the back , are completely black . The fur of the underparts appears dark gray , and is not sharply demarcated from the upperparts . There , the hairs are also plumbeous at the bases , but the tips range from white to yellowish @-@ brown . The mystacial vibrissae — whiskers above the mouth — are medium @-@ sized . The short , rounded ears are densely covered with grayish hairs . Monticolomys has broad hindfeet bearing prominent pads and long outer digits . There are white hairs on the upper sides of the metapodials and digits , and long ungual tufts — tufts of hair surrounding the bases of the claws — are present . The thumb of the forefeet bears a nail , but claws are present on the other digits . The long tail is covered with small scales and light brown hairs . The tail lacks a distinct tuft at the tip , as is present in Eliurus and Macrotarsomys . Females have six mammae . Head and body length is 84 to 101 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 0 in ) , tail length is 116 to 143 mm ( 4 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 6 in ) , hindfoot length is 23 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) , ear length is 15 to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) , and body mass is 18 @.@ 5 to 27 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 65 to 0 @.@ 97 oz ) . 
 The skull is small and delicate . The front part , the rostrum , is narrow and relatively long . The nasal bones are rounded at the front , but blunt at the back . The zygomatic plate — a bony plate at the side of the skull — is narrow and extends back to the front margin of the first upper molar ( M1 ) . The jugal bones constitute much of the thin zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) . The interorbital region , between the eyes , is narrow and hourglass @-@ shaped . There are no crests or ridges on the interorbital region or on the braincase . The incisive foramina , openings in the front part of the palate , extend back to a point between the front roots of the M1s . The bony palate itself is broad and lacks many indentations and protuberances present in other species . Its posterior margin is at the level of the upper third molars ( M3s ) . There is no alisphenoid strut , so that the masticatory @-@ buccinator foramen and the foramen ovale accessorium , two openings on the underside of the skull , are fused . There are 13 thoracic ( chest ) , 7 lumbar ( abdomen ) , 4 sacral ( hip ) , and 38 caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . 
 The upper incisors have orange enamel and are opisthodont , with the cutting edge of the tooth inclined backwards . The root of the lower incisors extends though the mandible ( lower jaw ) to a low capsular process at the back of the jawbone . The molars are brachyodont ( low @-@ crowned ) and bear distinct cusps . The second molars , although decidedly smaller than the first , are similar in their crown morphology , but the much smaller third molars are reduced and more distinct from the first molars in morphology . The molars lack accessory crests and other features . Each of the upper molars is three @-@ rooted , whereas the lowers have two roots . The molars are quite similar to those of Macrotarsomys , and differ only in minor details . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 The range of Monticolomys is now known to extend across the mountain ranges of eastern Madagascar from the Tsaratanana Massif south to Andohahela , at 800 to 2 @,@ 200 m ( 2 @,@ 600 to 7 @,@ 200 ft ) above sea level . It occurs in montane forest , but also in degraded grassland , where it is among the first species to return after fires . At Ankaratra , where the species was recorded in 1929 , it occurred in such grassland , where the nesomyine Brachyuromys <unk> was also found . The animal was again recorded at Ankaratra in 1996 , this time in a heavily disturbed forest , where it occurred with Eliurus minor and the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . At Andringitra , the animal was recorded in high montane forest together with six other nesomyines — Brachyuromys <unk> , Eliurus minor , Eliurus <unk> , Eliurus webbi , Gymnuromys roberti , and Nesomys rufus — as well as the black rat . At Andohahela , Monticolomys was found at an altitude of 1 @,@ 875 m ( 6 @,@ 152 ft ) in sclerophyllous forest . Its distribution corresponds to the High Mountain Domain , a region defined on the basis of plant distributions . This region is now discontinuous , but the High Mountain Domain habitat was continuous from mountain to mountain as recently as the early Holocene . Subfossil remains of Monticolomys have been found in Mahajanga Province ( northwestern Madagascar ) . Monticolomys koopmani is morphologically uniform across its wide distribution . 
 Monticolomys is nocturnal and solitary and produces litters of up to three offspring . It is scansorial , spending time on the ground but also climbing in vegetation . In Andringitra , two specimens were captured on a liana 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) over the ground , and a third was caught on the ground together with two shrew tenrecs ( Microgale <unk> ) . All five specimens from Andohahela were trapped on the ground , as was the specimen caught in Ankaratra in 1996 . Its diet includes fruits and seeds ; in captivity , it eats <unk> fruits . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 As Monticolomys koopmani is now known to be a widespread , common species occurring in at least one protected area ( Andringitra National Park ; it may also occur in Ankarana Special Reserve ) , it is listed on the IUCN Red List as " Least Concern " . However , fires pose a threat in montane forest and , at lower elevations , its habitat is being converted into agricultural land . 
 = Kenneth M. Taylor = 
 Kenneth <unk> Taylor ( December 23 , 1919 – November 25 , 2006 ) was a new United States Army Air Corps Second Lieutenant pilot stationed at Pearl Harbor during the Japanese attack on December 7 , 1941 . Along with his fellow pilot and friend George Welch , he managed to get a fighter plane airborne under fire . Taylor claimed to have shot down four Japanese dive bombers but only two were confirmed . Taylor was injured during the incident and received several awards for his efforts , including the Distinguished Service Cross and the Purple Heart . 
 Taylor later commanded several squadrons while stationed in the United States and elsewhere , and served for 27 years of active duty . He joined the Alaska Air National Guard until 1971 and worked in the insurance industry before retiring in 1985 . His Pearl Harbor experience was portrayed in the 1970 film Tora ! Tora ! Tora ! and the film Pearl Harbor . Taylor died of hernia complications in November 2006 and is buried at the Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Early years and military training = = 
 Shortly after his birth in Enid , Oklahoma , Taylor 's father , Joe M. Taylor , moved his family to <unk> , Oklahoma , where Taylor graduated high school in 1938 . He entered the University of Oklahoma as a pre @-@ law student in the same year and joined the Army Air Corps two years later . He graduated from aviation training at Brooks Field near San Antonio , Texas on April 25 , 1941 , reaching the rank of second lieutenant and was assigned to class 41C . In June 1941 , he was assigned to the 47th Pursuit Squadron at Wheeler Army Airfield in Honolulu , Hawaii , and began flying two weeks later . Although the 47th had several types of aircraft — some obsolete — he began his training in the advanced Curtiss P @-@ 40B Warhawk fighter . Taylor accumulated more than 430 flight hours of training before the attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 = = Pearl Harbor = = 
 Prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 , Taylor spent the night before playing poker and dancing at the officers ' club at Wheeler with fellow pilot George Welch , and did not go to sleep until 6 : 30 a.m. local time . Taylor and Welch awoke less than an hour and a half later at 7 : 55 a.m. to the sounds of low @-@ flying planes , machine @-@ gun fire , and explosions . Lt. Taylor quickly put on his tuxedo pants from the night before and called Haleiwa Auxiliary Air Field , where eighteen P @-@ 40B fighters were located . Without orders , he told the ground crews to get two P @-@ 40s armed and ready for takeoff . The new Buick he drove was strafed by Japanese aircraft as the two pilots sped the 10 miles ( 16 km ) to Haleiwa ; Taylor at times reached speeds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . At the airstrip , they climbed into their Curtiss P @-@ 40B Warhawk fighters , which were fueled but armed with only .30 cal Browning ammunition . 
 After they took off , they headed towards Barber 's Point at the southwest tip of Oahu , and initially saw an unarmed group of American B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers arriving from the mainland United States . They soon arrived at Ewa Mooring Mast Field , which was being strafed by at least 12 Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers of the second Japanese attack wave after expending their bomb ordinance at Pearl Harbor . Although the two pilots were outnumbered six @-@ to @-@ one , they immediately began firing on the dive bombers . Taylor shot down two dive bombers and was able to damage another ( the third damaged aircraft was considered Taylor 's first probable kill ) . When both pilots ran out of ammunition , they headed for Wheeler Field to get additional .50 cal ammunition , since Haleiwa did not carry any . As he landed around 8 : 40 a.m. , he had to avoid friendly anti @-@ aircraft and ground fire . Once he was on the ground , several officers told Taylor and Welch to leave the airplanes , but the two pilots were able to convince the officers into allowing them to keep fighting . 
 While his plane was being reloaded with the .50 cal , a flight of dive bombers began strafing Wheeler . Welch took off again ( since he had landed a few minutes before Taylor and was already reloaded ) . The men who were loading the ammunition on Taylor 's plane left the ammunition boxes on his wing as they scattered to get away from the bombers . Taylor quickly took off , jumping over an armament dolly and the ammunition boxes fell off of his plane 's wing . Both pilots realized that if they took off away from the incoming aircraft they would become targets once they were airborne , so both headed directly towards the bombers at take @-@ off . Additionally , if the low @-@ flying bombers attempted to fire at the grounded P @-@ 40s at their current elevation , they would risk crashing . Taylor used this hindrance to his advantage and began immediately firing on the Japanese aircraft as he took off , and performed a <unk> . 
 Taylor headed for a group of Japanese aircraft , and due to a combination of clouds and smoke , he unintentionally entered the middle of the formation of seven or eight A6M Zeros . A Japanese rear @-@ gunner from a dive bomber fired at Taylor 's aircraft and one of the bullets came within an inch of Taylor 's head and exploded in the cockpit . One piece went through his left arm and shrapnel entered his leg . Taylor reflected on the injuries in a 2001 interview , saying " It was of no consequence ; it just scared the hell out of me for a minute . " A few years after the interview , Taylor received from his crew chief two other slugs that had been found behind his seat . Welch shot down the dive bomber aircraft that had injured Taylor , and Taylor damaged another aircraft ( his second probable kill ) before pulling away to assist Welch with a pursuing A6M Zero fighter . The Zero and the rest of its formation soon broke off the pursuit and left to return to their carriers as Taylor neared Welch . Taylor continued to fire on several Japanese aircraft until he ran out of ammunition . Both pilots headed back to Haleiwa . After landing and driving back to Wheeler , Taylor and Welch passed by their squadron commander , Major Gordon H. Austin , who noticed that they were wearing their tuxedo attire . Unaware of their earlier dogfights , he shouted at the two men , saying " Get back to Haleiwa ! You know there 's a war on ? " The two pilots explained what they had done , and the commander thanked them . In a 2003 interview , Taylor reflected on his actions : " I wasn 't in the least bit terrified , and let me tell you why : I was too young and too stupid to realize that I was in a lot of danger . " 
 = = = Records and awards = = = 
 According to the 25th Infantry Division 's Tropic Lightning Museum , 14 different American pilots were able to take off during the surprise attack and record 10 Japanese aircraft kills . Air Corps records credit Welch with four kills and Taylor with two , yet new research of Japanese combat reports confirms Taylor got four kills ( when the two probable kills are included ) . Taylor claimed in an interview : " I know for certain I shot down two planes or perhaps more ; I don 't know . " On the 13th anniversary of the Pearl Harbor attack , the United States Air Force stated that they could not determine which of the two pilots shot down the first Japanese bomber : " Each of them in his first attack shot down an enemy bomber , so the difference in time would have been but a few seconds in any case . " While in the air during the dogfight , the two pilots agreed that whoever survived the battle would claim credit to the title for the first kill . However , both pilots survived and because Welch outranked Taylor ( he was a 41A , Taylor a 41C ) and was the lead aircraft in the fight , he was credited with the first kill . The efforts of the two pilots ’ dogfights were able to divert the Japanese from destroying the Haleiwa air field , which the Japanese intelligence did not know about prior to the attack . Taylor later reacted to the attack , saying " I believed I was a better @-@ trained pilot than the enemy . I had good equipment , and I was proud of it . " 
 For their action on December 7 , the U.S. War Department in Communiqué No. 19 on December 13 , 1941 , designated Taylor and Welch as the first two American heroes of World War II , and awarded both the Distinguished Service Cross on January 8 , 1942 . Taylor learned that he was to receive the award in mid @-@ December after reading several newspapers . The award is the United States Army 's second highest honor for valor in the heat of combat . Additionally , he later received the Distinguished Service Medal , the Legion of Merit , the Air Medal , and a Purple Heart for injuries he sustained . Both men were recommended for the Medal of Honor , but were turned down because they had taken off without orders . 
 = = Military and National Guard service = = 
 After the Pearl Harbor attack , Taylor was assigned to the 44th Fighter Squadron , and went to the South Pacific at Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . He was able to record two additional aerial kills : the first on January 27 and the other on December 7 , 1943 , two years after Pearl Harbor . This brought his total number of career kills to six , making him a flying ace . Officially however , Taylor is still only credited with two aerial victories on December 7 , 1941 and one on January 27 , 1943 . At Guadalcanal , he was injured during an air raid and was sent back to the United States in 1943 . In the U.S. , he trained pilots in preparation of combat in Europe and was then assigned to the 12th Pursuit Squadron . At the end of World War II , Taylor had reached the rank of major and went to the Philippines to command a squadron that used the first United States Air Force combat jets , the Lockheed P @-@ 80 Shooting Star . 
 Afterwards , he commanded the <unk> Special Weapons Test Group , became a tactical evaluator at the USAF Inspector General 's office , and worked in The Pentagon . He was also the Deputy Chief of Staff and Plans for the Alaskan Air Command and was a long @-@ range planner on the Joint Staff . 
 After 27 years of active duty , he retired as a colonel in 1967 , and soon started as the Assistant Adjutant General for the Alaska Air National Guard , retiring as a brigadier general in 1971 . Taylor then worked in the insurance industry in Alaska until 1985 . 
 = = Personal life and depictions in film = = 
 On May 9 , 1942 , Taylor married Flora Love Morrison of Hennessey , Oklahoma , whom he had met when she was visiting her father in Hawaii . Married for 64 years , the Taylors had two children ( daughter Tina and son Ken II ) , three grandchildren , and two great @-@ grandchildren . While he lived in Anchorage , Taylor would vacation in Hawaii each year . Taylor 's son later retired as a brigadier general commanding the Alaska Air National Guard , the same position formerly held by his father . 
 At a 50th anniversary symposium of the Pearl Harbor attack , Taylor met with a Japanese pilot who was part of the first wave of bombers to attack Pearl Harbor . The pilot reflected on Taylor 's efforts , " I was impressed by Mr. Taylor 's grit to storm into the pack of Japanese fighters " , and Taylor also told a reporter " I have no hatred against Japanese people , but I do against those who started the war . " 
 Taylor was a technical adviser for and was portrayed in the 1970 film Tora ! Tora ! Tora ! by Carl <unk> . The 2001 film Pearl Harbor featured a sequence in which the characters portrayed by Ben Affleck and Josh Hartnett took to the skies to fight the Japanese . This sequence is understood to be a fill @-@ in for Taylor 's and Welch 's roles , but the characters do not bear any other similarities to Taylor and Welch . Unlike Tora ! Tora ! Tora ! , Taylor was not consulted for the Pearl Harbor film , and later called the adaptation " ... a piece of trash ... over @-@ sensationalized and distorted . " 
 = = Death = = 
 After contracting an illness from a hip surgery two years prior , Taylor died on November 25 , 2006 of a strangulated hernia at an assisted living residence in Tucson , Arizona . His son stated that he wanted " to be remembered mostly as a good father , husband , grandfather and great @-@ grandfather . He was very loyal and dutiful , and to him that was more important than what he did in the war . " He was cremated and later buried at the Arlington National Cemetery in June 2007 with full military honors . Alaska Senator Ted Stevens gave a eulogy at the United States Senate prior to the service at Arlington . 
 = Good Old Mountain Dew = 
 " Good Old Mountain Dew " ( <unk> <unk> ) , sometimes called simply " Mountain Dew " or " Real Old Mountain Dew " , is an Appalachian folk song composed by Bascom Lamar Lunsford and Scotty Wiseman . There are two versions of the lyrics , a 1928 version written by Lunsford and a 1935 adaptation by Wiseman . Both versions of the song are about moonshine . The 1935 version has been widely covered and has entered into the folk tradition becoming a standard . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Along with being an amateur folklorist and musician , Bascom Lamar Lunsford was a lawyer practicing in rural North Carolina during the 1920s . At the time , the manufacturing of alcohol was illegal in the United States due to prohibition , but North Carolina residents nevertheless continued their longstanding tradition of making a form of illegal whiskey called moonshine . Lunsford frequently defended local clients that were accused of the practice , and the original lyrics and banjo accompaniment to " Good Old Mountain Dew " were written during the course of one of these cases . In 1928 , Lunsford recorded the song for Brunswick Records . 
 Scotty Wiseman , of the duo Lulu Belle and Scotty , was a friend of Lunsford 's . When Lulu Belle and Scotty needed one more song to finish a 1935 record for Vocalion Records , Wiseman suggested using the song his friend had written . To make the piece appeal to more people , Wiseman added the modern chorus and replaced verses about a man appearing in court with verses about making moonshine . Two years later , at the National Folk Festival in Chicago , Wiseman showed his version to Lunsford . Lunsford was impressed with it ; later the same night , he sold the song to Wiseman for $ 25 ( $ 339 in 2013 ) so he could buy a train ticket back to North Carolina . Wiseman copyrighted the song and made sure that 50 % of the royalties it earned were given to Lunsford until Lunsford 's death . 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 The 1928 version of " Good Old Mountain Dew " is close to the style of a ballad . The lyrics tell the story of a man 's first day in court to answer charges of making illegal alcohol . In the first verse , the prosecutor closes his case . In the next three verses , several respected members of the community — the deacon , the doctor , and the conductor — visit the charged man , trying to buy his whiskey . In the final verse , the judge offers the young man clemency if he is willing to pay court costs for the trial . 
 The 1935 lyrics are not ballad @-@ like and do not tell a story . This version tells of an " old hollow tree " that is used as a dead drop . A person who is looking to buy moonshine places money in the tree and leaves . When that person returns , there is a jug where the money was . The song goes on to extoll the drink and tell of its great properties . 
 = = Relationship with " The Rare Old Mountain Dew " = = 
 There is some controversy over the possible connection between " Good Old Mountain Dew " and the Irish folk song " The Rare Old Mountain Dew " , which dates to 1916 or earlier ( at least a decade before " Good Old Mountain Dew " was written ) . The terms " mountain dew " and " moonshine " are thought to have come to the United States from Ireland . Lunsford wrote several parodies and adaptations of other Irish folk songs ; based on this , some folklorists claim that the song " Good Old Mountain Dew " was based on " The Rare Old Mountain Dew " . Other folklorists disagree , pointing out that the only commonality the songs share is the use of the phrase " mountain dew " . 
 = = Recordings and adaptions = = 
 Since 1935 , " Good Old Mountain Dew " has been rerecorded and covered by a wide variety of folk , old time , and country musicians including Grandpa Jones and Willie Nelson . Nelson 's cover reached number twenty @-@ three on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs and stayed there for six weeks . Over time , artists have added new verses , but the tune has remained the same since it was first written in the 1920s . The gospel song " Traveling the Highway Home " is based on " Good Old Mountain Dew " and uses the same tune but has lyrics about moving closer to eternal life after death instead of about moonshine . 
 After PepsiCo bought the soft drink Mountain Dew in 1964 , they commissioned a set of advertisements featuring a " Good Old Mountain Dew " -based jingle and the drink 's mascot : a barefooted back @-@ country man called " Willie the Hillbilly " . 
 = Charitable trusts in English law = 
 Charitable trusts in English law are a form of express trust dedicated to charitable goals . There are a variety of advantages to charitable trust status , including exception from most forms of tax and freedom for the trustees not found in other types of English trust . To be a valid charitable trust , the organisation must demonstrate both a charitable purpose and a public benefit . Applicable charitable purposes are normally divided into categories for public benefit including the relief of poverty , the promotion of education , the advancement of health and saving of lives , promotion of religion and all other types of trust recognised by the law . There is also a requirement that the trust 's purposes benefit the public ( or some section of the public ) , and not simply a group of private individuals . 
 Such trusts will be invalid in several circumstances ; charitable trusts are not allowed to be run for profit , nor can they have purposes that are not charitable ( unless these are ancillary to the charitable purpose ) . In addition , it is considered unacceptable for charitable trusts to campaign for political or legal change , although discussing political issues in a neutral manner is acceptable . Charitable trusts , as with other trusts , are administered by trustees , but there is no relationship between the trustees and the beneficiaries . This results in two things ; firstly , the trustees of a charitable trust are far freer to act than other trustees and secondly , beneficiaries cannot bring a court case against the trustees . Rather , the beneficiaries are represented by the Attorney General for England and Wales as a parens patriae , who appears on the part of The Crown . 
 Jurisdiction over charitable disputes is shared equally between the High Court of Justice and the Charity Commission . The Commission , the first port of call , is tasked with regulating and promoting charitable trusts , as well as providing advice and opinions to trustees on administrative matters . Where the Commission feels there has been mismanagement or maladministration , it can sanction the trustees , removing them , appointing new ones or temporarily taking the trust property itself to prevent harm being done . Where there are flaws with a charity , the High Court can administer schemes directing the function of the charity , or even , under the Cy @-@ près doctrine , change the purpose of the charity or gift altogether . 
 = = Creation = = 
 As a form of express trust , charitable trusts are subject to certain formalities , as well as the requirements of the three certainties , when being created . These vary depending on whether the gift that creates the trust is given in life , given after death , or includes land . If the gift is given after death through a will , the will must comply with Section 9 of the Wills Act 1837 , which requires that the will be in writing and signed by the testator ( or somebody else present , at the testator 's instruction ) , it is clear that the testator intended to give effect to the will , and the signature is made or noted by two or more witnesses . If these are all carried out , the will is a valid document , and the gift made as part of it can create a charitable trust . If the gift is of land and made during the donor 's lifetime , it must comply with Section 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Law of Property Act 1925 , which requires that the agreement be a written document signed by the person giving it . If the gift is of personal property and made inter vivos , there are no formal requirements ; it is enough that an oral declaration is made creating the trust . Once constituted properly , a charitable trust , like all express trusts , cannot be undone unless there is something allowing that within the trust instrument . 
 = = Advantages of charity status = = 
 There are a variety of advantages to charity status . Within English trusts law , a standard express trust has a relationship between the trustees and the beneficiaries ; this does not apply to charitable trusts , partially because of the special definition of trustee used and partially because there are no individual beneficiaries identified in a charitable trust . Instead , the Attorney General of England and Wales sues on behalf of beneficiaries to enforce a charitable trust . Because of this lack of a relationship , the trustees ' powers are far wider @-@ ranging , only being regulated by the Charity Commission and actions brought by the Attorney General ; the beneficiaries have no direct control . Charitable trusts are also exempt from many formalities when being created , including the rule against <unk> . The trustees are also not required to act unanimously , only with a majority . 
 Tax law also makes special exemptions for charitable trusts . They are free from the income tax paid by individuals and companies , and also the corporation tax paid by incorporated and unincorporated associations . There is no requirement for charitable trusts to pay capital gains tax or council tax , although they are obliged to pay VAT . This freedom from tax liability applies not just to charitable trusts , but also to people who donate to them . Individuals who donate via Gift Aid are free from paying tax on that amount , while companies who give gifts to charity can claim tax on the amount back from HM Revenue & Customs . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The definitions of a trustee and a trust within charitable trusts differ significantly from the norm . In particular , according to the Charities Act 1993 ( section 37 ) : 
 <unk> trustees ' means the person having the general control and management of the charity ... 
 <unk> ' in relation to a charity means the provisions establishing it as a charity and regulating its purposes and administration , whether those provisions take effect as a trust or not , and in relation to other institutions has a corresponding meaning . 
 There is no statutory definition of what a charity is ; it is instead dealt with in a roundabout way . The Charities Act 2006 states in section 1 ( 1 ) that : 
 For the purposes of the law of England and Wales , ' charity ' means an institution which 
 ( a ) is established for charitable purposes only , and 
 ( b ) falls to be subject to the control of the High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction with respect to charities . 
 = = Charitable purpose = = 
 The first definition of a " charitable purpose " was found in the preamble to the Charitable Uses Act 1601 . The standard categorisation ( since all previous attempts to put it on the statute books were " unduly cumbersome " ) was set out by Lord Macnaghten in IRC v <unk> , where he said that " Charity in its legal sense comprises four principal divisions : Trusts for the relief of poverty ; trusts for the advancement of education ; trusts for the advancement of religion ; and trusts for other purposes beneficial to the community " . This " charitable purpose " was expanded on in Section 2 ( 2 ) of the Charities Act 2006 , but the Macnaghten categories are still widely used . 
 Trusts must also be for " public benefit " , which was considered at length in Oppenheim v Tobacco Securities Trust . A fund was created to benefit children of employees and former employees of British American Tobacco , which was a large number ; the total number of employees was over 110 @,@ 000 . The House of Lords found that size was not the issue ; the group did not count as a section of the public because of the " personal nexus " , or common relationship , between the <unk> ( British American Tobacco ) and the beneficiaries . The nature of charitable trusts means that the definition of " public benefit " varies between Macnaghten 's four categories . 
 = = = Poverty = = = 
 The 1601 Act stated that charities for the benefit of the " aged , impotent and poor people " had an appropriate purpose ; it is accepted that these may appear individually . A charity does not have to be for the benefit of people who are both poor , impotent and aged to be valid , only one of them . " Poverty " is a subjective term , and in Re <unk> , Sir Raymond Evershed indicated that it should be treated as such ; " poverty , of course , does not mean destitution ... it [ means ] persons who have to ' go short ' ... due regard being had to their status in life and so forth " . This appears to indicate that a millionaire who loses half of his income may be considered " poor " , in that he is unable to have the lifestyle he is accustomed to . Some limits were set to this provision by Lord Simonds in IRC v Baddeley , where he wrote that : 
 There may be a good charity for the relief of persons who are not in grinding need or utter destitution ... but relief connotes need of some sort , either need for a home , or for the means to provide for some necessity or <unk> @-@ necessity , and not merely for an amusement , however healthy . 
 The gift that creates the charitable trust , whatever the definition of poverty accepted by the courts , must be for the poor and nobody else . In Re <unk> , money was left to provide short trousers to children in Farnham . While this was a necessity under the standard definition of poverty , the gift was not limited to the poor , and instead went to every child in the area . As a result , the trust failed . 
 The " poverty " category is a " major exception " to the rule on personal relationships laid down in Oppenheim v Tobacco Securities Trust . In Dingle v Turner , a charitable trust was established to help poor employees of Dingle & Co . While the beneficiaries were all linked by a personal relationship ( their employer ) , the courts ruled that poverty is an exception to the Oppenheim rule . Academics Richard Edwards and Nigel Stockwell argue that this is because allowing such trusts to exist relieves the rest of society for having to provide for poor people ; as a result , there is " public benefit " in a wider way . The general public benefit rule in the " poverty " category is that " gifts for the relief of poverty among poor people of a particular description " is charitable ; " gifts to particular persons , the relief of poverty being the motive of the gift " are not . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 As with poverty , this category is also found in the 1601 Act 's preamble , which refers to charities established for the " Maintenance of ... Schools of Learning , Free Schools , and Scholars at Universities " . The common law , over the years , has recognised a wide area covered by " education " . This includes the education of the young , a particularly wide category , described by Lord Hailsham in IRC v McMullen , as " a balanced and systematic process of instruction , training and practice containing both spiritual , moral , mental and physical elements " . Although wide , this excludes things that the courts feel are harmful ; in Re Shaw , Harman J excluded schools for pickpockets or prostitutes . " Education " also includes research , as long as the subject is useful and the gift makes some requirement that the information be made available to others and disseminated . In Re Hopkins , a gift was given to the Francis Bacon society to find proof that William Shakespeare 's plays were written by Bacon . Wilberforce J held that it was a valid gift , as " the discovery would be of the highest value to history and to literature " . He also gave the definition of research required for a gift to be valid : 
 The word education must be used in a wide sense , certainly extending beyond teaching , and the requirement is that , in order to be charitable , research must either be of educational value to the researcher or must be so directed as to lead to something which will pass into the store of educational material , or so as to improve the sum of communicable knowledge in an area which education must cover - education in this last context extending to the formation of literary taste and appreciation . 
 This definition was expanded on by Slade J in McGovern v Attorney General , where he said that : 
 ( 1 ) A trust for research will ordinarily qualify as a charitable trust if , but only if ( a ) the subject matter of the proposed research is a useful object of study ; and ( b ) if it is contemplated that the knowledge acquired as a result of the research will be disseminated to others ; and ( c ) the trust is for the benefit of the public , or a sufficiently important section of the public . 
 ( 2 ) In the absence of such a contrary context , however , the court will be readily inclined to construe a trust for research as importing subsequent dissemination of the results thereof . Furthermore , if a trust for research is to constitute a valid trust for the advancement of education , it is no necessary either ( a ) that the teacher / pupil relationship should be in contemplation , or ( b ) that the persons to benefit from the knowledge to be acquired should be persons who are already in the course of receiving an education in the conventional sense . 
 For artistic pursuits , it is not enough to promote such things generally , as it is too vague . A body for specific artistic purposes may be charitable , as in Royal Choral Society v IRC , as is the promotion of a particular composer , seen in Re Delius . For a gift to be charitable , the courts must be convinced that the subject of advancement be of artistic merit . This includes famous composers , as seen above , and social graces , as in Re Shaw 's Wills Trust . When there is doubt , the courts ignore the opinions of the beneficiary and instead rely on experts , as in Re Pinion . This area is covered by the Charities Act 2006 , which lists " the advancement of citizenship or community development " and " the advancement of the arts , culture , heritage or science " as valid types of charitable trust . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 For the purposes of this category , " religion " was seen to mean a faith in a higher power , and does not include ethical principles or rationalism , as in Bowman v Secular Society . The 2006 Act expanded this , noting that religion " includes .. a religion which does not involve belief in a god " . This extends to the support of religious buildings and sick or old members of the clergy , as in Re Forster . This category also covers groups with small followings , as in Re Watson , and with doubtful theology , as in Thornton v Howe . Curiously , and individually to religious charities , the public benefit requirement is justified by the assumption that , according to Cross J in Neville Estates v Madden , " some benefit accrues to the public from attendance at places of worship of persons who live in this world and mix with their fellow citizens " . Notably , this excludes gifts to groups which do not associate with the public , as in Gilmour v Coats . 
 = = = Other purposes = = = 
 Macnaghten 's fourth category contains not only individual categories of its own , but also general principles that are applied when a body seeks to be recognised as a charitable trust . The first of these " sub @-@ categories " contains trusts for the benefit of the sick and old ; the Preamble to the 1601 Act gave " aged , impotent and poor people " as acceptable beneficiaries for a charity . These acceptable beneficiaries are to be read individually ; there is no requirement to aid the aged and impotent as well as the poor , and one can even exclude the poor , such as in Re Resch 's Will Trusts , which dealt with a hospital that charged fees . The second sub @-@ category is for charitable trusts relating to animals . As with religious charities , the benefit is derived not from the comfort afforded to the animals , but from the " indirect moral benefit to mankind " . Again , this excludes trusts which isolate the beneficiaries from the public , as in Re Grove @-@ Grady , where the trust sought to provide " a refuge [ for animals ] ... so that they shall be safe from molestation and destruction by man " . Charities for the purpose of creating animal sanctuaries usually pass the public benefit test despite this , because they do not completely exclude the public and often have educational value . 
 The third sub @-@ category covers charitable trusts for the benefit of localities . A trust for the benefit of a locality has long been held only to apply to that area ; if its purpose within that area is charitable , it is valid . If the money is to be spent on non @-@ charitable purposes , the trust fails , regardless of the fact that it applies to a particular area . This class of charities can be held valid even when it only impacts on a class within a locality , as in Goodman v Saltash Corporation . This can apply even when the class " fluctuates " , such as in Re Christchurch Inclosure Act , where a gift was for the benefit of the inhabitants of a group of cottages , whoever those inhabitants might be . 
 Charitable trusts have historically been invalid if they include " purely recreational pastimes " , as in IRC v City of Glasgow Police Athletic Association ; even though the purpose of the charity was to improve the efficiency of the police force , the fact that this included a recreational element invalidated the trust . In response to this case and IRC v Baddely , the Recreational Charities Act 1958 was passed , which provides that " it shall be and be deemed always to have been charitable to provide , or assist in the provision of , facilities for recreation or other leisure @-@ time occupation , if the facilities are provided in the interest of social welfare " . Section 1 ( 1 ) of the Act , however , preserves the need to provide a " public benefit " . The Act also lays out what kinds of activities are in the " interest of social welfare " , stating in Section 1 ( 2 ) that it is where the facilities " are provided with the object of improving the conditions of life for the persons for whom the facilities are primarily provided " and in Section 1 ( 2 ) ( a ) " those persons have need of such facilities as aforesaid by reason of their youth , age , infirmity or <unk> , poverty or social and economic circumstances " , or where , in Section 1 ( 2 ) ( b ) " the facilities are available to members ... of the public at large " . 
 This definition and the acceptance of the need for a " public benefit " allows the courts to reject charitable trusts for recreational activities , such as if they felt that the activities are harmful . The Act also excludes private clubs , unless the members fall under Section 1 ( 2 ) ( a ) . The courts are willing to accept charitable trusts for recreational activities if they benefit people as a whole , and not just the people covered by Section 1 ( 2 ) ( a ) , as in Guild v IRC , where Lord Keith stated " the fact is that persons from all walks of life and all kinds of social circumstances may have their conditions of life improved by the provision of recreational facilities of a suitable nature " . 
 = = Invalid purposes = = 
 = = = Political activism = = = 
 Charitable trusts can 't be used to promote political changes , and charities attempting such have been " consistently rebuffed " by the courts . There are two justifications for this . The first is that , even when a campaign for political change is stated to be for the benefit of the community , it is not within the court 's competence to decide whether or not the change would be beneficial . The second , laid out in National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society v IRC , is that the courts must assume the law to be correct , and as such could not support any charity which is trying to alter that law . Academic Alastair Hudson describes this argument as " a little thin . Given that judges contentedly take it upon themselves to interpret , limit and extend statutes ( as well as occasionally recommending the creation of new statutes to shore up the common law ) , it is peculiar to see judges so coy in the face of an argument being advanced that legislation might be changed " . 
 The leading case , Anti @-@ Vivisection Society , sets out a strict rule that charities cannot campaign politically . An illustration of its strictness is Bowman v Secular Society , where it was held that even when attempted changes to the law were ancillary to the main goals , it was still unacceptable . There is a dividing line ; charitable trusts discussing political issues can be valid , as discussed by Hoffmann J obiter dicta in Attorney General v Ross . This line is considered by the Charity Commission in their official guidelines , which allow the Commission to look at the wider purpose of the organisation when deciding if it constitutes a valid charity . 
 = = = Profit @-@ making = = = 
 No organisation run for profit can be a charity ; a public school may be a charitable body despite the fees paid , but not if they are directly run to make a profit , as in Re Girls ' Public Day School Trust . This also excludes benefit societies where the benefits are limited to those who have funded it , as in Re Holborn Air Raid Distress Fund . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A charitable trust created from a gift must be exclusively charitable ; if there are any purposes which would not be charitable on their own , the trust fails . Trust instruments should ideally identify that the money is to be used for " charitable purposes " . The use of other words such as " beneficial " or " benevolent " causes the trust to fail at creation , as the words are not synonymous with charity . An example is the Privy Council decision in Attorney General of the Cayman Islands v Wahr @-@ Hansen , where the Council held that gifts to " organisations or institutions operating for the public good " and acting " for the good or for the benefit of mankind " failed , because the definition given was not exclusively charitable . 
 There are two exceptions to the rule of exclusivity ; ancillary purposes , and severance . Where the non @-@ charitable purpose is a necessary ancillary to the charitable one , the trust will not fail . This is a matter of degrees , and was discussed by Slade J in McGovern v Attorney General , when he said that : 
 The distinction is between ( a ) those non @-@ charitable activities authorised by the trust instrument which are merely incidental or subsidiary to a charitable purpose and ( b ) those non @-@ charitable activities so authorised which themselves form part of the trust purpose . In the latter but not the former case the reference to non @-@ charitable activities will deprive the trust of its charitable status . 
 Severance refers to the separation of charitable and non @-@ charitable purposes , dividing the funds between them . This allows the charitable element to take effect . This is only possible when the trust instrument indicates that the donor intended for the fund to be divided , and cannot work where the donor gives a list of purposes a single fund is to be used for . The standard rule for dividing the funds is based on the equitable rule that " equity is equality " ; money should be divided equally . There are exceptions where it is not practicable , as in Re Coxon , where of a £ 200 @,@ 000 gift to the City of London for charitable purposes , a £ 100 dinner and other small gifts to the board of trustees was funded . 
 = = Administration of charitable trusts = = 
 The administration of charitable trusts is covered primarily by the Charities Act 1993 and the Charities Act 2006 , and is widely divided between four groups ; the Attorney General for England and Wales , the trustees , the Charity Commission and the Official Custodian for Charities . 
 = = = Attorney General and trustees = = = 
 As mentioned , the Attorney General represents the beneficiaries as a parens patriae , appearing on the part of The Crown . Any case involving charities has him joined as a party , he may act against trustees in disputes , and take actions to recover property from third parties . His role was discussed in Brooks v Richardson , where the court quoted the practitioner 's text Tudor on Charity : 
 By reason of his duty as the Sovereign 's representative protecting all the persons interested in the charity funds , the Attorney @-@ General is as a general rule a necessary party to charity proceeding . He represents the beneficial interest ; it follows that in all proceedings in which the beneficial interest has to be before the court , he must be a party . He represents all the objects of the charity , who are in effect parties through him . 
 The next significant role is played by the charity trustees , defined in Section 97 of the 1993 Act as those persons having the general control and management of the administration of charities . As mentioned , charitable trustees have significantly more freedom to act than normal trustees , but the 1993 Act has put restrictions on who may be a charitable trustee . Section 72 excludes people convicted of a crime involving dishonesty , bankrupts , people previously removed from charity trusteeship , and people struck off as directors of companies . Those trustees appointed have many duties when administering the trust , including informing the Commission of changes to the charity or its dissolution , registering the charity and keeping proper accounts and records , to be submitted annually to the Commission . 
 = = = Charity Commission = = = 
 The Charity Commission originated as the Charity Commissioners , created by the Charitable Trusts Act 1853 to provide advice to charitable trusts . Currently governed by and exercising its functions under the Charities Act 2011 , it has five core objectives : 
 to increase public trust and confidence in charities ; 
 to promote the understanding of the public benefit requirement ; 
 to increase the compliance of trustees with their legal obligations ; 
 to promote the effective use of charitable resources ; 
 to make charities more accountable to the donors , beneficiaries and the public . 
 Along with these objectives , it has six functions under the 2011 Act : 
 Determining whether institutions are or are not charities . 
 Encouraging and facilitating the better administration of charities . 
 Identifying , investigating and taking appropriate action with regard to apparent misconduct or mismanagement . 
 Issuing public collection certificates in respect of public charity collections . 
 Providing information relating to its functions or objectives including maintenance of an up @-@ to @-@ date register . 
 Giving information or advice to any Minister of the Crown with regard to the Commission 's functions or meeting of its objectives . 
 The Charity Commission has the power to issue an inquiry into a charity under Section 46 of the 2011 act and , if they are satisfied there has been mismanagement , they are allowed to suspend trustees or officers , appoint additional trustees , vest charity property in the Official Custodian for Charities or order debtors or people holding charity property not to transfer it without their permission . They can also remove trustees on the grounds of bankruptcy , mental incapacity , failure to act or the trustee 's absence from the country . The Commission is also authorised to appoint new trustees to replace removed ones , or even to increase the number of trustees . 
 The jurisdiction of the Charity Commission is concurrent with that of the High Court of Justice . The High Court possesses all the powers of the Commission , who only exercise theirs on application of the charity or Attorney General , or trustees , beneficiaries and interested people when the charity has an income of less than £ 500 . The Commission , under Section 29 of the 2011 Act , also keeps the register of charities . Under Section 110 of the Act , the Commission is tasked with giving advice or opinions to trustees relating to the performance or administration of their charity . The Commission also acts as the Official Custodian for Charities , who acts as a trustee for charities at the direction of the Commission . 
 = = = Schemes = = = 
 Both the High Court and the Charities Commission are authorised to establish schemes administering charities . These can come about when money has been left for a charitable purpose which is not specified , or with no suggestion as to how it should be administered . The scheme may be used to appoint new trustees , except when the trustee 's identity is crucial to the intentions of the testator , as in Re <unk> . Schemes may also be used to fix administrative difficulties caused by uncertainty , as in Re Gott , or even to completely defeat the gift . Schemes can also be used , on the application of trustees , to extend powers of investment or consolidate funds . The trustees may apply to change the core purpose of the trust , which while enacted through a scheme , follows the doctrine of Cy @-@ près . 
 = = = Cy @-@ près doctrine = = = 
 The doctrine of cy @-@ près is a form of variation of trusts ; it allows the original purpose of the trust to be altered . The doctrine originated in ecclesiastical law , the name coming as a contraction of the Norman French cy pres comme possible ( as close as possible ) , and is typically used where the original purpose of the charity has failed , and results in the trust purpose being altered to the nearest realistic alternative . Prior to the Charities Act 1960 , this " failed purpose " situation was the only time when cy @-@ près could be applied ; it required the original purpose to be impossible or impractical . With the 1960 Act ( the relevant provisions of which are now included in the 1993 Act ) , cy @-@ près can be applied where the original purposes have : 
 ( a ) been as far as may be fulfilled ; or cannot be carried out , or not according to the directions given and to the spirit of the gift ; 
 ( b ) or where the original purposes provide a use for part only of the property available by virtue of the gift ; 
 ( c ) where the property available by virtue of the gift and other property applicable for similar purposes can be more effectively used in conjunction , and to that end can suitably , regard being had to the spirit of the gift , be made applicable to common purposes ; 
 ( d ) or where the original purposes were laid down by reference to an area which then was but has ceased to be a unit for some other purpose , or by reference to a class of persons or to an area which has for any reason since ceased to be suitable , regard being had to the spirit of the gift , or to be practical in administering the gift ; 
 ( e ) or where the original purposes , in whole or in part , have since they were laid down been adequately provided for by other means ; or ceased , as being useless or harmful to the community or for other reasons , to be in law charitable ; or ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective method of using the property available by virtue of the gift , regarding being had to the spirit of the gift . 
 This definition was amended by the Charities Act 2006 to replace " the spirit of the gift " with " the appropriate considerations " , which are defined as " ( on the one hand ) the spirit of the gift concerned , and ( on the other ) the social and economic circumstances prevailing at the time of the proposed alteration of the original purposes " . 
 Failures that lead to an application for cy @-@ près are of two sorts ; subsequent failure , where the trust , constituted properly , failed after a period of action , and initial failure , where the trust fails at creation . Subsequent failure cases are designed to have the charity 's funds applied to more effective purposes , and as such money already donated to the charity cannot be returned to the next of kin of the original money ; in Re Wright , it was said that " once money has been effectually dedicated to charity ... the testator 's next of kin or residuary legatees are for ever excluded " . Schemes for initial failure , on the other hand , ask the court to decide whether the gifts should be returned to the testator 's estate and next of kin or be applied to a new purpose under cy @-@ près . When deciding if a gift has failed , there is a distinction made between gifts to unincorporated bodies and incorporated bodies , as laid down in Re Vernon 's Will Trust . This is because gifts to an unincorporated body must be treated as gifts to that body 's purpose , not to the body itself , since unincorporated bodies cannot hold property . As such , the gift does not revert to the next of kin because even if the body is dissolved , the gift 's purpose is ( presumably ) still valid . 
 = Alien 8 = 
 Alien 8 is an action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game . It was released for the ZX Spectrum , BBC Micro , Amstrad CPC and MSX in 1985 . The game is a spiritual successor to the best @-@ selling Knight Lore , which was lauded by critics for its isometric graphics . In the game , the player takes control of a robot , Alien 8 , whose job is to ensure that all of the cryogenically frozen passengers on board a starship remain viable during the ship 's voyage . 
 The game was written by Chris Stamper , and graphics were designed by Tim Stamper . Alien 8 uses the same image masking technique as Knight Lore , which allows the developers to create composite structures out of stacked images without visual overlay . The technique was copyrighted by Ultimate as the Filmation game engine . As with its spiritual predecessor , the game is rendered isometric projection . The game was critically acclaimed upon release . Reviewers praised the game 's graphics and innovation , however minor criticism was directed at its similarities to Knight Lore . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented in an isometric format and set on board a starship . Taking on the role of the robot , Alien 8 , the player must explore the large starship in order to ensure that the cryogenic life support systems preserving the biological crew are re @-@ activated . The core of this system is a series of geometrically @-@ shaped circuits . However , the circuits have been removed by the invading aliens and distributed around the starship . The main objective of the game is to collect the correct circuits and return them to their respective locations before the starship reaches its destination . The circuits are variously shaped as cubes , pyramids , domes or cylinders . 
 As with its spiritual predecessor , the environment of the game takes the form of a series of isometric flip @-@ screen rooms ( which trace the outline of a large starship ) . There are a total of 129 rooms and most are filled with various objects , such as moveable platforms , static hazards such as spikes and hostile aliens . As well as executing well @-@ timed manoeuvres and jumps , the player is able to use starship props to block or defend themselves . Another feature is the use of remote controlled drones , which can be directed by Alien 8 into inaccessible or dangerous areas . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 On a dying planet in a distant galaxy , the last of the creatures known as the " guardians " stored all of their libraries , records , and knowledge on a single starship together with cryogenically preserved members of their race . A single robot , Alien 8 , is tasked with keeping the occupants of the vessel alive for the duration of its journey . 
 The ship is launched towards a new solar system and Alien 8 performs his task for thousands of years during the journey . However , as the ship nears its destination , it is attacked and boarded by hostile aliens . The cryogenic life support systems were damaged during the attack and Alien 8 must restore them to an operational status before the ship 's automatic thrusting systems manoeuvre it into planetary orbit . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing multiple video games mainly for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . The company was known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " ; one team would work on graphics while the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or programming . 
 Development of Alien 8 began immediately after the release of Knight Lore , in which the Stamper brothers predicted that publishers would attempt to copy Knight Lore 's Filmation technology in other games . As with its predecessor , the Stamper brothers developed the game in monochrome to avoid visual overlay and attribute clash , as it was a common processing limitation in early 8 @-@ bit consoles . However , the Amstrad release exclusively displayed dual @-@ colours . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was critically acclaimed upon release . A reviewer of Crash praised its graphics and presentation , stating them to be " excellent " and more " imaginative and pleasing " compared to its predecessor , despite regarding it as " only having a slight difference " . Amstrad Action similarly praised the graphics , citing them as " amazing " , " brilliant " and having " great " colour combinations . A reviewer of Amtix ! stated that the visuals were " breathtakingly stunning " and improves on its predecessor . David Kelly of Popular Computing Weekly stated the game was a " little " disappointment due to its similarities to Knight Lore , however he asserted that the graphics were of superior quality to its predecessor . Chris Bourne of Sinclair User stated that the general quality of graphics were " higher " than its predecessor , although it used an identical system . 
 Crash praised the new additions to the game , in particular the time limit and various collectable items . The reviewer stated that the new features were " compelling and exciting " , as it differs from its predecessor . A reviewer of Amstrad Action similarly praised its innovation , stating that it has " wonderfully " original ideas , despite criticising it similarities to Knight Lore . Kelly praised the game 's extra puzzles and the animation of enemies , heralding them as " brilliant " . Bourne similarly praised the 3D animation , stating that every extension of the game improved over Knight Lore . 
 = The Boat Race 1889 = 
 The 46th Boat Race took place on 30 March 1889 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . For the first time in the history of the event , all eight rowers in the Cambridge crew had rowed the previous year . Cambridge won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 14 seconds , their fourth consecutive victory which took the overall record in the event to 23 – 22 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by seven lengths , while Oxford held the overall lead , with 23 victories to Cambridge 's 21 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge 's coaches were Fraser Emilie Churchill ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1883 , 1884 and 1885 races ) , Charles William Moore ( who represented Cambridge in the 1881 , 1882 , 1883 and 1884 races ) , Frederick Islay Pitman ( who rowed in 1884 , 1885 and 1886 ) , Herbert Edward Rhodes ( who rowed in the 1873 , 1874 , 1875 and 1876 races ) and Henry Tudor Trevor @-@ Jones . Oxford were coached by Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss ( who rowed for the Dark Blues four times between the 1875 and the 1878 races ) and William Grenfell ( who rowed for Oxford in 1877 , 1878 and was non @-@ rowing boat club president in 1879 ) . 
 The umpire for the race was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 5 lb ( 77 @.@ 6 kg ) , 3 @.@ 25 pounds ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . For the only time in the history of the event , every rower from the Cambridge crew had taken part in the previous year 's race , with Stanley Muttlebury making his fourth consecutive appearance . As a result of the availability of the former Blues , there was little competition in the trial eights , and the Cambridge crew were considered to be " not nearly as fast " as they had been in 1888 . Only the cox Thomas Welby <unk> was new to the event . Oxford 's crew contained three former Blues , including H. R. Parker who was rowing in his third Boat Race . All of the competitors were registered as British . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Commencing at <unk> , at a high stroke rate Cambridge took an early lead , before settling down to a " long , steady and tremendously powerful stroke " . By the Crab Tree pub , they were almost clear and despite a spurt from the Dark Blues , Cambridge were a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half ahead by Hammersmith Bridge . They continued to pull away at Chiswick and despite the " tremendous sea raised by the wind above Barnes " , extended their lead further to win by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 14 seconds . It was Cambridge 's fourth consecutive victory and their fifth in six years , with the fastest winning time since Oxford 's victory in the 1882 race . The victory took the overall record to 23 – 22 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Wannabe ( song ) = 
 " Wannabe " is the debut hit single by the British girl group the Spice Girls . Written by the group members with Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard during the group 's first professional songwriting session , it was produced by Rowe and Stannard for the group 's debut album Spice , released in November 1996 . The song was written and recorded very quickly ; the result was considered lacklustre by their label , and was sent to be mixed by Dave Way . The group was not pleased with the result , and the recording was mixed again , this time by Mark " Spike " Stent . 
 " Wannabe " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song that incorporates a mix of hip hop and rap . The lyrics , which address the value of female friendship over the heterosexual bond , became an iconic symbol of female empowerment and the most emblematic song of the group 's Girl Power philosophy . Despite receiving mixed reviews from music critics , the song won for Best British @-@ Written Single at the 1997 Ivor Novello Awards and for Best Single at the 1997 BRIT Awards . 
 " Wannabe " was heavily promoted by the group . Its music video , directed by Johan Camitz , became a big success on the British cable network The Box , which sparked press interest in the group . Subsequently the song had intensive radio airplay across the United Kingdom , while the group performed it on television programmes and started doing interviews and photo shoots for teen magazines . 
 Responding to the wave of public interest in the group , Virgin released the song as the group 's debut single in July 1996 , well ahead of the planned release date of the Spice album . " Wannabe " topped the UK Singles Chart for seven weeks and has received a double Platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . In January 1997 it was released in the United States , topping the Billboard Hot 100 for four weeks . It was the group 's only number @-@ one single in that country . By the end of 1996 , " Wannabe " had topped the charts in 22 nations , and by March 1997 this number had climbed to 37 . " Wannabe " became the best @-@ selling single by a female group in the world , with 1 @,@ 360 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 910 @,@ 000 copies sold in United Kingdom ( by 2015 ) and United States ( by 2014 ) , respectively , and over 7 million copies worldwide by the end of 1997 . In 2014 , it was rated as the most easily recognisable pop song of the last 60 years . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1994 , father @-@ and @-@ son team Bob and Chris Herbert , together with <unk> Chic Murphy , working under the business name of Heart Management , placed an advertisement in The Stage , which asked the question : " Are you street smart , extrovert , ambitious , and able to sing and dance ? " After receiving hundreds of replies , the management had narrowed their search to a group of five girls : Victoria Adams , Melanie Brown , Melanie Chisholm , Geri Halliwell , and Michelle Stephenson . The group moved to a house in Maidenhead and received the name " Touch " . Stephenson was eventually fired because she lacked the drive of the other group members . She was replaced by Emma Bunton . In November , the group — now named " Spice " — persuaded their managers to set up a showcase in front of industry writers , producers , and A & R men at the Nomis Studios in Shepherd 's Bush , London . Producer Richard Stannard , at the studio for a meeting with pop star Jason Donovan , attended in the showcase after hearing Brown , as she went charging across the corridor . Stannard recalls : 
 More than anything , they just made me laugh . I couldn 't believe I 'd walked into this situation . You didn 't care if they were in time with the dance steps or whether one was overweight or one wasn 't as good as the others . It was something more . It just made you feel happy . Like great pop records . 
 Stannard stayed behind after the showcase to talk to the group . He then reported to his songwriter partner , Matt Rowe , that he had found " the pop group of their dreams " . Chris Herbert booked the group 's first professional songwriting session with the producers at the Strongroom in Curtain Road , East London , in January 1995 . Rowe recalls feelings similar to Stannard 's : " I love them . Immediately . [ ... ] They were like no one I 'd met before , really . " The session was productive ; Stannard and Rowe discussed the songwriting process with the group , and talked about what the group wanted to do on the record . In her autobiography , Brown recalls that the duo instinctively understood their point of view and knew how to incorporate " the spirit of five loud girls into great pop music " . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 The first song the Spice Girls wrote with Stannard and Rowe was called " Feed Your Love " , a slow and soulful song that was recorded and mastered for the group 's debut album ; the song was not used because it was considered too rude for the target audience . The group next proposed to write a track with an uptempo rhythm . Rowe set up a drum loop on his MPC3000 drum machine . Its fast rhythm made Stannard remember the scene where John Travolta and Olivia Newton @-@ John perform " You 're the One That I Want " in Grease . Stannard commented that the only pre @-@ planned concept for the song was that it should represent the essence of what they were . The group then added their own contributions to the song , Rowe recalls : 
 They made all these different bits up , not thinking in terms of verse , chorus , bridge or what was going to go where , just coming up with all these sections of chanting , rapping and singing , which we recorded all <unk> @-@ <unk> . And then we just sewed it together . It was rather like the way we 'd been working on the dance remixes we 'd been doing before . Kind of a cut @-@ and @-@ paste method . 
 " Wannabe " was written in thirty minutes — mainly because the group had written parts of the song beforehand — in what Brown describes as a " sudden creative frenzy " . During the session , Brown and Bunton came up with the idea of including a rap near the end of the song . At this point the group got very motivated , and incorporated the word " zigazig @-@ ha " into the lyrics . Chisholm told Billboard magazine : " You know when you 're in a gang and you 're having a laugh and you make up silly words ? Well we were having a giggle and we made up this silly word , zigazig @-@ ha . And we were in the studio and it all came together in this song . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 While most of the other songs on the Spice album required two or three days of studio time , " Wannabe " was recorded in less than an hour . The solo parts were divided between Brown , Bunton , Chisholm , and Halliwell . Victoria Adams missed most of the writing session and communicated with the rest of the group on a mobile phone . In her autobiography she wrote : " I just couldn 't bear not being there . Because whatever they said about how it didn 't matter , it did matter . Saying ' Yes , I like that ' or ' Not sure about that ' down the phone is not the same " . She contributed backing vocals and sings during the chorus . Rowe stayed up all night working on the song , and it was finished by morning , the only later addition was the sound of Brown 's footsteps as she ran to the microphone . 
 The group parted with Heart Management in March 1995 because of their frustration with the management company 's unwillingness to listen to their visions and ideas . The girls met with artist manager Simon Fuller , who signed them with 19 Entertainment . The group considered a variety of record labels , and signed a deal with Virgin Records in July . The original mix of " Wannabe " was considered lacklustre by the label 's executives . Ashley Newton , who was in charge of A & R , sent the song to American producer Dave Way for remixing ; the result was not what the group had hoped to achieve . As Halliwell later described it , " the result was bloody awful " . She elaborated in her second autobiography , Just for the Record : " Right at the beginning of the Spice Girls , [ ... ] Ashley Newton had tried to turn us into an R & B group . He sent " Wannabe " over to America to be remixed by some hot R & B producers . He brought us jungle versions and hip @-@ hop mixes and I hated them all . Although Mel B [ <unk> ] was a big fan of R & B , she agreed with me that these versions just didn 't work so we exercised our Spice veto ! " Fuller gave the song to audio engineer Mark " Spike " Stent , who thought that it was a " weird pop record " . Stent remixed it in six hours , in what he described as " tightening it up " and " getting the vocals sounding really good " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Wannabe " is a dance @-@ pop song with influences of hip @-@ hop and rap . Written in the key of B major , it is set in the time signature of common time and moves at a moderate tempo of 110 beats per minute . It uses the sequence B – D – E – A – A ♯ as a bass line during the refrain , the chorus , and the bridge , and uses a chord progression of F ♯ – G ♯ m – E – B for the verses . The song is constructed in a verse @-@ pre @-@ chorus @-@ chorus form , with a rapped bridge before the third and final chorus . Musically , it is " energised " by a highly @-@ syncopated synthesised riff , and by the way the repetitive lyrics and rhythm are highlighted during the bridge . " Wannabe " presents a different version of the traditional pop love song performed by females ; its <unk> , self @-@ assertive style expresses a confident independence that is not reliant on the male figure for its continuance . 
 The song opens with Brown 's laugh , followed by " <unk> [ sic ] piano notes " . Over these notes , the first lines of the refrain are rapped in a call and response interaction between Brown and Halliwell . The words " tell " , " really " and " I wanna " are repeated , so that the vocal tone and lyrics build up an image of female self @-@ assertion . The refrain ends with the word " zigazig @-@ ha " , a euphemism for female desire , which is ambiguously sexualised or broadly economic . The first verse follows ; Brown , Halliwell , Chisholm , Bunton sing one line individually , in that order . In this part , the lyrics have a pragmatic sense of control of the situation — " If you want my future , forget my past " — which , according to musicologist Sheila Whiteley , tap directly into the emotions of the young teenage audience . 
 During the chorus , the lyrics — " If you wanna be my lover / You gotta get with my friends " — address the value of female friendship over the heterosexual bond , while the ascending group of chords and the number of voices creates a sense of power that adds to the song 's level of excitement . The same pattern occurs , leading to the second chorus . Towards the end , Brown and Halliwell rap the bridge , which serves as a presentation to each of the girls ' personalities . The group repeats the chorus for the last time , ending the song with energetic refrains — " Slam your body down and wind it all around " — and the word " zigazig @-@ ha " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 After signing the group , Virgin Records launched a major campaign for their debut song to promote them as the new high @-@ profile act . There was a period of indecision about what song would be released as the first single ; the label wanted to get everything right for the campaign , because the all @-@ girl group format was untested . The group , led by Brown and Halliwell , was adamant that the debut song should be " Wannabe " , they felt it served as an introduction to their personalities and the Girl Power statement . Virgin 's executives believed that the first single should be " Say You 'll Be There " , which they considered a much " cooler " track . At the beginning of 1996 the impasse between the group and their record label about the release of the single was temporarily solved . In March , Fuller announced that he agreed with Virgin in that " Wannabe " should not be the first single . The label wanted a song that appealed to the mainstream market , and nothing considered too radical . Halliwell was shocked and furious ; she told Fuller , " It 's not negotiable as far as we 're concerned . ' Wannabe ' is our first single . " Fuller and the executives at Virgin relented , and the song was chosen as their first single . 
 The trigger for the Spice Girls ' launch was the release of the " Wannabe " music video in May 1996 . Its quick success on the British cable network The Box sparked press interest , despite initial resistance to the all @-@ girl group idea . The same month , their first music press interviews appeared in Music Week , Top of the Pops , and Smash Hits , and their first live TV slot was broadcast on LWT 's Surprise Surprise . A month after the video 's release , the song was receiving intensive airplay on the main radio stations across the UK , while the group started to appear on television — mainly on kid 's programmes such as Live & Kicking — and doing interviews and photo shoots for teen magazines . A full @-@ page advertisement appeared in the July issue of Smash Hits , saying : " Wanted : Anyone with a sense of fun , freedom and adventure . Hold tight , get ready ! Girl Power is comin ' at you " . The group appeared on the television programme This Morning with Richard and Judy , and performed at their first Radio One road show in Birmingham . 
 " Wannabe " was released in the United Kingdom on 8 July 1996 in two single versions . The first one , released in two formats — a standard CD single and a cassette single — included the radio edit of the track , the <unk> 8 vocal slam remix , and the B @-@ side , " Bumper to Bumper " . The group wrote " Bumper to Bumper " with Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins — the songwriter @-@ production duo known as Absolute — and British singer @-@ songwriter Cathy Dennis . The second version , released on maxi single format , featured the radio edit , an instrumental version , the <unk> 8 dub slam remix , and the Dave Way alternative mix . This version came with a fold @-@ out postcard inlay and a stickered case . 
 During the weeks following the UK release , the group began promotional visits abroad . They did three trips to Japan and brief visits to Germany and the Netherlands . On a trip to the Far East , they visited Hong Kong , Thailand , and South Korea . In January 1997 they travelled to North America to do a promotional campaign that Phil <unk> , president of Virgin Records America , described as " absolutely massive " . During their visit to the US , the group met with influential radio programmers , TV networks , and magazines . In addition , Virgin persuaded fifty radio stations to playlist the song before it was released , while the music video was placed into heavy rotation by MTV . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Wannabe " received mixed reviews from UK music critics . Paul Gorman of Music Week called the group " smart , witty , abrasive and downright fun . " He described the song as a " R & B @-@ lite debut single , " and noted influences from Neneh Cherry in it . In a review conducted by the British pop band Deuce for Smash Hits magazine , the group described " Wannabe " as " limp , " " awful , " and " not strong enough for a debut single . " Kate Thornton , editor of Top of the Pops magazine , commented that the all @-@ girl group idea was " not going to happen ; " she considered it too threatening . In her review for The Guardian , Caroline Sullivan called it a combination of " cute hip pop and a vaguely feminist lyric , " she was also surprised that " considering the slightness of ' Wannabe , ' " the group had an overwhelming amount of offers from record companies . The NME characterised the song as " a combined force of Bananarama , Betty Boo and Shampoo rolled into one . " Dele Fadele of the same magazine called the rap during the song 's bridge " annoying , " and added , writing of the group 's music : " It 's not good . It 's not clever . But it 's fun . " The magazine named " Wannabe " the worst single of the year at the 1997 NME Awards . Conversely , it won for Best Single at the 1997 BRIT Awards , and for International Hit of the Year and Best British @-@ Written Single at the 1997 Ivor Novello Awards presented by the British Academy of Composers and Songwriters . In October 2011 , the NME placed it at number 111 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years . " 
 In the United States , reaction to the song was also mixed . In a review of the group 's debut album , Edna Gundersen of USA Today said that " Wannabe " is " a melodious but disposable tune that typifies this debut 's tart bubblegum and packaged sexiness . " Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune called it " insidiously snappy , [ ... ] [ that ] is shaping up as this year 's ' Macarena . ' " Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune said that " ' Wannabe ' has UGH written all over it , " adding that it was " relentlessly catchy and horrifyingly hummable . " The Buffalo News 's Anthony Violanti called it " irresistible . " Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe described it as a " maniacally zippy single , " and Stephanie Zacharek of Salon.com referred to it as an " unapologetically sassy dance hit . " Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch commented that " based on their efficacious American debut single , [ ... ] the Spice Girls might be expected to deliver more of that zingy pop on their debut album , " but she felt that " aside from ' Wannabe , ' the album 's dance tracks are color @-@ by @-@ numbers bland . " Larry Flick of Billboard magazine said that " fans of the more edgy girl @-@ group [ ... ] may find this single too fluffy , " but added that " everyone else with a love of tasty pop hooks , lyrical positivity , and jaunty rhythms is going to be humming this single for months to come . " 
 Some reviewers noticed the combination of musical genres . Christina Kelly from Rolling Stone magazine criticised the group 's image , and added that their songs , including " Wannabe , " were " a watered @-@ down mix of hip @-@ hop and cheesy pop balladry , brought together by a manager with a marketing concept . " Matt Diehl of Entertainment Weekly said that it was " more a compendium of music styles ( from ABBA @-@ style choruses to unconvincing hip hop ) than an actual song , " and Sara Scribner of the Los Angeles Times described it as " a bubblegum hip @-@ hop confection of rapping lifted off Neneh Cherry and Monie Love albums . " Charles Aaron of Spin magazine called it " a quickie , mid- ' 80s teen paperback come to life [ ... ] so gooey it melts in your hands , not in your mouth . " The song ranked at fifteenth on Village Voice 's 1997 " Pazz & Jop " critics ' poll , conducted by music journalist Robert Christgau . 
 Present @-@ day reviews from critics , however , are mostly positive . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that " none of the girls have great voices , but they do exude personality and charisma , which is what drives bouncy dance @-@ pop like ' Wannabe , ' with its ridiculous ' zig @-@ a @-@ zig @-@ <unk> ' hook , into pure pop guilty pleasure . " Dam Cairns of The Sunday Times said that the song " leaves a bad taste in the mouth : [ because ] the true legacy of Girl Power is , arguably , a preteen clothing industry selling crop tops and other minimal garments to young girls , " but added that it " remains the same two minutes and 53 seconds of pop perfection that it ever was . " In a review of their Greatest Hits album , IGN said that after ten years it " still sound reasonably fresh , " while Digital Spy 's Nick Levine said that " Wannabe " still remained an " exuberant calling card . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 As part of Virgin 's strategy to make the group an international act , " Wannabe " was released in Japan and Southeast Asia two weeks before the British release . After the song was placed into heavy rotation on FM stations in Japan , the Spice Girls made promotional tours in May , July , and September 1996 . The group received major press and TV exposure , appearing in programmes such as Space Shower . The single was released by Toshiba EMI on 26 June 1996 , and sold 100 @,@ 000 copies by October 1996 . 
 " Wannabe " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number three , six days after its physical release , and climbed to number one the next week . It spent seven weeks at the top , the second @-@ longest stay by an all @-@ female group , only behind Shakespears Sister 's " Stay " . With eighteen weeks in the top forty and twenty @-@ six weeks in the top seventy @-@ five , it became the second @-@ biggest selling single of the year , and as of November 2012 has sold over 1 @.@ 32 million copies , the biggest @-@ selling single by a female group in the UK . 
 " Wannabe " was commercially successful in the rest of Europe . On 14 September 1996 the song reached the top of Eurochart Hot 100 , where it stayed for nine consecutive weeks , when it was replaced by the group 's second single , " Say You 'll Be There " . " Wannabe " topped the singles charts in Belgium ( both the Flemish and French charts ) , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden , and Switzerland , and peaked inside the top five in Austria and Italy . The song was a success in Oceania . In Australia , it debuted at number sixty @-@ four , reached the top of the ARIA Charts for eleven weeks , and ended at number five on the 1996 year @-@ end chart . In New Zealand , it debuted on 1 September 1996 at number thirty @-@ eight , reaching the top position ten weeks later . Despite only being at the top position for one week , it spent an amazing seventeen consecutive weeks inside the top ten . At the beginning of 1997 , the Spice Girls had their first three songs " Wannabe " , " Say You 'll Be There " and " 2 Become 1 " all holding a position in the top ten on the New Zealand singles chart , an amazing feat . " Wannabe " also topped the singles charts in Hong Kong and Israel . 
 In Canada , it debuted at the eighty @-@ ninth position of the RPM singles chart on the week beginning December 16 , 1996 , a full month before it hit the US charts . It peaked at nine in its eighth week , and ended at number sixty @-@ eight on the year @-@ end chart . The song performed better on the dance chart , where it reached the top for three weeks , and ended at the top of the year @-@ end chart . In the US , the song debuted on 25 January 1997 at number eleven . At the time , this was the highest @-@ ever debut by a British act , beating the record previously held by The Beatles for " I Want to Hold Your Hand " at number twelve . It reached the top of the chart in its fifth week , and stayed there for four consecutive weeks simultaneously with the group 's fourth single ( " Mama " / " Who Do You Think You Are " ) being at number one in the UK . " Wannabe " reached the sixth position of the Hot 100 Airplay chart , and topped the Hot 100 Singles Sales chart for four consecutive weeks , selling over 1 @.@ 8 million copies as of January 1998 . It peaked at four on the Mainstream Top 40 , and was a crossover success , topping the Rhythmic Top 40 , peaking at twenty on the Hot Dance Club Play and at nine on the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . New remixes of the song were produced in 2007 in conjunction with the release of their Greatest Hits CD and these rose to number 15 on the Billboard Dance Charts . " Wannabe " also remains the best selling song by a female group in the United States with 2 @,@ 910 @,@ 000 physical singles and downloads combined , according to Nielsen SoundScan in 2014 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Wannabe " was the first for director Johan Camitz . Camitz was hired on Fuller 's recommendation because of his commercials for Volkswagen , Diesel , and Nike . His original concept for the video was a one @-@ take shoot of the group arriving at an exotic building in Barcelona , taking over the place , and running a riot — the same way they did when they were looking for a manager and a record company . A few days before the shoot on 19 April 1996 , Camitz was unable to get permission to use the building , and the shoot was relocated to the Midland Grand Hotel in St Pancras , London . 
 The video features the group running , singing , dancing , and creating mischief at an eccentric bohemian party . Among their antics is Chisholm 's back handspring on one of the tables . Because the video needed to be taken in one shot , the group rehearsed the routine several times through the night , while a steadycam operator followed them . About the experience , Halliwell wrote : " The video I remember as being very chaotic and cold . It wasn 't very controlled — we didn 't want it to be . We wanted the camera to capture the madness of the Spice Girls " . Virgin 's executives were horrified with the final result : " the girls were freezing cold , which showed itself in various different ways " , Ashley Newton recalled . The video was later banned in some parts of Asia because of Brown 's erect nipples . Additionally , the lighting was considered too dark and gloomy ; the best takes showed the girls bumping with the furniture and looking behind them . Virgin was concerned that old people appeared on the video , the part when they jump up on the table , and Halliwell 's showgirl outfit would be considered too threatening by music channels . Virgin immediately opened discussions about a re @-@ shoot of the video or creating an alternate one for the US , but the group refused . The video was sent for trial airing in its original form . 
 When the music video first appeared on the British cable network The Box , it was selected so frequently that it reached the top of the viewers ' chart within two hours of going on air , and stayed at number one for thirteen weeks . It was aired up to seventy times a week at its peak and became the most requested track in the channel 's history . The video premiered in the U.S. on January 25 , <unk> was an instant hit , winning Best Dance Video at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards , and Best Video at the 1997 Comet Media Awards . It was also nominated for Best British Video at the 1997 BRIT Awards , and was ranked at number forty @-@ one in the Top 100 Pop Videos of all time by Channel 4 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Spice Girls were in Japan when " Wannabe " went to number one in the UK . The group made their first appearance on Top of the Pops by satellite link from Tokyo , where they used a local temple as a backdrop for their mimed performance . They have performed the song several more times on the show , including the programme 's 1996 Christmas special . It was performed many times on television , in both Europe and the US , including An Audience with ... , the Bravo Supershow , Sorpresa ¡ Sorpresa ! , Fully Booked , Live with Regis and Kathie Lee , The Oprah Winfrey Show , and Saturday Night Live . The performance at Saturday Night Live on 12 April 1997 was the first time the group ever performed " Wannabe " with a live band — their previous performances had all been either lip @-@ synched or sung to a recorded backing track . 
 The group performed it at awards ceremonies such as the 1996 Smash Hits ! Awards , the 1996 Irish Music Awards , the 1997 BRIT Awards , and the 1997 Channel V Music Awards held in New Delhi , where they wore Indian costumes and entered the stage in auto rickshaws . In October 1997 the group performed " Wannabe " as the last song of their first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay @-@ per @-@ view event titled Spice Girls in Concert Wild ! , and was later included in the VHS and DVD release Girl Power ! Live in Istanbul . 
 The Spice Girls have performed the song on their three tours , the Spiceworld Tour , the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour , and the Return of the Spice Girls . After Geri Halliwell left the band at the end of the European leg of the Spiceworld Tour , her parts were replaced by Melanie Chisholm ( refrain ) , Victoria Adams ( verses ) , and Bunton ( bridge ) . The performance at the tour 's final concert can be found on the video Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium , filmed in London , on 20 September 1998 . The group performed the song on 12 August 2012 at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London as part of a medley with the song " Spice Up Your Life " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Wannabe " has been covered by numerous artists both in albums and live performances . In 1998 American retro @-@ satirist duo The Lounge @-@ O @-@ <unk> did a kitschy , lounge @-@ inspired rendition of " Wannabe " for their debut album , Experiment in Terror . British intelligent dance music producer µ @-@ <unk> recorded a cover for his fourth album , Lunatic Harness . The London Double Bass Sound recorded an instrumental version in 1999 , a dance remix was recorded by Jan Stevens , Denise <unk> , and <unk> for the 1997 album <unk> Dance Mixes , Vol . 2 , while an electronic version was recorded by the Street Girls for the 2005 album The World of Hits of the 80 's . In 1999 the song was used in " Weird Al " Yankovic 's polka medley , " Polka Power ! " , for his tenth album , Running with Scissors . 
 Covers of the song in a punk style include a thrash parody version by British punk rock band Snuff for their 1998 EP , <unk> <unk> Pinkie , a punk rock version by Dutch band <unk> for their 1999 album , <unk> , and a pop punk cover by Zebrahead for their 2004 EP , Waste of <unk> . Covers in live performances includes a punk version by Australian duo The Veronicas , and another from American rock band Foo Fighters . In 2005 " Wannabe " was covered and included in the soundtrack of Disney 's animated film Chicken Little . In 2007 , the season 4 finale of One Tree Hill featured the female characters dancing as a group to the song . King Julien performed this song in the 2012 film Madagascar 3 : Europe 's Most Wanted . On 3 October 2012 Geri Halliwell performed the song as a solo during a breast @-@ cancer care show . The song was an acoustic ballad with several lyrics changed , such as " you 've gotta get with my friends " , changed to " you 've gotta be my best friend " . The characters Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , Marley ( Melissa Benoist ) , Kitty ( Becca Tobin ) and Unique ( Alex Newell ) covered the song on the 17th episode of the fourth season of Glee . In 2013 Fifth Harmony covered the song which they put on their official YouTube on Halloween 2013 Also 2013 the Brazilian funk carioca singers MC <unk> , MC <unk> , MC Baby Liss and DZ MC released a version of the song , called " <unk> <unk> Mais " ( en : " I Deserve More " ) , and a music video inspired by the original . 
 The song appeared in first season of MTV animated series Daria in the episode " College Bored " and also in the Melrose Place episode 26 " Last Exit to Ohio " of the fifth season . Furthermore , The song was used in 2 episodes of Fox animated series The Simpsons , including " How the Test Was Won " , in which it was sung by Ralph Wiggum . In Chile , The song appears in soundtrack telenovela TVN <unk> . It was also used in the trailer for the 1997 film Excess Baggage . The song also appeared in the 1998 film Small Soldiers . 
 In 2014 , a study at the University of Amsterdam with the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester , has found that " Wannabe " as the most recognisable and catchiest pop song of last 60 years . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Wannabe " : 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Spice Girls – lyrics , vocals 
 Matt Rowe – lyrics , producer , keyboards and programming 
 Richard Stannard – lyrics , producer , keyboards and programming 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Adrian Bushby – recording engineer 
 Patrick McGovern – assistant 
 Published by Windswept Pacific Music Ltd / PolyGram Music Publishing Ltd . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hilton Head Island , South Carolina = 
 Hilton Head Island , sometimes referred to as simply Hilton Head , is a Lowcountry resort town located on an island of the same name in Beaufort County , South Carolina , United States . It is 20 miles ( 32 km ) northeast of Savannah , Georgia , and 95 miles ( 153 km ) southwest of Charleston . The island is named after Captain William Hilton , who in 1663 , identified a headland near the entrance to Port Royal Sound , which he named " Hilton 's Head " after himself . The island features 12 miles ( 19 km ) of beachfront on the Atlantic Ocean and is a popular vacation destination . In 2004 , an estimated 2 @.@ 25 million visitors pumped more than $ 1 @.@ 5 billion into the local economy . The year @-@ round population was 37 @,@ 099 at the 2010 census , although during the peak of summer vacation season the population can swell to 275 @,@ 000 . Over the past decade , the island 's population growth rate was 32 % . Hilton Head Island is a primary city within the Hilton Head Island @-@ Bluffton @-@ Beaufort metropolitan area . 
 The island has a rich history that started with seasonal occupation by Native Americans thousands of years ago , and continued with European exploration and the Sea Island Cotton trade . It became an important base of operations for the Union blockade of the Southern ports during the Civil War . Once the island fell to Union troops , hundreds of ex @-@ slaves flocked to Hilton Head , which is still home to many " native islanders " , many of whom are descendants of freed slaves known as the Gullah ( or <unk> ) who have managed to hold on to much of their ethnic and cultural identity . 
 The Town of Hilton Head Island incorporated as a municipality in 1983 and is well known for its eco @-@ friendly development . The town 's Natural Resources Division enforces the Land Management Ordinance which minimizes the impact of development and governs the style of buildings and how they are situated amongst existing trees . As a result , Hilton Head Island enjoys an unusual amount of tree cover relative to the amount of development . Approximately 70 % of the island , including most of the tourist areas , is located inside gated communities . However , the town maintains several public beach access points , including one for the exclusive use of town residents , who have approved several multimillion @-@ dollar land @-@ buying bond referendums to control commercial growth . 
 Hilton Head Island offers an unusual number of cultural opportunities for a community its size , including Broadway @-@ quality plays at the Arts Center of Coastal Carolina , the 120 @-@ member full chorus of the Hilton Head Choral Society , the highly rated Hilton Head Symphony Orchestra , the largest annual outdoor , tented wine tasting event on the east coast , and several other annual community festivals . It also hosts the Heritage Golf Classic , a PGA Tour tournament played on the Harbour Town Golf Links in Sea Pines Resort . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = New World discovery = = = 
 The Sea Pines shell ring can be seen near the east entrance to the Sea Pines Forest Preserve . The ring , one of only 20 in existence , is 150 feet ( 46 m ) in diameter and is believed to be over 4 @,@ 000 years old . Archeologists believe that the ring was a refuse heap , created by Indians who lived in the interior of the ring , which was kept clear and used as a common area . Two other shell rings on Hilton Head were destroyed when the shells were removed and used to make tabby for roads and buildings . The Green 's Shell Enclosure , Sea Pines , and Skull Creek shell rings are listed in the National Register of Historic Places and are protected by law . 
 Since the beginning of recorded history in the New World , the waters around Hilton Head Island have been known , occupied and fought for in turn by the English , Spanish , French , and Scots . 
 A Spanish expedition led by Francisco <unk> explored the area in 1521 , initiating European contact with local tribes . In 1663 , Captain William Hilton sailed on the Adventure from Barbados to explore lands granted by King Charles II of England to the eight Lords Proprietor . In his travels , he identified a headland near the entrance to Port Royal Sound . He named it " Hilton 's Head " after himself . He stayed for several days , making note of the trees , crops , " sweet water " , and " clear sweet air " . 
 = = = 17th to 19th centuries = = = 
 In 1698 , Hilton Head Island was granted as part of a barony to John Bayley of <unk> , County of Tipperary , Kingdom of Ireland . Another John Bayley , son of the first , appointed Alexander Trench as the island 's first retail agent . For a time , Hilton Head was known as Trench 's Island . In 1729 , Trench sold some land to John Gascoine which Gascoine named " John 's Island " after himself . The land later came to be known as Jenkin 's Island after another owner . 
 In the mid @-@ 1740s , the South Carolina provincial half @-@ galley Beaufort was stationed in a cove at the southern tip of Hilton Head to guard against intrusions by the Spanish of St. Augustine . The point and cove are named after Captain David Cutler Braddock , commander of the Beaufort . Captain Braddock was a mariner and privateer of note in Colonial times . Earlier , he had been placed in command of the Georgia schooner Norfolk by James Oglethorpe , founder of Georgia , and helped chase the Spanish back to St. Augustine after their failed 1742 invasion of St. Simons Island . After relocating to Savannah in 1746 , he served two terms in the Georgia Commons House of Assembly while earning a living as a highly active privateer . He drew a well @-@ known chart of the Florida Keys while on a privateering venture in 1756 . The chart is in the Library of Congress . 
 In 1788 , a small Episcopal church called the Zion Chapel of Ease was constructed for plantation owners . The chapel 's old cemetery , located near the corner of William Hilton Parkway and Mathews Drive ( Folly Field ) , is all that remains . Charles <unk> , a prominent island planter during the Revolutionary War , is buried there . <unk> was shot by Captain <unk> of Daufuskie Island in 1781 . This location is also home to the oldest intact structure on Hilton Head Island , the Baynard Mausoleum , which was built in 1846 . 
 William Elliott II of Myrtle Bank Plantation grew the first crop of Sea Island Cotton in South Carolina on Hilton Head Island in 1790 . 
 During the Civil War , Fort Walker was a Confederate fort in what is now Port Royal Plantation . The fort was a station for Confederate troops , and its guns helped protect the 2 @-@ mile wide ( 3 km ) entrance to Port Royal Sound , which is fed by two slow @-@ moving and navigable rivers , the Broad River and the Beaufort River . It was vital to the Sea Island Cotton trade and the southern economy . On October 29 , 1861 , the largest fleet ever assembled in North America moved south to seize it . In the Battle of Port Royal , the fort came under attack by the U.S. Navy , and on November 7 , 1861 , it fell to over 12 @,@ 000 Union troops . The fort was renamed Fort Welles , in honor of Gideon Welles , the Secretary of the Navy . 
 Hilton Head Island had tremendous significance in the Civil War and became an important base of operations for the Union blockade of the Southern ports , particularly Savannah and Charleston . The Union also built a military hospital on Hilton Head Island with a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ foot ( 370 m ) frontage and a floor area of 60 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 000 m2 ) . 
 Hundreds of ex @-@ slaves flocked to Hilton Head Island , where they could buy land , go to school , live in government housing , and serve in what was called the First Regiment of South Carolina Volunteers ( although in the beginning , many were " recruited " at the point of a bayonet ) . A community called <unk> ( in honor of General Ormsby M. Mitchel ) was constructed on the north end of the island to house them . 
 The Leamington Lighthouse was built in the 1870s on the southern edge of what is now Palmetto Dunes . 
 On August 27 , 1893 , the Sea Islands Hurricane made landfall near Savannah , with a storm surge of 16 feet ( 5 m ) , and swept north across South Carolina , killing over a thousand and leaving tens of thousands homeless . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 An experimental steam cannon guarding Port Royal Sound was built around 1900 , in what is now Port Royal Plantation . The cannon was fixed but its propulsion system allowed for long range shots for the time . 
 In 1931 , Wall Street tycoon , physicist , and patron of scientific research Alfred Lee Loomis , along with his brother @-@ in @-@ law and partner Landon K. Thorne , purchased 17 @,@ 000 acres ( 69 km2 ) on the island ( over 63 % of the total land mass ) for about $ 120 @,@ 000 to be used as a private game reserve . On the Atlantic coast of the island , large concrete gun platforms were built to defend against a possible invasion by the Axis powers of World War II . Platforms like these can be found all along the Eastern Seaboard . The Mounted Beach Patrol and Dog Training Center on Hilton Head Island trained U.S. Coast Guard Beach Patrol personnel to use horses and dogs to protect the southeastern coastline of the U.S. 
 In the early 1950s , three lumber mills contributed to the logging of 19 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 km2 ) of the island . The island population was only 300 residents . Prior to 1956 , access to Hilton Head was limited to private boats and a state @-@ operated ferry . The island 's economy centered on shipbuilding , cotton , lumbering , and fishing . 
 The James F. Byrnes Bridge was built in 1956 . It was a two @-@ lane toll swing bridge constructed at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million that opened the island to automobile traffic from the mainland . The swing bridge was hit by a barge in 1974 which shut down all vehicle traffic to the island until the Army Corps of Engineers built and manned a pontoon bridge while the bridge was being repaired . The swing bridge was replaced by the current four @-@ lane bridge in 1982 . 
 The beginning of Hilton Head as a resort started in 1956 with Charles E. Fraser developing Sea Pines Resort . Soon , other developments followed , such as Hilton Head Plantation , Palmetto Dunes Plantation , Shipyard Plantation , and Port Royal Plantation , imitating Sea Pines ' architecture and landscape . Sea Pines however continued to stand out by creating a unique locality within the plantation called Harbour Town , anchored by a recognizable lighthouse . Fraser was a committed environmentalist who changed the whole configuration of the marina at Harbour Town to save an ancient live oak . It came to be known as the Liberty Oak , known to generations of children who watched singer and songwriter Gregg Russell perform under the tree for over 25 years . Fraser was buried next to the tree when he died in 2002 . 
 The Heritage Golf Classic was first played in Sea Pines Resort in 1969 and has been a regular stop on the PGA Tour ever since . Also in 1969 , the Hilton Head Island Community Association successfully fought off the development of a BASF chemical complex on the shores of Victoria Bluff ( now Colleton River Plantation ) . Soon after , the association and other concerned citizens " south of the Broad " fought the development of off @-@ shore oil platforms by Brown & Root ( a division of Halliburton ) and ten @-@ story tall liquefied natural gas shipping spheres by Chicago Bridge & Iron . These events helped to polarize the community , and the Chamber of Commerce started drumming up support for the town to incorporate as a municipality . After the Four Seasons Resort ( now Hilton Head Resort ) was built along William Hilton Parkway , a referendum of incorporation was passed in May 1983 . Hilton Head Island had become a town . 
 The Land Management Ordinance was passed by the Town Council in 1987 . Disney 's Hilton Head Island Resort opened in 1996 , and the Cross Island Parkway opened in January 1997 . An indoor smoking ban in bars , restaurants , and public places took effect on May 1 , 2007 . 
 Fort Howell , Cherry Hill School , Daufuskie Island Historic District , Fish Haul Archaeological Site ( <unk> ) , Green 's Shell Enclosure , Hilton Head Range Rear Light , Sea Pines , Skull Creek , SS William Lawrence Shipwreck Site , and Stoney @-@ Baynard Plantation are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Government = = 
 The Town of Hilton Head Island incorporated as a municipality in 1983 and has jurisdiction over the entire island except Mariner 's Cove , Blue Heron Point , and Windmill Harbor . The Town of Hilton Head Island has a Council @-@ Manager form of government . The Town Manager is the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch and is responsible to the municipal council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the town . The Town Council exercises all powers not specifically delegated to the Town Manager . The Mayor has the same powers , duties , and responsibilities as a member of Town Council . In addition , the Mayor establishes the agenda for Town Council meetings , calls special meetings , executes contracts , deeds , resolutions , and proclamations not designated to the Town Manager , and represents the town at ceremonial functions . 
 Town departments include Building & Fire Codes , Business License , Code Enforcement , Finance , Fire & Rescue , Human Resources , Legal , Municipal Court , Planning , and Public Projects & Facilities . 
 The town had a budget of $ 74 @,@ 753 @,@ 260 for fiscal year 2006 / 2007 . It consists of three separate fiscal accounting funds : the General Fund , the Capital Projects Fund , and the Debt Service Fund . The General Fund is the operating fund for the town and accounts for all financial resources of the town except the Capital Projects Fund and the Debt Service Fund . The Capital Projects Fund is used to acquire land and facilities , and improve public facilities , including roads , bike paths , fire stations , vehicle replacement , drainage improvements , and park development . The Debt Service Fund accounts for the accumulation of resources and the payment of debt . 
 On June 5 , 2007 , the Town Council approved a $ 93 @,@ 154 @,@ 110 budget for fiscal year 2007 / 2008 on the first reading with a vote of 6 – 0 . The most recent budget , for the 2010 / 2011 fiscal year is $ 74 @,@ 299 @,@ 720 
 Office holders as of December 2014 : 
 Council mission statement : 
 To provide excellent customer service to all that come in contact with the Town . 
 To wisely manage and utilize the financial and physical resources of Town government . 
 To promote policies and programs which will assure the long term health and vitality of the community . 
 To encourage and instill job satisfaction for all Town staff . 
 To develop and enhance the professional growth of all Staff members . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Hilton Head Island is a shoe @-@ shaped island that lies 20 miles ( 32 km ) by air northeast of Savannah , Georgia , and 90 miles ( 140 km ) south of Charleston . The exact coordinates are 32 ° 10 ′ 44 ″ N 80 ° 44 ′ 35 ″ W ( 32 @.@ <unk> , − 80 @.@ <unk> ) . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 69 @.@ 2 square miles ( 179 @.@ 1 km2 ) , of which 41 @.@ 4 square miles ( 107 @.@ 1 km2 ) is land , and 27 @.@ 8 square miles ( 71 @.@ 9 km2 ) , or 40 @.@ 17 % , is water . 
 = = = Barrier island = = = 
 Hilton Head Island is sometimes referred to as the second largest barrier island on the Eastern Seaboard after Long Island ( which is not actually a barrier island but two glacial moraines ) . Technically , however , Hilton Head Island is only a half barrier island . The north end of the island is a sea island dating to the Pleistocene epoch , and the south end is a barrier island that appeared as recently as the Holocene epoch . Broad Creek , which is actually a land @-@ locked tidal marsh , separates the two halves of the island . 
 The terrain of a barrier island is determined by a dynamic beach system with offshore bars , pounding surf , and shifting beaches ; as well as grassy dunes behind the beach , maritime forests with wetlands in the interiors , and salt or tidal marshes on the lee side , facing the mainland . A typical barrier island has a headland , a beach and surf zone , and a sand spit . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Hilton Head Island has a humid subtropical climate . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Organizations and entities = = = 
 Formerly the Self Family Arts Center , the Arts Center of Coastal Carolina is a showcase for professional performing and visual arts , as well as cultural festivals and educational outreach . The Arts Center also offers community education , including Visual and Performing Arts Camps , Theater Camp , and other workshops and classes . 
 The Coastal Discovery Museum , located at 70 Honey Horn Drive , offers a variety of programs , activities , and indoor and outdoor exhibits year @-@ round to over 125 @,@ 000 visitors . The Discovery House has permanent exhibitions about the natural history and cultural heritage of the Lowcountry , a gift store , Kids ' Zone and a temporary gallery space . The museum offers many tours of its 68 @-@ acre ( 28 ha ) property that includes salt marsh boardwalks , trails , a native butterfly habitat and various gardens . The Coastal Discovery Museum is open Monday — Saturday , 9 : 00 a.m. – 4 : 30 p.m. and Sunday 11 : 00 a.m. – 3 : 00 p.m. 
 The Hilton Head Choral Society , founded in 1975 , is a non @-@ profit organization " open to community members who love to sing and enjoy good fellowship . " The choirs of the Hilton Head Choral Society are known for their diverse musical repertoire including classical masterworks , pops concerts and lighter fare , patriotic and Americana , and gospel and musical theatre . There is also a 20 @-@ voice chamber choir and a youth choir . The 120 @-@ member full chorus presents four major programs per season : A Fall Pops Concert , The Christmas Concert , The Musical Masterworks Concert and a pair of Memorial Day concerts celebrating the art of American choral singing and a patriotic tribute . 
 The Hilton Head Symphony Orchestra was started 25 years ago by a handful of musicians and classical music aficionados who dreamed of bringing " big city " culture to Hilton Head . Since then , they have transformed from a small group of classical music lovers to a highly rated symphony orchestra . Their main performance hall is the First Presbyterian Church on William Hilton Parkway , next to Fire Station 3 . A branch formed from the Hilton Head Symphony Orchestra is the Hilton Head Youth Orchestra , helping young musicians across the county with their love for music . 
 The Arts Council of Beaufort County ( ACBC ) ' s mission is to promote and foster the arts of Beaufort County , including Hilton Head Island . ACBC 's vision is to position and maintain Beaufort County as a vibrant arts community and destination through active marketing , service to current arts organizations and artists and advocacy for the arts . ACBC programs include Quarterly Community Arts Grants , the Ever Expanding Arts Calendar , Get Your Art Out emerging artist initiative , the print publication <unk> , and Arts of the <unk> , which are free quarterly seminars exploring the business of art . 
 The Main Street Youth Theatre , located on the north end of the island on Main Street , is a non @-@ profit community theatre dedicated to enriching the lives of the island 's youth by providing a true theatrical experience . Each year , <unk> performs four or five Broadway @-@ quality shows that run about two months at a time . During the tourist season , <unk> is a major tourist attraction and is also a local hot spot year round . The organization also provides acting , dance , and vocal instruction after school and during the summer . 
 Lifelong Learning of Hilton Head Island ( <unk> ) offers the adult community of Hilton Head Island a collection of educational and fun classes covering subjects from history , arts , yoga , and current events to outer space exploration and beyond . Each semester promises choices from 20 – 30 topics . Annual membership is $ 30 . Fall and Winter terms are $ 45 each with no limit on the number of classes a member can take . 
 The Heritage Library of Hilton Head Island is the repository for Hilton Head Island history and a premier ancestry research center . The Heritage Library is a non @-@ profit member library that is open to the public for a small daily fee , and offers history programs , genealogy classes , and special programs throughout the year . 
 = = = Annual events = = = 
 Gullah Celebration – Although threatened by the rapid increase in tourism , Gullah culture can be seen at the annual Hilton Head Island Gullah Celebration which is held at Shelter Cove Community Park in February . In the summer , the acclaimed Hallelujah Singers present a Gullah concert series at Hilton Head 's Arts Center of Coastal Carolina . 
 <unk> – The Annual <unk> is the largest outdoor , tented wine tasting on the East Coast , featuring over 1 @,@ 500 domestic and international wines . 
 St. Patrick 's Day Parade – The annual St. Patrick 's Day Parade draws over 20 @,@ 000 people . 
 <unk> – The annual <unk> <unk> is held at Shelter Cove Community Park . The event is operated by the Island Recreation Association , and all proceeds benefit the Island Recreation Scholarship Fund . 
 HarbourFest – HarbourFest , now in its 26th season , is held every Tuesday night from June to August at Shelter Cove Marina . It features arts and crafts , live entertainment , and fireworks at sunset . There is a special HarbourFest celebration on July 4 . 
 Heritage Golf Classic – The annual Heritage Classic Golf Tournament is held every April at Harbour Town Golf Links in Sea Pines Resort . 
 Rib <unk> & Barbecue Fest – The annual Rib <unk> & Barbecue Fest is held at Honey Horn Plantation . 
 Celebrity Golf Tournament – The annual Celebrity Golf Tournament is held at the Golf Club at Indigo Run , the Robert Trent Jones course in Palmetto Dunes and Harbour Town Golf Links . The tournament has contributed over $ 3 million to 18 children 's charities . 
 <unk> – <unk> celebrates the talent of the local hospitality industry and provides attendees with several spectator events including : The Best Bartender Drink Making Contest , The <unk> Waiter ’ s Race , and The <unk> Gourmet Challenge . 
 Chili <unk> – The annual Chili <unk> is held at Honey Horn Plantation . 
 Community Festival – The annual Community Festival at Honey Horn Plantation features a " haunted trail " in the " haunted forest " presented by the Hilton Head Rotary Club and the Interact Clubs from Hilton Head Island High School and Hilton Head Preparatory School . 
 Motoring Festival & Concours d 'Elegance – World @-@ class automobiles take center stage each November at the annual Hilton Head Island Motoring Festival & Concours d 'Elegance at the Honey Horn Plantation . The festival features some of the country 's finest collector automobiles , including classic cars , two @-@ wheeled machines , wooden boats , and beach mobiles . 
 The Dove Street Festival of Lights – Begun 1990 , the Dove Street Festival of Lights takes place each December . More than 50 homes on Dove street decorate with holiday lights , and the Glee Club of the Miami University of Ohio serenades residents with holiday songs . Town volunteers collect donations of money , food and toys at the festival that are given to The Deep Well Project , a local charity . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 The Hilton Head Island area is home to a vast array of wildlife , including alligators , deer , loggerhead sea turtles , manatees , hundreds of species of birds , and dolphins . 
 The Coastal Discovery Museum , in conjunction with the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources , patrols the beaches from May through October as part of the Sea Turtle Protection Project . The purpose of the project is to inventory and monitor nesting locations , and if necessary , move them to more suitable locations . During the summer months , the museum sponsors the Turtle Talk & Walk , which is a special tour designed to educate the public about this endangered species . To protect loggerhead sea turtles , a town ordinance stipulates that artificial lighting must be shielded so that it cannot be seen from the beach , or it must be turned off by 10 : 00 p.m. from May 1 to October 31 each year . The waters around Hilton Head Island are one of the few places on Earth where dolphins routinely use a technique called " strand feeding " , whereby schools of fish are herded up onto mud banks , and the dolphins lie on their side while they feed before sliding back down into the water . 
 Particularly prominent in the ocean waters surrounding Hilton Head Island , the stingray serves as a fascination and painful natural encounter for many beach goers . Small stingrays inhabit the quieter , shallow region of ocean floor just beyond the break of the surf , typically buried beneath a thin layer of sand . Stingrays are a type of demersal , cartilaginous fish common to the South Carolina coast as well as other areas on the Atlantic shoreline . Typically , stingrays avoid contact with humans unless they are accidentally stepped upon , a situation often ending in a stingray injury , where the stingray punctures the human with its poisonous barb . While these injuries are extremely painful , they are not usually life @-@ threatening as long as they are properly attended to by a medical professional . One complaint shared by many Hilton Head Island tourists is that the lifeguards maintain a poor alert system for notifying swimmers when numerous stingrays have been sighted within a specific stretch of the shore . This lack of notification on days when multiple sightings are reported can sometimes end in a high number of stingray injuries that might have otherwise been avoided ; in 2009 , 121 people were treated for stingray injuries . 
 The saltmarsh estuaries of Hilton Head Island are the feeding grounds , breeding grounds , and nurseries for many saltwater species of game fish , sport fish , and marine mammals . The dense plankton population gives the coastal water its murky brown @-@ green coloration . 
 Plankton support marine life including oysters , shrimp and other invertebrates , and bait @-@ fish species including menhaden and mullet , which in turn support larger fish and mammal species that populate the local waterways . Popular sport fish in the Hilton Head Island area include the red drum ( or spot tail bass ) , spotted sea trout , sheepshead , <unk> , tarpon , and various shark species . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 37 @,@ 099 people , 16 @,@ 535 households , and 10 @,@ 700 families residing in the town , occupying a land area of 42 @.@ 06 square miles ( 109 km2 ) . The population density was 882 @.@ 0 people per square mile ( 340 @.@ 4 / km ² ) . There were 33 @,@ 602 housing units at an average density of 798 @.@ 9 per square mile ( 308 @.@ 3 / km ² ) . 
 Although the town occupies most of the land area of the island , it is not coterminous with it ; there is a small part near the main access road from the mainland , William Hilton Parkway , which is not incorporated into the town . Hilton Head ( the island ) therefore has a slightly higher population ( 48 @,@ 407 in Census 2000 , defined as the Hilton Head Island Urban Cluster ) and a larger land area ( 42 @.@ 65 sq mi or 110 @.@ 5 km2 ) than the town . The Hilton Head Island @-@ Bluffton Beaufort Metropolitan Statistical Area , which includes Beaufort and Jasper counties , had a 2012 estimated year @-@ round population of 193 @,@ 882 . 
 The racial makeup of the town was 82 @.@ 9 % White , 7 @.@ 5 % African American , 0 @.@ 2 % Native American , 0 @.@ 9 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 7 @.@ 3 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 2 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 15 @.@ 8 % of the population . 
 There were 16 @,@ 535 households in which 18 @.@ 4 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 54 @.@ 7 % were married couples living together , 6 @.@ 8 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 35 @.@ 3 % were non @-@ families . 28 @.@ 3 % of all households were made up of individuals and 14 @.@ 0 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 23 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 66 . 
 In the town the population was spread out with 18 % under the age of 20 , 4 @.@ 4 % from 20 to 24 , 20 @.@ 4 % from 25 to 44 , 28 @.@ 4 % from 45 to 64 , and 28 @.@ 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 50 @.@ 9 years . For every 100 females there were 103 @.@ 8 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 105 @.@ 5 males . 
 According to a 2014 estimate , the median income for a household in the town was $ 68 @,@ 437 , and the median income for a family was $ 85 @,@ 296 . Males had a median income of $ 51 @,@ 463 versus $ 36 @,@ 743 for females . The per capita income for the town was $ 45 @,@ 116 . About 5 @.@ 4 % of families and 9 @.@ 3 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 16 @.@ 9 % of those under age 18 and 3 @.@ 9 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = Emergency services = = 
 Hilton Head Island Fire & Rescue began operations July 1 , 1993 , as a consolidation of the former Sea Pines Forest Beach Fire Department , the Hilton Head Island Fire District , and the Hilton Head Island Rescue Squad . It is a career department that provides fire suppression and emergency medical services ( EMS ) at the advanced life support level . Special operations capabilities include HAZMAT , urban search and rescue ( USAR ) , confined space rescue , trench rescue , and rope rescue . The department is accredited by the Commission on Fire Accreditation International ( <unk> ) . 
 There are seven fire stations on Hilton Head Island , providing professional fire protection and emergency medical care . 
 Station 1 : 70 <unk> Parkway – ( in Shipyard Plantation near the Pope Avenue entrance ) 
 Station 2 : 65 Lighthouse Road – ( in Sea Pines Resort between Frazer Circle and Harbour Town ) 
 Station 3 : 534 William Hilton Parkway – ( across from Port Royal Plantation next to First Presbyterian Church ) 
 Station 4 : 400 Squire Pope Road – ( near the back gate of Hilton Head Plantation ) 
 Station 5 : 20 <unk> Crane Way – ( near the front gate of Hilton Head Plantation ) 
 Station 6 : 16 Queen 's Folly Road – ( in the front of Palmetto Dunes under the water tower ) 
 Station 7 : 1001 Marshland Road – ( by the toll booths of the Cross Island Parkway ) 
 Fire & Rescue Headquarters : 40 Summit Drive – ( general aviation entrance to the airport off Dillon Road , next to the convenience center ) 
 Hilton Head Island Fire & Rescue works with Bluffton Township Fire Department as a sponsoring agency for two of South Carolina 's designated special teams : one of the state 's Hazardous Materials / Weapons of Mass Destruction Response Teams and one of the four Regional Urban Search and Rescue Response Teams . 
 Police services are contracted through Beaufort County Sheriff 's Office . The island is equipped with an enhanced 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 system . 
 = = Economy = = 
 According to Hilton Head Island 's 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report , the top employers in the town are : 
 = = Facilities and structures = = 
 = = = <unk> communities = = = 
 Hilton Head Plantation 
 Indigo Run Plantation 
 Long Cove Plantation 
 Palmetto Hall Plantation 
 Port Royal Plantation 
 Sea Pines Resort 
 Shipyard Plantation 
 Spanish Pointe 
 Spanish Wells plantation 
 Wexford Plantation 
 Windmill Harbour 
 Victoria Square 
 Ashton Cove 
 Bermuda Pointe 
 Yacht Cove 
 Palmetto Dunes 
 = = = Public beach access = = = 
 Alder Lane Beach Access – 22 metered spaces 
 Burkes Beach Access – 13 metered spaces 
 Coligny Beach Park — parking is free — some parking reserved for annual beach passes from 8 : 00 a.m. to 3 : 00 p.m. 
 Driessen Beach Park – 207 long term parking spaces — some parking reserved for annual beach passes from 8 : 00 a.m. to 3 : 00 p.m. 
 Fish Haul Park — parking is free 
 Folly Field Beach Park – 51 metered spaces 
 Islanders Beach Park — annual beach pass parking only 
 <unk> Beach Park — parking is free 
 = = = Island parks = = = 
 = = = Schools = = = 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the popular television series A Different World , Whitley Gilbert 's parents have a summer home there . 
 In " Big Trouble in Little Langley " , a 2007 episode of American Dad ! , Francine 's birth parents Nick and Cassandra Dawson live there . 
 In the book By Order of the President , by W. E. B. Griffin , the President of the United States maintains a home on Hilton Head Island . This is where Charlie Castillo meets the President for the first time . 
 In the 2012 movie Parental Guidance ( starring Billy Crystal , Bette Midler , and Marisa Tomei ) , the parents visit Hilton Head Island for a conference . Aerial pans of Harbor Town are shown . 
 In the science fiction franchise <unk> , the headquarters of the interstellar telecommunications organization " <unk> " are located on Hilton Head Island . 
 In the first season of the ABC Family television mystery @-@ thriller series Pretty Little Liars , main character Alison <unk> ( Sasha <unk> ) had a mysterious stay in a resort on the island shortly before her disappearance . 
 = Giselle = 
 Giselle ( French : Giselle , ou les Wilis ) is a romantic ballet in two acts . It was first performed by the Ballet du Théâtre de l 'Académie Royale de Musique at the Salle Le Peletier in Paris , France on Monday , 28 June 1841 , with Italian ballerina Carlotta Grisi as Giselle . The ballet was an unqualified triumph . Giselle became hugely popular and was staged at once across Europe , Russia , and the United States . The traditional choreography that has been passed down to the present day derives primarily from the revivals staged by Marius Petipa during the late 19th and early 20th centuries for the Imperial Ballet in St. Petersburg . 
 The ballet is about a peasant girl named Giselle , who dies of a broken heart after discovering her lover is betrothed to another . The Wilis , a group of supernatural women who dance men to death , summon Giselle from her grave . They target her lover for death , but Giselle 's great love frees him from their grasp . 
 <unk> Jules @-@ Henri Vernoy de Saint @-@ Georges and Théophile Gautier took their inspiration for the plot from a prose passage about the Wilis in De l 'Allemagne , by Heinrich Heine , and from a poem called " <unk> " in Les Orientales by Victor Hugo . 
 The prolific opera and ballet composer Adolphe Adam composed the music . Jean Coralli and Jules Perrot created the choreography . The role of Giselle was intended for Carlotta Grisi as her debut piece for the Paris public . She became the first to dance the role and was the only ballerina to dance it at the Opéra for many years . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 The following plot summary is that of the first performances in Paris with Grisi in the title role . The plot changed slightly in details as the years passed . 
 The ballet opens on a sunny autumnal morning in the Rhineland during the Middle Ages . The grape harvest is in progress . Duke Albrecht of Silesia , a young nobleman , has fallen in love with a shy and beautiful peasant girl , Giselle , despite being betrothed to Bathilde , the daughter of the Duke of Courtland . Albrecht disguises himself as a humble villager called " Loys " in order to woo the innocent Giselle , who knows nothing of his true identity . With the help of his squire , Albrecht hides his fine attire and sword before coaxing Giselle out of her house to romance her as the harvest festivities begin . 
 Hilarion , a local gamekeeper , is also in love with Giselle and is highly suspicious of the newcomer " Loys " who has won Giselle 's affections . He tries to convince the naive Giselle that her beau cannot be trusted , but she ignores his warnings . Giselle 's mother , Berthe , is very protective of her daughter , as Giselle has a weak heart that leaves her in delicate health . She discourages a relationship between Giselle and Loys , and disapproves of Giselle 's fondness for dancing . 
 A party of noblemen seeking refreshment following the rigors of the hunt arrive in the village . Albrecht hurries away , knowing he will be recognized by Bathilde , who is in attendance . The villagers welcome the party , offer them drinks , and perform several dances . Bathilde is charmed with Giselle 's sweet and demure nature , not knowing of her relationship with Albrecht . Giselle is honored when the beautiful stranger offers her a necklace as a gift before the group of nobles depart . 
 The villagers continue the harvest festivities , and Albrecht emerges again to dance with Giselle , who is named the Harvest Queen . Hilarion interrupts the festivities . He has discovered Albrecht 's finely made sword and presents it as proof that the lovesick peasant boy is really a nobleman who is promised to another woman . Using Albrecht 's hunting horn , Hilarion calls back the party of noblemen . Albrecht has no time to hide and has no choice but to greet Bathilde as his betrothed . All are shocked by the revelation but none more than Giselle , who becomes inconsolable when faced with her lover 's deception . Knowing that they can never be together , Giselle flies into a mad fit of grief in which all the tender moments she shared with " Loys " flash before her eyes . She begins to dance erratically , causing her weak heart to give out . She dies in Albrecht 's arms . Hilarion and Albrecht turn on each other in rage before Albrecht flees the scene in misery . The curtain closes as Berthe weeps over her daughter 's body . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 Late at night , Hilarion mourns at Giselle 's grave in the forest , but is frightened away by the arrival of the Wilis , the ghostly spirits of maidens betrayed by their lovers . The Wilis , led by their merciless queen Myrtha , haunt the forest at night to seek revenge on any man they encounter , forcing their victims to dance until they die of exhaustion . 
 Myrtha and the Wilis rouse Giselle 's spirit from her grave and induct her into their clan before disappearing into the forest . Albrecht arrives to lay flowers on Giselle 's grave and he weeps with guilt over her death . Giselle 's spirit appears and Albrecht begs her forgiveness . Giselle , her love undiminished , gently forgives him . She disappears to join the rest of the Wilis and Albrecht desperately follows her . 
 Meanwhile , the Wilis have cornered a terrified Hilarion . They use their magic to force him to dance until he is nearly dead , and then drown him in a nearby lake . Then they turn on Albrecht , sentencing him to death as well . He pleads to Myrtha for his life , but she coldly refuses . Giselle 's pleas are also dismissed and Albrecht is forced to dance until sunrise . However , the power of Giselle 's love counters the Wilis ' magic and spares his life . The other spirits return to their graves at daybreak , but Giselle has broken through the chains of hatred and vengeance that control the Wilis , and is thus released from their powers . After bidding a tender farewell to Albrecht , Giselle returns to her grave to rest in peace . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French Revolution ( 1789 – 1799 ) brought sweeping changes to theatre in France . Banished were the ballets the aristocracy preferred about the gods and goddesses of Mount Olympus . Instead , ballets about everyday people , real places , real time , the historical past , and the supernatural took prominence . These sorts of ballets were preferred by the burgeoning middle class . 
 Two ballets caused great excitement in Paris in the 1830s . In November 1831 , Meyerbeer 's opera Robert le diable had its first performance . It featured a short ballet called Ballet of the Nuns . In this little ballet , scantily clad nuns rise from their graves to dance wantonly in the moonlight . The public loved this little supernatural ballet . 
 In March 1832 , the ballet La Sylphide debuted in Paris . This ballet is about a beautiful sylph who loves James , a young Scotsman . Tragedy occurs . After dallying in the woods , the sylph dies when her earthly lover uses a bewitched scarf to trap her . This ballet brought Marie Taglioni before the French public . She was the first to dance en pointe for artistic reasons rather than spectacle and was also the first to wear the white , bell @-@ shaped , calf @-@ length ballet skirt now considered an essential feature of the romantic ballet . Poet and critic Théophile Gautier attended the first performance of La Sylphide . His ideas for Giselle would show touches of La Sylphide ten years later . It would be set in a real place and in the past , for example , and would be about everyday people and supernatural women . 
 = = Development = = 
 In an 1841 news article announcing the first performance of Giselle , Théophile Gautier recorded his part in the creation of the ballet . He had read Heinrich Heine 's description of the Wilis in De l 'Allemagne and thought these evil spirits would make a " pretty ballet " . He planned their story for Act II and settled upon a verse by Victor Hugo called " <unk> " to provide the inspiration for Act I. This verse is about a beautiful 15 @-@ year @-@ old Spanish girl who loves to dance . She becomes too warm at a ball and dies of a chill in the cool morning . 
 Heine 's prose passage in De l 'Allemagne tells of supernatural young women called the Wilis . They have died before their wedding day and rise from their graves in the middle of the night to dance . Any young man who crosses their path is forced to dance to his death . In another book , the Wilis are said to be jilted young women who have died and become vampires . This is assumed to be the reason that they hate men . 
 Gautier thought Heine 's Wilis and Hugo 's fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Spanish girl would make a good ballet story . His first idea was to present an empty ballroom glittering with crystal and candlelight . The Wilis would cast a spell over the floor . Giselle and other dancers would enter and whirl through the room , unable to resist the spell to keep them dancing . Giselle would try to keep her lover from partnering other girls . The Queen of the Wilis would enter , lay her cold hand on Giselle 's heart and the girl would drop dead . 
 Gautier was not satisfied with this story . It was basically a succession of dances with one moment of drama at its end . He had no experience writing ballet scenarios so he called upon Vernoy de St. Georges , a man who had written many ballet librettos . St. Georges liked Gautier 's basic idea of the frail young girl and the Wilis . He wrote the story of Giselle as it is known today in three days , and sent it to Léon Pillet , the director of the Paris Opéra . Pillet needed a good story to introduce Grisi to the Paris public . He found that story in Giselle . Grisi liked it as much as Pillet did , so Giselle was put into production at once . 
 = = First performance = = 
 The <unk> of Paris became very excited as the opening night of Giselle approached . News reports kept their interest alive . Some reports said that Grisi has had an accident whilst other reports indicated that the conductor was ill with a tumor . Still others said that the stage hands feared for their safety . 
 Hopes that the ballet would be ready in May were dashed and the opening night was postponed several times . Grisi was absent for a few days and her return was delayed to protect her health . Lighting , trapdoors , and scene changes needed further rehearsals . Cuts were made in Grisi 's role to spare the dancer 's health . Instead of returning to her tomb at the end of the ballet , it was decided that she would be placed on a bed of flowers and sink slowly into the earth . This touch preserved the romantic mood of the Act II finale . 
 At last , on Monday , 28 June 1841 the curtain rose on Giselle at the Salle Le Peletier . Grisi danced Giselle with Lucien Petipa as her lover Albrecht , Jean Coralli as the gamekeeper Hilarion , and Adèle Dumilâtre as Myrtha , the Queen of the Wilis . Typical of the theatrical practices of the time , Giselle was preceded by an excerpt from another production — in this case , the third act of Rossini 's opera , <unk> in Egitto . 
 In spite of the chief machinist shouting orders to his crew that could be heard by the audience , Giselle was a great success . Grisi was a sensation . Ballet @-@ goers regarded her as another Marie Taglioni , the greatest ballerina of the period . 
 = = Contemporary reviews and comments = = 
 Giselle was a great artistic and commercial success . Le Constitutionnel praised Act II for its " poetic effects " . Moniteur des théâtres wrote that Grisi " runs [ and ] flies across the stage like a gazelle in love " . One critic made a detailed analysis of the music in La France Musicale . He thought the Act I waltz " ravishing " and noted that the scene of Berthe 's narrative was filled with " quite new " harmonic modulations . He praised other moments in Act I ( especially the mad scene ) , and was in raptures with the music of Act II , singling out the entrance of the Wilis and the viola solo played through Giselle 's last moments . He thought the flute and harp music accompanying Giselle as she disappeared into her grave at ballet 's end " full of tragic beauty . " 
 Coralli was praised for the Act I peasant pas de deux and for the " elegance " of Act II . Coralli followed a suggestion made by Gautier and picked the most beautiful girls in the company to play the peasants and the Wilis . One observer thought the selection process cruel : the almost @-@ beautiful girls were turned away without a second thought . 
 Grisi and Petipa were great successes as the tragic lovers . Gautier praised their performance in Act II , writing that the two dancers made the act " a real poem , a choreographic elegy full of charm and tenderness ... More than one eye that thought it was seeing only [ dance ] was surprised to find its vision obscured by a tear — something that does not often happen in a ballet ... Grisi danced with a perfection ... that places her in the ranks between <unk> and Taglioni ... Her miming surpassed every expectation ... She is nature and <unk> personified . " 
 Adam thought Petipa " charming " as both dancer and actor , and that he had " rehabilitated " male dancing with his performance . Of Dumilâtre he wrote , " ... in spite of her coldness , [ Dumilâtre ] deserved the success she achieved by the correctness and the ' mythological ' quality of her poses : perhaps this word may seem a little pretentious , but I can think of no other to express such cold and noble dancing as would suit Minerva in a merry mood , and in this respect [ Dumilâtre ] seems to bear a strong resemblance to that goddess . " 
 Giselle made 6500 francs between June and September 1841 . This was twice the amount for the same time period in 1839 . Grisi 's salary was increased to make her the top earner among the dancers at the Opéra . Souvenirs were sold , pictures of Grisi as Giselle were printed , and sheet music arrangements were made for social dancing . The sculptor Emile Thomas made a statuette of Giselle in her Act II costume . A silk cloth was manufactured called <unk> Giselle , and Madame <unk> , a milliner , sold an artificial flower called ' Giselle ' . The ballet was parodied at the Théâtre du Palais @-@ Royal in October 1841 . 
 = = Music = = 
 Adolphe Adam was a popular writer of ballet and opera music in early 19th @-@ century France . He wrote with great speed and completed Giselle in about two months . The music was written in the smooth , song @-@ like style of the day called <unk> . This style is well known to music lovers from Bellini 's opera Norma and Donizetti 's Lucia di Lammermoor . 
 Adam used several leitmotifs in the ballet . This is a short musical phrase that is associated with a certain character , event , or idea . Adam 's leitmotifs are heard several times throughout the ballet . There is a leitmotif associated with Giselle and another with Albrecht . Hilarion 's motif marks his every entrance . It suggests the Fate theme in Beethoven 's Fifth Symphony . 
 Another leitmotif is associated with the " he loves me , he loves me not " flower test in Act I , which is heard again in the mad scene , and in Act II when Giselle offers flowers to Albrecht . The Wilis have their own motif . It is heard in the overture , in Act I when Berthe tells the story of the Wilis , and in the mad scene . It is heard again in Act II when the Wilis make their first entrance . The hunting horn motif marks sudden surprises . This motif is heard when Albrecht is exposed as a nobleman . 
 The music was completely original . A critic noted , however , that Adam had borrowed eight bars from a romance by a Miss Puget and three bars from the huntsman 's chorus in Carl Maria von Weber 's opera <unk> . 
 One dance historian wrote : 
 By no stretch of the imagination can the score of Giselle be called great music , but it cannot be denied that it is admirably suited to its purpose . It is danceable , and it has colour and mood attuned to the various dramatic situations ... As we listen today to these haunting melodies composed over a century ago , we quickly become conscious of their intense nostalgic quality , not unlike the opening of a Victorian Keepsake , between whose pages lies an admirably preserved Valentine — in all the glory of its intricate paper lace and symbolic floral designs — which whispers of a leisured age now forever past . For a brief space the air seems faintly perfumed with <unk> violet and gardenia . The music of Giselle still exerts its magic . 
 = = = Additions to the score = = = 
 Adam 's score for Giselle acquired several additional numbers over the course of its history , with some of these pieces becoming an integral part of the ballet 's performance tradition . 
 Immediately following the first <unk> générale of Giselle on the stage of the Paris Opéra , the danseuse Nathalie Fitz @-@ James used her influence as the mistress of an influential patron of the theatre to have a pas inserted for herself into the ballet . Jean Coralli was required to quickly arrange a number for Fitz @-@ James , which was arranged by Coralli as a pas de deux with the <unk> Auguste <unk> serving as Fitz @-@ James 's partner . Coralli 's original intentions were to have the ballet 's composer Adolphe Adam supply the music for Fitz @-@ James 's pas , but by this time Adam was unavailable . In light of this , Coralli chose a suite by the composer Friedrich <unk> 's titled Souvenirs de <unk> to fashion music for Fitz @-@ James 's required pas . This pas de deux , which was dubbed the Pas des <unk> ( or Peasant pas de deux ) , became part of the ballet 's performance tradition . 
 For Carlotta Grisi 's performances as Giselle with the Imperial Ballet in St. Petersburg , Perrot commissioned the composer Cesare Pugni to score a new pas de cinq for the ballerina that was added to the first tableau . This pas was only retained for Grisi 's performances and never performed again after her departure from St. Petersburg . Marius Petipa would also commission an additional piece for the first tableau of the ballet . This was a pas de deux from the composer Ludwig Minkus that was added to the choreographer 's 1884 revival for the ballerina Maria <unk> . As with Pugni 's 1850 pas de cinq for Grisi , <unk> 's 1884 pas de deux by Minkus never became part of the performance tradition of Giselle . 
 Three solo variations were added to the ballet by Petipa during the latter half of the 19th century . The first was arranged in 1867 for the grand pas de deux of the second tableau for the ballerina Adèle <unk> . The music was composed by Cesare Pugni and was based on Adolphe Adam 's " he loves me , he loves me not " leitmotif . This variation has been retained in the ballet ever since . 
 The second variation was added by Petipa to the first tableau for the ballerina Emma <unk> 's début as Giselle at the Mariinsky Theatre in 1886 , and on this occasion the composer Riccardo <unk> wrote the music for the variation . The music was never used again after <unk> 's departure from Russia until Agrippina <unk> added it to the Peasant pas de deux for the Kirov Ballet 's production of Giselle in 1932 . The inclusion of this variation in the Peasant pas de deux remains part of the Mariinsky Theatre 's performance tradition of Giselle to the present day . 
 The third variation added by Petipa was also composed by <unk> and has survived as one of the most beloved passages of Giselle . This variation , sometimes dubbed as the Pas seul , was arranged in 1887 for the ballerina Elena Cornalba . The variation was also danced by Cornalba 's successors in the role of Giselle at the Mariinsky Theatre . Cornalba 's variation was first performed outside of Russia by Olga <unk> in 1924 at the Paris Opéra , and from then on all productions staged outside of Russia included the variation . There was much confusion at that time as to who was responsible for composing the music , leading many ballet historians and musicologists to credit Ludwig Minkus as the author , a misconception which still persists . 
 = = Choreography = = 
 Jean Coralli and Jules Perrot choreographed the original version of Giselle . Perrot and Carlotta Grisi were lovers and , consequently , Perrot designed all of her dances and pantomime . Everyone in the Paris dance world knew that Perrot had created Grisi 's dances and Coralli admitted it , but Perrot was given no official credit in the printed materials such as posters and programs . This was most likely done to prevent Perrot from collecting royalties on the ballet . Perrot liked bold touches and planned several rapid aerial swoops on wires in Act II for Giselle . Grisi was afraid of these swoops , therefore a stage hand was brought in to test them . He crashed face @-@ first into the scenery and the swoops were dropped . 
 Cyril Beaumont writes that Giselle is made up of two elements : dance and mime . Act I features short mimed scenes , he points out , and episodes of dancing which are fused with mime . In Act II , mime has become fused entirely with dance . He indicates that the choreographic vocabulary is composed of a small number of simple steps : 
 Movements : <unk> , grand rond de jambe 
 Poses : arabesque , attitude 
 Gliding steps : chasse , <unk> , pas de basque , pas de bourrée 
 Hopping steps : <unk> , temps <unk> 
 Turning steps : pirouette , petit tour , tour en l 'air 
 Leaping steps : ( vertical ) <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , rond de jambe en l 'air <unk> , ( horizontal ) <unk> , <unk> , grande <unk> , <unk> 
 Beaumont speculates that the simple steps were deliberately planned to allow the " utmost expressiveness . " 
 Parts of Giselle have been cut or changed since the ballet 's first night . Giselle 's Act I pantomime scene in which she tells Albrecht of her strange dream is cut and the peasant pas de deux is also slightly cut back . The Duke of Courland and his daughter Bathilde used to make their entrance on horseback , but today they walk on . In the original production they were present at Giselle 's death , but now they leave the scene before she dies . The machines used to make Giselle fly and to make her disappear are no longer employed . A trapdoor is sometimes utilized to make Giselle rise from her grave and then sink into it at the end of Act II . At the end of Act II Bathilde formerly entered with the courtiers to search for Albrecht . He took a few unsteady steps toward them and then collapsed into their arms . This moment was an artistic parallel to the Act I finale when the peasants gathered about the dead Giselle . Now , Bathilde and the courtiers are cut and Albrecht slowly leaves the stage alone . 
 = = Ethnic elements = = 
 Ethnic music , dance , and costume were a large part of romantic ballet . At the time Giselle was written , people thought of Germany when they heard a waltz because the waltz is of German origin . Giselle makes her first entrance to the music of a waltz , and the audience would have known at once that the ballet was set in Germany . Adam wrote three waltzes for Giselle : two for Giselle and one for the Wilis . He said that the " Giselle Waltz " in Act I has " all the German color indicated by the locality " and people agreed . One critic wrote : " A lovely waltz ... in the Germanic spirit of the subject " . 
 At first , Gautier thought that some of the dancers in the waltz for the Wilis should dress in ethnic costume and dance ethnic steps . Adam put bits of French , Spanish , German , and Indian @-@ sounding music in the waltz for this purpose . Gautier 's " ethnic " idea was dropped as the ballet developed and it has not been picked up by modern producers . Today , Act II is a ballet blanc ( a " white " ballet in which all the ballerinas and the corps de ballet are dressed in full , white , bell @-@ shaped skirts and the dances have a geometric design ) . 
 = = Sets and costumes = = 
 The historical period for Giselle is not indicated in the story . Paul Lormier , the chief costume designer at the Paris Opéra , probably consulted Gautier on this matter . It is also possible that Pillet had the ballet 's budget in mind and decided to use the many Renaissance @-@ style costumes in the Opéra 's wardrobe for Giselle . These costumes were said to have been those from Rossini 's William Tell ( 1829 ) and Berlioz 's Benvenuto Cellini ( 1838 ) . Lormier certainly designed the costumes for the principal characters . His costumes were in use at the Opéra until the ballet was dropped from the repertoire in 1853 . 
 Giselle was revived in 1863 with new costumes by Lormier 's assistant , Alfred Albert . Albert 's costumes are closer to those of modern productions than those of Lormier , and were in use at the opera until 1868 . The ballet was revived again in 1924 with scenery and costumes by Alexandre Benois . He wanted to revive the costumes of the original production but dropped the idea , believing the critics would charge him with a lack of imaginative creativity . 
 = = = Sets = = = 
 Pierre Luc Charles Ciceri was the chief set designer at the Paris Opéra from 1815 to 1847 . He designed the sets for the first production of Giselle . Gautier was not specific about the ballet 's locale , but placed it in " some mysterious corner of Germany ... on the other side of the Rhine " . 
 Giselle was two months in rehearsal , which was a very long rehearsal time for the period . Even so , Ciceri did not have enough time to design sets for both acts and focused on the second act . The sets for the first act were actually those designed for the 1838 ballet , La Fille du Danube by Adam . An illustration from Les <unk> de l 'Opera of 1845 shows Giselle 's cottage with a roof of straw on the left and Albrecht 's cottage on the right . The two cottages are framed by the branches of two large trees on either sides of the stage . Between the two cottages , in the distance , appears a castle and slopes covered with vineyards . Although this scene was not designed for Giselle , it has remained the model for most modern productions . Ciceri 's set was in use until the ballet was dropped from the repertoire in 1853 . At that time , Gautier noticed that the sets were falling apart : " Giselle 's cottage has barely three or four straws on its roof . " 
 The Act II illustration from Les <unk> shows a dark wood with a pool of water in the distance . The branches of aged trees create a tree tunnel . Beneath these branches on the left is a marble cross with ' Giselle ' carved on it . From one of its arms hangs the crown of grape leaves Giselle wore as Queen of the Vintage . On the stage , thick weeds and wildflowers ( 200 bulrushes and 120 branches of flowers ) were the undergrowth . The gas jets of the footlights and those overhead suspended in the flies were turned low to create a mood of mystery and terror . 
 A circular hole was cut into the backdrop and covered with a transparent material . A strong light behind this hole represented the moon . The light was occasionally manipulated to suggest the passage of clouds . Gautier and St. Georges wanted the pool to be made of large mirrors but Pillet rejected this idea because of its cost . In the 1868 revival , however , mirrors were acquired for this scene . 
 Adam thought Ciceri 's backdrop for Act I was " not so good ... it is all weak and pale " but he liked the set for Act II : " [ Ciceri 's ] second act is a delight , a dark humid forest filled with bulrushes and wild flowers , and ending with a sunrise , seen at first through the trees at the end of the piece , and very magical in its effect . " The sunrise also delighted the critics . 
 = = Early productions = = 
 Giselle was performed in Paris from its debut in 1841 to 1849 , with Grisi always dancing the title role . In 1849 , it was dropped from the repertoire . The ballet was revived in 1852 and 1853 , without Grisi , then dropped from the repertoire after 1853 . It was revived in 1863 for a Russian ballerina , then dropped again in 1868 . It was revived almost 50 years later in 1924 for the debut of Olga <unk> . This production was revived in 1932 and 1938 . 
 Giselle was mounted by other ballet companies in Europe and America almost immediately after its first night . The British had their first taste of Giselle with a drama based on the ballet called Giselle , or The Phantom Night Dancers by William Moncrieff , who had seen the ballet in Paris the same year . The play was performed on 23 August 1841 at the Theatre Royal , Sadler 's Wells . The actual ballet was first staged in London at Her Majesty 's Theatre on 12 March 1842 with Grisi as Giselle and Perrot as Albrecht . The dances were credited to Perrot and one <unk> . This production was revived many times , once in 1884 with a Mlle. <unk> in the role of Albrecht . This production , preceded by an operetta called Pocahontas , met with little enthusiasm . 
 The ballet was staged by Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes in 1911 at the Royal Opera , Covent Garden , with Tamara Karsavina and Nijinsky as Giselle and Albrecht . Anna Pavlova danced Giselle with her own company in 1913 . Alicia Markova danced the role with the Vic @-@ Wells Ballet in 1934 , and Margot Fonteyn took the role in 1937 when Markova left the company . The English loved Giselle . In 1942 , for example , three different companies were dancing the ballet in London . 
 Giselle was first performed in Russia at the Bolshoi Theatre , St. Petersburg , on 18 December 1842 . Stepan <unk> , the Director of the St. Petersburg Imperial Theatres , sent his ballet master Antoine Titus to Paris to find a new ballet for ballerina Yelena <unk> . Titus chose Giselle . The Ballet Master then staged the work completely from memory in St. Petersburg . Perrot produced Giselle in St. Petersburg in 1851 . He made many changes to the ballet in his years of service to the Imperial Ballet . In the 1880s , Petipa made many changes to the Perrot production . 
 Giselle was first staged in Italy at Teatro alla Scala in Milan on 17 January 1843 . The music however was not Adam 's but that of Niccolò <unk> . The dances were not the original either but those of Antonio <unk> . It is possible that the ballet was first staged in the provincial theatres . This , however , is not known with certainty . 
 In 1844 , American ballerina Mary Ann Lee arrived in Paris to study with Coralli for a year . She returned to the United States in 1841 with the directions for Giselle and other ballets . Lee was the first to present Giselle in the United States . She did this on 1 January 1846 in Boston at the Howard Athenæum . George Washington Smith played Albrecht . Lee danced Giselle ( again with Smith ) on 13 April 1846 at the Park Theatre in New York City . 
 In a departure from the traditional Giselle , Frederic Franklin restaged the ballet in 1984 as Creole Giselle for the Dance Theatre of Harlem . This adaptation set the ballet among the Creoles and African Americans in 1840s Louisiana . 
 = Bertie the Brain = 
 Bertie the Brain was an early computer game , and one of the first games developed in the early history of video games . It was built in Toronto by Josef Kates for the 1950 Canadian National Exhibition . The four meter tall computer allowed exhibition attendees to play a game of tic @-@ tac @-@ toe against an artificial intelligence . The player entered a move on a lit keypad in the form of a three @-@ by @-@ three grid , and the game played out on a grid of lights overhead . The machine had an adjustable difficulty level . After two weeks on display by Rogers Majestic , the machine was disassembled at the end of the exhibition and largely forgotten as a curiosity . 
 Kates built the game to showcase his additron tube , a miniature version of the vacuum tube , though the transistor overtook it in computer development shortly thereafter . Patent issues prevented the additron tube from being used in computers besides Bertie before it was no longer useful . Bertie the Brain is a candidate for the first video game , as it was potentially the first computer game to have any sort of visual display of the game . It appeared only three years after the 1947 invention of the cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device , the earliest known interactive electronic game to use an electronic display . Bertie 's use of lightbulbs rather than a screen with real @-@ time visual graphics , however , much less moving graphics , does not meet some definitions of a video game . 
 = = History = = 
 Bertie the Brain was a computer game of tic @-@ tac @-@ toe , built by Dr. Josef Kates for the 1950 Canadian National Exhibition . Kates had previously worked at Rogers Majestic designing and building radar tubes during World War II , then after the war pursued graduate studies in the computing center at the University of Toronto while continuing to work at Rogers Majestic . While there , he helped build the University of Toronto Electronic Computer ( UTEC ) , one of the first working computers in the world . He also designed his own miniature version of the vacuum tube , called the additron tube , which he registered with the Radio Electronics Television Manufacturers ' Association on 20 March 1951 as type <unk> . 
 After filing for a patent for the additron tube , Rogers Majestic pushed Kates to create a device to showcase the tube to potential buyers . Kates designed a specialized computer incorporating the technology and built it with the assistance of engineers from Rogers Majestic . The large , four meter tall metal computer could only play tic @-@ tac @-@ toe and was installed in the Engineering Building at the Canadian National Exhibition from 25 August – 9 September 1950 . 
 The additron @-@ based computer , labeled as " Bertie the Brain " and subtitled " The Electronic Wonder by Rogers Majestic " , was a success at the two @-@ week exhibition , with attendees lining up to play it . Kates stayed by the machine when possible , adjusting the difficulty up or down for adults and children . Comedian Danny Kaye was photographed defeating the machine ( after several attempts ) for Life magazine . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Bertie the Brain was a game of tic @-@ tac @-@ toe in which the player would select the position for their next move from a grid of nine lit buttons on a raised panel . The moves would appear on a grid of nine large squares set vertically on the machine as well as on the buttons , with either an <unk> or O @-@ shaped light turning on in the corresponding space . The computer would make its move shortly after . A pair of signs to the right of the playfield , alternately lit up with " Electronic Brain " and an X or " Human Brain " and an O , marked which player 's turn it was , and would light up along with " Win " when a player had won . Bertie could be set to several difficulty levels . The computer responded almost instantly to the player 's moves and at the highest difficulty level was almost unbeatable . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the exhibition , Bertie was dismantled and " largely forgotten " as a novelty . Kates has said that he was working on so many projects at the same time that he had no energy to spare for preserving it , despite its significance . Despite being the first implemented computer game — preceded only by theorized chess programs — and featured in a Life magazine article , the game was largely forgotten , even by video game history books . Bertie 's primary purpose , to promote the additron tube , went unfulfilled , as it was the only completed application of the technology . By the time Rogers Majestic pushed Kates to develop a working model for the Exhibition , he had been working on the tubes for a year , developing several revisions , and the University of Toronto team felt that the development was too slow to attempt to integrate them into the UTEC . 
 Although other firms expressed interest to Kates and Rogers Majestic in using the tubes , issues with acquiring patents prevented him , Rogers Majestic , or the University of Toronto from patenting the tubes anywhere outside Canada until 1955 , and the patent application was not accepted in the United States until March 1957 , six years after filing . By then , research and use of vacuum tubes was heavily waning in the face of the rise of the superior transistor , preventing any re @-@ visitation of Bertie or similar machines . Kates went on to a distinguished career in Canadian engineering , but did not return to working on vacuum tubes or computer games . 
 Bertie was created only three years after the 1947 invention of the cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device , the earliest known interactive electronic game , and while non @-@ visual games had been developed for research computers such as Alan Turing and Dietrich Prinz 's chess program for the Ferranti Mark 1 at the University of Manchester , Bertie was the first computer @-@ based game to feature a visual display of any sort . Bertie is considered under some definitions in contention for the title of the first video game . While definitions vary , the prior cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device was a purely analog electrical game , and while Bertie did not feature an electronic screen it did run on a computer . Another special @-@ purpose computer @-@ based game , Nimrod , was built in 1951 , while the software @-@ based tic @-@ tac @-@ toe game OXO and a draughts program by Christopher Strachey were in 1952 the first computer games to display visuals on an electronic screen rather than light bulbs . 
 = SMS Gneisenau = 
 SMS Gneisenau was an armored cruiser of the German navy , part of the two @-@ ship Scharnhorst class . She was named after August von Gneisenau , a Prussian general of the Napoleonic Wars . The ship was laid down in 1904 at the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , launched in June 1906 , and completed in March 1908 , at a cost of over 19 million <unk> . She was armed with a main battery of eight 21 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns , had a top speed of 23 @.@ 6 knots ( 43 @.@ 7 km / h ; 27 @.@ 2 mph ) , and displaced 12 @,@ 985 metric tons ( 12 @,@ 780 long tons ; 14 @,@ 314 short tons ) at full combat load . 
 Gneisenau was assigned to the German East Asia Squadron based in Tsingtao , China , along with Scharnhorst , in 1910 . They served as the core of Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee 's fleet . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the two ships , accompanied by three light cruisers and several colliers , sailed across the Pacific ocean — in the process evading the various Allied naval forces sent to intercept them — before arriving off the southern coast of South America . On 1 November 1914 , Gneisenau and the rest of the East Asia Squadron encountered and overpowered a British squadron at the Battle of Coronel . The stinging defeat prompted the British Admiralty to detach two battlecruisers to hunt down and destroy von Spee 's flotilla , which they accomplished at the Battle of the Falkland Islands on 8 December 1914 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Gneisenau was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , Germany in 1904 , under construction number 144 . She was launched on 14 June 1906 , and commissioned into the fleet nearly two years later on 6 March 1908 . The ship cost the German government 19 @,@ 243 @,@ 000 <unk> . The ship had been designed for service with the High Seas Fleet , though they were found to be too weak for service with the battle fleet ; instead they were deployed overseas , a role in which they performed well . 
 Gneisenau was 144 @.@ 6 metres ( 474 ft ) long overall , and had a beam of 21 @.@ 6 m ( 71 ft ) , a draft of 8 @.@ 4 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) . The ship displaced 11 @,@ 616 metric tons ( 11 @,@ 433 long tons ; 12 @,@ 804 short tons ) standard , and 12 @,@ 985 t ( 12 @,@ 780 long tons ; 14 @,@ 314 short tons ) at full load . Gneisenau 's crew consisted of 38 officers and 726 enlisted men . The ship was powered by coal @-@ fired triple expansion engines that provided a top speed of 23 @.@ 6 knots ( 43 @.@ 7 km / h ; 27 @.@ 2 mph ) 
 Gneisenau 's primary armament consisted of eight 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 2 inch ) SK L / 40 guns , four in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the main superstructure , and the remaining four were mounted in single wing turrets . Secondary armament included six 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns in MPL casemates , and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 inch ) guns mounted in casemates . She was also equipped with four 44 cm ( 17 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , one on each broadside , and the fourth was placed in the stern . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Field Marshal Alfred von Schlieffen , the former Chief of the General staff , christened the ship at her commissioning on 6 March 1908 . Captain Franz von Hipper was the ship 's first commanding officer ; he took command of the ship the day she was commissioned . He was tasked with conducting the ship 's shakedown cruise , which lasted from 26 March to the middle of July . She officially joined the fleet on 12 July . The ship then departed for Asia , though Hipper left the ship and went on to command the I Torpedo @-@ boat Division in Kiel . Gneisenau was assigned to the Ostasiengeschwader ( East Asia Squadron ) , where in 1910 she joined Scharnhorst , which had been assigned to the unit the previous year . The two ships formed the core of the squadron , with Scharnhorst serving as the flagship . The pair were crack gunnery ships ; Gneisenau won the Kaiser 's Cup four times during her career : twice while in German waters in 1908 and 1909 and twice in Asia in 1910 and 1911 , and Scharnhorst 's finished in second place in 1913 and 1914 . 
 In June 1914 , the annual summer cruise of the East Asia Squadron began ; Gneisenau rendezvoused with Scharnhorst in Nagasaki , Japan , where they received a full supply of coal . They then sailed south , arriving in Truk in early July where they restocked their coal supplies . While en route , they received news of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo . On 17 July , the East Asia Squadron arrived in Ponape in the Caroline Islands . Here , von Spee had access to the German radio network , where he learned of the Austro @-@ Hungarian declaration of war on Serbia and the Russian mobilization . On 31 July , word came that the German ultimatum , which demanded the demobilization of Russia 's armies , was set to expire . Von Spee ordered his ships be stripped for war . On 2 August , Kaiser Wilhelm II ordered German mobilization against France and Russia . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I the East Asia Squadron consisted of Gneisenau and Scharnhorst , and the light cruisers Emden , Nürnberg , and Leipzig . On 6 August 1914 , Gneisenau , Scharnhorst , the supply ship Titania , and the Japanese collier <unk> Maru were still in Ponape ; von Spee had issued orders to recall the light cruisers , which had been dispersed on various cruises around the Pacific . Nürnberg joined von Spee that day . Von Spee decided the best place to concentrate his forces was Pagan Island in the northern Marianas Islands , a German possession in the central Pacific . All available colliers , supply ships , and passenger liners were ordered to meet the East Asia Squadron there . On 11 August , von Spee arrived in Pagan ; he was joined by several supply ships , as well as Emden and the auxiliary cruiser Prinz Eitel Friedrich . 
 The flotilla was reinforced with the arrival of Emden and Nürnberg ; the ships then departed the central Pacific , bound for Chile . On 13 August the captain of Emden , Commodore Karl von Müller , persuaded von Spee to detach his ship for commerce raiding . On 14 August , the East Asia Squadron departed Pagan for Enewetak Atoll in the Marshall Islands . The ships again coaled after their arrival on 20 August . In order to keep the German high command informed , von Spee detached Nürnberg on 8 September to Honolulu to send word through neutral countries . Nürnberg brought back news of the Allied capture of the German colony at Samoa on 29 August . Gneisenau and Scharnhorst sailed to Apia to investigate the situation , but on 14 September found no suitable targets . 
 At the Battle of Papeete on 22 September , Gneisenau and the rest of the East Asia Squadron bombarded the colony . During the bombardment , the French gunboat Zélée was sunk by gunfire from the German ships . Fear of mines in the harbor prevented von Spee from seizing the coal that lay in the harbor . By 12 October , Gneisenau and the rest of the squadron had reached Easter Island . There they were joined by Dresden and Leipzig , which had sailed from American waters . Dresden was stationed in the Caribbean , but had been in San Francisco when von Spee issued the order to consolidate German naval forces in the Pacific . After a week off Easter Island , the ships departed for the Chilean mainland . 
 = = = = Battle of Coronel = = = = 
 To oppose the German squadron off the coast of South America , the British had scant resources ; under the command of Rear Admiral Christopher Craddock were the armored cruisers HMS Good Hope and Monmouth , the light cruiser Glasgow , and the auxiliary cruiser Otranto . This flotilla was reinforced by the elderly pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Canopus and the armored cruiser Defence , the latter , however , did not arrive until after the Battle of Coronel . Canopus was left behind by Craddock , who likely felt that her slow speed would prevent him from bringing the German ships to battle . 
 On the evening of 26 October , Gneisenau and the rest of the squadron steamed out of Mas a Fuera , Chile , and headed eastward . Von Spee learned that Glasgow had been spotted in Coronel on the 31st , and so turned toward the port . He arrived on the afternoon of 1 November , and to his surprise , encountered Good Hope , Monmouth , and Otranto as well as Glasgow . Canopus was still some 300 miles ( 480 km ) behind , escorting the British colliers . At 17 : 00 , Glasgow spotted the Germans ; Craddock formed a line with Good Hope in the lead , followed by Monmouth , Glasgow , and Otranto in the rear . Von Spee decided to hold off on engaging the British until the sun had set more , at which point the British ships would be silhouetted by the sun . At this point , Craddock realized the uselessness of Otranto in the line of battle , and so detached her . 
 At 19 : 00 , the German ships closed to attack . In the span of five minutes , the German cruisers ' guns had seriously damaged Good Hope , which was destroyed by a magazine explosion . Monmouth attempted to escape to the south ; she was burning furiously and her guns had fallen silent . Nürnberg closed to point @-@ blank range of Monmouth and poured shells into her . Glasgow was forced to abandon Monmouth after 20 : 20 , before fleeing south and meeting with Canopus . Monmouth eventually capsized and sank at 21 : 18 . Over 1 @,@ 600 men were killed in the sinking of the two armored cruisers , including Admiral Craddock ; German losses were negligible . However , the German ships had expended over 40 % of their ammunition supply . 
 = = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = = 
 Once word of the defeat reached London , the Royal Navy set to organizing a force to hunt down and destroy the East Asia Squadron . To this end , the powerful new battlecruisers Invincible and Inflexible were detached from the Grand Fleet and placed under the command of Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee . The two ships left Devonport on 10 November , and while en route to the Falkland Islands , they were joined by the armored cruisers Carnarvon , Kent , and Cornwall , the light cruisers Bristol and Glasgow , and the Otranto . The force of eight ships reached the Falklands by 7 December , where they immediately coaled . 
 Gneisenau and Nürnberg , the first two ships in the German line , approached the Falklands on the same morning , with the intention of destroying the wireless transmitter there . Observers aboard Gneisenau spotted the two battlecruisers in the harbor of Port Stanley , and when 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) shells were fired from Canopus , which had been beached as a guard ship , the Germans turned to flee . The Germans took a south @-@ easterly course at 22 kn ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . Von Spee formed his line with Gneisenau and Nürnberg ahead , Scharnhorst in the center , and Dresden and Leipzig astern . The fast battlecruisers quickly got up steam and sailed out of the harbor to pursue the East Asia Squadron . 
 By 13 : 20 , the faster British ships had caught up with Gneisenau and the other cruisers , and began to fire at a range of 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) . Von Spee realized his armored cruisers could not escape the much faster battlecruisers , and so ordered the three light cruisers to attempt to break away while he turned about to engage the British with Gneisenau and Scharnhorst . However , Sturdee detached his armored and light cruisers to pursue the German light cruisers , while the battlecruisers dealt with Gneisenau and Scharnhorst . Inflexible attacked Gneisenau while Invincible opened fire at Scharnhorst . Sturdee attempted to widen the distance by turning two points to the north to prevent von Spee from closing to within the range of his smaller 8 @.@ 2 in ( 21 cm ) guns . Von Spee counteracted this maneuver by turning rapidly to the south , which forced Sturdee to turn south as well . This allowed Scharnhorst and Gneisenau to get close enough to engage with their secondary 5 @.@ 9 in ( 15 cm ) guns ; their shooting was so effective that it forced the British to haul away temporarily . 
 At 16 : 04 , Scharnhorst was observed from Inflexible as having rapidly listed to port , and she sank at 16 : 17 . Shortly before she sank , von Spee transmitted one last order to Gneisenau : " Endeavor to escape if your engines are still intact . " Damage to the ship 's boiler rooms had reduced her speed to 16 kn ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) , however , and so the ship continued to fight on . Gneisenau scored a hit on Invincible as late as 17 : 15 . By 17 : 30 , however , the ship was a burning wreck ; she had a severe list to starboard and smoke poured from the ship , which came to a stop . Ten minutes later , the British ships closed in and the flag on Gneisenau 's foremast was struck ; at 17 : 50 , Sturdee ordered his ships to cease fire . Gneisenau 's captain ordered the crew to scuttle the ship , as they had expended their ammunition and the engines were disabled . The ship slowly rolled over and sank , but not before allowing some 200 of the survivors time to escape . Of these men , many died quickly from exposure in the 39 ° F ( 4 ° C ) water . A total of 598 men of her crew were killed in the engagement . Leipzig , and Nürnberg were also sunk . Only Dresden managed to escape , but she was eventually tracked to the Juan Fernandez Island and sunk . The complete destruction of the squadron killed some 2 @,@ 200 German sailors and officers , including two of von Spee 's sons . 
 = The Aenar = 
 " The Aenar " is the fourteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , and originally aired on February 11 , 2005 . It was written by André Bormanis from a story by Manny Coto , and was directed by Mike Vejar . " The Aenar " was the third installment of a three @-@ part story which concluded the events of episodes " Babel One " and " United " . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise . In this episode , Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) and Commander Shran ( Jeffrey Combs ) travel to Andoria , a moon , seeking the help of the Aenar — an offshoot race of the Andorians — one of whom has been taken by the Romulans to pilot a drone vessel ( first seen in the previous episode ) . 
 The episode showed the home world of the Andorians for the first time , with the sets for the planet 's ice tunnels being created on a sound stage . Alexandra Lydon and Alicia Adams made their first Star Trek appearances in " The Aenar " . Reviews of the episode were mostly negative , with critics citing issues with plot holes and unanswered questions from the story arc . On its first showing , 3 @.@ 17 million watched the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Senator Vrax ( Geno Silva ) , fresh from the Romulan Senate , is disappointed that Admiral Valadore ( Brian Thompson ) and scientist Nijil 's ( J. Michael Flynn ) drone program has failed to provoke a rift between Human , Andorian and Tellarite races as they had hoped ( seen in " Babel One " and " United " ) . In fact , the opposite has happened – political discord throughout the Alpha and Beta Quadrants has declined . Now that a second drone vessel is ready to be launched , Valadore suggests a mission against the Enterprise in order to impress the Senate . Nijil argues that the pilot requires time to recover from his previous exertions , but Valadore insists and prioritizes the mission . 
 On Enterprise , analysis of data gathered in the previous encounter with the Romulan ship reveals that the ship is being piloted telepathically by an Andorian . Commander Shran ( Jeffrey Combs ) explains that the data indicates that the pilot is probably a member of the Aenar , a white @-@ skinned and blind Andorian sub @-@ race . This , however , seems unlikely , since the Aenar are few in number , reclusive pacifists , and inhabitants of the isolated extreme northern polar region of their moon . Shran and Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) then beam down to contact the Aenar . The Aenar 's spokesperson , <unk> ( Alicia Adams ) , initially declines to assist as the Aenar do not want to get involved in a war . However , a young Aenar named <unk> ( Alexandra Lydon ) decides to help , since doing so may help locate <unk> ( Scott Allen Rinker ) , her missing brother . 
 Meanwhile , Doctor Phlox ( John Billingsley ) , Commander T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) , and Commander Charles " Trip " Tucker III ( Connor Trinneer ) work in Sickbay on their own " telepresence " unit to help counter the drone ship . T 'Pol volunteers to test it , and a concerned Tucker finds it increasingly difficult to balance his duties and emotions . <unk> then tests the unit , with better results . Later , when the drone ships reappear and attack , she is able to contact the drone pilot , and it is indeed her long @-@ lost brother , who was tricked into working with the Romulans . Learning the deception of his " helpers " , he turns the drones on each other and both are soon destroyed , and Valadore angrily kills him as retribution for his failure . With the threat resolved , the Andorians depart Enterprise and but Tucker requests to leave the ship to join the USS Columbia . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Aenar " was the third and final part in the Romulan story arc , comprising " Babel One " , " United " and " The Aenar " . It was written by André Bormanis from a story by show runner Manny Coto . Bormanis had also written " Babel One " , and earlier in the season the episode " Awakening " , which formed part of the Vulcan story arc . " The Aenar " was directed by Mike Vejar , his third episode of the season . 
 This episode was the first time the homeworld of the Andorian race was represented on screen . The race had been introduced in the Star Trek : The Original Series second season episode " Journey to Babel " . The interior of a sound stage was fitted out to appear like caverns on the ice world as it was theorized that this was the environment in which a race such as the Andorians , including the Aenar sub @-@ species , could have evolved . These sets were enhanced in post @-@ production using computer @-@ generated imagery . 
 Filming began on November 22 , 2004 , and was completed on December 2 , with the production being halted for two days due to Thanksgiving . The majority of the guest stars from earlier installments of the trilogy returned for " The Aenar " , and they were joined by Alexandra Lydon and Alicia Adams , who were both making their first appearances in a Star Trek series . Kim Koski was the stunt double for Jeffrey Combs during a scene in which Shran was impaled through the leg by a stalagmite . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Aenar " was first aired in the United States on UPN on February 11 , 2005 . It was watched by 3 @.@ 17 million viewers , which was an increase on the 2 @.@ 81 million viewers who watched the previous episode . The following episode , " Affliction " , received around the same number of viewers as " The Aenar " . 
 Michelle Erica Green , while writing for the website TrekNation , thought that the episode had strong character development despite the other flaws present . She felt that it opened up a number of questions about the abilities of the Andorians due to their similarity to the Aenar , and enjoyed the issues present in the Tucker / T 'Pol relationship . Although she said that it was the " weakest " of the story arc , it was also the most " gripping " . Jamahl Epsicokhan , at his website Jammer 's Reviews , gave the episode two out of four , adding that " The Aenar " was " aimless " since the majority of the storyline ended in the previous episode . He found fault with the plot , as the Romulan threat was unspecific , and because of several plot holes which the episode failed to explain . 
 David Greven , in his book Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek , said that the Aenar were an example of the " uncanny whiteness " style characters which appear in the franchise which are used to provide a " denatured form of whiteness " to the viewer . Other examples of these type of characters include the Borg and the human @-@ like Klingons explained earlier in season four of Enterprise . He added that the blindness of the Aenar acted as an allegory for the way in which white people are unable to perceive their own whiteness . 
 " The Aenar " was released on home media in the United States on November 1 , 2005 , as part of the season four DVD box set of Enterprise . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = The Variable = 
 " The Variable " is the 14th television episode of the fifth season of Lost , and the 100th episode overall . It originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on April 29 , 2009 . The hundredth episode milestone was celebrated by cast and crew on location in Hawaii . In the episode , Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) returns to the island in order to warn its inhabitants of a catastrophe involving the Dharma Initiative research station , The Swan . Jack ( Matthew Fox ) , Kate ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Daniel begin a gun fight with Dharma , leading Dharma to go after Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) and Juliet ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) . In flashbacks , Daniel 's relationship with his parents , Eloise Hawking ( Fionnula Flanagan ) and Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) , is shown . 
 The episode was written by executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by Paul Edwards . It serves as a companion piece to the season four episode " The Constant " , another episode that heavily features the character Daniel , and the third Lost episode to deal directly with the concept of time travel . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics , mostly complimenting Davies 's performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 At a young age , Eloise asks Daniel if he knows what destiny is and then tells him that he has a special gift — his brilliant mind — and that his destiny relies on this . After Daniel graduates from Oxford University , Eloise gives him a new journal as a gift and again reminds him of his destiny . Meanwhile , Daniel has received an enormous research grant from Charles , who Daniel does not know is actually his father . Years later , following the crash of Flight 815 , Daniel has suffered severe psychological effects from performing experiments on himself ; he has lost his mental acuity , and now lives with a caretaker . While watching the news coverage of the discovery of the Flight 815 wreckage in the Sunda Trench , Daniel is visited by Charles , who tells him that he faked the found wreckage and that the real plane actually landed on the island . Charles invites Daniel to go to the island , which Charles claims will cure his psychological problems . Eloise later visits Daniel and further encourages him to go to the island . 
 = = = 1977 = = = 
 Following the events of the previous episode , " Some Like It Hoth " , Daniel has returned to the island , having spent three years in Ann Arbor , Michigan , conducting research for the Dharma Initiative . He has returned because Jack , Kate and Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) have managed to travel back in time and become part of the Initiative . After learning from Jack that they were sent to the island by Daniel 's mother , Eloise ( younger : Alice Evans ; older : Fionnula Flanagan ) , Daniel visits Dr. Pierre Chang ( François Chau ) at the Orchid station and warns him of a catastrophic event that is to occur at the Swan station in six hours . Dr. Chang does not believe Daniel when he says that he is from the future , and Miles ( Ken Leung ) does not affirm Dan 's story , even after Daniel informs Dr. Chang that Miles is his son from the future . 
 At the Barracks , Sawyer , Juliet , Jin ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , Hurley and Miles decide that they will flee to the survivors ' original beach , abandoning Dharma . But Kate , Jack and Daniel decide to visit the island 's native population , the " Others " , and get help to prevent the impending disaster . They arouse suspicion from Dharma 's head of research , Radzinsky ( Eric Lange ) , while trying to steal weapons and a gun fight ensues . The survivors are able to escape ; however , Radzinsky brings his team to Sawyer and Juliet 's house , where they find Dharma member Phil ( Patrick Fischler ) tied up . Meanwhile , Daniel explains to Jack and Kate that he intends to detonate the hydrogen bomb that had been buried on the island in 1954 in order to prevent the construction of the Swan , which in turn will ensure that Oceanic Flight 815 never crashes on the island , which means it never becomes visible to Widmore 's team , so he never sends the freighter which brings himself and Charlotte , therefore Charlotte doesn 't die . Daniel enters the Others ' camp with his gun drawn and demands that Richard Alpert ( Nestor Carbonell ) take him to see Eloise ; Eloise shoots Daniel in the back as they argue , a move which provokes hostility from Richard . Before Daniel dies , he tells her that he is her son . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 Following the events of " Dead is Dead " , Desmond ( Henry Ian Cusick ) is brought to a hospital , having been shot by Ben ( Michael Emerson ) . While waiting , his wife Penny ( Sonya Walger ) , is visited by Eloise , who apologizes for involving Desmond in everything that has happened . Penny later visits Desmond , who is expected to make a full recovery . Charles , who is also Daniel 's father , speaks with Eloise outside the hospital , but does not visit his daughter . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Variable " was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by Paul Edwards . Like most season five episodes , it features elements of time travel . It serves as a companion piece to the season four episode " The Constant " , another episode that heavily features the character Daniel , and the third Lost episode to deal directly with the concept of time travel after " Flashes Before Your Eyes " from the third season and The Constant " from the fourth season . In " The Constant " , Desmond and Sayid ( Naveen Andrews ) are on their way off the island when their helicopter hits turbulence , causing Desmond 's 1996 consciousness to take over his 2004 body and switch uncontrollably between 1996 and 2004 . Lost show runner Damon Lindelof said the fifth season of the show has " flung major characters across decades , leaving them — and the audience — feverishly attempting to keep events straight and the end game in sight . " In " The Variable " , the viewers would get a few more pieces of the puzzle , Lindelof said , and added : " We 're not promising any big whiz @-@ bang flash pyrotechnics , but it does serve as a companion piece to another memorable episode , last season 's ' The Constant ' , in which Desmond endured vicious , turbulence @-@ caused side effects from traveling in time . " Lindelof also commented that the fifth season is about the rules of time travel as explained by Daniel , and said , " We 've never done a flashback story for Daniel , so he 's very mysterious . Some of those mysteries will be answered in this episode . " Since Lindelof and his show runner partner Carlton Cuse wrote " The Constant " , they thought the " sister episode " should be written by someone other than them , which led to Kitsis and Horowitz writing it . The two show runners were pleased with the outcome of the episode . Cuse thought it was one of the best episodes of the season . 
 The episode features the death of Jeremy Davies character Daniel Faraday . Daniel was introduced in the fourth season and was originally intended to be a minor character only . However , his quiet demeanor and seemingly good heart made him a favorite with the fans , so Lindelof and Cuse decided to expand Daniel 's role , which has led to him being a key player in Lost 's eventual resolution . In response to Daniel 's death , Cuse said , " It was an incredibly painful thing to kill this beloved character , but we feel that ’ s what this show has to do . His death is kind of the culminating event in the entire season . It really ends one chapter and commences the start of the final chapter of the entire series . " Once the show runners explained that to Davies , he was saddened that his full @-@ time status on Lost was coming to an end , but put the story " above his own personal self " . Damon seconded Carlton 's emotions , adding that Jeremy took the news well : " When Carlton and I called Jeremy to explain what was going to be happening with Daniel , we ’ ve never had a more awesome exit interview with somebody on the show . For us , Daniel really was the cornerstone of the fifth season – he really shined . I can ’ t imagine what Season 5 would have looked like without Jeremy Davies . When you think about all the crazy stuff that had to come out of that guy ’ s mouth , for him to be as interesting and emotional and poetic as he was is really extraordinary . " The cast of the show said Davies would be missed , though he may not be done with Lost — Carlton commented that Jeremy 's " full @-@ time " status was over , but dead characters have been known to reappear on the show . Michael Emerson , who plays Ben , said Davies was " a great sensitive guy who got deep into his character , he really lived it . " 
 " The Variable " was the hundredth episode of the show to be produced and aired on television . Josh Holloway , who plays the role of Sawyer , said , " Just statistically speaking , to hit a hundred episodes doesn 't happen very often , especially on a show where everyone is saying ' Lost on an island ? What are you gonna do after a season or two ? ' , so the fact that we 've lasted not only a season or two but flourishing still at this time ... it 's shocking ... it 's amazing to me . " In an interview with The News & Observer , Lindelof recalled meeting with the ABC executives in 2004 to pitch the idea of a plane crash and survivors stranded on an island full of mystery and danger . When Lindelof was asked by the executives where the Lost saga would stand in the future , he replied , " We 're probably not going to get past episode thirteen . Let 's all be honest about that up front . " Lindelof added that if he had " traveled back in time to tell myself after that meeting that we were going to make it to a hundred and still have a season beyond that , I would have laughed in my face . " The hundredth episode milestone was celebrated by the cast and crew on location in Oahu , Hawaii . Duff Goldman and his crew from the Food Network 's American television show Ace of Cakes made a special Lost cake for the party to commemorate the milestone . The cake featured replicas of a Dharma beer bottles , the computer from the Swan station , a suitcase and a miniature Oceanic Flight 815 . The Ace of Cakes episode ( " LOST in Hawaii " ) featuring the making of the cake aired on the Food Network in the United States on May 9 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Variable " was watched live or recorded and watched within five hours of broadcast by 8 @.@ 8 million viewers in the United States , achieving a 3 @.@ 9 / 10 in the coveted adults aged eighteen to forty @-@ nine demographic . Lost was that Wednesday 's number one scripted television show in the aforementioned demographic for its thirteenth straight original telecast . In Australia , the episode was watched by 296 @,@ 000 people , ranking forty @-@ sixth for the night . 
 Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics , mostly complimenting Davies 's performance as Daniel . Chris Carabott of IGN commented that if this is the last appearance of Davies on Lost , which he " somehow " doubts , then , " I 'm glad he had the opportunity to leave on such a strong note . He delivers in some really great , emotional , moments this week – especially in the scenes in which he is suffering from memory deterioration . I 've become a huge fan of Davies over the course of the last couple of years thanks to his performance on this show . " Rachel Dovey of Paste said the episode revealed " a whole different " side of Daniel : " We 've oscillated before about the true nature of the physicist , whether it 's good or evil [ ... ] We decided he 's mostly a decent guy , barring the whole experimenting @-@ on @-@ his @-@ girlfriend @-@ then @-@ running @-@ away @-@ when @-@ her @-@ brain @-@ turned @-@ to @-@ mush thing . In the past , he 's just seemed lost and confused , and , since he has those big , earnest puppy eyes , we decided to forgive him . But ' The Variable ' showed us the dynamic at the heart of Daniel 's stuttering vulnerability . Like all broken superheroes and Freudian beings , the man has mommy issues . This week we dove inside the dynamic between Daniel and his mother growing up . " 
 Adam Sweeney of Film School Rejects was positive about the episode , " For anyone who has been complaining that Lost had been too slow lately , here you go . Those who watched ' The Variable ' saw more action than ( basketball player ) Wilt Chamberlain . They , and by they I mean we , also got a clear explanation of how the islanders got onto the island . You wanted answers , you got them . " Sweeney also believed Davies 's acting was the " high point " of the episode . David Oliver of CHUD.com gave the episode an 8 @.@ 6 rating out of 10 , and commented that it was a " good " episode , though he was " bummed " to see Daniel go . Oliver also said that while the episode did " very little " to advance the season storyline significantly , there were " some significant " developments and revelations in it . TV Verdict 's Stephen Lackey said the episode was " fast paced " and featured " one exciting twist after another " . 
 The episode also received some criticism . Dan Compora of Airlock Alpha said after a run of " several strong " episodes , Lost " has slipped into mediocrity . While none of the recent episodes have been bad , they haven 't been anything special . For a hundredth episode , average simply isn 't good enough . While the shooting of Daniel at the end was stunning , I expected something much more from the rest of the episode than learning the identity of Daniel 's parents . " A reviewer for <unk> thought the episode was good , though not as good as " The Constant " , and he thought " it came with lots of answers and references to past episodes from this season and the ones before it , making it all the more exciting . " The reviewer would , however , have " loved any sort of explanation as to why [ Daniel ] changed his mind about changing the past or how he thought this could work . There must have been something that made Daniel think this was possible , but he was in such a rush that he never took care to explain . " Jon Lachonis of TVOvermind said that as an internal character piece , " The Variable " was not " so much a great ending for Daniel . We brushed up against many key events and people – Theresa , Daniel ’ s ‘ nurse ’ , and the Widmore and Eloise parental connection , etc . – but these forays into the geniuses ’ past events were more to thread Daniel through the plot than to establish their connection to who Daniel truly was . " 
 = HMS Exmouth ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Exmouth was an E @-@ class destroyer flotilla leader built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . Although assigned to the Home Fleet upon completion , the ship was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1935 – 36 during the Abyssinia Crisis . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 she spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Exmouth was assigned to convoy escort and anti @-@ submarine patrol duties in the Western Approaches when World War II began in September 1939 . She was sunk by a German submarine in January 1940 while escorting a merchant ship north of Scotland . 
 = = Description = = 
 Exmouth displaced 1 @,@ 495 long tons ( 1 @,@ 519 t ) at standard load and 2 @,@ 050 long tons ( 2 @,@ 080 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 343 feet ( 104 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet 9 inches ( 10 @.@ 3 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The turbines developed a total of 38 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 28 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Exmouth carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 6 @,@ 350 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 760 km ; 7 @,@ 310 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 175 officers and ratings . 
 The ship mounted five 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft defence , Exmouth had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Exmouth was ordered on 1 November 1932 under the 1931 Naval Programme , and was laid down at Portsmouth Dockyard on 15 March 1933 . She was launched on 30 January 1934 , named the following day , and commissioned for service on 9 November 1934 . On commissioning , Exmouth was assigned as leader of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet . The increased tensions between Italy and Abyssinia – eventually leading to the outbreak of the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War – caused the Admiralty to attach the flotilla to the Mediterranean Fleet from August 1935 to March 1936 , although Exmouth was refitted in Alexandria from 4 October 1935 to 5 January 1936 . The ship patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee in between annual refits at Portsmouth between 17 November 1936 and 19 January 1937 and 21 November 1938 and 16 January 1939 . She returned to Britain in March and Exmouth was assigned to training duties and local flotilla work based at Portsmouth on 28 April . She carried out these duties until 2 August , when she was placed into full commission as the leader of the 12th Destroyer Flotilla . 
 Exmouth and her flotilla were initially assigned to the Home Fleet upon the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 . The ship and two of her flotilla mates , Eclipse and Echo , escorted the battlecruiser Hood as she searched for German commerce raiders south of Iceland in late November . In December , she was transferred to the Western Approaches Command to carry out patrols and escort convoys , but was transferred to Rosyth in January 1940 to carry out the same duties in the North Sea . She was escorting the merchant Cyprian Prince on 21 January 1940 when she was spotted by the German submarine U @-@ 22 , under the command of Karl @-@ Heinrich <unk> , and torpedoed at 05 : 35 . She sank with the loss of all hands . After sinking Exmouth , the submarine also fired on Cyprian Prince whose master deemed it too dangerous to pick up survivors . Eighteen bodies were later found washed ashore by a schoolboy playing truant near Wick . They were buried with full military honours in the cemetery at Wick . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The wreck of Exmouth was discovered in the Moray Firth in July 2001 by an independent expedition , with their findings being verified by Historic Scotland . The wreck is one of those listed as a ' protected place ' under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 . 
 = Covering of the Senne = 
 The covering of the Senne ( French : <unk> de la Senne , Dutch : <unk> van de Zenne ) was the covering and later diverting of the main river of Brussels , and the construction of public buildings and major boulevards in its place . It is one of the defining events in the history of Brussels . 
 The Senne / Zenne ( French / Dutch ) was historically the main waterway of Brussels , but it became more polluted and less navigable as the city grew . By the second half of the 19th century , it had become a serious health hazard and was filled with pollution , garbage and decaying organic matter . It flooded frequently , inundating the lower town and the working class neighbourhoods which surrounded it . 
 Numerous proposals were made to remedy this problem , and in 1865 , the mayor of Brussels , Jules Anspach , selected a design by architect Léon Suys to cover the river and build a series of grand boulevards and public buildings . The project faced fierce opposition and controversy , mostly due to its cost and the need for expropriation and demolition of working @-@ class neighbourhoods . The construction was contracted to a British company , but control was returned to the government following an embezzlement scandal . This delayed the project , but it was still completed in 1871 . Its completion allowed the construction of the modern buildings and boulevards which are central to downtown Brussels today . 
 In the 1930s , plans were made to cover the Senne along its entire course within the greater Brussels area , which had grown significantly since the covering of the 19th century . The course of the Senne was changed to the downtown 's peripheral boulevards . In 1976 , the disused tunnels were converted into the north @-@ south axis of Brussels ' underground tram system , the <unk> . Actual purification of the waste water from the Brussels @-@ Capital Region was not completed until March 2007 , when two treatment stations were built , thus finally cleansing the Senne after centuries of problems . 
 = = The Senne in Brussels = = 
 At the beginning of the 19th century , Brussels was still in many ways a medieval city . The royal quarter in the upper town , inhabited mainly by the nobility and the richer members of the bourgeoisie , was upscale and modern . The rest of the city , however , in particular the lower town , located in the western half of the Pentagon , was densely populated and industrial , characterized by an illogical street layout , back alleys , narrow streets , and numerous dead ends . 
 The Senne river split into two branches at Anderlecht , penetrating the Pentagon , the former site of the second city walls , in two places . The main and more southern arm entered through the Greater Sluice Gate , near today 's Brussels @-@ South railway station . The smaller northerly arm entered through the Lesser Sluice Gate , near today 's <unk> Gate . The courses of the two traced a meandering path through the city centre , forming several islands , the largest of which was known as Saint <unk> Island . The two branches met up on the north side of Saint <unk> Island , exiting the Pentagon one block east of Antwerp Gate . A man @-@ made arm , called the " Lesser Senne " ( French : petite Senne , Dutch : kleine Zenne ) continued on the borders of the Pentagon in the former moat , outside the sluice gates . It followed the Charleroi Canal before rejoining the main part of the Senne north of the city . 
 The Senne had long since lost its usefulness as a navigable waterway , being replaced by canals , including the Charleroi Canal . The Senne had always been a river with an inconsistent flow , often overflowing its banks . In times of heavy rainfall , even the sluice gates were unable to regulate the flow of the river which was often swollen by numerous creeks flowing down from higher ground . Making matters worse , within the city the river 's bed was narrowed by encroaching construction due to demographic pressure . The supports of numerous unregulated bridges impeded water flow and caused water levels to rise even further , exacerbated by a riverbed of accumulated waste . 
 During dry periods , however , much of the Senne 's water was diverted for the needs of the populace of the city as well as to maintain the water level in the Charleroi Canal . This left a flow too feeble to evacuate the filthy water , leaving the sewage , garbage , detritus and industrial waste that had been dumped into the river to accumulate in the stagnant water . The Senne , which a witness in 1853 described as " the most nauseous little river in the world " , had become an open @-@ air sewer spreading pestilential odours throughout the city . Early in the second half of the 19th century , Brussels saw numerous dry periods , floods and a cholera epidemic , caused as much by the river itself as by the poverty and the lack of hygiene and potable water in the lower city . This forced the governments of the Province of Brabant and the City of Brussels to act . 
 = = Attempts at purification = = 
 The first studies and propositions to clean up the river date back to 1859 , and during the following years , many different commissions of engineers were assigned to examine possible solutions . Dozens of different ideas were submitted , many of which were completely unfeasible . Several of them proposed diverting large amounts of cleaner water from other rivers upstream to dilute the Senne , while greatly improving the drainage system in the city . Other proposals involved diverting the main course of the Senne completely to the Lesser Senne , which would then be enlarged and thus more useful for boat traffic and mills . Others considered any sort of sanitization impossible , and proposed covering the Senne without greatly changing its course . Among these was a proposal to double the size of the underground drainage tunnels , creating space for a subterranean railroad tunnel . The idea was ahead of its time , but would be implemented a century later with the North – South connection . 
 The municipal council chose the proposal by architect Léon Suys , submitted in 1865 , which had the backing of mayor Jules Anspach . The plan involved suppressing the secondary arm of the Senne by closing the Lesser Sluice Gate . The main branch would be channelled into underground tunnels , to be placed directly beneath a long , straight 30 m ( 100 ft ) wide boulevard , stretching from the Greater Sluice Gate to the Augustinian church ( now De <unk> Square ) before splitting into two . One branch was to head towards the Brussels North railway station and present day Rogier Square , the other towards Antwerp Gate , thus forming a long , narrow " Y " shape . 
 Anspach 's backing of Suys ' proposal was a calculated decision , as he had radical plans to transform the city . Anspach saw the proposal as an unexpected boon , as it allowed him to accomplish several of his goals at once . It had long been his ambition to transform the impoverished lower city into a centre of business and commerce , suitable for a modern capital . He wanted to attract the middle class , most of whom had left the dingy downtown for the cleaner suburbs , including the Leopold Quarter ( now often called the European quarter ) and Avenue Louise , causing a large loss in tax revenue for the city . The elimination of the numerous alleys and dead @-@ ends in the lower town in favour of a large , straight , wide , open @-@ air boulevard , linking the two rapidly growing train stations , seemed both a necessity and an opportunity to beautify the city and improve both traffic circulation and hygiene . 
 = = Controversy and opposition = = 
 The Belgian Parliament had recently passed a law allowing the expropriation of privately owned land by the government when the land was to be used for the ' greater good . ' This could be done even if the project was still speculative in nature , and allowed for more land to be taken beyond what was strictly necessary for a project . The city expropriated large swathes of the lower town , counting on reselling the land for a profit , which , after the project was complete , would be on a grandiose modern boulevard in an upper @-@ class neighbourhood . The selling of land after the completion of the project was seen as a way of financing the project itself . That the poorer residents of the lower town were forced away into other already overcrowded districts or into the surrounding suburbs did not trouble the upper classes very much , as the displaced residents did not pay taxes or have the right to vote . 
 Even after Suys ' proposal was officially adopted , Anspach faced strong opposition to the project . This opposition came first from engineers who felt that the covering was incompatible with Brussels ’ s geology , would accumulate potentially dangerous gases and would not be able to handle enough water to prevent floods . Others opposed to the project complained about the high taxes resulting from its high cost , poor compensation for seized property and the lack of public input into the project . The press accused Anspach of being responsible for demolishing Brussels ' old town , and published numerous caricatures mocking him . 
 A liberal , Anspach feared the weakness and rigidity of the government and therefore gave the work of covering the river to a private British company , the Belgian Public Works Company ( the English name was used ) , which was created for the task . However , partway through construction , it was forced to relinquish control to the city of Brussels after an embezzlement scandal in which a company director allegedly attempted to steal 2 @.@ 5 million francs from the company . Anspach only barely kept his office in 1869 by @-@ elections . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Excluding the important sewers built upriver and downriver in the adjacent suburbs , the covered section itself was to be 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) in length . Constructed from bricks , the covering was to consist of two parallel 6 m ( 20 ft ) wide tunnels , and a set of two lateral drainage pipes , each taking in waste water from its respective side of the street . 
 The contract was signed on June 15 , 1866 and the expropriation of the first 1 @,@ 100 houses was completed in a few months . The work began on February 13 , 1867 . There were several technical difficulties that delayed the covering , many of which were due to the geology of Brussels , though they were not as bad as some engineers had forecast . The embezzlement scandal also caused a significant delay in construction , largely due to the change in control . The project was completed in 1871 , with the municipal council ceremonially opening the reconstructed sluice gates on November 30 . 
 = = The new central boulevards = = 
 The series of boulevards created by the project – Hainaut Boulevard ( now Maurice Lemonnier Boulevard ) , Central Boulevard ( now Boulevard Anspach ) , North Boulevard ( now Adolphe Max Boulevard ) , and Senne Boulevard ( now Émile <unk> Boulevard ) – were progressively opened to traffic from 1871 to 1873 . 
 The opening of these new routes offered a more efficient way to get into the lower town than the cramped streets of rue du Midi / <unk> , rue des <unk> / <unk> and rue Neuve and helped revitalize the lower quarters of the town . In order to accomplish this revitalization and attract investment , public buildings were constructed as part of the Léon Suys project including the Brussels Stock Exchange . The vast Halles Centrales / Centrale Hallen , a good example of metallic architecture , replaced unhygienic open @-@ air markets , though it was torn down in 1958 . The monumental fountain that was to break the monotony of the boulevards at <unk> Square was abandoned for budgetary reasons . 
 The construction of private buildings on the boulevards and surrounding areas took place later . The middle class continued to prefer living in new suburbs rather than the cramped areas of the city center . The high prices of the land ( expected to finance part of the construction costs ) and the high rents were not within the means of the lower classes . Life in apartments was no longer desirable for residents of Brussels , who preferred to live in single family homes . The buildings constructed by private citizens had difficulty finding buyers . 
 To give builders an incentive to create elaborate and appealing facades on their works , an architecture competition was arranged in which twenty buildings built before January 1 , 1876 would win prizes . The first prize of 20 @,@ 000 francs was awarded to Henri <unk> who designed the " Hier ist in den <unk> en de kat " ( Loosely , " House of Cats " ) on North Boulevard . Nonetheless , it took another 20 years , until 1895 , for buildings to solidly line the boulevards . 
 The former Augustinian church , built at the beginning of the 17th century in the baroque style , was the only remaining part of a convent destroyed in 1796 by French revolutionaries . After having been used as a Protestant church from 1815 to 1830 , it subsequently saw use as a concert hall , a commercial exchange , and a post office . At the center of de <unk> square , the church ’ s façade was intended by Léon Suys to be one of the focal points of the new boulevards . The work to cover the river , which nearly surrounded the church , preserved the integrity of the building at great trouble and expense , but the church was finally demolished in 1893 , its style no longer popular with the people and its presence unsuitable for the area . The church was replaced by a fountain dedicated to the memory of Jules Anspach . The facade of the church , however , was preserved , being disassembled and moved to serve as the façade for the St. Trinity Church in the suburb of Ixelles . 
 = = Diversion and treatment = = 
 Although the original covering of the Senne resolved sanitary problems and flooding in Brussels ’ old city , this was not the case in peripheral areas . The Senne was still very polluted , despite work done to the sewers and spillways in the canal . The drainage into the canal was not able to completely stop the floods that regularly affected certain outer areas of the city . 
 In 1930 , a group was created whose objective was to channel the Senne into subterranean tunnels for nearly its entire course through the Brussels metropolitan area . This was done in order to expand the benefits that the covering achieved in the old city . In the centre , the course of the river was to be changed from the central boulevards to the peripheral boulevards of the small ring . The project , delayed by war and the work being done on the North – South connection , was only finished in 1955 . 
 The disused channels of the central boulevards later facilitated the construction of the north @-@ south line of the <unk> , which opened in 1976 . The conversion of the existing tunnels to metro tunnels ensured that there was minimal disruption on the surface . Some of the former pipes also served as storm drains . The Anspach Fountain was transferred to the Quartier des <unk> / <unk> . 
 Actual purification of the waste water from the Brussels @-@ Capital Region was not completed until the 21st century , when two purification stations were built . The south station treats refuse water from 360 @,@ 000 inhabitants , which is about one third of the polluted water , and lies on the border of Anderlecht and Forest . The north station , completed in March 2007 , is located near the border of the Brussels @-@ Capital Region , between the Senne and the Charleroi @-@ <unk> Canal , near Buda Bridge . A portion of the cost was footed by the Flemish Government , as 7 of the adjacent municipalities lie within the Flemish Region . This station is capable of treating the water of 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 inhabitants and should finally be capable of fully purifying the Senne , which had long caused much of the pollution of the Scheldt river . 
 = Euro = 
 The euro ( sign : € ; code : EUR ) is the official currency of the eurozone , which consists of 19 of the 28 member states of the European Union : Austria , Belgium , Cyprus , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Malta , the Netherlands , Portugal , Slovakia , Slovenia , and Spain . The currency is also officially used by the institutions of the European Union and four other European countries , as well as unilaterally by two others , and is consequently used daily by some 337 million Europeans as of 2015 . Outside of Europe , a number of overseas territories of EU members also use the euro as their currency . 
 Additionally , 210 million people worldwide as of 2013 use currencies pegged to the euro . The euro is the second largest reserve currency as well as the second most traded currency in the world after the United States dollar . As of August 2014 , with more than € 995 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in circulation , the euro has the highest combined value of banknotes and coins in circulation in the world , having surpassed the U.S. dollar . Based on International Monetary Fund estimates of 2008 GDP and purchasing power parity among the various currencies , the eurozone is the second largest economy in the world . 
 The name euro was officially adopted on 16 December 1995 . The euro was introduced to world financial markets as an accounting currency on 1 January 1999 , replacing the former European Currency Unit ( ECU ) at a ratio of 1 : 1 ( US $ 1 @.@ 1743 ) . Physical euro coins and banknotes entered into circulation on 1 January 2002 , making it the day @-@ to @-@ day operating currency of its original members . While the euro dropped subsequently to US $ 0 @.@ <unk> within two years ( 26 October 2000 ) , it has traded above the U.S. dollar since the end of 2002 , peaking at US $ 1 @.@ <unk> on 18 July 2008 . Since late 2009 , the euro has been immersed in the European sovereign @-@ debt crisis which has led to the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility as well as other reforms aimed at stabilising the currency . In July 2012 , the euro fell below US $ 1 @.@ 21 for the first time in two years , following concerns raised over Greek debt and Spain 's troubled banking sector . As of 31 May 2016 , the euro – dollar exchange rate stands at ~ US $ 1 @.@ 1137 . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The euro is managed and administered by the Frankfurt @-@ based European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the Eurosystem ( composed of the central banks of the eurozone countries ) . As an independent central bank , the ECB has sole authority to set monetary policy . The Eurosystem participates in the printing , minting and distribution of notes and coins in all member states , and the operation of the eurozone payment systems . 
 The 1992 Maastricht Treaty obliges most EU member states to adopt the euro upon meeting certain monetary and budgetary convergence criteria , although not all states have done so . The United Kingdom and Denmark negotiated exemptions , while Sweden ( which joined the EU in 1995 , after the Maastricht Treaty was signed ) turned down the euro in a 2003 referendum , and has circumvented the obligation to adopt the euro by not meeting the monetary and budgetary requirements . All nations that have joined the EU since 1993 have pledged to adopt the euro in due course . 
 = = Issuing modalities for banknotes = = 
 Since 5 January 2002 , the national central banks ( NCBs ) and the ECB have issued euro banknotes on a joint basis . Euro banknotes do not show which central bank issued them . Eurosystem NCBs are required to accept euro banknotes put into circulation by other Eurosystem members and these banknotes are not repatriated . The ECB issues 8 % of the total value of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem . In practice , the ECB 's banknotes are put into circulation by the NCBs , thereby incurring matching liabilities vis @-@ à @-@ vis the ECB . These liabilities carry interest at the main refinancing rate of the ECB . The other 92 % of the euro banknotes are issued by the NCBs in proportion to their respective shares in the capital key of the ECB , calculated using national share of European Union population and national share of European Union GDP , equally weighted . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Coins and banknotes = = = 
 The euro is divided into 100 cents ( sometimes referred to as euro cents , especially when distinguishing them from other currencies , and referred to as such on the common side of all cent coins ) . In Community legislative acts the plural forms of euro and cent are spelled without the s , notwithstanding normal English usage . Otherwise , normal English plurals are sometimes used , with many local variations such as <unk> in France . 
 All circulating coins have a common side showing the denomination or value , and a map in the background . Due to the linguistic plurality of Europe , the Latin alphabet version of euro is used ( as opposed to the less common Greek or Cyrillic ) and Arabic numerals ( other text is used on national sides in national languages , but other text on the common side is avoided ) . For the denominations except the 1- , 2- and 5 @-@ cent coins , the map only showed the 15 member states which were members when the euro was introduced . Beginning in 2007 or 2008 ( depending on the country ) the old map is being replaced by a map of Europe also showing countries outside the Union like Norway . The 1- , 2- and 5 @-@ cent coins , however , keep their old design , showing a geographical map of Europe with the 15 member states of 2002 raised somewhat above the rest of the map . All common sides were designed by Luc <unk> . The coins also have a national side showing an image specifically chosen by the country that issued the coin . Euro coins from any member state may be freely used in any nation that has adopted the euro . 
 The coins are issued in € 2 , € 1 , 50c , <unk> , 10c , 5c , 2c , and 1c denominations . To avoid the use of the two smallest coins , some cash transactions are rounded to the nearest five cents in the Netherlands and Ireland ( by voluntary agreement ) and in Finland ( by law ) . This practice is discouraged by the Commission , as is the practice of certain shops to refuse to accept high value euro notes . 
 Commemorative coins with € 2 face value have been issued with changes to the design of the national side of the coin . These include both commonly issued coins , such as the € 2 commemorative coin for the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome , and nationally issued coins , such as the coin to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics issued by Greece . These coins are legal tender throughout the eurozone . Collector coins with various other denominations have been issued as well , but these are not intended for general circulation , and they are legal tender only in the member state that issued them . 
 The design for the euro banknotes has common designs on both sides . The design was created by the Austrian designer Robert Kalina . Notes are issued in € 500 , € 200 , € 100 , € 50 , € 20 , € 10 , € 5 . Each banknote has its own colour and is dedicated to an artistic period of European architecture . The front of the note features windows or gateways while the back has bridges , symbolising links between countries and with the future . While the designs are supposed to be devoid of any identifiable characteristics , the initial designs by Robert Kalina were of specific bridges , including the Rialto and the Pont de Neuilly , and were subsequently rendered more generic ; the final designs still bear very close similarities to their specific prototypes ; thus they are not truly generic . The monuments looked similar enough to different national monuments to please everyone . 
 = = = Payments clearing , electronic funds transfer = = = 
 Capital within the EU may be transferred in any amount from one country to another . All intra @-@ EU transfers in euro are treated as domestic transactions and bear the corresponding domestic transfer costs . This includes all member states of the EU , even those outside the eurozone providing the transactions are carried out in euro . Credit / debit card charging and ATM withdrawals within the eurozone are also treated as domestic transactions ; however paper @-@ based payment orders , like cheques , have not been standardised so these are still domestic @-@ based . The ECB has also set up a clearing system , <unk> , for large euro transactions . 
 = = = Currency sign = = = 
 A special euro currency sign ( € ) was designed after a public survey had narrowed the original ten proposals down to two . The European Commission then chose the design created by the Belgian Alain <unk> . 
 Inspiration for the € symbol itself came from the Greek epsilon ( <unk> ) – a reference to the cradle of European civilisation – and the first letter of the word Europe , crossed by two parallel lines to ' certify ' the stability of the euro . 
 The European Commission also specified a euro logo with exact proportions and foreground and background colour tones . While the Commission intended the logo to be a prescribed glyph shape , font designers made it clear that they intended to design their own variants instead . <unk> lacking the euro sign can create it by typing a capital ' C ' , <unk> and <unk> it with the equal ( ' = ' ) sign . Placement of the currency sign relative to the numeric amount varies from nation to nation , but for texts in English the symbol ( or the ISO @-@ standard " EUR " ) should precede the amount . 
 There is no official symbol for the cent . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 The euro was established by the provisions in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty . To participate in the currency , member states are meant to meet strict criteria , such as a budget deficit of less than three percent of their GDP , a debt ratio of less than sixty percent of GDP ( both of which were ultimately widely flouted after introduction ) , low inflation , and interest rates close to the EU average . In the Maastricht Treaty , the United Kingdom and Denmark were granted exemptions per their request from moving to the stage of monetary union which would result in the introduction of the euro . 
 Economists who helped create or contributed to the euro include Fred <unk> , Neil Dowling , Wim Duisenberg , Robert Mundell , Tommaso <unk> @-@ Schioppa and Robert <unk> . ( For macroeconomic theory , see below . ) 
 The name " euro " was officially adopted in Madrid on 16 December 1995 . Belgian <unk> Germain <unk> , a former teacher of French and history is credited with naming the new currency by sending a letter to then President of the European Commission , Jacques Santer , suggesting the name " euro " on 4 August 1995 . 
 Due to differences in national conventions for rounding and significant digits , all conversion between the national currencies had to be carried out using the process of triangulation via the euro . The definitive values of one euro in terms of the exchange rates at which the currency entered the euro are shown on the right . 
 The rates were determined by the Council of the European Union , based on a recommendation from the European Commission based on the market rates on 31 December 1998 . They were set so that one European Currency Unit ( ECU ) would equal one euro . The European Currency Unit was an accounting unit used by the EU , based on the currencies of the member states ; it was not a currency in its own right . They could not be set earlier , because the ECU depended on the closing exchange rate of the non @-@ euro currencies ( principally the pound sterling ) that day . 
 The procedure used to fix the conversion rate between the Greek drachma and the euro was different , since the euro by then was already two years old . While the conversion rates for the initial eleven currencies were determined only hours before the euro was introduced , the conversion rate for the Greek drachma was fixed several months beforehand . 
 The currency was introduced in non @-@ physical form ( traveller 's cheques , electronic transfers , banking , etc . ) at midnight on 1 January 1999 , when the national currencies of participating countries ( the eurozone ) ceased to exist independently . Their exchange rates were locked at fixed rates against each other . The euro thus became the successor to the European Currency Unit ( ECU ) . The notes and coins for the old currencies , however , continued to be used as legal tender until new euro notes and coins were introduced on 1 January 2002 . 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from several years to forever ( the latter in Austria , Germany , Ireland , Estonia and Latvia for banknotes and coins ; also , Belgium , Luxembourg , Slovenia and Slovakia will accept banknotes forever , but not coins ) . The earliest coins to become non @-@ convertible were the Portuguese escudos , which ceased to have monetary value after 31 December 2002 , although banknotes remain exchangeable until 2022 . 
 = = = Eurozone crisis = = = 
 Following the U.S. financial crisis in 2008 , fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed in 2009 among fiscally conservative investors concerning some European states , with the situation becoming particularly tense in early 2010 . This included eurozone members Greece , Ireland and Portugal and also some EU countries outside the area . Iceland , the country which experienced the largest crisis in 2008 when its entire international banking system collapsed , has emerged less affected by the sovereign @-@ debt crisis as the government was unable to bail the banks out . In the EU , especially in countries where sovereign debts have increased sharply due to bank bailouts , a crisis of confidence has emerged with the widening of bond yield spreads and risk insurance on credit default swaps between these countries and other EU members , most importantly Germany . To be included in the eurozone , the countries had to fulfil certain convergence criteria , but the meaningfulness of such criteria was diminished by the fact it was not enforced with the same degree of strictness from country to country . 
 According to the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2011 , " [ I ] f the [ euro area ] is treated as a single entity , its [ economic and fiscal ] position looks no worse and in some respects , rather better than that of the US or the UK " and the budget deficit for the euro area as a whole is much lower and the euro area 's government debt / GDP ratio of 86 % in 2010 was about the same level as that of the United States . " Moreover " , they write , " private @-@ sector indebtedness across the euro area as a whole is markedly lower than in the highly leveraged Anglo @-@ Saxon economies " . The authors conclude that the crisis " is as much political as economic " and the result of the fact that the euro area lacks the support of " institutional paraphernalia ( and mutual bonds of solidarity ) of a state " . 
 The crisis continued with S & P downgrading nine euro @-@ area countries , including France , then downgrading the entire European Financial Stability Facility ( <unk> ) fund . 
 In May 2012 , socialist François Hollande was elected as president of France and a month later the French socialist legislative position was strengthened , while German leader Angela Merkel " has appeared to be floundering and been badly let down by her advisers in recent months " , one commentator said . As such , " serious discord between French and German monetary decision @-@ makers was [ comparable to that of ] ... 1992 – 93 , at the height of the crisis over the European Monetary System , the forerunner to EMU " ( European Monetary Union ) . " [ H ] <unk> relatively dormant signs of euro skepticism in German public opinion and throughout industry have been multiplying in recent months , making Hollande 's proposals increasingly unpalatable to a broad swathe of German opinion . Although considerable controversy will continue to swirl over Greece and Spain , the real battle lines over the future of the euro will be drawn up between Germany and France " , the commentary concluded . Another historical parallel – to 1931 when Germany was burdened with debt , unemployment and austerity while France and the United States were relatively strong creditors – gained attention in summer 2012 even as Germany received a debt @-@ rating warning of its own . 
 = = Direct and indirect usage = = 
 = = = Direct usage = = = 
 The euro is the sole currency of 19 EU member states : Austria , Belgium , Cyprus , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Malta , the Netherlands , Portugal , Slovakia , Slovenia , and Spain . These countries constitute the " eurozone " , some 332 million people in total as of 2013 . 
 With all but two of the remaining EU members obliged to join , together with future members of the EU , the enlargement of the eurozone is set to continue . Outside the EU , the euro is also the sole currency of Montenegro and Kosovo and several European microstates ( Andorra , Monaco , San Marino and the Vatican City ) as well as in four overseas territories of EU members that are not themselves part of the EU ( Saint Barthélemy , Saint Pierre and Miquelon , the French Southern and Antarctic Lands and Akrotiri and <unk> ) . Together this direct usage of the euro outside the EU affects nearly 3 million people . 
 The Euro has been used as a trading currency in Cuba since 1998 , and Syria since 2006 . There are also various currencies pegged to the euro ( see below ) . In 2009 , Zimbabwe abandoned its local currency and used major currencies instead , including the euro and the United States dollar . 
 = = = Use as reserve currency = = = 
 Since its introduction , the euro has been the second most widely held international reserve currency after the U.S. dollar . The share of the euro as a reserve currency has increased from 18 % in 1999 to 27 % in 2008 . Over this period the share of the U.S. dollar fell from 71 % to 64 % and the Yen fell from 6 @.@ 4 % to 3 @.@ 3 % . The euro inherited and built on the status of the Deutsche Mark as the second most important reserve currency . The euro remains underweight as a reserve currency in advanced economies while overweight in emerging and developing economies : according to the International Monetary Fund the total of euro held as a reserve in the world at the end of 2008 was equal to $ 1 @.@ 1 trillion or € 850 billion , with a share of 22 % of all currency reserves in advanced economies , but a total of 31 % of all currency reserves in emerging and developing economies . 
 The possibility of the euro becoming the first international reserve currency is now widely debated among economists . Former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan gave his opinion in September 2007 that it is " absolutely conceivable that the euro will replace the US dollar as reserve currency , or will be traded as an equally important reserve currency " . In contrast to Greenspan 's 2007 assessment , the euro 's increase in the share of the worldwide currency reserve basket has slowed considerably since 2007 and since the beginning of the worldwide credit crunch related recession and European sovereign @-@ debt crisis . 
 = = = <unk> pegged to the euro = = = 
 Outside the eurozone , a total of 22 countries and territories that do not belong to the EU have currencies that are directly pegged to the euro including 13 countries in mainland Africa ( CFA franc ) , two African island countries ( Comorian franc and Cape Verdean escudo ) , three French Pacific territories ( <unk> franc ) and three Balkan countries , Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark ) , Bulgaria ( Bulgarian lev ) and Macedonia ( Macedonian <unk> ) . On 28 July 2009 , São Tomé and Príncipe signed an agreement with Portugal which will eventually tie its currency to the euro . Additionally , the Moroccan dirham is tied to a basket of currencies , including the Euro and the US dollar , with the Euro given the highest weighting . 
 With the exception of Bosnia , Bulgaria , Macedonia ( which had pegged their currencies against the Deutsche Mark ) and Cape Verde ( formerly pegged to the Portuguese escudo ) , all of these non @-@ EU countries had a currency peg to the French Franc before pegging their currencies to the euro . <unk> a country 's currency to a major currency is regarded as a safety measure , especially for currencies of areas with weak economies , as the euro is seen as a stable currency , prevents runaway inflation and encourages foreign investment due to its stability . 
 Within the EU several currencies have a peg to the euro , in most instances as a precondition to joining the eurozone . The Bulgarian lev was formerly pegged to the Deutsche Mark ; one other EU member state has a direct peg due to ERM II : the Danish krone . 
 In total , as of 2013 , 182 million people in Africa use a currency pegged to the euro , 27 million people outside the eurozone in Europe , and another 545 @,@ 000 people on Pacific islands . 
 Since 2005 , stamps issued by the Sovereign Military Order of Malta have been denominated in euros , although the Order 's official currency remains the Maltese <unk> . The Maltese <unk> itself is pegged to the euro and is only recognised as legal tender within the Order . 
 = = Economics = = 
 = = = Optimal currency area = = = 
 In economics , an optimum currency area , or region ( OCA or OCR ) , is a geographical region in which it would maximise economic efficiency to have the entire region share a single currency . There are two models , both proposed by Robert Mundell : the stationary expectations model and the international risk sharing model . Mundell himself advocates the international risk sharing model and thus concludes in favour of the euro . However , even before the creation of the single currency , there were concerns over diverging economies . Before the late @-@ 2000s recession the chances of a state leaving the euro , or the chances that the whole zone would collapse , were considered extremely slim . However the Greek government @-@ debt crisis led to former British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw claiming the eurozone could not last in its current form . Part of the problem seems to be the rules that were created when the euro was set up . John Lanchester , writing for The New Yorker , explains it thus : 
 The guiding principle of the currency , which opened for business in 1999 , were supposed to be a set of rules to limit a country 's annual deficit to three per cent of gross domestic product , and the total accumulated debt to sixty per cent of <unk> It was a nice idea , but by 2004 the two biggest economies in the euro zone , Germany and France , had broken the rules for three years in a row . 
 = = = Transaction costs and risks = = = 
 The most obvious benefit of adopting a single currency is to remove the cost of exchanging currency , theoretically allowing businesses and individuals to consummate previously unprofitable trades . For consumers , banks in the eurozone must charge the same for intra @-@ member cross @-@ border transactions as purely domestic transactions for electronic payments ( e.g. , credit cards , debit cards and cash machine withdrawals ) . 
 The absence of distinct currencies also theoretically removes exchange rate risks , although the imposition of transfer restrictions in 2012 – 13 Cypriot financial crisis means that the situation is not quite so simple . The risk of unanticipated exchange rate movement has always added an additional risk or uncertainty for companies or individuals that invest or trade outside their own currency zones . Companies that hedge against this risk will no longer need to shoulder this additional cost . This is particularly important for countries whose currencies had traditionally fluctuated a great deal , particularly the Mediterranean nations . 
 Financial markets on the continent are expected to be far more liquid and flexible than they were in the past . The reduction in cross @-@ border transaction costs will allow larger banking firms to provide a wider array of banking services that can compete across and beyond the eurozone . However , although transaction costs were reduced , some studies have shown that risk aversion has increased during the last 40 years in the Eurozone . 
 = = = Price parity = = = 
 Another effect of the common European currency is that differences in prices — in particular in price levels — should decrease because of the law of one price . Differences in prices can trigger arbitrage , i.e. , speculative trade in a commodity across borders purely to exploit the price differential . Therefore , prices on commonly traded goods are likely to converge , causing inflation in some regions and deflation in others during the transition . Some evidence of this has been observed in specific eurozone markets . 
 = = = Macroeconomic stability = = = 
 Low levels of inflation are the hallmark of stable and modern economies . Because a high level of inflation acts as a tax ( seigniorage ) and theoretically discourages investment , it is generally viewed as undesirable . In spite of the downside , many countries have been unable or unwilling to deal with serious inflationary pressures . Some countries have successfully contained them by establishing largely independent central banks . One such bank was the Bundesbank in Germany ; as the European Central Bank is modelled on the Bundesbank , it is independent of the pressures of national governments and has a mandate to keep inflation low . Member countries that join the euro hope to enjoy the macroeconomic stability associated with low levels of inflation . The ECB ( unlike the Federal Reserve in the United States of America ) does not have a second objective to sustain growth and employment . 
 Many national and corporate bonds denominated in euro are significantly more liquid and have lower interest rates than was historically the case when denominated in national currencies . While increased liquidity may lower the nominal interest rate on the bond , <unk> the bond in a currency with low levels of inflation arguably plays a much larger role . A credible commitment to low levels of inflation and a stable debt reduces the risk that the value of the debt will be eroded by higher levels of inflation or default in the future , allowing debt to be issued at a lower nominal interest rate . 
 Unfortunately , there is also a cost in structurally keeping inflation lower than in the United States , UK , and China . The result is that seen from those countries , the euro has become expensive , making European products increasingly expensive for its largest importers . Hence export from the euro zone becomes more difficult . This is one of the main reasons why economic growth inside the euro zone now lags behind growth in other large economies . This effect is strongest in European countries with a weak economy . 
 In general , those in Europe who own large amounts of euros are served by high stability and low inflation . Those who now need to earn euros , including those countries who need to pay interest on large debts , are likely better served with a slightly less strong euro leading to more export . Because with a lower euro , investors would see better chances for ( companies in ) southern European countries to grow themselves out of the crisis . As a result , investing there would become less risky , and that would push interest rates for southern countries more in line with the European average . 
 The contradiction here is that high macroeconomic stability in the form of ongoing historically low inflation over time leads to economic problems , creating higher interest rates and political and economic instability for the weaker partners . 
 = = = = Trade = = = = 
 A 2009 consensus from the studies of the introduction of the euro concluded that it has increased trade within the eurozone by 5 % to 10 % , although one study suggested an increase of only 3 % while another estimated 9 to 14 % . However , a meta @-@ analysis of all available studies suggests that the prevalence of positive estimates is caused by publication bias and that the underlying effect may be negligible . Furthermore , studies accounting for time trend reflecting general cohesion policies in Europe that started before , and continue after implementing the common currency find no effect on trade . These results suggest that other policies aimed at European integration might be the source of observed increase in trade . 
 = = = = Investment = = = = 
 Physical investment seems to have increased by 5 % in the eurozone due to the introduction . Regarding foreign direct investment , a study found that the intra @-@ eurozone FDI stocks have increased by about 20 % during the first four years of the EMU . Concerning the effect on corporate investment , there is evidence that the introduction of the euro has resulted in an increase in investment rates and that it has made it easier for firms to access financing in Europe . The euro has most specifically stimulated investment in companies that come from countries that previously had weak currencies . A study found that the introduction of the euro accounts for 22 % of the investment rate after 1998 in countries that previously had a weak currency . 
 = = = = Inflation = = = = 
 The introduction of the euro has led to extensive discussion about its possible effect on inflation . In the short term , there was a widespread impression in the population of the eurozone that the introduction of the euro had led to an increase in prices , but this impression was not confirmed by general indices of inflation and other studies . A study of this paradox found that this was due to an asymmetric effect of the introduction of the euro on prices : while it had no effect on most goods , it had an effect on cheap goods which have seen their price round up after the introduction of the euro . The study found that consumers based their beliefs on inflation of those cheap goods which are frequently purchased . It has also been suggested that the jump in small prices may be because prior to the introduction , retailers made fewer upward adjustments and waited for the introduction of the euro to do so . 
 = = = = Exchange rate risk = = = = 
 One of the advantages of the adoption of a common currency is the reduction of the risk associated with changes in currency exchange rates . It has been found that the introduction of the euro created " significant reductions in market risk exposures for <unk> firms both in and outside of Europe " . These reductions in market risk " were concentrated in firms domiciled in the eurozone and in non @-@ Euro firms with a high fraction of foreign sales or assets in Europe " . 
 = = = = Financial integration = = = = 
 The introduction of the euro seems to have had a strong effect on European financial integration . According to a study on this question , it has " significantly reshaped the European financial system , especially with respect to the securities markets [ ... ] However , the real and policy barriers to integration in the retail and corporate banking sectors remain significant , even if the wholesale end of banking has been largely integrated . " Specifically , the euro has significantly decreased the cost of trade in bonds , equity , and banking assets within the eurozone . On a global level , there is evidence that the introduction of the euro has led to an integration in terms of investment in bond portfolios , with eurozone countries lending and borrowing more between each other than with other countries . 
 = = = = Effect on interest rates = = = = 
 As of January 2014 , and since the introduction of the euro , interest rates of most members countries ( particularly those with a weak currency ) , have decreased . The countries whose interest rates fell most as a result of the adoption of the euro are Greece , Ireland , Portugal , Spain , and Italy . These very countries have had the most serious sovereign financing problems . 
 The effect of declining interest rates , combined with excess liquidity continually provided by the ECB , made it easier for banks within the countries in which interest rates fell the most , and their linked sovereigns , to borrow significant amounts ( above the 3 % of GDP budget deficit imposed on the eurozone initially ) and significantly inflate their public and private debt levels . Following the late @-@ 2000s financial crisis , governments in these countries found it necessary to bail out or nationalise their privately held banks to prevent systemic failure of the banking system when underlying hard or financial asset values were found to be grossly inflated and sometimes so near worthless there was no liquid market for them . This further increased the already high levels of public debt to a level the markets began to consider unsustainable , via increasing government bond interest rates , producing the ongoing European sovereign @-@ debt crisis . 
 = = = = Price convergence = = = = 
 The evidence on the convergence of prices in the eurozone with the introduction of the euro is mixed . Several studies failed to find any evidence of convergence following the introduction of the euro after a phase of convergence in the early 1990s . Other studies have found evidence of price convergence , in particular for cars . A possible reason for the divergence between the different studies is that the processes of convergence may not have been linear , slowing down substantially between 2000 and 2003 , and resurfacing after 2003 as suggested by a recent study ( 2009 ) . 
 = = = = Tourism = = = = 
