 Liverpool was involved in the closest finish to a league season during the 1988 – 89 season . Liverpool finished equal with Arsenal on both points and goal difference , but lost the title on total goals scored when Arsenal scored the final goal in the last minute of the season . 
 Dalglish cited the Hillsborough disaster and its repercussions as the reason for his resignation in 1991 ; he was replaced by former player Graeme Souness . Under his leadership Liverpool won the 1992 FA Cup Final , but their league performances slumped , with two consecutive sixth @-@ place finishes , eventually resulting in his dismissal in January 1994 . Souness was replaced by Roy Evans , and Liverpool went on to win the 1995 Football League Cup Final . While they made some title challenges under Evans , third @-@ place finishes in 1996 and 1998 were the best they could manage , and so Gérard Houllier was appointed co @-@ manager in the 1998 – 99 season , and became the sole manager in November 1998 after Evans resigned . In 2001 , Houllier 's second full season in charge , Liverpool won a " Treble " : the FA Cup , League Cup and UEFA Cup . Houllier underwent major heart surgery during the 2001 – 02 season and Liverpool finished second in the League , behind Arsenal . They won a further League Cup in 2003 , but failed to mount a title challenge in the two seasons that followed . 
 Houllier was replaced by Rafael Benítez at the end of the 2003 – 04 season . Despite finishing fifth in Benítez 's first season , Liverpool won the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League , beating A.C. Milan 3 – 2 in a penalty shootout after the match ended with a score of 3 – 3 . The following season , Liverpool finished third in the Premier League and won the 2006 FA Cup Final , beating West Ham United in a penalty shootout after the match finished 3 – 3 . American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks became the owners of the club during the 2006 – 07 season , in a deal which valued the club and its outstanding debts at £ 218 @.@ 9 million . The club reached the 2007 UEFA Champions League Final against Milan , as it had in 2005 , but lost 2 – 1 . During the 2008 – 09 season Liverpool achieved 86 points , its highest Premier League points total , and finished as runners up to Manchester United . 
 In the 2009 – 10 season , Liverpool finished seventh in the Premier League and failed to qualify for the Champions League . Benítez subsequently left by mutual consent and was replaced by Fulham manager Roy Hodgson . At the start of the 2010 – 11 season Liverpool was on the verge of bankruptcy and the club 's creditors asked the High Court to allow the sale of the club , overruling the wishes of Hicks and Gillett . John W. Henry , owner of the Boston Red Sox and of Fenway Sports Group , bid successfully for the club and took ownership in October 2010 . Poor results during the start of that season led to Hodgson leaving the club by mutual consent and former player & manager Kenny Dalglish taking over . Despite a record 8th League Cup success against Cardiff and an FA Cup final defeat to Chelsea , Liverpool finished in eighth position in the 2011 – 12 season , the worst league finish in 18 years and led to the sacking of Dalglish . He was replaced by Brendan Rodgers . In Rodgers ' first season , Liverpool finished in seventh . In the 2013 – 14 season , Liverpool mounted an unexpected title charge to finish second behind champions Manchester City and subsequently return to the Champions League , scoring 101 goals in the process , the most since the 106 scored in the 1895 – 96 season . Following a disappointing 2014 – 15 season , where Liverpool finished sixth in the league , and a poor start to the 2015 – 16 season , Brendan Rodgers was sacked in October 2015 . He was replaced by Jürgen Klopp , who became the third foreign manager in Liverpool 's history . In Klopp 's first season at Liverpool , he took the club to the finals of both the Football League Cup and UEFA Europa League , finishing as runner @-@ up in both competitions . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 For much of Liverpool 's history its home colours have been all red , but when the club was founded its kit was more like the contemporary Everton kit . The blue and white quartered shirts were used until 1894 , when the club adopted the city 's colour of red . The city 's symbol of the liver bird was adopted as the club 's badge in 1901 , although it was not incorporated into the kit until 1955 . Liverpool continued to wear red shirts and white shorts until 1964 , when manager Bill Shankly decided to change to an all red strip . Liverpool played in all red for the first time against Anderlecht , as Ian St. John recalled in his autobiography : 
 He [ Shankly ] thought the colour scheme would carry psychological impact — red for danger , red for power . He came into the dressing room one day and threw a pair of red shorts to Ronnie Yeats . " Get into those shorts and let 's see how you look " , he said . " Christ , Ronnie , you look awesome , terrifying . You look <unk> tall . " " Why not go the whole hog , boss ? " I suggested . " Why not wear red socks ? Let 's go out all in red . " Shankly approved and an iconic kit was born . 
 The Liverpool away strip has more often than not been all yellow or white shirts and black shorts , but there have been several exceptions . An all grey kit was introduced in 1987 , which was used until the 1991 – 92 centenary season , when it was replaced by a combination of green shirts and white shorts . After various colour combinations in the 1990s , including gold and navy , bright yellow , black and grey , and <unk> , the club alternated between yellow and white away kits until the 2008 – 09 season , when it re @-@ introduced the grey kit . A third kit is designed for European away matches , though it is also worn in domestic away matches on occasions when the current away kit clashes with a team 's home kit . The current kits are designed by Warrior Sports , who became the club 's kit providers at the start of the 2012 – 13 season . In February 2015 , Warrior 's parent company New Balance announced it would be entering the global football market , with teams sponsored by Warrior now being outfitted by New Balance . The only other branded shirts worn by the club were made by Umbro until 1985 , when they were replaced by Adidas , who produced the kits until 1996 when Reebok took over . They produced the kits for ten years before Adidas made the kits from 2006 to 2012 . 
 Liverpool was the first English professional club to have a sponsor 's logo on its shirts , after agreeing a deal with Hitachi in 1979 . Since then the club has been sponsored by Crown Paints , Candy , Carlsberg and Standard Chartered Bank . The contract with Carlsberg , which was signed in 1992 , was the longest @-@ lasting agreement in English top @-@ flight football . The association with Carlsberg ended at the start of the 2010 – 11 season , when Standard Chartered Bank became the club 's sponsor . 
 The Liverpool badge is based on the city 's liver bird , which in the past had been placed inside a shield . In 1992 , to commemorate the centennial of the club , a new badge was commissioned , including a representation of the Shankly Gates . The next year twin flames were added at either side are symbolic of the Hillsborough memorial outside Anfield , where an eternal flame burns in memory of those who died in the Hillsborough disaster . In 2012 , Warrior Sports ' first Liverpool kit removed the shield and gates , returning the badge to what had adorned Liverpool shirts in the 1970s ; the flames were moved to the back collar of the shirt , surrounding the number 96 for number who died at Hillsborough . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Anfield was built in 1884 on land adjacent to Stanley Park . It was originally used by Everton before the club moved to Goodison Park after a dispute over rent with Anfield owner John Houlding . Left with an empty ground , Houlding founded Liverpool in 1892 and the club has played at Anfield ever since . The capacity of the stadium at the time was 20 @,@ 000 , although only 100 spectators attended Liverpool 's first match at Anfield . 
 In 1906 the banked stand at one end of the ground was formally renamed the Spion Kop after a hill in KwaZulu @-@ Natal . The hill was the site of the Battle of Spion Kop in the Second Boer War , where over 300 men of the Lancashire Regiment died , many of them from Liverpool . At its peak , the stand could hold 28 @,@ 000 spectators and was one of the largest single @-@ tier stands in the world . Many stadia in England had stands named after Spion Kop , but Anfield 's was the largest of them at the time ; it could hold more supporters than some entire football grounds . 
 Anfield could accommodate more than 60 @,@ 000 supporters at its peak , and had a capacity of 55 @,@ 000 until the 1990s . The Taylor Report and Premier League regulations obliged Liverpool to convert Anfield to an all @-@ seater stadium in time for the 1993 – 94 season , reducing the capacity to 45 @,@ 276 . The findings of the Taylor Report precipitated the redevelopment of the Kemlyn Road Stand , which was rebuilt in 1992 , coinciding with the centenary of the club , and is now known as the Centenary Stand . An extra tier was added to the Anfield Road end in 1998 , which further increased the capacity of the ground but gave rise to problems when it was opened . A series of support poles and stanchions were inserted to give extra stability to the top tier of the stand after movement of the tier was reported at the start of the 1999 – 2000 season . 
 Because of restrictions on expanding the capacity at Anfield , Liverpool announced plans to move to the proposed Stanley Park Stadium in May 2002 . Planning permission was granted in July 2004 , and in September 2006 , Liverpool City Council agreed to grant Liverpool a 999 @-@ year lease on the proposed site . Following the takeover of the club by George Gillett and Tom Hicks in February 2007 , the proposed stadium was redesigned . The new design was approved by the Council in November 2007 . The stadium was scheduled to open in August 2011 and would hold 60 @,@ 000 spectators , with HKS , Inc. contracted to build the stadium . Construction was halted in August 2008 , as Gillett and Hicks had difficulty in financing the £ 300 million needed for the development . In October 2012 , BBC Sport reported that Fenway Sports Group , the new owners of Liverpool FC , had decided to redevelop their current home at Anfield stadium , rather than building a new stadium in Stanley Park . As part of the redevelopment the capacity of Anfield was to increase from 45 @,@ 276 to approximately 60 @,@ 000 and would cost approximately £ 150m . 
 = = Support = = 
 Liverpool is one of the best supported clubs in Europe . The club states that its worldwide fan base includes more than 200 officially recognised Club of the LFC Official Supporters Clubs in at least 50 countries . Notable groups include Spirit of Shankly and Reclaim The Kop . The club takes advantage of this support through its worldwide summer tours . Liverpool fans often refer to themselves as <unk> , a reference to the fans who once stood , and now sit , on the Kop at Anfield . In 2008 a group of fans decided to form a splinter club , A.F.C. Liverpool , to play matches for fans who had been priced out of watching Premier League football . 
 The song " You 'll Never Walk Alone " , originally from the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical Carousel and later recorded by Liverpool musicians Gerry & The Pacemakers , is the club 's anthem and has been sung by the Anfield crowd since the early 1960s . It has since gained popularity among fans of other clubs around the world . The song 's title adorns the top of the Shankly Gates , which were unveiled on 2 August 1982 in memory of former manager Bill Shankly . The " You 'll Never Walk Alone " portion of the Shankly Gates is also reproduced on the club 's crest . 
 The club 's supporters have been involved in two stadium disasters . The first was the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster , in which 39 Juventus supporters were killed . They were confined to a corner by Liverpool fans who had charged in their direction ; the weight of the cornered fans caused a wall to collapse . UEFA laid the blame for the incident solely on the Liverpool supporters , and banned all English clubs from European competition for five years . Liverpool was banned for an additional year , preventing it from participating in the 1990 – 91 European Cup , even though it won the League in 1990 . Twenty @-@ seven fans were arrested on suspicion of manslaughter and were extradited to Belgium in 1987 to face trial . In 1989 , after a five @-@ month trial in Belgium , 14 Liverpool fans were given three @-@ year sentences for involuntary manslaughter ; half of the terms were suspended . 
 The second disaster took place during an FA Cup semi @-@ final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium , Sheffield , on 15 April 1989 . Ninety @-@ six Liverpool fans died as a consequence of overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end , in what became known as the Hillsborough disaster . In the following days The Sun newspaper published an article entitled " The Truth " , in which it claimed that Liverpool fans had robbed the dead and had urinated on and attacked the police . Subsequent investigations proved the allegations false , leading to a boycott of the newspaper by Liverpool fans across the city and elsewhere ; many still refuse to buy The Sun more than 20 years later . Many support organisations were set up in the wake of the disaster , such as the Hillsborough Justice Campaign , which represents bereaved families , survivors and supporters in their efforts to secure justice . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 Liverpool 's longest @-@ established rivalry is with fellow Merseyside and Liverpool @-@ based team Everton , against whom the club contest the Merseyside derby . Their rivalry stems from Liverpool 's formation and the dispute with Everton officials and the then owners of Anfield . Unlike other rivalries , there is no political , geographical or religious split between Liverpool and Everton . The Merseyside derby is usually sold out . It is one of the few local derbies which do not enforce fan segregation , and hence was known as the " friendly derby " . Since the mid @-@ 1980s , the rivalry has intensified both on and off the field and , since the inception of the Premier League in 1992 , the Merseyside derby has had more players sent off than any other Premier League game . It has been referred to as " the most ill @-@ disciplined and explosive fixture in the Premier League " . 
 Liverpool 's rivalry with Manchester United is viewed as a manifestation of the cities ' competition during the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century . The two clubs alternated as champions between 1964 and 1967 , and Manchester United became the first English team to win the European Cup in 1968 , followed by Liverpool 's four European Cup victories . Despite the 38 league titles and eight European Cups between them the two rivals have rarely been successful at the same time – Liverpool 's run of titles in the 1970s and 1980s coincided with Manchester United 's 26 @-@ year title drought , and United 's success in the Premier League @-@ era has likewise coincided with Liverpool 's ongoing drought , and the two clubs have finished first and second in the league only five times . Nonetheless , former Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson said in 2002 , " My greatest challenge was knocking Liverpool right off their fucking perch " , and the last player to be transferred between the two clubs was Phil <unk> , who moved to Liverpool from Manchester United in 1964 . 
 = = Ownership and finances = = 
 As the owner of Anfield and founder of Liverpool , John Houlding was the club 's first chairman , a position he held from its founding in 1892 until 1904 . John McKenna took over as chairman after Houlding 's departure . McKenna subsequently became President of the Football League . The chairmanship changed hands many times before John Smith , whose father was a shareholder of the club , took up the role in 1973 . He oversaw the most successful period in Liverpool 's history before stepping down in 1990 . His successor was Noel White who became Chairman in 1990 In August 1991 David Moores , whose family had owned the club for more than 50 years became Chairman . His uncle John Moores was also a shareholder at Liverpool and was chairman of Everton from 1961 to 1973 . Moores owned 51 percent of the club , and in 2004 expressed his willingness to consider a bid for his shares in Liverpool . 
 Moores eventually sold the club to American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks on 6 February 2007 . The deal valued the club and its outstanding debts at £ 218 @.@ 9 million . The pair paid £ 5 @,@ 000 per share , or £ <unk> for the total shareholding and £ <unk> to cover the club 's debts . Disagreements between Gillett and Hicks , and the fans ' lack of support for them , resulted in the pair looking to sell the club . Martin Broughton was appointed chairman of the club on 16 April 2010 to oversee its sale . In May 2010 , accounts were released showing the holding company of the club to be £ <unk> in debt ( due to leveraged takeover ) with losses of £ 55m , causing auditor KPMG to qualify its audit opinion . The group 's creditors , including the Royal Bank of Scotland , took Gillett and Hicks to court to force them to allow the board to proceed with the sale of the club , the major asset of the holding company . A High Court judge , Mr Justice Floyd , ruled in favour of the creditors and paved the way for the sale of the club to Fenway Sports Group ( formerly New England Sports Ventures ) , although Gillett and Hicks still had the option to appeal . Liverpool was sold to Fenway Sports Group on 15 October 2010 for £ 300m . 
 Liverpool has been described as a global brand ; a 2010 report valued the club 's trademarks and associated intellectual property at £ <unk> , an increase of £ 5m on the previous year . Liverpool was given a brand rating of AA ( Very Strong ) . In April 2010 business magazine Forbes ranked Liverpool as the sixth most valuable football team in the world , behind Manchester United , Real Madrid , Arsenal , Barcelona and Bayern Munich ; they valued the club at $ <unk> ( £ <unk> ) , excluding debt . Accountants Deloitte ranked Liverpool eighth in the Deloitte Football Money League , which ranks the world 's football clubs in terms of revenue . Liverpool 's income in the 2009 – 10 season was € <unk> 
 = = Liverpool in popular culture = = 
 Because of its successful history , Liverpool is often featured when football is depicted in British culture and has appeared in a number of media firsts . The club appeared in the first edition of the BBC 's Match of the Day , which screened highlights of its match against Arsenal at Anfield on 22 August 1964 . The first football match to be televised in colour was between Liverpool and West Ham United , broadcast live in March 1967 . Liverpool fans featured in the Pink Floyd song " Fearless " , in which they sang excerpts from " You 'll Never Walk Alone " . To mark the club 's appearance in the 1988 FA Cup Final , Liverpool released a song known as the " Anfield Rap " , featuring John Barnes and other members of the squad . 
 A documentary drama on the Hillsborough disaster , written by Jimmy McGovern , was screened in 1996 . It featured Christopher Eccleston as Trevor Hicks , whose story is the focus of the script . Hicks , who lost two teenage daughters in the disaster , went on to campaign for safer stadiums and helped to form the Hillsborough Families Support Group . Liverpool featured in the film The 51st State ( also known as Formula 51 ) , in which ex @-@ hitman Felix <unk> ( Robert Carlyle ) is a keen supporter of the team and the last scene takes place at a match between Liverpool and Manchester United . The club was featured in a children 's television show called Scully ; the plot revolved around a young boy , Francis Scully , who tried to gain a trial match with Liverpool . The show featured prominent Liverpool players of the time such as Kenny Dalglish . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First @-@ team squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserves and Academy = = = 
 = = = Former players = = = 
 = = = Player records = = = 
 = = = Club captains = = = 
 Since the establishment of the club in 1892 , 45 players have been club captain of Liverpool F.C. Andrew Hannah became the first captain of the club after Liverpool separated from Everton and formed its own club . Initially Alex Raisbeck , who was club captain from 1899 to 1909 , was the longest serving captain before being overtaken by Steven Gerrard who served 12 seasons as Liverpool captain starting from the 2003 – 04 season . The present captain is Jordan Henderson , who replaced Gerrard in the 2015 – 16 season following Gerrard 's move to LA Galaxy . 
 = = = Player of the Season = = = 
 = = Club officials = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Liverpool 's first trophy was the Lancashire League , which it won in the club 's first season . In 1901 , the club won its first League title , while its first success in the FA Cup was in 1965 . In terms of the number of trophies won , Liverpool 's most successful decade was the 1980s , when the club won six League titles , two FA Cups , four League Cups , five Charity Shields ( one shared ) and two European Cups . Liverpool has won the English League Championship eighteen times , the FA Cup seven times and the League Cup a record eight times . The club achieved a League and FA Cup " double " in 1986 and won the League and European Cup double both in 1977 and in 1984 . Liverpool also won the League Cup in 1984 to complete a treble , a feat repeated ( albeit with different trophies ) in 2001 , when the club won the FA Cup , League Cup and UEFA Cup . 
 The club has accumulated more top @-@ flight wins and points than any other English team . Liverpool also has the highest average league finishing position ( 3 @,@ 3 ) for the 50 @-@ year period to 2015 and second @-@ highest average league finishing position for the period 1900 – 1999 after Arsenal , with an average league placing of 8 @.@ 7 . Liverpool has won the European Cup , Europe 's premier club competition , five times , an English record and only surpassed by Real Madrid and A.C. Milan . Liverpool 's fifth European Cup win , in 2005 , meant that the club was awarded the trophy permanently and was also awarded a multiple @-@ winner badge . Liverpool has won the UEFA Cup , Europe 's secondary club competition , three times . 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 = = = = League = = = = 
 First Division : 18 
 1900 – 01 , 1905 – 06 , 1921 – 22 , 1922 – 23 , 1946 – 47 , 1963 – 64 , 1965 – 66 , 1972 – 73 , 1975 – 76 , 1976 – 77 , 1978 – 79 , 1979 – 80 , 1981 – 82 , 1982 – 83 , 1983 – 84 , 1985 – 86 , 1987 – 88 , 1989 – 90 
 Second Division : 4 
 1893 – 94 , 1895 – 96 , 1904 – 05 , 1961 – 62 
 Lancashire League : 1 
 1892 – 93 
 = = = = Cups = = = = 
 FA Cup : 7 
 1964 – 65 , 1973 – 74 , 1985 – 86 , 1988 – 89 , 1991 – 92 , 2000 – 01 , 2005 – 06 
 League Cup : 8 
 1980 – 81 , 1981 – 82 , 1982 – 83 , 1983 – 84 , 1994 – 95 , 2000 – 01 , 2002 – 03 , 2011 – 12 ( record ) 
 FA Charity / Community Shield : 15 
 1964 * , 1965 * , 1966 , 1974 * , 1976 , 1977 * , 1979 , 1980 , 1982 , 1986 * , 1988 , 1989 , 1990 * , 2001 , 2006 ( * shared ) 
 Football League Super Cup : 1 
 1985 – 86 
 = = = European = = = 
 European Cup / UEFA Champions League : 5 
 1976 – 77 , 1977 – 78 , 1980 – 81 , 1983 – 84 , 2004 – 05 
 UEFA Cup / UEFA Europa League : : 3 
 1972 – 73 , 1975 – 76 , 2000 – 01 
 European Super Cup / UEFA Super Cup : 3 
 1977 , 2001 , 2005 
 = = = Doubles and trebles = = = 
 Doubles : League and FA Cup : 1 
 1985 – 86 
 League and League Cup : 2 
 1981 – 82 , 1982 – 83 
 European Double ( League and European Cup ) : 1 
 1976 – 77 
 League and UEFA Cup : 2 
 1972 – 73 , 1975 – 76 
 League Cup and European Cup : 1 
 1980 – 81 
 <unk> , League Cup and European Cup : 1 
 1983 – 84 
 FA Cup , League Cup and UEFA Cup : 1 
 2000 – 01 
 Especially short competitions , such as the FA Community Shield and the UEFA Super Cup , are not generally considered to contribute towards a Double or Treble . 
 = New York State Route 252A = 
 New York State Route 252A ( NY 252A ) was an east – west state highway located within the town of Chili in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route was at an intersection with NY 33A and NY 386 in the hamlet of Chili Center . Its eastern terminus was at a junction with NY 383 near the Greater Rochester International Airport . NY 252A was known as Paul Road and was a 4 @.@ 40 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 08 km ) alternate route of NY 252 through Chili ; however , it did not directly connect to NY 252 . 
 NY 252A was originally designated as New York State Route 198 c . 1932 . NY 198 became part of NY 252 in 1949 ; however , NY 252 was realigned in the late 1950s to follow a more southerly alignment through the town of Chili . Its former routing was redesignated as NY 252A . The route was realigned slightly in the late 1960s following an expansion of the Greater Rochester International Airport 's primary runway . Ownership and maintenance of NY 252A was transferred from the state of New York to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap that took effect on November 26 , 2007 , and the NY 252A designation was eliminated on July 1 , 2009 . NY 252A 's former routing is now part of County Route 168 ( CR 168 ) , an unsigned route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 252A began at an intersection with NY 33A and NY 386 in Chili Center , a hamlet located within the town of Chili . The route proceeded eastward from the commercial community and passed through largely residential neighborhoods on its way across Chili . As it approached the Greater Rochester International Airport , the homes were gradually replaced by industrial factories and warehouses . It crossed the Rochester and Southern Railroad in the community of Maplewood just before intersecting Beahan Road , a local road that serves as the western extent of the airport property . 
 The route , and Paul Road along with it , turned southward at the Beahan Road junction , replacing Beahan Road as the boundary @-@ delimiting highway . This portion of NY 252A formed a " U " as it looped around the southern end of the airport 's primary runway . East of the runway , the route gradually curved to the northeast before ending south of the airport at a junction with NY 383 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of the city of Rochester . 
 = = History = = 
 The east – west highway connecting the hamlet of Chili Center to the western bank of the Genesee River by way of the community of Maplewood was originally known as Clifton Road . At the time , Clifton Road continued due east from the modern junction of Paul and Beahan Roads to Scottsville Road ( now NY 383 ) . It became a state highway on August 6 , 1903 , following the conclusion of a 13 @-@ month project to improve the highway . The Chili Center – Maplewood highway was designated as NY 198 c . 1932 . 
 NY 198 became a westward extension of NY 252 on January 1 , 1949 , and Clifton Road was renamed to Paul Road in the early 1950s . NY 252 was rerouted in the late 1950s to follow a new , more southerly alignment through Chili . The former routing of NY 252 between Chili Center and NY 383 was redesignated as NY 252A even though it did not directly connect to NY 252 , its implied parent route . In the late 1960s , the then @-@ Rochester – Monroe County Airport expanded its primary runway southward across a tract of land that included part of NY 252A 's routing . As a result , NY 252A was moved onto a new alignment that circumvented the runway to the south . 
 In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of NY 252A was transferred from the state of New York to Monroe County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . NY 252A became concurrent with CR 168 , which was extended eastward from its previous terminus at NY 33A and NY 386 in Chili Center to cover NY 252A . The NY 252A designation was removed from CR 168 on July 1 , 2009 . However , the NY 252A shields remained posted until they were removed by Fall 2010 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Chili , Monroe County . 
 = History of Bombay under Portuguese rule ( 1534 – 1661 ) = 
 Bombay , now called Mumbai , Bombaim in Portuguese , is the financial and commercial capital of India and one of the most populous cities in the world . At the time of arrival of the Portuguese , current Bombay was an archipelago of seven islands . Between the third century BCE and 1348 , the islands came under the control of successive Hindu dynasties . The Muslim rulers of Gujarat , who had been ruling current Thane and Vasai for a few decades , annexed the islands in 1348 , that were later governed by the Gujarat Sultanate from 1391 to 1534 . Growing apprehensive of the power of the Mughal emperor Humayun , Sultan Bahadur Shah of the Gujarat Sultanate was obliged to sign the Treaty of Bassein with the Portuguese Empire on 23 December 1534 . According to the treaty , the seven islands of Bombay , the nearby strategic town of Bassein and its dependencies were offered to the Portuguese . The territories were later surrendered on 25 October 1535 . 
 The Portuguese were actively involved in the foundation and growth of their Roman Catholic religious orders in Bombay . They called the islands by various names , which finally took the written form Bombaim . The islands were leased to several Portuguese officers during their regime . The Portuguese Franciscans and Jesuits built several churches in the city , prominent being the St. Michael 's Church at Mahim , St. John the Baptist Church at Andheri , St. Andrew 's Church at Bandra , and Gloria Church at <unk> . The Portuguese also built several fortifications around the city like the Bombay Castle , Castella de Aguada ( Castelo da Aguada or Bandra Fort ) , and Madh Fort . The British were in constant struggle with the Portuguese vying for hegemony over Bombay , as they recognized its strategic natural harbour and its natural isolation from land @-@ attacks . 
 By the middle of the 17th century the growing power of the Dutch Empire forced the British to acquire a station in western India . On 11 May 1661 , the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza , daughter of King John IV of Portugal , placed Bombay in possession of the British Empire , as part of dowry of Catherine to Charles . Even after the treaty , some villages in Bombay remained under Portuguese possession , but many were later acquired by the British . 
 = = Arrival of the Portuguese = = 
 Between the third century BCE and 1534 , the islands had come under the control of successive dynasties : Mauryas ( 3rd century BCE - around 185 BCE ) , Satavahanas ( Around 185 BCE - 250 CE ) , Abhiras and Vakatakas ( 250 CE - early 5th century ) , Kalachuris ( 5th century ) , Konkan Mauryas ( 6th and early 7th century ) , Chalukyas ( later 7th century ) , Rashtrakutas ( mid @-@ 8th century ) , Silharas ( 810 to 1260 ) , Yadavas ( late 13th century - 1348 ) , Muslim rulers of Gujarat ( 1348 – 1391 ) , and the Gujarat Sultanate ( 1391 – 1534 ) . At the time of arrival of the Portuguese , Bombay was ruled by Sultan Bahadur Shah of the Gujarat Sultanate , and was an archipelago of seven islands : Bombay Island ( Bombaim ) , Parel , Mazagaon , Mahim , Colaba , Worli , and Old Woman 's Island ( also known as Little Colaba ) . The Salsette group of islands were located east of Bombay , separated by the Mahim Bay . Important strategic towns located near Bombay were ; Bassein ( <unk> ) to the north , Thana to the east , and Chaul to the south . 
 The Portuguese first reached the west coast of India when the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama landed at Calicut in 1498 . For several years after their arrival in India , they had been consolidating their power in north Konkan . They had established a strong foothold in Goa , which they captured from the Sultan of Bijapur in 1510 . Portuguese explorer Francisco de Almeida 's ship sailed into the deep natural harbour of Bombay in December 1508 on his expedition from Cannanore to Diu . The Portuguese paid their first visit to the islands on 21 January 1509 , when they landed at Mahim after capturing a barge of the Gujarat Sultanate in the Mahim creek . Between 1513 @-@ 14 , they requested Sultan Bahadur Shah to allow them build a fortress at Mahim . In 1517 , during the viceroyalty of Lopo Soares de <unk> ( 1515 – 18 ) , João de <unk> entered the <unk> creek ( Bandra creek ) and defeated the Gujarat commandant of Mahim . Between 1522 and 1524 , when Duarte de Menezes was viceroy of Goa , the Portuguese were constantly prowling about Bombay for the ships of the Gujarat <unk> . 
 In 1526 , the Portuguese established their factory at Bassein . During 1528 @-@ 29 , Lopo Vaz de Sampaio seized the fort of Mahim from the Gujarat Sultanate , when Sultan Bahadur Shah was at war with Nizam @-@ ul @-@ mulk , the emperor of Chaul . Bombay came into prominence in connection with the attempt of the Portuguese to capture Diu in 1530 @-@ 31 . Nuno da Cunha , the viceroy of Goa , commanded the largest fleet seen in India , which passed through Bombay Harbour . In March – April 1531 , the Portuguese torched the towns of Thana and Mahim . In consequence of this success , and later of Nuno da Cunha 's capture of Bassein in January 1533 , the islands of Bombay and Mahim , together with Bandra , became tributary to the Portuguese . 
 = = Accession of the islands to the Portuguese = = 
 The Mughal Empire , founded in 1526 , was the dominant power in the Indian subcontinent during the mid @-@ 16th century . The dynasty was founded when Babur , hailing from Ferghana ( in modern @-@ day Uzbekistan ) , invaded parts of North India and defeated Ibrahim Shah Lodhi , the ruler of Delhi Sultanate , at the First Battle of Panipat in 1526 . After Babur 's death on 26 December 1530 , his son Humayun ( 1530 – 40 ) ascended to the throne at Agra on 29 December 1530 . 
 Sultan Bahadur Shah had grown apprehensive of the power of Humayun . He dispatched his chief officer <unk> ( Shah <unk> ) to Nuno da Cunha with an offer to hand over the seven islands of Bombay together with Bassein , its dependencies , and revenues by sea and land . On 23 December 1534 , the Treaty of Bassein was signed on board the galleon San Mateos ( St. Matthew ) . Bassein and the seven islands of Bombay were surrendered later by a treaty of peace and commerce between Bahadur Shah and Nuno da Cunha on 25 October 1535 , permanently ending the Islamic rule on the islands . 
 = = Development of islands = = 
 In the general distribution of estates which occurred after 1534 , Bombay Island was leased to Mestre Diogo for an annual rent of 1 @,@ 432 ½ pardaos ( about Rs . 537 @-@ 3 @-@ 0 ) , payable at the royal treasury in Bassein . Mahim was similarly rented for 36 @,@ 057 foedeas ( Rs . 751 @-@ 3 @-@ 0 ) , the custom house of Mahim for 39 @,@ 975 foedeas ( Rs . 791 @-@ 2 @-@ 9 ) , and Mazagon for 8 @,@ 500 foedeas ( Rs . 178 ) . The San Miguel ( St. Michael 's Church ) in Mahim , the oldest Portuguese Franciscan church in Bombay , was built in 1534 . Bombay was placed under the spiritual jurisdiction of the <unk> da Vara at Bassein . Under his auspices , the Franciscan Order was established . The Jesuit Order was established in 1542 , the most notable member of which was the Navarrese Jesuit Francis Xavier . The Dominican Order established in Goa in 1545 , was established in Bombay in 1548 . The Portuguese called the islands by various names like <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , which finally took the written form Bombaim , still common in current Portuguese use . After the British gained possession , it was believed to be anglicised to Bombay from the Portuguese Bombaim . Between 1545 and 1548 , during the viceroyalty of João de Castro ( 1545 @-@ 7 ) , the four villages of Parel , Wadala , Sion , and Worli were granted to Manuel Serrão for an annual payment of 412 pardaos ( Rs . 154 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 ) . Salsette was granted for three years to João Rodrigues Dantas , Cosme Corres , and Manuel Corres . Trombay and Chembur were granted to Roque Tello de Menezes , and the Island of Pory ( Elephanta Island ) to João <unk> in 1548 for 105 pardaos ( Rs . 39 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 ) . The revenue of the custom house at Walkeshwar was granted to a Portuguese officer for 60 foedeas ( Rs . 1 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 ) . Mazagaon was granted to António Pessoa . In 1554 , during the viceroyalty of Pedro Mascarenhas , the seven islands of Bombay were leased to Garcia de Orta , a Portuguese physician and botanist , for a yearly rent equivalent to about £ 85 sterling . Orta had fled Portugal to escape the trials of the Portuguese Inquisition , established in 1536 , that kept an eye on Jewish families converted to Catholicism and severely persecuted them in case of real or imagined relapse on their former faith . 
 Garcia de Orta was responsible for building the manor @-@ house ( Bombay Castle ) in Bombay . He also mentioned several accounts of the islands and the people living in Bombay during his time . During his regime , as regards the population of the island , Bombay was composed of seven villages subordinate to two <unk> ( <unk> ) or chief stations , at which customs @-@ duty was levied . These villages were Mahim , Parel , <unk> ( Wadala ) and <unk> ( Sion ) under the kasba ( chief officer ) of Mahim , and Mazagaon , Bombaim ( Bombay ) , and <unk> ( Worli ) under the kasba ( chief officer ) of Bombay . In addition to these , there were smaller hamlets like <unk> , Colaba , <unk> and Dongri , which had existed from the epoch of indigenous Hindu settlement . The Kolis , a fishing community , formed the most numerous class of people , and dwelt in most parts of Bombay from Colaba in the south to Sion and Mahim in the north . Other Hindu communities residing were , the <unk> and <unk> ( <unk> ) ( who cultivated the fields and sowed them with rice and all sorts of pulse ) , the <unk> ( who tended the orchards ) , and the <unk> ( men @-@ at @-@ arms ) ( who were Bhandaris ) . The Parus ( Prabhus ) dwelt in Mahim , Bombay , and Parel . They collected the rents of the King and of the inhabitants and their estates , and were also merchants . The Muslim Moors in Bombay were solely engaged in maritime trade . A few Muslims of less mixed descent were living in Mahim , but the bulk of the followers of Islam belonged to the Konkani Muslim community . Christians residing in Bombay during his time included eleven Roman Catholic Portuguese families of married men . The other three communities mentioned by Orta as residents in Bassein and its surrounding tracts were <unk> ( Banias ) , <unk> or <unk> ( Parsis ) , and <unk> ( <unk> or <unk> ) or <unk> . Most Banias and Parsis did not actually settle in Bombay until after its cession to England by the Portuguese . Bombay apparently remained in Orta 's possession until his peaceful death in Goa in 1570 . Several years later , his bones were exhumed and burnt at the stake for his Jewish faith . The islands appears to have been granted on the same tenure to several Portuguese officials in succession . 
 The Portuguese encouraged intermarriage with the local population , and strongly supported the Roman Catholic Church . They converted nearly 10 @,@ 000 natives to Christianity in Bassein , Thane , and neighbouring places . They started the Inquisition in India in 1560 . These people were referred as " Portuguese Christians " . Later , named themselves as the East Indian Catholics ( after the British East India Company ) during the British regime because Goan and Mangalorean Catholic settlers in Bombay were also referred to as " Portuguese Christians " by British . After António Pessoa 's death in 1571 , a patent was issued which granted Mazagaon in perpetuity to the Sousa e Lima family . The St. Andrew Church at Bandra was built in 1575 by the Portuguese Jesuits . The union of the crowns of Portugal and Spain in 1580 – 1640 opened the way for other European powers to follow the spice routes to India . The Dutch arrived first , closely followed by the British . The Portuguese also built several fortifications around the city . The Madh Fort was one of their most important constructions in Salsette . The first English merchants arrived in Bombay in November 1583 , and travelled through Bassein and Thana . A prominent merchant among them was Ralph Fitch from London . They mentioned that Bassein and Thana were trading in rice and corn on a small scale . They arrived in Chaul on 10 November 1583 . During this time , Bombay 's main trade was coconuts and coir . The Portuguese Franciscans had obtained practical control of Salsette and Mahim by 1585 , and built Nossa Senhora do Bom Conselho ( Our Lady of Good Advice , affiliated to <unk> de São Miguel / St. Michael 's Church in 1596 ) at Sion and Nossa Senhora da <unk> ( Our Lady of Salvation , popularly referred as " Portuguese Church " ) at Dadar in 1596 . The immense natural advantages of Bombay aroused the cupidity of the English who recognized its value as a naval base . In November 1612 , the British fought the Battle of <unk> with the Portuguese at Surat for the possession of Bombay . The British emerged victorious in the battle , and the Portuguese defeat was a significant event in marking the beginning of the end of their commercial monopoly over western India . Later , the British burnt the manor house built by Garcia de Orta in 1626 . Dorabji Nanabhoy , a Gujarati trader , was the first Parsi to settle in Bombay in 1640 . The Parsis immensely contributed towards the future development of Bombay during the British period . In 1640 , the Portuguese built Castella da Aguada ( Fort of the <unk> ) at Bandra , as a watchtower overlooking the Mahim Bay , the Arabian Sea and the southern island of Mahim . It was armed with seven cannons and other smaller guns as defence . 
 = = End of Portuguese rule = = 
 In 1652 , the Surat Council of the British Empire urged the British East India Company to purchase Bombay from the Portuguese . In 1654 , the British East India Company drew the attention of Oliver Cromwell , a top English military officer , to this suggestion by the Surat Council , laying great stress upon its excellent harbour and its natural isolation from land @-@ attacks . By the middle of the seventeenth century the growing power of the Dutch Empire forced the English to acquire a station in western India . The Directors of the Council of Surat reported in 1659 that every effort should be made to obtain Bombay from King John IV of Portugal . On 11 May 1661 , the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza , daughter of King John IV of Portugal , placed Bombay in the possession of the British Empire , as part of Catherine 's dowry to Charles . 
 On 19 March 1662 , Abraham Shipman was appointed the first Governor and General of the city , and his fleet arrived in Bombay in September – October 1662 . On being asked to hand over Bombay and Salsette to the English , the Portuguese Governor contended that Bombay Island alone had been ceded , and alleging irregularity in the patent , he refused to give up even Bombay Island . The Portuguese Viceroy declined to interfere and Shipman was prevented from landing in Bombay . He was forced to retire to the island of Anjediva in North Canara and died there in October 1664 . In November 1664 , Shipman 's successor Humphrey Cooke agreed to accept Bombay Island without its dependencies , with the condition of granting special privileges to Portuguese citizens in Bombay , and no interference in the Roman Catholic religion . However , Salsette ( including Bandra ) , Mazagaon , Parel , Worli , Sion , Dharavi , Wadala and Elephanta island still remained under Portuguese possession , as much as Thane or Vasai . From 1665 to 1666 , Cooke managed to acquire Mahim , Sion , Dharavi , and Wadala for the English . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The historical period of Portuguese colonial rule in the seven original islands of Bombay ( 1534 – 1665 ) and in the remaining territory of the Northern Province of the Estado da Índia ( 1534 – 1739 ) has been <unk> researched . During the second half of the 19th century , Dr. J Gerson da Cunha , a <unk> of Goan origin , began compiling information on the subject and published some books and articles . He wrote the first book on history of Bombay , The Origin of Bombay , published by the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society . Later , Braz Fernandes , an East @-@ Indian , took up da Cunha 's work and provided more in depth studies , especially about the Island of Salsette ( Shashti ) and the ruins in Vasai . Since the Independence of India , a few historians and scholars in Bombay have studied local or partial aspects of the period 's history . Of particular interest are the works of Mariam <unk> , Pankaj Joshi , Theresa Albuquerque and Fleur de Souza . However , the most significant recent contribution to the study of Bombay 's Portuguese layer has come from the research project Bombay Before the British , developed by the Architecture Department of the University of Coimbra between 2004 and 2007 . Broadly speaking , the state of the art regarding Bombay 's <unk> @-@ Portuguese historical layer is currently ( 2012 ) represented by two PhD dissertations recently concluded in Portugal and also most of the content in the " Heritage of Portuguese Influence " inventory . 
 = Sea Mither = 
 Sea Mither , or Mither of the Sea , is a mythical being of Orcadian folklore that lives in the sea during summer , when she confines the demonic nuckelavee to the ocean depths . Each spring she battles with her arch @-@ enemy Teran , another spirit of Orcadian legend capable of causing severe winter storms , to gain control of the seas and the weather . Eventually Sea Mither overcomes Teran and sends him to the depths of the ocean , but the effort of keeping him confined there along with her other benevolent labours during the summer exhaust her , until in the autumn Teran takes advantage of her weakness to wrest control from her once again . 
 Stories of the Sea Mither and Teran are among Orkney 's oldest legends , perhaps invented to explain the vagaries of weather and other naturally occurring events . In Shetland fishermen petition Sea Mither to afford them protection from the Devil . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Mither is defined in the Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue as the Scots variant of " mother " , which may particularly reflect oral Orcadian use . The name of her opponent , Teran , is local Orkney dialect meaning " furious anger " , and may be a derivative of <unk> , Norse for " angry " . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 Sea Mither is a spirit of summer days that <unk> the turbulent sea waters around the northern isles of Scotland . Shetland islanders , particularly fishermen , seek her protection from the Devil . Control of the seas is maintained by Teran , the spirit of winter , until Sea Mither arrives around the time of the vernal equinox in mid @-@ March . Both spirits are invisible to humans . Teran is her arch @-@ enemy and the pair fight bitterly , often for weeks as she tries to gain control . Their arguments cause gale force winds and heavy tumultuous seas as she tries to wrest control from him . Teran 's screeches are carried by the howling gales as the two spirits try to oust each other . The period of the spring combat between the pair is termed the Vore <unk> or the " spring struggle " . Eventually Sea Mither overcomes Teran , relegating him to the depths of the ocean ; inclement summer weather is caused by Teran 's attempts to escape . 
 During summer months the Sea Mither also keeps the demonic nuckelavee creature confined , and undertakes benevolent labours : she empowers aquatic creatures with the ability to reproduce ; warms and calms the seas ; and instils a softer song @-@ like quality to the gentle summer breeze . According to folklorist and Orkney resident , Walter Traill Dennison , during Sea Mither 's reign in summer the conditions reported by islanders may have " tempted one to believe that the Orkney archipelago had become the islands of the blessed . " But the continual work she undertakes to keep everything calm and the strain of maintaining control over Teran gradually tires her . 
 As autumn approaches , Teran takes advantage of Sea Mither 's exhaustion to break free , and conflict between the two starts again . The power struggles cause the weather to change with darkening skies and howling winds . This time , Teran triumphs in the conflict termed the Gore <unk> . Control of the ocean and weather is returned to Teran and Sea Mither is forced to leave . No details are given as to where she spends the winter , but during the storms caused by Teran the fishermen were consoled that Sea Mither would return refreshed and powerful in the spring , to again oust Teran from his malevolent grip over the seas . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Orcadian tales were strongly influenced by Scandinavian mythology with a blending of traditional Celtic stories . Folklorist and writer Ernest Marwick describes the Sea Mither and Teran as " pure personifications of nature . " Several ancient myths were based upon the natural elements of the turbulent and ever changing sea surrounding Orkney , but the stories of the two spirits are among the oldest legends on the islands . People had to be able to explain the vagaries of weather and other natural life cycles without the benefit of science ; Traill Dennison hypothesises that this is why " the imagination of some half savage " may have formed the foundations of the myth . 
 = McCarthyism = 
 McCarthyism is the practice of making accusations of subversion or treason without proper regard for evidence . It also means " the practice of making unfair allegations or using unfair investigative techniques , especially in order to restrict dissent or political criticism . " The term has its origins in the period in the United States known as the Second Red Scare , lasting roughly from 1950 to 1956 and characterized by heightened political repression against supposed communists , as well as a campaign spreading fear of their influence on American institutions and of espionage by Soviet agents . Originally coined to criticize the anti @-@ communist pursuits of Republican U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin , " McCarthyism " soon took on a broader meaning , describing the excesses of similar efforts . The term is also now used more generally to describe reckless , unsubstantiated accusations , as well as demagogic attacks on the character or patriotism of political adversaries . 
 During the McCarthy era , thousands of Americans were accused of being communists or communist sympathizers and became the subject of aggressive investigations and questioning before government or private @-@ industry panels , committees and agencies . The primary targets of such suspicions were government employees , those in the entertainment industry , educators and union activists . Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive or questionable evidence , and the level of threat posed by a person 's real or supposed leftist associations or beliefs was often greatly exaggerated . Many people suffered loss of employment and / or destruction of their careers ; some even suffered imprisonment . Most of these punishments came about through trial verdicts later overturned , laws that were later declared unconstitutional , dismissals for reasons later declared illegal or actionable , or extra @-@ legal procedures that would come into general disrepute . 
 The most notable examples of McCarthyism include the speeches , investigations , and hearings of Senator McCarthy himself ; the Hollywood blacklist , associated with hearings conducted by the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) ; and the various anti @-@ communist activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) under Director J. Edgar Hoover . McCarthyism was a widespread social and cultural phenomenon that affected all levels of society and was the source of a great deal of debate and conflict in the United States . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The historical period that came to be known as the McCarthy era began well before Joseph McCarthy 's own involvement in it . Many factors contributed to McCarthyism , some of them extending back to the years of the First Red Scare ( 1917 – 20 ) , inspired by Communism 's emergence as a recognized political force . Thanks in part to its success in organizing labor unions and its early opposition to fascism , the Communist Party of the United States ( CPUSA ) increased its membership through the 1930s , reaching a peak of about 75 @,@ 000 members in 1940 – 41 . While the United States was engaged in World War II and allied with the Soviet Union , the issue of anti @-@ communism was largely muted . With the end of World War II , the Cold War began almost immediately , as the Soviet Union installed Communist puppet <unk> across Central and Eastern Europe , while the United States backed anti @-@ communist forces in Greece and China . 
 Although the Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley affairs had raised the issue of Soviet espionage as far back as 1945 , events in 1949 and 1950 sharply increased the sense of threat from Communism in the United States . The Soviet Union tested an atomic bomb in 1949 , earlier than many analysts had expected . That same year , Mao Zedong 's Communist army gained control of mainland China despite heavy American financial support of the opposing Kuomintang . In 1950 , the Korean War began , pitting U.S. , U.N. , and South Korean forces against Communists from North Korea and China . The following year also saw several significant developments regarding Soviet Cold War espionage activities . In January 1950 , Alger Hiss , a high @-@ level State Department official , was convicted of perjury . Hiss was in effect found guilty of espionage ; the statute of limitations had run out for that crime , but he was convicted of having perjured himself when he denied that charge in earlier testimony before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . In Great Britain , Klaus Fuchs confessed to committing espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union while working on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory during the War . Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were arrested in 1950 on charges of stealing atomic bomb secrets for the Soviets and were executed in 1953 . 
 There were also more subtle forces encouraging the rise of McCarthyism . It had long been a practice of more conservative politicians to refer to progressive reforms such as child labor laws and women 's suffrage as " Communist " or " Red plots . " This tendency increased in the 1930s in reaction to the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Many conservatives equated the New Deal with socialism or Communism , and saw its policies as evidence that the government had been heavily influenced by Communist policy @-@ makers in the Roosevelt administration . In general , the vaguely defined danger of " Communist influence " was a more common theme in the rhetoric of anti @-@ Communist politicians than was espionage or any other specific activity . 
 Joseph McCarthy 's involvement with the ongoing cultural phenomenon that would bear his name began with a speech he made on Lincoln Day , February 9 , 1950 , to the Republican Women 's Club of Wheeling , West Virginia . He produced a piece of paper which he claimed contained a list of known Communists working for the State Department . McCarthy is usually quoted as saying : " I have here in my hand a list of 205 — a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department . " This speech resulted in a flood of press attention to McCarthy and established the path that made him one of the most recognized politicians in the United States . 
 The first recorded use of the term McCarthyism was in a political cartoon by Washington Post editorial cartoonist Herbert Block ( aka <unk> ) , published on March 29 , 1950 . The cartoon depicted four leading Republicans trying to push an elephant ( the traditional symbol of the Republican Party ) to stand on a teetering stack of ten tar buckets , the topmost of which was labeled " McCarthyism " . Block later wrote that there was " nothing particularly ingenious about the term , which is simply used to represent a national affliction that can hardly be described in any other way . If anyone has a prior claim on it , he 's welcome to the word and to the junior senator from Wisconsin along with it . I will also throw in a set of free dishes and a case of soap . ” 
 = = Institutions = = 
 A number of anti @-@ Communist committees , panels , and " loyalty review boards " in federal , state , and local governments , as well as many private agencies carried out investigations for small and large companies concerned about possible Communists in their work force . 
 In Congress , the primary bodies that investigated Communist activities were the House Committee on Un @-@ American Activities , the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee , and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . Between 1949 and 1954 , a total of 109 investigations were carried out by these and other committees of Congress . 
 On December 2 , 1954 , the United States Senate voted 65 to 22 to condemn Joseph McCarthy for " conduct that tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute " . 
 = = = Executive branch = = = 
 = = = = Loyalty @-@ security reviews = = = = 
 In the federal government , President Harry Truman 's Executive Order <unk> initiated a program of loyalty reviews for federal employees in 1947 . It called for dismissal if there were " reasonable grounds ... for belief that the person involved is disloyal to the Government of the United States . " Truman , a Democrat , was probably reacting in part to the Republican sweep in the 1946 Congressional election and felt a need to counter growing criticism from conservatives and anti @-@ communists . 
 When President Dwight Eisenhower took office in 1953 , he strengthened and extended Truman 's loyalty review program , while decreasing the avenues of appeal available to dismissed employees . Hiram Bingham , Chairman of the Civil Service Commission Loyalty Review Board , referred to the new rules he was obliged to enforce as " just not the American way of doing things . " The following year , J. Robert Oppenheimer , scientific director of the Manhattan Project that built the first atomic bomb , then working as a consultant to the Atomic Energy Commission , was stripped of his security clearance after a four @-@ week hearing . Oppenheimer had received a top @-@ secret clearance in 1947 , but was denied clearance in the harsher climate of 1954 . 
 Similar loyalty reviews were established in many state and local government offices and some private industries across the nation . In 1958 , it was estimated that roughly one out of every five employees in the United States was required to pass some sort of loyalty review . Once a person lost a job due to an unfavorable loyalty review , it could be very difficult to find other employment . " A man is ruined everywhere and forever , " in the words of the chairman of President Truman 's Loyalty Review Board . " No responsible employer would be likely to take a chance in giving him a job . " 
 The Department of Justice started keeping a list of organizations that it deemed subversive beginning in 1942 . This list was first made public in 1948 , when it included 78 items . At its longest , it comprised 154 organizations , 110 of them identified as Communist . In the context of a loyalty review , membership in a listed organization was meant to raise a question , but not to be considered proof of disloyalty . One of the most common causes of suspicion was membership in the Washington Bookshop Association , a left @-@ leaning organization that offered lectures on literature , classical music concerts and discounts on books . 
 = = = = J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI = = = = 
 FBI director J. Edgar Hoover designed President Truman 's loyalty @-@ security program , and its background investigations of employees were carried out by FBI agents . This was a major assignment that led to the number of agents in the Bureau being increased from 3 @,@ 559 in 1946 to 7 @,@ 029 in 1952 . Hoover 's sense of the Communist threat and the standards of evidence applied by his bureau resulted in thousands of government workers losing their jobs . Due to Hoover 's insistence upon keeping the identity of his informers secret , most subjects of loyalty @-@ security reviews were not allowed to cross @-@ examine or know the identities of those who accused them . In many cases they were not even told what they were accused of . 
 Hoover 's influence extended beyond federal government employees and beyond the loyalty @-@ security programs . The records of loyalty review hearings and investigations were supposed to be confidential , but Hoover routinely gave evidence from them to congressional committees such as HUAC . 
 From 1951 to 1955 , the FBI operated a secret " Responsibilities Program " that distributed anonymous documents with evidence from FBI files of Communist affiliations on the part of teachers , lawyers , and others . Many people accused in these " blind memoranda " were fired without any further process . 
 The FBI engaged in a number of illegal practices in its pursuit of information on Communists , including burglaries , opening mail and illegal wiretaps . The members of the left @-@ wing National Lawyers Guild were among the few attorneys who were willing to defend clients in communist @-@ related cases , and this made the NLG a particular target of Hoover 's . The office of this organization was burgled by the FBI at least fourteen times between 1947 and 1951 . 
 Among other purposes , the FBI used its illegally obtained information to alert prosecuting attorneys about the planned legal strategies of NLG defense lawyers . 
 The FBI also used illegal undercover operations to disrupt Communist and other dissident political groups . In 1956 , Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department 's ability to prosecute Communists . At this time he formalized a covert " dirty tricks " program under the name COINTELPRO . COINTELPRO actions included planting forged documents to create the suspicion that a key person was an FBI informer , spreading rumors through anonymous letters , leaking information to the press , calling for IRS audits , and the like . The COINTELPRO program remained in operation until 1971 . 
 Historian Ellen Schrecker calls the FBI " the single most important component of the anti @-@ communist crusade " and writes : " Had observers known in the 1950s what they have learned since the 1970s , when the Freedom of Information Act opened the Bureau 's files , ' McCarthyism ' would probably be called ' <unk> ' . " 
 = = = Congress = = = 
 = = = = House Committee on Un @-@ American Activities = = = = 
 The House Committee on Un @-@ American Activities - commonly referred to as the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) - was the most prominent and active government committee involved in anti @-@ Communist investigations . Formed in 1938 and known as the Dies Committee for Rep. Martin Dies , who chaired it until 1944 , HUAC investigated a variety of " activities , " including those of German @-@ American Nazis during World War II . The Committee soon focused on Communism , beginning with an investigation into Communists in the Federal Theatre Project in 1938 . A significant step for HUAC was its investigation of the charges of espionage brought against Alger Hiss in 1948 . This investigation ultimately resulted in Hiss 's trial and conviction for perjury , and convinced many of the usefulness of congressional committees for uncovering Communist subversion . 
 HUAC achieved its greatest fame and notoriety with its investigation into the Hollywood film industry . In October 1947 , the Committee began to subpoena screenwriters , directors , and other movie industry professionals to testify about their known or suspected membership in the Communist Party , association with its members , or support of its beliefs . It was at these testimonies that what became known as " the $ 64 @,@ 000 question " was asked : " Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party of the United States ? " Among the first film industry witnesses subpoenaed by the Committee were ten who decided not to cooperate . These men , who became known as the " Hollywood Ten " , cited the First Amendment 's guarantee of free speech and free assembly , which they believed legally protected them from being required to answer the Committee 's questions . This tactic failed , and the ten were sentenced to prison for contempt of Congress . Two of the ten were sentenced to six months , the rest to a year . 
 In the future , witnesses ( in the entertainment industries and otherwise ) who were determined not to cooperate with the Committee would claim their Fifth Amendment protection against self @-@ incrimination . While this usually protected them from a contempt of Congress citation , it was considered grounds for dismissal by many government and private industry employers . The legal requirements for Fifth Amendment protection were such that a person could not testify about his own association with the Communist Party and then refuse to " name names " of colleagues with Communist affiliations . Thus many faced a choice between " crawl [ ing ] through the mud to be an informer , " as actor Larry Parks put it , or becoming known as a " Fifth Amendment Communist " — an epithet often used by Senator McCarthy . 
 = = = = Senate committees = = = = 
 In the Senate , the primary committee for investigating Communists was the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee ( SISS ) , formed in 1950 and charged with ensuring the enforcement of laws relating to " espionage , sabotage , and the protection of the internal security of the United States . " The SISS was headed by Democrat Pat McCarran and gained a reputation for careful and extensive investigations . This committee spent a year investigating Owen Lattimore and other members of the Institute of Pacific Relations . As had been done numerous times before , the collection of scholars and diplomats associated with Lattimore ( the so @-@ called China Hands ) were accused of " losing China , " and while some evidence of pro @-@ communist attitudes was found , there was nothing to support McCarran 's accusation that Lattimore was " a conscious and articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy " . Lattimore was charged with perjuring himself before the SISS in 1952 . After many of the charges were rejected by a Federal Judge and one of the witnesses confessed to perjury , the case was dropped in 1955 . 
 Joseph McCarthy himself headed the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 1953 and 1954 , and during that time used it for a number of his Communist @-@ hunting investigations . McCarthy first examined allegations of Communist influence in the Voice of America , and then turned to the overseas library program of the State Department . Card catalogs of these libraries were searched for works by authors McCarthy deemed inappropriate . McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro @-@ communist authors before his subcommittee and the press . <unk> to the pressure , the State Department ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves " material by any controversial persons , Communists , fellow travelers , etc . " Some libraries actually burned the newly forbidden books . 
 McCarthy 's committee then began an investigation into the United States Army . This began at the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth . McCarthy garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the Army researchers , but ultimately nothing came of this investigation . McCarthy next turned his attention to the case of a U.S. Army dentist who had been promoted to the rank of major despite having refused to answer questions on an Army loyalty review form . McCarthy 's handling of this investigation , including a series of insults directed at a brigadier general , led to the Army @-@ McCarthy hearings , with the Army and McCarthy trading charges and counter @-@ charges for 36 days before a nationwide television audience . While the official outcome of the hearings was inconclusive , this exposure of McCarthy to the American public resulted in a sharp decline in his popularity . In less than a year , McCarthy was censured by the Senate and his position as a prominent force in anti @-@ communism was essentially ended . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 On November 25 , 1947 ( the day after the House of Representatives approved citations of contempt for the Hollywood Ten ) , Eric Johnston , President of the Motion Picture Association of America , issued a press release on behalf of the heads of the major studios that came to be referred to as the Waldorf Statement . This statement announced the firing of the Hollywood Ten and stated : " We will not knowingly employ a Communist or a member of any party or group which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States [ ... ] " This marked the beginning of the Hollywood blacklist . In spite of the fact that hundreds would be denied employment , the studios , producers and other employers did not publicly admit that a blacklist existed . 
 At this time , private loyalty @-@ review boards and anti @-@ communist investigators began to appear to fill a growing demand among certain industries to certify that their employees were above reproach . Companies that were concerned about the sensitivity of their business , or who , like the entertainment industry , felt particularly vulnerable to public opinion made use of these private services . For a fee , these teams would investigate employees and question them about their politics and affiliations . At such hearings , the subject would usually not have a right to the presence of an attorney , and as with HUAC , the interviewee might be asked to defend himself against accusations without being allowed to cross @-@ examine the accuser . These agencies would keep cross @-@ referenced lists of leftist organizations , publications , rallies , charities and the like , as well as lists of individuals who were known or suspected communists . Books such as Red Channels and newsletters such as Counterattack and Confidential Information were published to keep track of communist and leftist organizations and individuals . Insofar as the various blacklists of McCarthyism were actual physical lists , they were created and maintained by these private organizations . 
 = = = Laws and arrests = = = 
 Efforts to protect the United States from the perceived threat of Communist subversion were particularly enabled by several federal laws . The Alien Registration Act or Smith Act of 1940 made it a criminal offense for anyone to " knowingly or willfully advocate , abet , advise or teach the [ ... ] desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or of any State by force or violence , or for anyone to organize any association which teaches , advises or encourages such an overthrow , or for anyone to become a member of or to affiliate with any such association " . Hundreds of Communists and others were prosecuted under this law between 1941 and 1957 . Eleven leaders of the Communist Party were convicted under the Smith Act in 1949 in the Foley Square trial . Ten defendants were given sentences of five years and the eleventh was sentenced to three years . The defense attorneys were cited for contempt of court and given prison sentences . In 1951 , twenty @-@ three other leaders of the party were indicted , including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , a founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union . Many were convicted on the basis of testimony that was later admitted to be false . By 1957 , 140 leaders and members of the Communist Party had been charged under the law , of whom 93 were convicted . 
 The McCarran Internal Security Act , which became law in 1950 , has been described by scholar Ellen Schrecker as " the McCarthy era 's only important piece of legislation " ( the Smith Act technically predated McCarthyism ) . However , the McCarran Act had no real effect beyond legal harassment . It required the registration of Communist organizations with the U.S. Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate possible Communist @-@ action and Communist @-@ front organizations so they could be required to register . Due to numerous hearings , delays and appeals , the act was never enforced , even with regard to the Communist Party of the United States itself , and the major provisions of the act were found to be unconstitutional in 1965 and 1967 . In 1952 , the Immigration and Nationality , or McCarran @-@ Walter , Act was passed . This law allowed the government to deport immigrants or naturalized citizens engaged in subversive activities and also to bar suspected subversives from entering the country . 
 The Communist Control Act of 1954 was passed with overwhelming support in both houses of Congress after very little debate . Jointly drafted by Republican John Marshall Butler and Democrat Hubert Humphrey , the law was an extension of the Internal Security Act of 1950 , and sought to outlaw the Communist Party by declaring that the party , as well as " Communist @-@ <unk> Organizations " were " not entitled to any of the rights , privileges , and immunities attendant upon legal bodies " . The Communist Control Act never had any significant effect , and was perhaps most notable for the odd mix of liberals and conservatives among its supporters . It was successfully applied only twice : in 1954 it was used to prevent Communist Party members from appearing on the New Jersey state ballot , and in 1960 it was cited to deny the CPUSA recognition as an employer under New York State 's unemployment compensation system . The New York Post called the act " a monstrosity " , " a wretched repudiation of democratic principles , " while The Nation accused Democratic liberals of a " neurotic , election @-@ year anxiety to escape the charge of being ' soft on Communism ' even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights . " 
 = = Popular support = = 
 McCarthyism was supported by a variety of groups , including the American Legion and various other anti @-@ communist organizations . One core element of support was a variety of militantly anti @-@ communist women 's groups such as the American Public Relations Forum and the Minute Women of the U.S.A .. These organized tens of thousands of housewives into study groups , letter @-@ writing networks , and patriotic clubs that coordinated efforts to identify and eradicate what they saw as subversion . 
 Although far @-@ right radicals were the bedrock of support for McCarthyism , they were not alone . A broad " coalition of the aggrieved " found McCarthyism attractive , or at least politically useful . Common themes uniting the coalition were opposition to internationalism , particularly the United Nations ; opposition to social welfare provisions , particularly the various programs established by the New Deal ; and opposition to efforts to reduce inequalities in the social structure of the United States . 
 One focus of popular McCarthyism concerned the provision of public health services , particularly vaccination , mental health care services and fluoridation , all of which were deemed by some to be communist plots to poison or brainwash the American people . At times , the anti @-@ internationalist aspect of <unk> literature took on an anti @-@ Jewish tone . ( See flier at right : ' Rabbi Spitz in the American Hebrew , March 1 , 1946 : " American Jews must come to grips with our contemporary anti @-@ Semites ; we must fill our insane asylums with anti @-@ Semitic lunatics . " ' ) Such viewpoints led to major collisions between McCarthyite radicals and supporters of public health programs , most notably in the case of the Alaska Mental Health Bill controversy of 1956 . 
 William F. Buckley , Jr . , the founder of the influential conservative political magazine National Review , wrote a defense of McCarthy , McCarthy and his Enemies , in which he asserted that " McCarthyism ... is a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks . " 
 In addition , as Richard Rovere points out , many ordinary Americans became convinced that there must be " no smoke without fire " and lent their support to McCarthyism . In January 1954 , a Gallup poll found that 50 % of the American public supported McCarthy , while 29 % had an unfavorable opinion of the senator . Earl Warren , the Chief Justice of the United States , commented that if the United States Bill of Rights had been put to a vote it probably would have been defeated . 
 = = Portrayals of Communists = = 
 Those who sought to justify McCarthyism did so largely through their characterization of Communism , and American Communists in particular . Proponents of McCarthyism claimed that the CPUSA was so completely under Moscow 's control that any American Communist is a puppet of the Soviet and Russian intelligence services . This view is supported by recent documentation from the archives of the KGB as well as post @-@ war decodes of wartime Soviet radio traffic from the Venona Project , showing that Moscow provided financial support to the CPUSA and had significant influence on CPUSA policies . J. Edgar Hoover commented in a 1950 speech , " Communist members , body and soul , are the property of the Party . " This attitude was not confined to arch @-@ conservatives . In 1940 , the American Civil Liberties Union ejected founding member Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , saying that her membership in the Communist Party was enough to disqualify her as a civil libertarian . In the government 's prosecutions of Communist Party members under the Smith Act ( see above ) , the prosecution case was based not on specific actions or statements by the defendants , but on the premise that a commitment to violent overthrow of the government was inherent in the doctrines of Marxism – Leninism . Passages of the CPUSA 's constitution that specifically rejected revolutionary violence were dismissed as deliberate deception . 
 In addition , it was often claimed that the Party did not allow any member to resign , so a person who had been a member for a short time decades previously could be considered as suspect as a current member . Many of the hearings and trials of McCarthyism featured testimony by former Communist Party members such as Elizabeth Bentley , Louis Budenz , and Whittaker Chambers , speaking as expert witnesses . 
 Various historians and pundits have discussed alleged Soviet @-@ directed infiltration of the U.S. government and the possible collaboration of high U.S. government officials . 
 = = Victims of McCarthy = = 
 It is difficult to estimate the number of victims of McCarthy . The number imprisoned is in the hundreds , and some ten or twelve thousand lost their jobs . In many cases simply being subpoenaed by HUAC or one of the other committees was sufficient cause to be fired . Many of those who were imprisoned , lost their jobs or were questioned by committees did in fact have a past or present connection of some kind with the Communist Party . But for the vast majority , both the potential for them to do harm to the nation and the nature of their communist affiliation were tenuous . After the extremely damaging " Cambridge Five " spy scandal ( Burgess , Maclean , Philby , Blunt , et al . ) , suspected homosexuality was also a common cause for being targeted by McCarthyism . The hunt for " sexual perverts " , who were presumed to be subversive by nature , resulted in thousands being harassed and denied employment . Many have termed this aspect of McCarthyism the " Lavender Scare " . 
 Homosexuality was classified as a psychiatric disorder in the 1950s . However , in the context of the highly politicised Cold War environment , homosexuality became framed as a dangerous , contagious social disease that posed a potential threat to state security . As the family was believed to be the cornerstone of American strength and integrity , the description of homosexuals as " sexual perverts " meant that they were both unable to function within a family unit and presented the potential to poison the social body . This era also witnessed the establishment of widely spread FBI surveillance intended to identify homosexual government employees . 
 The McCarthy hearings and according " sexual pervert " investigations can be seen to have been driven by a desire to identify individuals whose ability to function as loyal citizens had been compromised . Joseph McCarthy began his campaign by drawing upon the ways in which he embodied traditional American values in order to become the self @-@ appointed vanguard of social morality . Paradoxically , accusations of alleged homosexual behaviour marked the end of McCarthy ’ s political career . 
 In the film industry , more than 300 actors , authors and directors were denied work in the U.S. through the unofficial Hollywood blacklist . <unk> were at work throughout the entertainment industry , in universities and schools at all levels , in the legal profession , and in many other fields . A port security program initiated by the Coast Guard shortly after the start of the Korean War required a review of every maritime worker who loaded or worked aboard any American ship , regardless of cargo or destination . As with other loyalty @-@ security reviews of McCarthyism , the identities of any accusers and even the nature of any accusations were typically kept secret from the accused . Nearly 3 @,@ 000 seamen and longshoremen lost their jobs due to this program alone . 
 Some of the more notable people who were blacklisted or suffered some other persecution during McCarthyism are listed here : 
 In 1953 , Robert K. Murray , a young professor of history at Pennsylvania State University who had served as an intelligence officer in World War II , was revising his dissertation on the Red Scare of 1919 – 20 for publication until Little , Brown and Company decided that " under the circumstances ... it wasn 't wise for them to bring this book out . " He learned that investigators were questioning his colleagues and relatives . The University of Minnesota press published his volume , Red Scare : A Study in National Hysteria , 1919 – 1920 , in 1955 . 
 = = Critical reactions = = 
 The nation was by no means united behind the policies and activities that have come to be associated with McCarthyism . There were many critics of various aspects of McCarthyism , including many figures not generally noted for their liberalism . 
 For example , in his overridden veto of the McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950 , President Truman wrote , " In a free country , we punish men for the crimes they commit , but never for the opinions they have . " Truman also unsuccessfully vetoed the Taft @-@ Hartley Act , which among other provisions denied trade unions National Labor Relations Board protection unless union leaders signed affidavits swearing they were not and had never been Communists . In 1953 , after he left office , Truman criticized the current Eisenhower administration : 
 It is now evident that the present Administration has fully embraced , for political advantage , McCarthyism . I am not referring to the Senator from Wisconsin . He is only important in that his name has taken on the dictionary meaning of the word . It is the corruption of truth , the abandonment of the due process law . It is the use of the big lie and the unfounded accusation against any citizen in the name of Americanism or security . It is the rise to power of the demagogue who lives on untruth ; it is the spreading of fear and the destruction of faith in every level of society . 
 On June 1 , 1950 , Senator Margaret Chase Smith , a Maine Republican , delivered a speech to the Senate she called a " Declaration of Conscience " . In a clear attack upon McCarthyism , she called for an end to " character assassinations " and named " some of the basic principles of Americanism : The right to criticize ; The right to hold unpopular beliefs ; The right to protest ; The right of independent thought " . She said " freedom of speech is not what it used to be in America " , and decried " cancerous tentacles of ' know nothing , suspect everything ' attitudes " . Six other Republican Senators — Wayne Morse , Irving M. Ives , Charles W. Tobey , Edward John Thye , George Aiken , and Robert C. Hendrickson — joined Smith in condemning the tactics of McCarthyism . 
 Elmer Davis , one of the most highly respected news reporters and commentators of the 1940s and 1950s , often spoke out against what he saw as the excesses of McCarthyism . On one occasion he warned that many local anti @-@ Communist movements constituted a " general attack not only on schools and colleges and libraries , on teachers and textbooks , but on all people who think and write [ ... ] in short , on the freedom of the mind " . 
 In 1952 , the Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision in Adler v. Board of Education of New York , thus approving a law that allowed state loyalty review boards to fire teachers deemed " subversive " . In his dissenting opinion , Justice William O. Douglas wrote : " The present law proceeds on a principle repugnant to our society — guilt by association . [ ... ] What happens under this law is typical of what happens in a police state . Teachers are under constant surveillance ; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty ; their utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts . " 
 One of the most influential opponents of McCarthyism was the famed CBS newscaster and analyst Edward R. Murrow . On October 20 , 1953 , Murrow 's show See It Now aired an episode about the dismissal of Milo <unk> , a former reserve Air Force lieutenant who was accused of associating with Communists . The show was strongly critical of the Air Force 's methods , which included presenting evidence in a sealed envelope that <unk> and his attorney were not allowed to open . On March 9 , 1954 , See It Now aired another episode on the issue of McCarthyism , this one attacking Joseph McCarthy himself . Titled " A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy " , it used footage of McCarthy speeches to portray him as dishonest , reckless and abusive toward witnesses and prominent Americans . In his concluding comment , Murrow said : 
 We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty . We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law . We will not walk in fear , one of another . We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason , if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine , and remember that we are not descended from fearful men . 
 This broadcast has been cited as a key episode in bringing about the end of McCarthyism . 
 In April 1954 , Senator McCarthy was also under attack in the Army – McCarthy hearings . These hearings were televised live on the new American Broadcasting Company network , allowing the public to view first @-@ hand McCarthy 's interrogation of individuals and his controversial tactics . In one exchange , McCarthy reminded the attorney for the Army , Joseph Welch , that he had an employee in his law firm who had belonged to an organization that had been accused of Communist sympathies . In an exchange that reflected the increasingly negative public opinion of McCarthy , Welch rebuked the senator : " Have you no sense of decency , sir ? At long last , have you left no sense of decency ? " 
 = = Decline = = 
 In the mid- and late 1950s , the attitudes and institutions of McCarthyism slowly weakened . Changing public sentiments heavily contributed to the decline of McCarthyism . Its decline may also be charted through a series of court decisions . 
 A key figure in the end of the blacklisting of McCarthyism was John Henry Faulk . Host of an afternoon comedy radio show , Faulk was a leftist active in his union , the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists . He was scrutinized by AWARE , Inc . , one of the private firms that examined individuals for signs of communist " disloyalty " . Marked by AWARE as unfit , he was fired by CBS Radio . Almost uniquely among the many victims of blacklisting , Faulk decided to sue AWARE in 1957 and finally won the case in 1962 . With this court decision , the private <unk> and those who used them were put on notice that they were legally liable for the professional and financial damage they caused . Although some informal blacklisting continued , the private " loyalty checking " agencies were soon a thing of the past . Even before the Faulk verdict , many in Hollywood had decided it was time to break the blacklist . In 1960 , Dalton Trumbo , one of the best known members of the Hollywood Ten , was publicly credited with writing the films Exodus and Spartacus . 
 Much of the undoing of McCarthyism came at the hands of the Supreme Court . As Richard Rovere wrote in his biography of Joseph McCarthy , " [ T ] he United States Supreme Court took judicial notice of the rents McCarthy was making in the fabric of liberty and thereupon wrote a series of decisions that have made the fabric stronger than before . " Two Eisenhower appointees to the court — Earl Warren ( who was made Chief Justice ) and William J. Brennan , Jr . — proved to be more liberal than Eisenhower had anticipated , and he would later refer to the appointment of Warren as his " biggest mistake " . 
 In 1956 , the Supreme Court heard the case of Slochower v. Board of Education . Harry Slochower was a professor at Brooklyn College who had been fired by New York City for invoking the Fifth Amendment when McCarthy 's committee questioned him about his past membership in the Communist Party . The court prohibited such actions , ruling " ... we must condemn the practice of imputing a sinister meaning to the exercise of a person 's constitutional right under the Fifth Amendment . [ ... ] The privilege against self @-@ incrimination would be reduced to a hollow mockery if its exercise could be taken as equivalent either to a confession of guilt or a conclusive presumption of perjury . " 
 Another key decision was in the 1957 case Yates v. United States , in which the convictions of fourteen Communists were reversed . In Justice Black 's opinion , he wrote of the original " Smith Act " trials : " The testimony of witnesses is comparatively insignificant . Guilt or innocence may turn on what Marx or Engels or someone else wrote or advocated as much as a hundred years or more ago . [ ... ] When the propriety of obnoxious or unfamiliar view about government is in reality made the crucial issue , [ ... ] prejudice makes conviction inevitable except in the rarest circumstances . " 
 Also in 1957 , the Supreme Court ruled on the case of Watkins v. United States , curtailing the power of HUAC to punish uncooperative witnesses by finding them in contempt of Congress . Justice Warren wrote in the decision : " The mere summoning of a witness and compelling him to testify , against his will , about his beliefs , expressions or associations is a measure of governmental interference . And when those forced revelations concern matters that are unorthodox , unpopular , or even hateful to the general public , the reaction in the life of the witness may be disastrous . " 
 In its 1958 decision in Kent v. Dulles , the Supreme Court halted the State Department from using the authority of its own regulations to refuse or revoke passports based on an applicant 's communist beliefs or associations . 
 = = Repercussions = = 
 The political divisions McCarthyism created in the United States continue to make themselves manifest , and the politics and history of anti @-@ Communism in the United States are still contentious . Portions of the massive security apparatus established during the McCarthy era still exist . Loyalty oaths are still required by the California Constitution for all officials and employees of the government of California ( which is highly problematic for Quakers and Jehovah 's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging absolute loyalty to the state ) , and at the federal level , a few portions of the McCarran Internal Security Act are still in effect . A number of observers have compared the oppression of liberals and leftists during the McCarthy period to recent actions against suspected terrorists , most of them Muslims . In The Age of Anxiety : McCarthyism to Terrorism , author Haynes Johnson compares the " abuses suffered by aliens thrown into high security U.S. prisons in the wake of 9 / 11 " to the excesses of the McCarthy era . Similarly , David D. Cole has written that the Patriot Act " in effect resurrects the philosophy of McCarthyism , simply substituting ' terrorist ' for ' communist . ' " 
 From the opposite pole , conservative writer Ann Coulter devotes much of her book Treason to drawing parallels between past opposition to McCarthy and McCarthyism and the policies and beliefs of modern @-@ day liberals , arguing that the former hindered the anti @-@ Communist cause and the latter hinder the War on Terrorism . Other authors who have drawn on a comparison between current anti @-@ terrorism policies and McCarthyism include Geoffrey R. Stone , Ted Morgan , and Jonah Goldberg . 
 McCarthyism also attracts controversy purely as a historical issue . Through declassified documents from Soviet archives and Venona project decryptions of coded Soviet messages , it has become known that the Soviet Union engaged in substantial espionage activities in the United States during the 1940s . It is also known that the Communist Party USA was substantially funded and its policies controlled by the Soviet Union , and there are accusations that CPUSA members were often recruited as spies . In the view of some contemporary commentators , these revelations stand as at least a partial vindication of McCarthyism . Some feel that there was a genuinely dangerous subversive element in the United States , and that this danger justified extreme measures . Others , while acknowledging that there were inexcusable excesses during McCarthyism , argue that some contemporary historians of McCarthyism underplay the depth of Soviet espionage in America or the undemocratic nature of the CPUSA , the latter concern being shared by some <unk> who felt that they , and anti @-@ Stalin socialists in general , were persecuted by the CPUSA . The opposing view holds that , recent revelations notwithstanding , by the time McCarthyism began in the late 1940s , the CPUSA was an ineffectual fringe group , and the damage done to U.S. interests by Soviet spies after World War II was minimal . Historian Ellen Schrecker , herself criticised for pro @-@ Stalinist leanings , has written , " in this country , McCarthyism did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever did . " 
 = = = Later use of the term = = = 
 Since the time of McCarthy , the word McCarthyism has entered American speech as a general term for a variety of practices : aggressively questioning a person 's patriotism , making poorly supported accusations , using accusations of disloyalty to pressure a person to adhere to conformist politics or to discredit an opponent , subverting civil and political rights in the name of national security , and the use of demagoguery are all often referred to as McCarthyism . McCarthyism can also be synonymous with the term witch @-@ hunt , both referring to mass hysteria and moral panic . 
 = = McCarthyism in popular culture = = 
 The 1952 Arthur Miller play The Crucible used the Salem witch trials as a metaphor for McCarthyism , suggesting that the process of McCarthyism @-@ style persecution can occur at any time or place . The play focused on the fact that once accused , a person had little chance of exoneration , given the irrational and circular reasoning of both the courts and the public . Miller later wrote : " The more I read into the Salem panic , the more it touched off corresponding images of common experiences in the fifties . " 
 The 1976 film The Front dealt with the McCarthy @-@ era Hollywood blacklist , as did the 2015 film Trumbo . 
 = Boosey & Hawkes = 
 Boosey & Hawkes is a British music publisher purported to be the largest specialist classical music publisher in the world . Until 2003 , it was also a major manufacturer of brass , string and woodwind musical instruments . 
 Formed in 1930 through the merger of two well @-@ established British music businesses , the company owns the copyrights or agencies to much major , 20th @-@ century music , including works by Bartók , Leonard Bernstein , Britten , Copland , Kodály , Prokofiev , Richard Strauss and Stravinsky . It also publishes many prominent contemporary composers , including Steve Reich , John Adams , James MacMillan , Elliott Carter , Harrison Birtwistle , Osvaldo <unk> , Anna Clyne , and Louis Andriessen . 
 With subsidiaries in Germany , the UK and the US , the company also sells sheet music ; provides ready @-@ made production music for television , radio and audio @-@ visual use ; commissions and produces music for radio , television and advertising ; and administers copyrights owned by media companies . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before the merger of the Boosey and Hawkes companies = = = 
 Boosey & Hawkes was founded in 1930 through the merger of two respected music companies , Boosey & Company and Hawkes & Son . 
 The Boosey family was of Franco – Flemish origin . Boosey & Company traces its roots back to John Boosey , a bookseller in London in the 1760s – 1770s . His son Thomas continued the business at 4 Old Bond Street , and from 1819 the bookshop was called Boosey & Sons or T. & T. Boosey . 
 Thomas Boosey 's son , also named Thomas ( 1794 / 1795 – 1871 ) , set up a separate musical branch of the company known as T. Boosey & Co. and , in the latter part of the 19th century , Boosey & Company . This branch initially imported foreign music but soon began publishing in England the works of composers such as Johann Nepomuk Hummel , Saverio Mercadante and Gioachino Rossini , and subsequently important operas by Bellini , Donizetti and Verdi . Elgar and Vaughan Williams were among its later signings . The company also produced books : among its first publications was an English translation of Johann Nikolaus <unk> 's book Life of J.S. Bach ( 1820 ) . The company was seriously affected by the House of Lords ' decision in Boosey v. Jeffreys ( 1854 ) which deprived English publishers of many of their foreign copyrights . 
 Boosey & Company diversified into manufacturing woodwind instruments in 1851 , collaborating in 1856 with flautist R.S. Pratten ( 1846 – 1936 ) to develop new designs for flutes . The firm bought over the business of Henry Distin in 1868 , allowing it to begin making brass instruments . Among its achievements was the widely acclaimed design for compensating valves developed by David James <unk> in 1874 . The company also commenced production of string instruments . 
 The company capitalised on the increasing popularity of the ballad by focusing its publishing activities on them . To promote sales , John Boosey ( <unk> – 1893 ) , son of Thomas Jr . , established the London Ballad Concerts in 1867 at St. James 's Hall and later at Queen 's Hall when it opened in 1893 . Clara Butt , John Sims Reeves and Charles W. Clark performed at these concerts , and its successes included Arthur Sullivan 's " The Lost Chord " ( 1877 ) and Stephen Adams ' " The Holy City " . The company began emphasising educational music from about the end of the 19th century . 
 In 1874 Boosey & Company moved into offices at 295 Regent Street , where the business was to stay for the next 131 years . In 1892 , Boosey & Company opened an office in New York which still exists today . The business eventually owned half of Regent Street , and at the time of the merger was managed by Leslie Boosey ( 1887 – 1979 ) . 
 Hawkes & Son ( later Rivière & Hawkes ) , a rival to Boosey & Company , was founded in 1865 by William Henry Hawkes selling orchestral sheet music . The company also made musical instruments and spare parts such as clarinet reeds , and by 1925 Hawkes had set up an instrument factory in Edgware , North London . The business , which was particularly known for brass and military band music , was eventually inherited by Ralph Hawkes ( 1898 – 1950 ) . 
 = = = After the merger = = = 
 Leslie Boosey and Ralph Hawkes met in the 1920s when they were on the Board of the Performing Right Society , and saw an opportunity to go into business together . They formed Boosey & Hawkes in October 1930 through a merger of their respective businesses . Hawkes & Son moved from its office in Denman Street to join the Boosey staff at 295 Regent Street . 
 The 1938 Anschluss — the annexation of Austria into Greater Germany by the Nazi regime — led to the Nazification of Viennese publishing house Universal Edition . Boosey & Hawkes seized the opportunity to sign up composers Béla Bartók and Zoltán Kodály , and also rescued Universal 's Jewish staff , who later played an important role in developing the company . One such employee in particular , Ernst Roth , facilitated the signing of Richard Strauss and Igor Stravinsky , and was instrumental in the production of Strauss 's Vier letzte Lieder ( Four Last Songs ) ( 1948 ; premièred 1950 ) and Stravinsky 's The Rake 's Progress ( premièred 1951 ) . Another significant figure from Vienna who occupied an editorial role was composer Arnold Schoenberg 's pupil Erwin Stein , and after the war the composer Leopold Spinner , a pupil of Anton Webern , was also on the editorial staff . Stein was instrumental in founding the modern @-@ music journal Tempo in 1939 , which began as Boosey & Hawkes ' own newsletter but later became a more independent publication . 
 By the time World War II broke out in 1939 , Boosey & Hawkes had also signed Benjamin Britten and Aaron Copland . It was Ralph Hawkes who championed Britten when he was still relatively unknown , often against the rest of the board of directors , until the première on 7 June 1945 of Peter Grimes , which was a critical and popular success . Sheet music sales soared during the War , enabling Boosey & Hawkes to buy Editions Russes which held the rights to the most valuable works of Prokofiev , Rachmaninoff and Stravinsky . The company also purchased the lease of the Royal Opera House in London in 1944 , rescuing it from becoming a permanent dance hall and providing a venue for world @-@ class ballet and opera in the capital . 
 By 1950 , Boosey & Hawkes was a leading international music company with an extensive catalogue of serious composers and offices in Bonn , Johannesburg , New York , Paris , Toronto and Sydney . However , from the late 1940s , strains had begun to appear in the relationship between Leslie Boosey and Ralph Hawkes , and this led to factions supporting each man forming in the company . It was discovered that Hawkes had borrowed capital of £ 100 @,@ 000 during the war without the permission of the exchange control authorities , and Boosey was forced to clear up the situation at great personal cost . Hawkes secretly wanted to buy out the music publishing side of the business and manage it from New York , leaving Boosey in London with the musical instrument business which Hawkes found dull . However , he died suddenly on 8 September 1950 , and representation of his faction was taken over by his flamboyant but unreliable brother Geoffrey who spent much of the company 's money on ventures such as the manufacture of mouth organs and ovens , which failed . Geoffrey Hawkes also sold shares in the company to fund his philandering , to the point that the company was forced to go public to raise cash . Leslie Boosey allowed Geoffrey his turn as chairman , but within two years the profitable company was on the brink of insolvency and Geoffrey Hawkes died of leukaemia in 1961 . 
 During these difficult years , Boosey was supported by his trusted managing director , Ernst Roth . However , Roth later regarded the Boosey family as ineffectual and parochial . In the early 1960s , Roth forced Boosey 's sons Anthony and Simon out of the company , and prevented his youngest son , Nigel , from even joining , allegedly at the behest of Benjamin Britten . Roth and Boosey also had differences over Britten 's influence over the company . Roth regarded Britten as a gifted local musician , rather than a true genius like Roth 's friends Strauss and Stravinsky . Boosey realised how valuable Britten was to the company , and agreed to Britten 's request to divide the company into instruments and publishing . However , Britten humiliated Boosey by preventing him from chairing the music publishing board Boosey had established at Britten 's request . In 1963 , Britten also managed to get Boosey & Hawkes to employ Donald Mitchell to find new , young composers for the company . Angered by the sway Britten had over Boosey , Roth fired Mitchell within a year . Mitchell later set up Faber Music for book publisher Faber and Faber with the assistance of Britten and the blessing of T. S. Eliot . 
 Boosey retired from the company in 1964 , and died without an obituary in 1979 . Although he had been awarded with the Légion d 'honneur by France , his achievements were mostly unrecognised in the UK . However , a large number of composers and their estates continue to benefit from his pioneering work in rights and royalty collection . In addition , every two years the Royal Philharmonic Society and the Performing Right Society honour individuals who have made an outstanding contribution to the furtherance of contemporary music in Britain with the Leslie Boosey Award . The award is given to those who work " backstage " , such as administrators , broadcasters , educationalists , programmers , publishers and representatives from the recording industry . 
 Some time during the late 1960s or early 1970s Boosey & Hawkes bought out The Salvation Army Brass Instrument Factory in North London . They continued for some years to manufacture instruments with The Salvation Army name and crest on them such as The Bandmaster cornets . 
 Boosey & Hawkes ' musical instruments division was gradually scaled down from the mid @-@ 1970s as it became less viable to have such an extensive range of products . Various lines were outsourced and sold off . By the time of the closure of the Edgware factory in 2001 , brass instruments were the only thriving part of the instrument range . Production was moved to Watford , Hertfordshire , and the instruments rebranded Besson . 
 It took nearly 20 years for Boosey & Hawkes to regain the leading position in the international music scene that it has today . It claims to be the largest specialist classical music publisher in the world . 
 = = The company today = = 
 In 2001 , Boosey & Hawkes was put up for sale after accounting irregularities were discovered in its Chicago instrument @-@ distribution business , leading to £ 13m worth of sales being written off , a plummeting share price , and the company 's near @-@ bankruptcy . It was eventually bought by venture capitalists HgCapital in 2003 for £ 40 million . 
 On 11 February 2003 , Boosey & Hawkes sold its musical instrument division , which included clarinet maker Buffet Crampon and guitar manufacturer Höfner , to The Music Group , a company formed by rescue buyout specialists Rutland Fund Management , for £ 33 @.@ 2 million . An archive of musical instruments manufactured or collected by the company throughout its history was passed to the Horniman Museum in Forest Hill , South London . 
 In September 2005 the company was again offered for sale by HgCapital which announced that it was seeking between £ 60 and £ 80 million . One of the interested buyers was Elevation Partners , a private equity firm which counts U2 lead singer Bono as a partner and managing director . Despite offers of about £ 115 million from a number of parties , the sale was later cancelled in November 2005 . In April 2008 , Boosey & Hawkes was bought by the Imagem Music Group . 
 Today , partly due to the foresight or business acumen of Ralph Hawkes , the company owns the copyrights or agencies to much major 20th @-@ century music , including works by Bartók , Leonard Bernstein , Britten ( notably all his output between 1938 and 1963 ) , Copland , Kodály , Prokofiev , Rachmaninoff , Richard Strauss and Stravinsky . It also publishes many prominent contemporary composers , such as John Adams , Louis Andriessen , Sir Harrison Birtwistle , <unk> Chin , Michael Daugherty , Peter Maxwell Davies , Henryk Górecki , Heinz Karl Gruber , Robin Holloway , Magnus Lindberg , James MacMillan , Olga Neuwirth , Kurt Schwertsik and Mark @-@ Anthony Turnage . The company 's New York branch has developed its own catalogue emphasising the works of American composers , including Elliott Carter , David Del Tredici , Walter Piston , Ned Rorem and Steve Reich . 
 295 Regent Street , which was the home of Boosey & Company since 1874 and of Boosey & Hawkes ' publishing business and music shop from 1930 , was finally given up by the company in 2005 which then relocated to Aldwych House . Boosey & Hawkes Music Shop claims to have the UK 's largest selection of printed music from all publishers , and operates a worldwide mail order service . 
 The company had a major division , <unk> , that commissioned and produced music for radio , television and advertising jingles , and the administration of copyrights owned by media companies . This has now been split into commercial synchronisation and production music departments , both under the Imagem name . Its Cavendish Production Music Library provides ready @-@ made production music for television , radio and audio @-@ visual use . 
 The Boosey & Hawkes group has branches in five countries on four continents , including companies in Germany ( Bote & Bock GmbH & Co . KG and Anton J. Benjamin GmbH ) , the UK ( Boosey & Hawkes Music Publishers Ltd . ) and the USA ( Boosey & Hawkes , Inc . ) . In North America , Boosey & Hawkes ' print sales catalogue is distributed by the Hal Leonard Corporation . 
 Boosey & Hawkes launched its Online Scores service in 2011 , allowing customers to view full scores of works in its catalogue . 
 = = Parodies = = 
 The company was lampooned by The Goon Show as " <unk> and <unk> " in their episode , " <unk> Strikes Britain " , as well as by musical parodist Peter Schickele who named one of the friends of fictional composer <unk> Bach Jonathan " <unk> " Hawkes . Somewhat more recondite was the punning reference delivered in one of Gerard Hoffnung 's parody concerts : " If Boosey 's will Hawk it , Schott 's will Tippett " ( from Punkt <unk> at Hoffnung Interplanetary Music Festival with John Amis , Royal Festival Hall , 21 and 22 November 1958 ) 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Mortimer , C.G. ( 1938 – 1939 ) . " Leading Music Publishers : Boosey & Hawkes Ltd . " . Musical Opinion ( Luton , Bedfordshire : Musical Opinion Ltd . ) 62 : 181 – 190 . ISSN 0027 @-@ 4623 . 02 . 
 " The Music Publisher of Tradition : The <unk> : Thomas and John ; The Hawkes : William Henry and Oliver " . Musical Opinion ( Luton , Bedfordshire : Musical Opinion Ltd . ) 65 : 68 . 1941 – 1942 . ISSN 0027 @-@ 4623 . 02 . 
 " Boosey & Hawkes Settle with Disney " . The Daily Telegraph . 21 March 2001 . 
 Aldrick , Philip ( 1 May 2001 ) . " Boosey in Talks with Lenders after Account Irregularities " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Fagan , Mary ( 7 October 2001 ) . " Boosey & Hawkes Faces £ 50m Bid " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Aldrick , Philip ( 13 February 2002 ) . " Steinway Quits Boosey Auction " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Parkinson , Gary ( 25 February 2002 ) . " Equity Groups Make a Play for Boosey " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Osborne , Alistair ( 30 April 2002 ) . " Boosey & Hawkes in Sale Talks " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Jay , Adam ( 27 May 2003 ) . " Boosey Stands Firm on EMI Deal " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Jay , Adam ( 11 September 2003 ) . " Final Notes Sound in Boosey Sale Opera " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Jay , Adam ( 10 September 2003 ) . " Fresh Bidder Chimes in on Boosey Sale " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Lawson , Annie ( 10 September 2003 ) . " Boosey Trumpets £ 40m Buyout " . The Guardian . 
 Osborne , Alistair ( 17 September 2003 ) . " Boosey Prepared for Trio of Suitors " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 Osborne , Alistair ( 4 October 2003 ) . " Hg Offer Tops Boosey Buyout " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 <unk> , Dan ( 23 November 2004 ) . " La Donna e mobile ? Key in a Classic Ringtone " . The Guardian . 
 Hopkins , Nic ( 20 September 2005 ) . " Clamour of Interest in £ <unk> Sale of Boosey " . The Times ( London ) . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Boosey , William ( 1931 ) . Fifty Years of Music . London : Ernest Benn . OCLC <unk> . 
 Wallace , Helen ( 2007 ) . Boosey & Hawkes : The Publishing Story . London : Boosey & Hawkes Music Publishers Ltd . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 514 @-@ 0 . 
 = Radar ( song ) = 
 " Radar " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fifth studio album , Blackout ( 2007 ) . It was written and produced by Bloodshy & Avant and The Clutch , with additional writing from Henrik Jonback , as a record that did not relate to any of her personal problems at the time . The recording sessions took place the day after Spears filed for divorce from Kevin Federline , and members of The Clutch claimed to be surprised by her work ethic . " Radar " was originally planned to be released as the third single from Blackout , but " Break the Ice " was chosen instead . The song was then planned as the fourth single , but the release was cancelled as Spears began recording her sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . " Radar " was later included as a bonus track on Circus , and released as the fourth and final single from the album on June 22 , 2009 by Jive Records . 
 Musically , " Radar " is an electropop and synthpop song , that runs through a midtempo dance groove . Spears ' vocals are auto tuned and accompanied by sonar pulses and a heavy usage of distorted synthesizers . The lyrics refer to an attraction between the protagonist and a man , while she wonders if he knows what she is feeling . " Radar " received mixed reviews from critics ; some called it one of the highlights of Blackout , while others felt that it was over @-@ produced and also criticized her vocals for being processed . In July 2008 , " Radar " charted in the top forty of Ireland and New Zealand , and inside the top @-@ ten in Sweden . After it was released as a single from Circus , the track performed poorly on the charts and did not manage to enter the top forty in most countries . However , it became her 21st hit on the US Billboard 's Pop Songs chart , the most for any artist of the decade . 
 The single 's accompanying music video was directed by Dave Meyers , and pays tribute to the music video of Madonna 's " Take a Bow " ( 1994 ) . In the video , Spears is an aristocratic woman involved in a love triangle with two men who are polo players . The video received mixed reviews from critics , who complimented the fashion but called the idea unoriginal . " Radar " was performed by Spears at The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) , with the accompanying dance routine featuring her pole dancing . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main instrumentation was recorded by Bloodshy & Avant at Bloodshy & Avant Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . In November 2006 , Spears recorded " Radar " with Ezekiel Lewis and Patrick M. Smith of The Clutch at Sony Music Studios in New York City . Lewis had wanted to work with her for a long time and was motivated to produce something for her that was going to " help her project become a great project to come back with " . Smith stated that the team tried to create a record " for the Britney Spears that we know and love " and that it did not " touch on anything that was really dealing with all the stuff that she was dealing with . " Both commented that although Spears arrived late to the recording sessions , she caught them off guard with her efficiency and professionalism , with Lewis adding , " It was absolutely nuts , and she took directions very well . [ ... ] I don ’ t know what I was expecting because we went in to cut that record the day after she filed divorce from Kevin [ Federline ] . " The song was later mixed by Niklas Flyckt at <unk> Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . " Radar " was originally planned to be released as the third single from Blackout , according to Lewis . " Break the Ice " was released instead and " Radar " was chosen as the fourth single . In July 2008 , a CD single was released in countries such as New Zealand and Sweden . However , a wider release was scrapped when Spears began recording new material for her sixth studio album , Circus . On May 7 , 2009 , the song was announced as the fourth single from Circus . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Radar " is an electropop and synthpop song , that runs through a midtempo dance groove . The song is influenced by rave music and R & B. It has a bouncy and skipping beat , and a repetitive melody reminiscent of a nursery rhyme . Spears ' vocals are auto tuned and kept " more in the foreground " , according to Jennifer Vineyard of MTV . Her voice is accompanied by sonar pulses and distorted synthesizers . The synthesizers have been compared by Kimberly Chou of The Michigan Daily to those of Soft Cell 's " Tainted Love " ( 1981 ) . During the outro , Spears repeats <unk> da @-@ da @-@ das . Critics noted that " Radar " is influenced by the works of Rihanna ; Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun said the song sounds " like an inferior take " of Rihanna 's single “ SOS ” ( 2006 ) . According to Poppy Cossins of The Sun , Radar sounds " like the Pussycat Dolls at their most risqué " . Roger Friedman of Fox News said that along with " Break the Ice " , " Radar " was more " straight @-@ ahead electronic disco " than the rest of Blackout and added that it " sounds like Las Vegas goes Eurodisco . " In the lyrics , Spears lets the subject know he is on her radar , while she lists the qualities the man has . Kimberly Chou said Spears ' delivery " [ is ] so aggressive it 's almost threatening . " Spears sings lyrics such as " Confidence is a must / cockiness is a plus / edginess is a rush / edges I like ' em rough / A man with a Midas touch / <unk> me I 'm a lush . " During the bridge she sings " I got my eye on you / And I can 't let you get away " , making clear her attraction . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Blender gave the song four and a half stars , named it the second potential hit from the album , and called it “ a bubblegum @-@ electro dance floor jam with a hook most pop stars would kill for ” . Eric R. Danton of The Hartford Courant deemed it as " crackling " and " club @-@ ready " , while calling it one of the " killer tracks " off the album along with " Break the Ice " and " Hot as Ice " . Denton Record @-@ Chronicle 's Mike Daniel said the best tracks of Blackout are " the unwaveringly catchy ' Radar ' and the neo @-@ wave curveball of ' Heaven and Earth ' " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said some of the songs of Blackout , " really show off the skills of the producers " , exemplifying " Gimme More " , " Radar " , " Break the Ice " , " Heaven on Earth " and " Hot as Ice " . He also selected it as one of his ' track picks ' of the album . Jedd <unk> of The Maneater deemed it as one of the standout tracks of Blackout along with " Ooh Ooh Baby . " 
 Nekesa Mumbi Moody of USA Today called it " a sexy techno groove that you can 't help but bounce to . " Theon Weber of The Village Voice said that " Spears 's writers present her with the goofiest , most vivacious productions she 's ever had , filling ' Radar ' with pinging noises and polishing Madonna 's dance @-@ floor trash bright . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy called it " a rave @-@ tinged electro <unk> on which Spears is vocodered to the point of sounding extra @-@ terrestrial . " Alexis Petridis from The Guardian said that the song " seems to be bending over backwards to annoy the listener . Perhaps it 's a last desperate tactic to win back some privacy : she 's trying to get people to leave her alone by making as irritating a noise as possible . " A reviewer from the Ottawa Citizen said that " some tracks [ of the album ] just don 't work , such as Radar , in which Britney 's voice is tuned up so high she sounds like she 's 14 . " 
 Laura Herbert of BBC News said that many of the album 's songs , including " Radar " and " Toy Soldier " " are repetitive and over @-@ produced . " Jim Abbott of the Orlando Sentinel said that " Musically , songs such as ' Piece of Me , ' ' Radar ' and ' Break the Ice ' are one @-@ dimensional , robotic exercises . " Chris Wasser from the Irish Independent said the album had single potential , exemplifying that " There 's little doubting we 'll hear the bouncing and digitally affected vocals of Radar and the livelier Hot As Ice on the radio soon enough , but both tracks still seem a little under par . " After the release of " Radar " single from Circus , Nick Levine of Digital Spy said it " still sounds pretty ace , one of the best examples of the <unk> sound Blackout essentially invented , but its fresh @-@ out @-@ the @-@ box sheen has long since faded " . On July 29 , 2009 , " Radar " was chosen as single of the week in FHM . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On November 17 , 2007 , due to digital downloads for the Blackout release , " Radar " peaked at number fifty @-@ two on the U.S. Billboard Hot Digital Songs . The song also charted in several countries based on strong digital sales and airplay alone , surprisingly reaching high chart positions . In Ireland , the song debuted at number forty @-@ seven on July 15 , 2008 . It peaked at number thirty @-@ two on August 5 , 2008 . In Sweden , " Radar " debuted at number forty @-@ six on July 24 , 2008 . The single peaked at number eight on July 28 , 2008 , becoming the second highest @-@ charting single from the album after " Gimme More " . It stayed on the position for two weeks , and for eight weeks on the chart overall . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on August 18 , 2008 , and peaked at number thirty @-@ two two weeks later . It stayed on the chart for five weeks . 
 After being confirmed as the fourth single from Circus , " Radar " re @-@ entered the charts in several countries . On August 29 , 2009 , the song peaked at number thirty on the U.S. Billboard Pop Songs . On September 5 , 2009 , " Radar " finally entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number ninety , and peaked at number eighty @-@ eight on the following week . It became her fifth song from Circus to chart on the Hot 100 , marking the first time five songs from one of her albums entered the chart . It was also her 22nd Hot 100 hit . " Radar " also became her 21st hit on the Pop Songs chart , the most for any artist of the decade . As of July 2010 , " Radar " has sold 481 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . On the same week , the song peaked at number sixty @-@ five in Canada . The track re @-@ entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number forty @-@ six on July 20 , 2009 and stayed on the chart for just one week . In the UK , the song peaked at number forty @-@ six on August 2 , 2009 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In June 2008 , Spears ' manager Larry Rudolph told The Sun that a video for " Radar " directed by Spears was to be shot in Chelsea , London . The concept would have Spears and her friends chasing a man in different clubs . However , this was scrapped along with the single ’ s release . The music video for " Radar " from Circus was filmed on May 27 and 28 , 2009 , at the <unk> Resort & Spa located in Santa Barbara , California . It was directed by Dave Meyers , who previously worked with Spears on her music videos for " Lucky " , " Boys " and " Outrageous " as well as the Curious commercials . Meyers claimed the video pays tribute to the music video of Madonna 's 1994 single " Take a Bow " . He added , " [ we were ] looking for a way to take her into a contemporary , classy environment . I felt empowered by referencing Madonna 's video . Britney hasn 't done anything like that " . He had a very clear idea of how he wanted the story line to work : " There is a narrative going on , a romantic triangle on a weekend at this polo mansion , " he said . " A soap @-@ opera romance . " Meyers commented that working with Spears again was " a great celebration of trusting one another " , explaining that both wanted " to do something fresh and new , seeking out an actual different technique and stylistic choices and trying to find a form to celebrate them in . " Since the song was not the first single from Circus , Meyers chose to experiment and not have dancing scenes , saying that " the videos are a chance for her to vocalize a sense of herself . The media tends to attack her , so I thought , ' Let 's show the classy side of Britney and focus on a classy experience , very European @-@ inspired ' . And she 's at the point in her career where I think this would be a nice step . " After the video was finished , Meyers said he was happy with the lack of dancing scenes , because the cuts and dissolves kept the pace of the song . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Spears arriving at a polo mansion . She comes out from the car wearing a vest , jeans and showing her midriff . She starts singing while her boyfriend welcomes her . They walk past a barn , where a polo player is sitting . They look at each other briefly and she starts to sing in a balcony , watching the second man with a pair of binoculars . At the end of the first chorus , her boyfriend comes and puts a studded necklace around her neck , as a surprise gift . Until the end of the second chorus , we see scenes of Spears singing and watching the polo player as he gets ready . When the bridge begins , Spears arrives at a match wearing a white dress and a large hat . She looks at the polo player over her shoulder and sings the lines " I got my eye on you / And I can ’ t let you get away " . When the match ends , she leaves and the second man follows her . They flirt inside a hallway and leave . Her boyfriend notices her absence , walks into the hallway and sees her necklace on the floor . The video ends with Spears and the second man walking into the sunset . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The music video leaked online on July 1 , 2009 . Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone said the music video was her weakest since " Gimme More " and highlighted the comparisons with " Take a Bow " , saying , " while Madonna dressed the role of a distressed aristocratic <unk> in the stands , Spears ’ wardrobe and giant hat mirror the elite at the Kentucky Derby " . He also said the idea was unoriginal and compared it to Spears ' <unk> commercials . Nadia Mendoza of The Sun said , " forget PVC catsuits and teeny <unk> air hostess outfits . Britney Spears has gone all sophisticated on us " and positively commented on the fashion , saying " Britney dons a hat more suited to Ascot than a music video " . Peter Gicas of E ! commented that the video was a nice departure from her recent more choreographed videos , such as " Womanizer " and " If U Seek Amy " . He commended it for its " more straightforward approach in telling a so @-@ called story " , but felt it was " a bit too much like one of those overly dramatic fragrance commercials " . OK ! said the video was " posh " and also noted the difference from her recent videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears performed the song during The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) . After the performance of " Piece of Me " , there was a brief interlude in which acrobats hanging from fabric simulated a thunderstorm . Spears took the stage again to perform " Radar " , which featured her pole dancing . She wore a black bra encrusted with Swarovski crystals , fishnet stockings and high @-@ heeled laced up boots , designed by Dean and Dan Caten . Spears ended the performance with her and her dancers posing in the middle of the three @-@ ring stage as a red curtain slowly descended in the closing . A contest in <unk> was announced to promote the song . The contestants had to upload a video of them dancing to " Radar " , and Spears and Jive Records picked the winner . In the revamped Britney : Piece Of Me concert ( 2016 ) , " Radar " plays during an interlude that features multiple excerpts of Britney 's music videos . A cover version of the song by American singer @-@ songwriter Christopher Dallman was included in an EP titled Sad Britney , released on November 9 , 2009 , along with covers of " ... Baby One More Time " , " Toxic " and " Gimme More " . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and Personnel = = 
 Backing vocals , Lead vocals – Britney Spears 
 Writers , drums – Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg , Henrik Jonback , Balewa Muhammad , Candice Nelson , Ezekiel " Zeke " Lewis , Patrick " <unk> " Smith 
 Producers , drums – Bloodshy & Avant , The Clutch 
 Mixing – Niklas Flyckt 
 Assistant engineer – Jim <unk> 
 Guitars – Henrik Jonback 
 Keyboard , bass – Bloodshy & Avant 
 Background vocals – Candice Nelson , Michaela Breen 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Number 1 's ( Destiny 's Child album ) = 
 # 1 's is the first compilation album released by recording group Destiny 's Child through Columbia Records on October 25 , 2005 . It marked their last album before a formal disbandment in late 2005 , announced during the tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It . The greatest hits album features the highest @-@ charting singles from Destiny 's Child 's four studio albums released between 1998 and 2004 as well as a song from their remix album This Is the Remix released in 2002 . In addition to already existing material , three new songs were recorded for the compilation — " Stand up For Love " , " Feel the Same Way I Do " and group member Beyoncé 's collaboration with Slim Thug , " Check on It " . 
 Following its release , # 1 's received positive reviews from music critics who praised the included material as the highlights of the group 's music career . However , its title was dismissed as many of the songs included on the track listing hadn 't reached the top position of a major record chart ; it was later acknowledged by Billboard magazine that the title was only used as a marketing strategy . The compilation debuted and peaked on top of the US Billboard 200 album chart becoming the group 's second album to reach number one in that country . It further peaked at number one in Japan and number six in the UK while also reaching the top forty in many European countries . The compilation received seven certifications by music trade organizations in different countries across the world . It further spawned two singles : " Stand up For Love " , which failed to appear on a major music chart , and " Check on It " , which reached number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and the top ten on many European charts . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Destiny 's Child went to a hiatus , following the release of their third studio album Survivor ( 2001 ) , allowing each member of the group to release solo material . As each member had success with their individual projects , questions arose by the public whether they would record again as a group . However , group members Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams reunited again to work on their fourth studio album Destiny Fulfilled . The album was released in late 2004 and the group further embarked on a worldwide tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It the following year as part of its promotion . During a concert the group had at the Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona , Spain on June 11 , 2005 , Rowland announced to the audience that the tour would be Destiny 's Child last together , revealing their formal disbandment . It was announced that after their final North American leg , the group would part ways , with each member continuing their music career as a solo act . During an interview , they explained that their disbandment was planned during the making of Destiny Fulfilled as they discussed their individual aspirations and realized that remaining as a group would prevent them in pursuing those interests . However , it was acknowledged that the album would not be their last album together . 
 On August 1 , 2005 , Rowland announced the release of a greatest hits album later that year during an interview with Billboard magazine . She said , " We 're definitely going to record another song for our greatest hits album for our fans . We 're still thinking about it because we want it to mean something . " In September , the album 's title # 1 's was revealed along with a release date on October 25 , 2005 . A DualDisc edition of # 1 's was also announced with the same songs of the standard edition mixed in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound on a CD as well as bonus content on a DVD containing seven music videos and a trailer for the live album Destiny 's Child : Live in Atlanta ( 2005 ) . The album was also released as a two @-@ pack set at Walmart including the original CD and a DVD titled " Fan Pack II " which contained live performances of two songs , three music videos of the members ' solo songs and bonus footage . 
 = = Content = = 
 # 1 's contained charting songs from Destiny 's Child 's four studio albums Destiny 's Child ( 1998 ) , The Writing 's on the Wall ( 1999 ) , Survivor ( 2001 ) and Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) as well as their remix album This Is the Remix ( 2002 ) . Following the announcement of # 1 's , Billboard magazine questioned the criteria by which the inclusion of the songs would be determined as the group had only four number @-@ one singles on the main US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart and only one single topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . However , Keith Caulfield of Billboard magazine later acknowledged in an article that its title was a marketing strategy as its liner notes did not offer information on the chart positions of the songs . " Bills , Bills , Bills " , " Say My Name " , " Independent Women " and " Bootylicious " were the band 's four singles which topped the Hot 100 chart while " No , No , No " topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . " Lose My Breath " , " Soldier " featuring T.I and Lil Wayne and " Jumpin ' , Jumpin ' " additionally topped other component Billboard charts ; the former two peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs while the latter peaked at the top position of the Mainstream Top 40 . In addition to those , the album contained charting singles which not necessarily reached number one on a music chart — " Emotion " , " Bug a Boo " , " Girl " and " Cater 2 U " . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman further noted that every charting single was included on the album with the exception of songs from the group 's holiday album 8 Days of Christmas ( 2001 ) . " Brown Eyes " which was not released as a single was featured as an international bonus track due to its appearance on a chart in the US . Similarly , " Nasty Girl " and " So Good " were placed as bonus songs on the album 's Japanese edition . 
 The music on the album was noted to be contemporary R & B , pop and new age soul music ; Sputnikmusic 's John Hanson further described it as " filled " with bubblegum R & B pop . In addition to already released material , new songs were also recorded for the album , including " Stand Up for Love " , Beyoncé 's " Check on It " featuring Slim Thug and " Feel the Same Way I Do " . " Stand Up for Love " was written by David Foster , his daughter Amy Foster @-@ Gillies and Beyoncé while its production was handled by both Foster and Humberto Gatica . The ballad was inspired by poverty @-@ stricken children and families which receive funds from charitable organization . " Check on It " was originally written by Beyoncé , Slim Thug , Angela Beyince and Sean Garrett for the The Pink Panther 2006 soundtrack but was included on the compilation album and during the closing credits of the aforementioned film . It was later included on the track list of the international deluxe edition of Beyoncé 's second studio album B 'Day ( 2006 ) . Slim Thug raps his lines backed by a bassline , while Beyoncé 's vocals , further described as " R & B pipes " by Bret McCabe from the Baltimore City Paper , received comparisons to Donna Summer . A dance beat is present in the song along with quick hooks sang by Beyoncé . " Feel the Same Way I Do " was described as a track similar to soul songs by American group The Supremes instrumentally complete with " exotic " strings . Jess Harvell from Pitchfork Media felt its sound was suitable for Mariah Carey 's The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 " Stand Up for Love " was released as the compilation 's first single on September 27 , 2005 . It was termed as 2005 World Children 's Day Anthem and used for a worldwide fundraiser for Ronald McDonald House Charities and several other local children 's organizations . Critical commentary towards the song was generally negative and it failed to chart in the US becoming the band 's first single to do so . " Stand Up for Love " became the group 's last single together prior to their disbandment . The second single from the album , " Check on It " was released on December 13 , 2005 and was later available for digital download on January 31 , 2006 in the US . It managed to reach the top of the Hot 100 and three other component Billboard charts in the US . Worldwide , it topped the New Zealand Singles Chart , peaked at numbers two and three in Ireland and the UK and within the top ten in many other European countries . Destiny 's Child performed " Stand Up for Love " and " Survivor " on November 15 , 2005 on the television show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! as their last TV performance together as a group . The former was performed by the band again the same day at Ronald McDonald House in Los Angeles for World Children 's Day . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Andy Kellman from AllMusic wrote in his review that # 1 's was formatted the same was as other music scores and anthologies packed for the holiday shopping season . He further commented that its title should have been different and concluded , " the disc reaffirms that Destiny 's Child released some of the biggest R & B singles of the late ' 90s and early 2000s . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani criticized the album 's title as only four of the singles reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . However , he praised Destiny 's Child 's " impressive output , which includes some of the most recognizable R & B hits of the past bling / <unk> / status @-@ obsessed five years " . BBC Online 's writer James Blake called the album " more than decent " and added that the group 's success in the music industry was a notable reason for a greatest hits release . However , he argued that it was very soon to include songs from their final studio album , Destiny Fulfilled , as it was released only eleven months before # 1 's . Pitchfork Media 's Jess Harvell felt that it was a " smart " move not to arrange the songs on the compilation in a chronological order and felt it " has the odd knock @-@ on effect of suggesting that their legacy may be based on a smaller body of work than imagined " . Harvell finished the review by writing , " you can take # 1 's as pure product and not feel wrong for doing so " . Despite classifying its title as " misleading " and criticizing the new material , Houston Chronicle 's editor Michael D. Clark wrote the album was " <unk> up as beautiful and immaculate as " the members of the group and included their best singles from their four studio albums . 
 John A. Hanson of Sputnikmusic felt that the greatest hits album was released " at the perfect time " as many of the songs were released a long time ago and " they 've lost the <unk> , but its [ sic ] soon enough that they still have some sort of relevance " . He concluded for the album , " [ it ] hits you with recognizable hit after recognizable hit , and they are all pretty much as perfect as contemporary R & B @-@ pop gets " . Describing the album as a " masterclass in what happens when a great band comes together " , Yahoo ! Music 's Hattie Collins wrote , " Despite the low @-@ points , this is a Destiny 's Child must have collection of classics from one of R & B 's most significant talents " . A more mixed review came from Fiona <unk> from the website musicOMH who felt the album included many " skippable " songs and noted that the material from The Writing 's on the Wall and Survivor were the collection 's best . She felt that the progress in the sound of the band was evident on # 1 's , but offered the opinion , " As far as greatest hits albums go , Destiny 's Child show themselves to be pretty ace , but still not quite the incredible force in R & B " . San Francisco Chronicle 's Aidin Vaziri criticized the songs from Destiny Fulfilled and " Stand Up for Love " and concluded " surveying Destiny 's Child 's entire career on this set ... it 's obvious their hearts slipped away around the same time Beyonce 's solo album sold its first million " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In its first week , # 1 's sold 113 @,@ 000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 for the chart issue dated November 12 , 2005 . It became the band 's second number one album on that chart following Survivor in 2001 . In its second week of charting , the compilation fell to the position of number five selling 85 @,@ 000 copies with a decrease of 25 % of the previous sales . It also debuted atop the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums charts during the same week as it debuted on the Billboard 200 . It has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the compilation received a platinum certification by Music Canada ( MC ) for selling 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the UK , the compilation debuted and peaked at number six on the UK Albums Chart on November 5 , 2005 . It became the group 's fourth top ten entry in that country . In the week of the release of Beyoncé 's studio album 4 , on July 9 , 2011 , # 1 's climbed from the position of 111 back to 54 in its forty second charting week in that country . The same week , it set a peak on the UK R & B Albums Chart at number 12 in its fortieth . It was certified platinum in the UK on July 22 , 2013 by the British Phonographic Industry for shipment of 300 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , the compilation debuted at number ten on the Irish Albums Chart for the week ending October 27 , 2005 . The following week , it moved to number eight on the chart which also became its peak position in that country . The Irish Recorded Music Association ( IRMA ) certified # 1 's double platinum for selling 30 @,@ 000 copies in that country . Across other European countries , the album peaked within the top ten in Switzerland and the Flanders region in Belgium , within the top thirty in Germany and the Wallonia region of Belgium and within the top forty in Austria , Netherlands , Norway , Spain and Sweden . 
 On November 6 , 2005 , the compilation debuted on the position of 13 on the Australian ARIA Charts . The following week it moved to ten and spent a total of 19 weeks on the chart . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand it peaked at number three on the country 's albums chart in its second week of charting . The Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) certified it platinum for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies in that country . In Japan , # 1 's debuted at number one on the Oricon albums chart , selling 154 @,@ 859 copies in its first week . In 2005 , it was eventually certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for selling 500 @,@ 000 copies in that country . The same year , # 1 's was ranked as the twentieth best @-@ selling album in the world . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for # 1 's are adapted from the album 's liner notes and the website AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Archery at the 2004 Summer Olympics = 
 Archery at the 2004 Summer Olympics was held at Panathinaiko Stadium in Athens , Greece with ranking rounds on 12 August and regular competition held from 15 August to 21 August . One hundred twenty @-@ eight archers from forty @-@ three nations competed in the four gold medal events — individual and team events for men and for women — that were contested at these games . 
 The stadium , often called <unk> , is notable as the site of the first Olympic Games and even earlier , where the Ancient Greeks ' <unk> Games were hosted . At the behest of James Easton , president of the International Archery Federation , archery events were held in the historic stadium , hoping that its history and natural beauty would attract the public to the sport . Laurence Godfrey , the fourth @-@ place finisher in the men 's individual event , remarked that the stadium inspired pride , while American Vic <unk> spoke for most of the archers in saying , " It 's a great honor and a privilege to be able to compete inside the 1896 Olympic Stadium . " 
 The Korean team won three out of the four gold medals contested . Four Olympic records and several other world records were broken at these games , despite poor weather conditions during the preliminary rounds of competition . 
 = = Qualification and format = = 
 There were four ways for National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) to qualify individual archers for the Olympics in archery . For each gender , the host nation ( Greece ) was guaranteed three spots . The 2003 World Target Competition 's top 8 teams ( not including the host nation ) each received three spots , and the 19 highest ranked archers after the team qualifiers were removed also received spots . Fifteen of the remaining eighteen spots were divided equally among the five Olympic continents for allocation in continental tournaments . The last three spots in each gender were determined by the Tripartite Commission . Sixty @-@ four archers of each sex took part in the Olympics , with each NOC being able to enter a maximum of three archers . 
 For all archery events at the Olympics , archers stand 70 metres from their target . The target consists of concentric circles , and has a total diameter of 122 cm . Archers earn points based on which circle their arrow landed in , with ten points awarded for hitting the center circle , and one point awarded for hitting the outermost circle . During the ranking rounds , each archer shot twelve ends , or groups , of six arrows per end . The score from that round determined the match @-@ ups in the elimination rounds , with high @-@ ranking archers facing low @-@ ranking archers . The first three rounds of elimination used six ends of three arrows , narrowing the field of archers from 64 to 8 . The three final rounds ( quarterfinals , semifinals , and medal matches ) each used four ends of three arrows . 
 Thirteen men 's and fifteen women 's teams competed in the team competitions . The teams consisted of the country 's three archers from the individual round , and the team 's initial ranking was determined by summing the three members ' scores in the individual ranking round . Each round of eliminations consisted of each team firing 27 arrows ( 9 by each archer ) . 
 = = Medal summary = = 
 = = Event summary = = 
 For the sixth Olympics in a row , the South Korean team came out as the clear victor , taking three out of the four gold medals in Athens . Korean archers set new world records in the women 's individual ( Park Sung @-@ Hyun ) and team ( Park , Yun Mi @-@ Jin , and Lee Sung @-@ Jin ) ranking rounds and the men 's individual ranking round ( Im Dong Hyun ) , though none of those scores counted as Olympic records because the ranking round was held before the opening ceremony . Olympic records were broken in both the men 's and women 's 36 @-@ arrow 1 / 16 and 1 / 8 rounds combined ( by Chen <unk> Yuan of Chinese Taipei and Yun of Korea ) , as well as in the men 's 18 @-@ arrow match ( by Park Kyung Mo of Korea ) and 36 @-@ arrow finals rounds combined ( by Tim Cuddihy of Australia ) . 
 In the men 's events , the Korean team shot 12 maximum scores of 10 to win the gold medal against Chinese Taipei 251 @-@ 245 . Losing by two points , the United States failed to fend of the Ukraine team to capture the bronze . The event causing the most upset however was the men 's individual , the only event that the Korean team has never won and yet again failed to clinch . Defending champion Simon Fairweather was ousted from the competition in a first round loss due to blustery weather conditions . The wind caused some archers like Fairweather to make one @-@ point shots , and its strength even caused others to miss their targets completely . The final matches of this event also saw competitors coming close in score , with Italian Marco <unk> beating the Japanese Hiroshi Yamamoto by only two points to win gold . Even closer still was the bronze medal match , in which Britain 's Laurence Godfrey was outshot 112 @-@ 113 by seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Australian Tim Cuddihy , who himself only managed to get into the semifinals by one point . 
 The woman 's individual event fell easily to the Koreans ; they have won this event continuously since the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles and swept all three medals at the 2000 Olympics . Though both gold and silver fell to Korean archers , Alison Williamson captured the bronze medal , giving Britain its first medal in archery since 1992 . In the team event , the Korean women beat the Chinese team 241 @-@ 240 to win the gold medal , making this their eleventh straight women 's team championship win . Taiwan easily took the bronze medal over France . 
 = = Participating nations = = 
 Forty @-@ three nations contributed archers to compete in the events . Below is a list of the competing nations ; in parentheses are the number of national competitors . 
 = = Medal table = = 
 Korea continued its domination of the sport , winning three of the four gold medals as well as a silver . Marco <unk> won the men 's individual competition , earning Italy the nation 's first gold medal in Olympic archery , blocking Hiroshi Yamamoto 's attempt to win Japan 's first gold medal . Chinese Taipei , which had never before won a medal in archery , won a silver and a bronze . 
 = Santa Rosa de la Eminencia castle = 
 Santa Rosa de la Eminencia castle is a colonial castle built in the seventeenth century by the Spanish monarchy in La Asunción , Venezuela . Its construction started on 24 March 1677 by order of governor Juan Muñoz de Gadea after a group of French pirates attacked the city , and finished c . 1683 . The structure comprises three defensive fronts , each one with two bastions , two half bastions and three curtains , and is positioned at the top of a hill that overlooks the city . 
 The castle served as a prison for war heroine Luisa Cáceres de Arismendi between November 1815 and January 1816 . She was held captive by the Spanish forces on an attempt to bow down her husband , Juan Bautista Arismendi , who was the chief of the patriotic forces on the island . Simón Bolívar 's arrival to the island prompted the partial destruction and abandonment of the fort in May 1816 . By 1899 , the facility serviced as headquarters , and later as quarters for the National Army . It was declared as a National Monument in 1965 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Santa Rosa de la Eminencia castle was built on the site of the old San Bernardo fortress ; its construction started on 24 March 1677 and finished c . 1683 , under the command of governor Don Juan Fermín de Huidobro . Construction of the fortress began by order of governor Juan Muñoz de Gadea after a group of French pirates attacked the city in early 1677 . The castle is positioned at the top of a hill that overlooks the city of La Asunción , and next to a reservoir . It comprises three defensive fronts , each one with two bastions , two half bastions and three curtains . The castle also includes barracks , a chapel , and a cistern , located at the parade along a <unk> and the ramp leading to the upper level . La Asunción was founded in 1562 by Pedro González Cervantes de <unk> on the Santa Lucía valley , located at the eastern part of the Margarita island on the state of Nueva Esparta . The city was an important stronghold at the Venezuelan War of Independence . 
 = = History = = 
 From November 1815 and until January 1816 , Luisa Cáceres de Arismendi , a heroine of the Venezuelan War of Independence , was imprisoned in the castle . The Spaniards wanted to bow down her husband , Juan Bautista Arismendi , who was the chief of the patriotic forces on the island . After the patriots attempted an unsuccessful takeover of the fort in December 1815 , Arismendi gave birth in January 1816 to a child that died at birth due to the terrible conditions of her confinement in the castle . Later in May 1816 , Simón Bolívar 's arrival to the island prompted the abandonment and partial destruction of the fort by the Spanish forces . 
 Between 1818 and 1821 , the structure was repaired and used as an artillery quarter during the War of Independence . It was later used as a magazine for the storage of gunpowder and ammunition in 1830 ; two years later , it functioned as <unk> and armory . By 1899 , the facility serviced as headquarters , and after receiving further repairs under instructions from the president Cipriano Castro in 1901 , it served as quarters for the National Army . The sickness and eventual death of president Juan Vicente Gómez in 1935 led to the abandonment of the castle by the troops . Later in 1955 , and due to a local initiative , the castle achieved the status of War Museum . It was declared as a National Monument in 1965 by president Raúl Leoni . 
 = A Glimpse of Hell ( book ) = 
 A Glimpse of Hell : The Explosion on the USS Iowa and Its Cover @-@ Up is a nonfiction book of investigative journalism , written by Charles C. Thompson II and published in 1999 . The book describes the USS Iowa turret explosion that took place on April 19 , 1989 , and the subsequent investigations that tried to determine the cause . The explosion aboard the United States Navy battleship Iowa killed 47 of the turret 's crewmen . 
 Soon after the explosion , Thompson was informed by an Iowa crewman that the Navy was conducting a dishonest investigation into the cause of the tragedy . Thompson , a producer for the television newsmagazine 60 Minutes , later produced several television reports which disputed the Navy 's conclusions as to what had caused the explosion . 
 Based on his work for the 60 Minutes reports plus further investigation on his own , Thompson wrote A Glimpse of Hell . The book was published by W. W. Norton & Company . Thompson 's book was extremely critical of most of the Navy personnel involved in the investigation , concluding that the Navy had orchestrated a cover @-@ up to conceal the true cause of the explosion . 
 Upon its publication , the book received favorable comments from book reviewers . Thompson later claimed that the Navy tried to suppress sales by banning the book from Navy exchange stores on Navy bases throughout the world . In 2001 , five Navy servicemen named in Thompson 's book sued Thompson , the book 's publisher , and one of Thompson 's sources for libel , false light privacy , and conspiracy . The suit was settled out @-@ of @-@ court in 2007 for undisclosed terms . 
 = = Background = = 
 On the morning of April 19 , 1989 , the United States Navy battleship USS Iowa , under the command of Captain Fred Moosally , was 260 nautical miles ( 480 km ) northeast of Puerto Rico , steaming at 15 knots ( 17 mph ; 28 km / h ) , and preparing to engage in a live @-@ fire exercise with its 16 @-@ inch guns . At 09 : 53 , as the ship 's 16 @-@ inch Turret Two loaded and prepared to fire its three guns , a fireball between 2500 and 3000 ° F ( 1400 and 1650 ° C ) and traveling at 2 @,@ 000 feet per second ( 600 m / s ) with a pressure of 4 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch ( 28 MPa ) blew out from the turret 's center gun 's open breech . The fireball spread through all three of the turret 's gun rooms and through much of the lower levels of the turret . All 47 crewmen inside the turret were killed . 
 Soon after the fires in the turret were extinguished , Vice Admiral Joseph S. Donnell , commander of Surface Forces Atlantic , appointed Rear Admiral Richard Milligan to conduct an informal one @-@ officer investigation into the explosion . Milligan boarded Iowa with his staff on April 20 and began his investigation by interviewing Iowa crewmembers . Milligan 's investigation continued after Iowa returned to its home port of Norfolk on April 23 . 
 Five days after the explosion , a gunner 's mate who worked in Iowa 's Turret One called Charles Thompson and told him that Milligan was conducting a dishonest investigation . " The news media is the only thing that can keep the Navy honest " said the caller . Thompson , a producer for 60 Minutes , was a former US Navy officer and naval gunfire spotter who had served two tours of duty during the Vietnam War . After leaving the military and becoming a journalist , Thompson had produced numerous news stories about military subjects . Thompson discussed the phone call with his colleague and journalist Mike Wallace , also a former naval officer , who asked him to begin following news stories about the explosion and the Navy 's investigation into its cause more closely . 
 On September 7 , 1989 , Milligan and Admiral Leon A. Edney , the Navy 's Vice Chief of Naval Operations , announced the results of Milligan 's investigation . Milligan 's investigation report , endorsed by the top Navy leadership , concluded that the explosion was " most probably " a result of an intentional act committed by a Turret Two crewman named Clayton Hartwig . According to the Navy , Hartwig , who had died in the explosion , was a suicidal loner who had initiated the explosion with either an electronic or chemical timer . 
 Robert Zelnick , an ABC News reporter , wrote an editorial for the New York Times on September 11 , 1989 , titled , " The Navy <unk> a Dead Seaman . " In the editorial , Zelnick was sharply critical of the Navy 's conclusions , stating that Hartwig had been subjected to a " process of guilt by fiat " and that the evidence against the sailor was very weak . Mike Wallace read Zelnick 's article and asked Thompson to produce a report for broadcast on the explosion and the Navy 's investigation . 
 With help from a team of ex @-@ military officers , including Ed Snyder , a former commander of the battleship USS New Jersey , Thompson produced a story which aired on 60 Minutes in November 1989 . The story , conducted by Mike Wallace , heavily criticized the findings of Milligan 's investigation . The story contained an interview in which Milligan defended his conclusions , saying , " Mike , there is no other cause of this accident . We have looked at everything . We 've ruled out everything . This was a deliberate act , most likely done by Petty Officer Hartwig . " 
 The Navy 's conclusions were heavily criticised by the victim 's families , the media , and congress . After a test found that an overram of the powder bags into the gun could have caused the explosion , the Navy reopened the investigation . On October 17 , 1991 , Frank Kelso , the new Navy Chief of Naval Operations , announced that the Navy could not determine who or what had caused the tragedy . Kelso apologized to Hartwig 's family and closed the Navy 's investigation . An independent review of the Navy 's investigation by Sandia National Laboratories concluded that the explosion had probably been caused by an overram of the powder bags into the center gun 's breech , possibly because of a malfunction in the rammer mechanism or because the gun crew was inadequately trained . Soon after , 60 Minutes broadcast an updated story on the Navy 's investigation . The report , written and produced by Thompson and Wallace , included an interview with Kelso . 
 After the Navy closed its investigation , Thompson continued his own research into the explosion and its aftermath . Thompson was assisted by Snyder and other former Navy personnel , including Iowa crewmen and Navy headquarters staff members . Family members of the victims as well as staff members of the House and Senate Armed Services Committees also helped Thompson . In addition , he obtained information via Freedom of Information Act requests to the Navy . Furthermore , Thompson accessed depositions taken from Navy leaders and investigators during a lawsuit against the Navy by Hartwig 's family . 
 Thompson 's book was published on April 19 , 1999 , the tenth anniversary of the explosion . The book 's publisher was W. W. Norton & Company , based in New York City . 
 = = Content = = 
 The book begins by describing conditions aboard Iowa before the explosion . Thompson depicts Moosally , the ship 's captain , as an inept seaman who gained command of the battleship through political connections . Under Moosally 's leadership , or lack thereof , Iowa operated with severe training and safety deficiencies , especially with regard to operations with the ship 's 16 @-@ inch guns . The book details how the ship 's Master Chief Fire Controlman , Stephen Skelley , conducted illegal gunnery experiments with the 16 @-@ inch guns . Moosally apparently did not check to ensure that the experiments were authorized , or in some cases , appears not to have been aware that they were being carried out . 
 The book describes the explosion on April 19 , 1989 , and the heroic efforts by the ship 's crew to contain the fires and avoid a cataclysmic detonation of the turret 's powder magazines . After the fires were contained , Moosally ordered the crew to immediately begin cleaning up the turret . The cleanup involved removing the bodies of the deceased turret crewman and disposing of the damaged turret equipment , all without photographing or otherwise recording the locations of the bodies or equipment which would have presumably assisted with the resulting investigation . 
 According to Thompson , the Navy immediately began efforts to cover up the cause of the explosion . Rear Admiral Richard Milligan , assigned to lead the investigation , soon focused his inquiry into trying to prove that one of the deceased turret 's crewmembers , Clayton Hartwig , had intentionally caused the explosion . After learning that Hartwig had named another sailor and friend , Kendall Truitt , as a beneficiary of a life insurance policy on himself , Milligan enlisted the help of the Naval Investigative Service ( NIS ) ( the predecessor of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service or NCIS ) to investigate Hartwig and Truitt . 
 NIS investigators tried to prove , unsuccessfully , that Hartwig and Truitt had had a homosexual relationship with each other and that Hartwig had initiated the explosion after the relationship had soured . As the NIS investigation continued , information about the Navy 's focus on the two sailors and innuendoes about their relationship were leaked to the media . The leaks were later said to have come from the NIS and from the Navy 's headquarters . Thompson alleges that during its investigation , NIS agents lied or otherwise conducted themselves in an extremely unprofessional manner . 
 Captain Joseph Miceli , assigned by the Navy to lead the technical investigation into the explosion , had supervised the preparation of powder and shells used in Iowa 's 16 @-@ inch guns . Thus , according to Thompson , Miceli had a conflict of interest in ensuring that the powder , ammunition , or guns were not at fault in the explosion . After being briefed on the NIS 's focus on Hartwig , Miceli directed his investigative team to determine how Hartwig had initiated the explosion using an electrical or chemical detonator . 
 Throughout the investigation , according to Thompson , Admiral Leon A. Edney , the Navy 's Vice Chief of Naval Operations , interfered with the investigation by sending suggestions to Milligan on avenues of inquiry and pushing for a finding that Hartwig or Truitt was responsible . Edney interfered with the investigation in order to prevent any findings that the Navy had knowingly operated an unsafe ship in an unsafe manner . Also , Edney feared that if the Iowa class battleships were found to be unsafe , the battleships would be decommissioned and the Navy would lose the associated admiral billets plus the other warships and support ships assigned to the battleship groups . 
 In September 1989 the Navy announced that it had determined that Hartwig intentionally caused the explosion . The victim 's family members , many in the media , and the United States Congress rejected the Navy 's findings . Sandia National Laboratories , acting on a request from the United States Senate Committee on Armed Services , determined that the explosion could have been an accident caused by <unk> the powder bags into the gun 's breech during the loading process . Forced by the revelation to reopen its investigation , the Navy inexplicably , according to Thompson , placed Miceli in charge of the new inquiry . 
 Nineteen months later the Navy concluded that it could not determine who or what had caused the explosion , provided a partial apology to Hartwig 's family , and closed its investigation . In contrast , Sandia concluded that the explosion had probably been caused by an overram of the powder bags into the center gun 's breech , possibly because of a malfunction in the rammer mechanism or because the gun crew was inadequately trained . 
 = = Critical reception , Navy reaction , and movie = = 
 Upon its publication , the book received favorable reviews . Dan Blue , reviewing the book for the San Francisco Chronicle , stated that , " In its main outlines , it convinces " and " Beyond accuracy , Thompson 's book provides a gripping read " . Steve Weinberg , in the Denver Post , wrote that , " Measured by its information gathering , this is a great book of investigative journalism . " The book was selected by the Book of the Month Club as its featured selection in March 1999 . 
 Thompson stated that after the book was published a previously scheduled invitation to speak at the US Navy 's National Museum was rescinded , his book was banned from being sold in the museum 's book store , and Navy exchange stores at bases throughout the world were forbidden from selling his book . Emails between Navy officials obtained by Thompson through a Freedom of Information Act request included one from a Navy public affairs officer dated April 15 , 1999 saying with regard to Thompson , " I will call book wholesalers and tell them not to set up book signings with this author . " 
 The Navy denied that it attempted to suppress or censor Thompson 's book , stating that it had simply refused permission for Thompson to hold book signings on any Navy bases . In August 1999 Salon.com checked the bookstores at the United States Naval Academy , Naval Submarine Base New London , and Iowa 's former home base Naval Station Norfolk and did not find the book available for sale at any of the locations . 
 In 2001 the FX TV network broadcast a movie A Glimpse of Hell based on Thompson 's book , starring James Caan and Robert Sean Leonard . The movie received a 3 @.@ 3 household rating and drew 2 @.@ 7 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , enough to make the movie the most @-@ watched program in FX 's seven @-@ year history . 
 W. W. Norton does not appear to have released sales figures for the book . As of January 2009 , Amazon.com lists the book at # 997 @,@ 726 in sales out of all books offered by the bookseller , and at No. 85 in books related to the state of Iowa . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 In March 2001 Moosally , Miceli , and two other former Iowa officers filed suit against Thompson , W. W. Norton , and Dan Meyer , who the plaintiffs stated provided much of the information used in the book , for libel , false light privacy , and conspiracy . In April 2001 , another former Iowa crewman filed a separate suit with the same attorney for the same causes of action . In response to the suits , Thompson stated that he stood " foursquare " behind his book 's content . 
 In April 2004 the South Carolina Supreme Court dismissed the suits against Thompson and Meyer , but allowed the suit against W. W. Norton to proceed . The court stated that South Carolina 's long @-@ arm jurisdiction did not apply to Thompson and Meyer , but did to W. W. Norton . 
 In February 2007 the suits were settled out @-@ of @-@ court for undisclosed terms . Stephen F. DeAntonio , attorney for the plaintiffs , said that his clients felt " totally vindicated . " W. W. Norton did not publicly retract or repudiate any of the material in Thompson 's book , however , instead sending a letter to the plaintiffs stating , in part , " To the extent you believe the book implies that any of you were engaged in a cover @-@ up , were incompetent , committed criminal acts , violated Naval regulations or exhibited faulty seamanship or professional ineptitude , Norton regrets the emotional distress experienced by you or your family . " 
 = Myotis escalerai = 
 Myotis escalerai is a European bat in the genus Myotis , found in Spain ( including the Balearic Islands ) , Portugal , and far southern France . 
 Although the species was first named in 1904 , it was included in Natterer 's bat ( Myotis nattereri ) until molecular studies , first published in 2006 , demonstrated that the two are distinct species . M. escalerai is most closely related to an unnamed species from Morocco . Unlike M. nattereri , which lives in small groups in tree holes , M. escalerai forms large colonies in caves . Females start to aggregate in late spring in maternity colonies , and their young are born in summer . The species spends each winter in hibernation colonies , usually in caves or basements . 
 M. escalerai is a medium @-@ sized , mostly gray bat , with lighter underparts . It has a pointed muzzle , a pink face , and long ears . The wings are broad and the species is an agile flyer . Wingspan is 245 to 300 mm ( 9 @.@ 6 to 11 @.@ 8 in ) and body mass is 5 to 9 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 18 to 0 @.@ 34 oz ) . Though very similar to M. nattereri , it differs from that species in some features of the tail membrane . The conservation status of M. escalerai is assessed as " Vulnerable " or " Data Deficient " in various parts of its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Myotis escalerai was named by Ángel Cabrera in 1904 , on the basis of four specimens from two localities in eastern Spain . He named the new species after one Mr. Martínez de la Escalera , who collected two specimens of the species in Bellver , Catalonia . Cabrera did not designate either of the two localities ( Bellver and <unk> , Valencia ) as the type locality , and later authors have listed both . Currently , <unk> , which was listed first by Cabrera , is accepted as the type locality . Cabrera commented that M. escalerai was close to Natterer 's bat ( Myotis nattereri ) , and in 1912 , Gerrit S. Miller listed escalerai as a synonym of that species . He argued that one of the features Cabrera had listed as distinguishing the two was an artefact of the preservation of the specimens of M. escalerai in alcohol . Miller 's classification was followed for almost a century , and indeed , Cabrera himself accepted in 1914 that M. escalerai was not a valid species . 
 However , a 2006 study by Carlos Ibáñez and colleagues found that M. nattereri in fact included several cryptic species with highly distinguished DNA sequences characteristics , even though morphological differences were small or nonexistent . One , which they recorded in the southern Iberian Peninsula , was identified as M. escalerai . Populations in the mountains of northern Spain represent another species ( " Myotis sp . A " ) , which is now also known from the Alps . A 2009 study using data from the mitochondrial genes cytochrome b and <unk> found that M. escalerai is most closely related to an unnamed species from Morocco previously included in M. nattereri ( " Myotis sp . B " ) , and more distantly to other members of the Myotis nattereri group . M. escalerai and the Moroccan species are estimated to have diverged about 2 million years ago . Later in 2009 , M. escalerai was also recorded for the first time from France . One 2011 study found a fifth putative species in the complex ( " Myotis sp . C " ) , occurring in the Italian peninsula and most closely related to M. sp . A , but another study published in the same year included these populations in M. sp . A. The latter study , by I. <unk> and colleagues , used sequences from six nuclear genes to confirm the distinctiveness of M. escalerai and its close relationship with M. sp . B. The common name " Escalera 's bat " has been used for M. escalerai . 
 = = Description = = 
 A medium @-@ sized gray bat , Myotis escalerai is similar to Myotis nattereri . The fur is long and soft ; with a brown tone on the back , and the brighter underparts approaching white . The feet are dark gray . Much of the face is pink , and the muzzle is pointed , with long hairs on the upper lip resembling a moustache . The long ears are brown to gray . The tragus , a projection on the inner side of the outer ear , is long and reaches to the middle of the ear and colored gray to yellow , becoming darker from the base towards the tip . According to several authors , it differs from M. nattereri in showing a distinct fringe of hairs on the tail membrane , but bat specialist A.M. Hutson writes that this feature does not distinguish the two species . In addition , the presence of an S @-@ shaped spur on the uropatagium ( membrane between the hind legs ) , which approaches the middle of the membrane , is a distinctive feature of this species . With its broad wings , low flight , and rapid wingbeats , the species is capable of precise , agile flight . 
 The head body length is 42 to 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) , tail length is 38 to 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 9 in ) , forearm length is 35 to 43 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 7 in ) , ear length is 14 to 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 to 0 @.@ 71 in ) , wingspan is 245 to 300 mm ( 9 @.@ 6 to 11 @.@ 8 in ) , and body mass is 5 to 9 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 18 to 0 @.@ 34 oz ) . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 The range of Myotis escalerai remains poorly constrained and may turn out to be larger than currently known . M. escalerai is widespread in Spain and Portugal . For example , it occurs widely , though localized , in Aragón , where Myotis sp . A ( the only other species in the M. nattereri complex to occur there ) is known from a single locality only . Similarly , in Catalonia , M. escalerai is widespread and occurs from sea level up to an altitude of 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . The species also occurs on the Balearic Islands of Mallorca , <unk> , and Ibiza . The sole French record is from a cave in <unk> , Pyrénées @-@ Orientales . 
 Relatively little is known of the biology of M. escalerai . Females begin to form reproductive colonies in April and May , either small ones or larger aggregations that may also contain males . However , most males remain solitary in this period , although some also form colonies . The single young is born in June or July and becomes independent after some six weeks . Mating usually takes place in fall , but sometimes in winter . The formation of large reproductive colonies in caves , which may consist of several hundreds of individuals , distinguishes M. escalerai from M. nattereri as well as M. sp . A , which roost in smaller groups in tree holes . In Aragón , colonies contain 50 to 880 individuals , and Catalan colonies are known to contain over a hundred bats . Reproductive colonies may be formed in a variety of structures , including caves , mines , tree holes , and human @-@ made structures such as bridges and houses . However , hibernation colonies need constant temperatures between 0 and 5 ° C ( 32 and 41 ° F ) , and are usually located in caves or basements . M. escalerai is considered a sedentary species , and does not usually migrate over long distances , although it does move between reproduction and hibernation colonies . Rabies has been identified in a Spanish specimen of M. escalerai . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN Red List does not separate Myotis escalerai from Myotis nattereri , which is listed as " least concern " , but the two species are listed separately on the Annex to the Agreement on the Conservation of Populations of European Bats . Portugal lists M. escalerai as " vulnerable " , though noting that populations may be increasing . Because of its restriction to caves , it is considered vulnerable in Aragón . In Catalonia , the species appears tolerant of different habitats and of human disturbance , but it is listed as " data deficient " . In France , where the species was only discovered in 2009 , it is also listed as " data deficient " . 
 = Sonic the Hedgehog 3 = 
 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 ( Japanese : ソニック ・ ザ ・ <unk> ( <unk> ) , Hepburn : Sonikku za Hejjihoggu Surī ) is a platform video game developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega . The third main game in the Sonic the Hedgehog series , it was released for the Sega Genesis worldwide in February 1994 , and in Japan three months later . Following the events of Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , Dr. Robotnik 's spaceship , the Death Egg , crash @-@ lands on a mysterious floating island . There , Sonic and Tails must once more retrieve the Chaos Emeralds to stop Death Egg from relaunching , while making rounds with the island 's guardian , Knuckles the Echidna . 
 Development of Sonic 3 began shortly after the release of Sonic 2 in November 1992 . It was developed simultaneously with Sonic & Knuckles ; as the games were originally developed as a single title until time constraints and cartridge costs later forced the team to split them in two projects . The Sonic & Knuckles cartridge features " lock @-@ on " technology that allows it to be physically attached to the Sonic 3 cartridge , creating a combined game , Sonic 3 & Knuckles . 
 As with its two predecessors , Sonic 3 was a critical and commercial success , with critics seeing it as an improvement over previous installments . It sold 1 @.@ 02 million copies in the United States ; though this makes it one of the best @-@ selling Genesis games , its predecessors , bundled with the Genesis in some regions , had sold a combined 21 million . The game has been re @-@ released in compilations and download releases for various platforms , including Sonic Mega Collection for the GameCube and Sonic 's Ultimate Genesis Collection for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Sonic the Hedgehog and Miles " Tails " Prower defeat Dr. Robotnik at the end of Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , his space station , the Death Egg , crash @-@ lands on a mystical floating landmass called Angel Island . As Robotnik begins to repair the damaged station , he meets up with Knuckles the Echidna . Knuckles is the last surviving member of an ancient echidna civilization that once inhabited the island , as well as the guardian of the Master Emerald , which grants the island its levitation powers . Knowing Sonic and Tails will try to track him down and realizing he can use the emerald to power the ship , Robotnik dupes Knuckles into believing Sonic is trying to steal the Master Emerald . 
 Meanwhile , Sonic and Tails approach Angel Island in their biplane the Tornado . Sonic , possessing the emeralds from the events of Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , jumps off the plane and turns into Super Sonic , zooming towards the island . When they arrive , Knuckles ambushes Sonic from underground and knocks the Chaos Emeralds from him , returning him to normal ; he then steals the emeralds from them and disappears inland . As Sonic and Tails travel through the levels , they frequently encounter Knuckles , who hinders their progress with various traps . 
 At the Launch Base Zone , Sonic uses a spare Egg @-@ O @-@ Matic to travel to the Death Egg , and ends up encountering Knuckles on a girder . As usual , Knuckles tries to stop Sonic , but is defeated when the Death Egg re @-@ launches and the girder collapses , sending Knuckles plummeting into the water . Sonic continues to a deck on the Death Egg , where he fights and defeats Robotnik 's Big Arm machine . The Death Egg is damaged and falls out of orbit , after which it explodes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sonic 3 is a 2D side @-@ scrolling platformer . At the game 's start , players can choose to select Sonic , Tails , or both . In the latter choice , players control Sonic while Tails runs along beside him ; a second player can join in at any time and control Tails separately . Sonic 3 adds the ability for Tails to fly for a short time by spinning his twin tails like a propeller ; when he gets too tired , he falls . Unlike Sonic , Tails can also swim underwater . 
 The game takes place over six zones , each divided into two acts . Levels are populated with Robotnik 's robots , called " <unk> " ; Sonic and Tails can defeat <unk> by jumping on them or using the " spin dash " attack , which also gives the character a speed boost . The levels include obstacles and other features such as vertical loops , corkscrews , breakable walls , spikes , water that the player can drown in , and bottomless pits . There is a miniboss fight with one of Robotnik 's large , powerful robots at the end of the first act of each level and a full boss fight with Robotnik at the end of the second . Reaching a new level saves the player 's game to one of six save slots , which can be loaded later . 
 As with previous Sonic games , Sonic 3 uses rings , scattered throughout the game 's levels , as a health system ; when the player is attacked without rings , is crushed , falls off @-@ screen , or exceeds the act 's ten @-@ minute limit , they lose a life and return to the most recently passed checkpoint . Dying with zero lives gives the player a game over . The levels also include power @-@ ups in television monitors that , when hit , grant the character an extra life , temporary invincibility to most hazards , a number of rings , a shield that allows them to breathe underwater , a shield that allows them to withstand fire from enemy projectiles , or a shield that attracts nearby rings . 
 The game contains two types of " special stages " . When the player collects at least 50 rings and passes a checkpoint , they can warp to the first type , which involves bouncing up a gumball machine @-@ like corridor to earn power @-@ ups by hitting a switch . Both sides of the corridor are lined with flippers , which disappear when the character bounces on them , and the switch drops when both flippers supporting it are removed . The corridor 's floor contains a bounce pad , which also disappears after one use ; falling afterwards causes the player to leave the stage with the most recent power @-@ up collected . 
 The second type , triggered by entering giant rings found in secret passages , involves running around a 3D map and passing through all of a number of blue spheres arranged in patterns . Passing through a blue sphere turns it red , and touching a red sphere causes the player to leave the stage , unless the player has just completed a cycle around an arrangement of blue spheres , in which case all of these spheres turn to harmless rings . Removing all of the blue spheres gives the player a Chaos Emerald ; if Sonic ( not Tails ) collects all seven , he can become Super Sonic at will , which makes him invincible to most obstacles . 
 Sonic 3 includes a competitive mode : two players , controlling Sonic , Tails , or Knuckles the Echidna ( this is the only way to use Knuckles without attaching Sonic & Knuckles to the cartridge ) , race through one or all of five stages that do not appear in the main game . In these same stages , a single player can compete against the clock in time attacks . 
 = = = Sonic 3 & Knuckles = = = 
 Sonic 3 and Sonic & Knuckles were intended to be a single game , but were released separately due to time and financial constraints . The Sonic & Knuckles cartridge features a " lock @-@ on " adapter that allows it to be physically attached to other Genesis cartridges . Connecting the Sonic 3 cartridge creates a combined game , Sonic 3 & Knuckles . The lock @-@ on function is available in some digital releases of the games , such as the Virtual Console service for the Wii . 
 Sonic 3 & Knuckles allows the player to play Sonic 3 levels as Knuckles or Sonic & Knuckles levels as Tails or both Sonic and Tails . Other new features are the ability to collect Super Emeralds , unlocking new " Hyper " forms for Sonic and Knuckles and a " Super " form for Tails , improved save options , which record the player 's lives and continues , and an additional ending that shows Sonic returning the Master Emerald to Angel Island . 
 = = Development = = 
 As with its predecessors , Sonic 3 was developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega . Yuji Naka and Hirokazu Yasuhara were the primary creators of the Sonic 3 design document and project schedule . Sonic 3 began as a top @-@ down , isometric game , similar to what would become Sonic 3D Blast ( 1996 ) , but the concept was abandoned early as the team did not want to change the Sonic formula too radically for a sequel . 
 Sonic 3 and Sonic & Knuckles were originally planned as a single game . However , time was limited and the manufacturing costs of a 34 megabit cartridge with <unk> would have been prohibitively expensive . Sonic Team split the game in half , giving the developers more time to finish the second part , and splitting the cost between two cartridges . The cartridge has a small amount of non @-@ volatile RAM built into it , which allows the player to save game progress to the game cartridge . 
 Sonic 3 was released on February 2 , 1994 in North America and February 24 in Europe . To help promote the game 's European release , Right Said Fred adapted the song " <unk> " to include references to many aspects of Sonic . The song was used in the game 's advertisements and released as a single , which charted in the UK at number 55 . In the music video , <unk> and Skull from the Sega TV advertising campaign appeared along with Sonic . 
 = = = Michael Jackson 's involvement = = = 
 In 2005 , former Sega Technical Institute director Roger Hector stated that Sega brought in Michael Jackson to compose music for Sonic 3 , but following the allegations of sexual abuse against Jackson , his involvement was terminated and the music reworked . The website of musician <unk> Jones , who contributed music to Sonic 3 and is credited in @-@ game as " Scirocco " , credits himself along with Jackson and Jackson 's tour keyboardist and songwriting collaborator Brad Buxer for musical cues for " levels 2 & 3 " of " Sonic the Hedgehog " . However , senior Sega staff later stated that any involvement of Jackson was arranged without their knowledge , and no contracts nor formal agreements were ever made . 
 In a 2009 interview with French magazine Black & White , Buxer stated that Jackson was involved with some Sonic 3 compositions , but chose to remain uncredited because he was unhappy with the sound capabilities of the Genesis . He also said that the Sonic 3 credits music later became the basis for Jackson 's 1996 single , " Stranger in Moscow " . In November 2013 , it was discovered by the community that the musical theme for " <unk> Zone " closely resembles a previously unreleased track from 1982 by The <unk> , of which Buxer was the keyboardist and co @-@ songwriter , called " Hard Times " . 
 In October 2013 , GameTrailers dedicated an episode of its Pop Fiction series to examining Jackson 's involvement with the game . Roger Hector , who previously stated that Jackson 's involvement in the game was dropped due to the sexual abuse allegations , stated that any similarities to Jackson 's music in Sonic 3 was not intentional on Sega 's part . However , an anonymous source involved in the game 's development reaffirmed Buxer 's statements and said Jackson 's involvement happened before the scandals came to light in August 1993 , and that his contributions remained in the game with Jackson choosing to remain uncredited . The source specified that the Carnival Night Zone music was one of the pieces Jackson contributed to . 
 = = Alternate versions and ports = = 
 = = = Compilation releases = = = 
 Compilations that include the game are Sonic Jam ( 1997 ) for the Sega Saturn ; Sonic & Knuckles Collection ( 1997 ) and Sonic & Garfield Pack ( 1999 ) for the PC ; Sonic Mega Collection ( 2002 ) for the GameCube ; Sonic Mega Collection Plus ( 2004 ) for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , and PC ; Sonic 's Ultimate Genesis Collection ( 2009 ) for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 ; and Sonic Classic Collection ( 2010 ) for the Nintendo DS . Most compilations feature the game largely unchanged . However , Sonic Jam , in addition to featuring the original release , also had a few new " remix " options . " Normal " mode altered the layout of rings and hazards , and " Easy " mode removes certain acts from the game entirely . Sonic & Knuckles Collection features a MIDI rendition of the game 's soundtrack , with certain levels featuring completely different music . 
 = = = Digital releases = = = 
 The game was released for the Wii 's Virtual Console in September 2007 and for the Xbox Live Arcade on June 10 , 2009 . The Xbox version has enhanced graphics for high definition displays as well as online leaderboards and support for multiplayer via split screen and Xbox Live . The original method of saving the game is replaced with a revamped version that allows progress to be saved anywhere during play , except after completing the game . When the PC version was released via the Steam software , the game and its successor were released together as Sonic 3 & Knuckles as originally intended , with the player ( even if playing as Tails ) simply continuing at the beginning of Sonic & Knuckles after finishing Sonic 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Genesis version of the game sold 1 @.@ 02 million copies in the United States . While Sonic 1 's worldwide sales have been estimated at 15 million and Sonic 2 's at 6 million , Sonic 3 , unlike these two , was not bundled with the Genesis console itself . However , Sonic 3 is still one of the best @-@ selling Genesis games of all time . 
 Like its predecessors , Sonic 3 received positive reviews . It holds a score of 89 % at review aggregator GameRankings based on 5 reviews . Critics generally felt Sonic 3 was the best game in the series so far . Andrew Humphreys of Hyper , who declared himself not a Sonic fan , said it was " undoubtedly " the best of the series , including the acclaimed but obscure Sonic CD , though he admitted having preferred Sonic 2 's special stages by a small margin . Sega Magazine , however , stated that Sonic 3 has better special stages and was not only superior to Sonic 2 as a whole but would be " a serious contender for the Best Platform Game Ever award " . Sega Power wrote that despite their skepticism , they found it " excellent " and easily " the most explorable and playable " in the series . Electronic Gaming Monthly also compared Sonic 3 favorably to Sonic 1 , 2 , and CD and awarded it their " Game of the Month " award . They later ranked it number 1 in The EGM Hot 50 , indicating that it received the highest average score of any game they 'd reviewed in the past year . Thomas of IGN stated that Sonic 3 " completed the trilogy as the best of them all . " Whitehead , however , considered Sonic & Knuckles superior . 
 Some critics felt that Sonic 3 had innovated too little from previous Sonic games . Humphreys of Hyper saw only " a few new features " while Sega Power thought it was " not all that different " and Nintendo Life writer Damien McFerran said that " there 's not a lot of new elements here to be brutally frank " . Provo stated that the game 's most significant addition was its save system . However , he and Electronic Gaming Monthly also both enjoyed the new power @-@ ups . Many aspects of the game 's level design were praised ; Electronic Gaming Monthly and Sega Power enjoyed the game 's expansive stages , secret areas , much less linear level design , and difficulty . Mean Machines agreed , describing the game as " a <unk> ride from start to finish " and listing Carnival Night as their favorite level , which they described as " probably the most slickly programmed portion of game in Megadrive history " . Humphreys and Mean Machines felt that the game was too short , but they and Sega Magazine felt that its two @-@ player mode and the Emerald collecting would significantly extend the title 's replay value . On the other hand , Whitehead said that the stages ' large sizes would keep players sufficiently engrossed . Sega Magazine also enjoyed having the ability to play as Knuckles in the two @-@ player mode . 
 The visuals were very well received . Humphreys described Sonic 3 as " one of the most beautiful games around " and full of " flashy new visual tricks " , highlighting Sonic 's ascension up pipes and spiraling pathways as particularly inventive . Sega Magazine exclaimed that its graphics were " brilliant " even for a Sonic title , while Provo praised the " elaborate " backgrounds . Mean Machines thought similarly , giving special praise to the camera 's quick scrolling , the diversity of the level themes , and the " <unk> , more detailed " overall aesthetic . Thomas and Provo especially enjoyed the use of wordless cutscenes to create a coherent story and thematically connect the zones . McFerran , however , felt that the visuals had been downgraded , particularly Sonic 's " <unk> " sprite and " the infamous ' <unk> ' textures " . 
 The sound effects and music were also well received , though somewhat less so than the visuals . Sega Magazine described them as " brilliant " and " far superior " to Sonic 2 's . Mean Machines stated that every level had " great tunes " and sound effects and particularly praised the game 's ending music . However , Humphreys described the sound as " <unk> ... with the emphasis on the ' icky ' " ; he also found it strikingly similar to the first two Sonic games ' soundtracks . Thomas thought the music was " impressive " , but not quite on par with Sonic 2 's . 
 Reviews of later ports have been slightly less positive ; its Xbox 360 release has scores of 78 % and 79 % at GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . Some critics , such as Adam Ghiggino of PALGN , felt the game had been insufficiently upgraded for its re @-@ releases ; Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer wished online co @-@ op had been implemented . Frank Provo of GameSpot and Lucas M. Thomas of IGN wished Sega had re @-@ released the game and its successor together as Sonic 3 & Knuckles instead . 
 Mega ranked it the fifth best Genesis game ever in November 1994 . In 2014 , GamesRadar ranked Sonic 3 & Knuckles as the seventh best Genesis game ; Jeremy Parish of US Gamer ranked the combined title eighth on a similar list in 2013 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Issues 33 and 34 of Sonic the Comic and issue 13 of the Archie Comics version of a Sonic the Hedgehog comic consisted of their own comic adaptations of the game . For Sonic 's twentieth anniversary , Sega released Sonic Generations , a game that remade aspects of various past games from the franchise . The Nintendo 3DS version of the game features a remake of the game 's final boss , " Big Arms " . Additionally , a re @-@ arranged version of the " Game Over " theme appeared in the game . 
 = Paul and Virginia ( 1910 film ) = 
 Paul and Virginia is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film was adapted from Jacques @-@ Henri Bernardin de Saint @-@ Pierre ' novel Paul et Virginie and features Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming as the title characters . The film follows two young lovers who grew up living on an island in the Indies . When Virginia is 16 , her wealthy aunt in Paris offers to make Virginia her heir and educate her . With her mother 's pleading , Virginia accepts and goes to France . Her aunt insists that she marry a rich nobleman , but Virginia refuses , is disowned and sent back home . The ship returns home in a hurricane and she drowns , with Paul nearly dying in an vain attempt to save her . Released on November 15 , 1910 , the film received mixed reviews in trade publications . The film was advertised with Pierre Auguste Cot 's The Storm painting , said to have been inspired by the original novel . The title characters ' costumes also appear to be based on Cot 's painting . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from November 19 , 1910 . It states : " Paul and Virginia are two young lovers who have grown up together from <unk> . Their widowed mothers lived near each other in rude cottages , on an island in the Indies , on which there are few inhabitants . Here the children are reared , knowing no play fellows but each other . When Virginia is 16 years of age , her mother receives a letter from a wealthy aunt in Paris , who offers to make Virginia her heir and give her a good education , providing Virginia will , in the future , make her aunt 's home her own . Virginia 's mother , having lost her own fortune through marrying against the will of her family , feels that she must not let her daughter suffer the poverty that she has been compelled to endure . She accordingly insists upon Virginia 's acceptance of her wealthy relatives offer . Virginia thereupon sets sail for France , leaving Paul broken @-@ hearted at her departure . Virginia tries to be a dutiful niece to her aunt , who is very old and sickly , although she longs to return to her humble home and Paul , whom she dearly loves . When , however , the aunt insists that she marry a rich nobleman , Virginia refuses ; her aunt disowns the girl and sends her back to the island home . Virginia 's ship arrives at the Indies during a hurricane , and although a cable 's length from shore , it sinks before help can reach it , and Virginia is drowned . Paul witnesses her death from the shore , and almost loses his own life in a vain attempt to save her . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Violet Heming as Virginia 
 Frank H. Crane as Paul 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The scenario was adapted from Jacques @-@ Henri Bernardin de Saint @-@ Pierre 's novel Paul et Virginie and the title is directly derived from the title . It was translated into English in 1795 and it became very popular , but some editions rewrote the tragic ending into a happy one . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited as the role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The only known cast credits are for the title roles . The other credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 The New York Dramatic Mirror review contained specific details about the costumes and the production of the film , allowing for a view into the lost film . Apparently , Frank H. Crane wore white tights that were bagged at the knees and elbows . Violet Heming wore white gauzy robes , likened to those of fictional fairy princess ' . The French gentleman sported a " Prince Albert " , referring to the double @-@ breasted Frock coat , and a silk hat . This contrast in gown was unusual , and the other characters wore colonial clothing . The scene containing the tempest which shipwrecks Virginia was described as being ineffective , but reviews in the Mirror were known to be strongly slanted towards Edison Trust companies . This included acting as a spoiler for Ten Nights in a Bar Room to bolster another Licensed company . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on November 15 , 1910 . Thanhouser advertised the film with Pierre Auguste Cot 's The Storm which is believed to have been inspired by Paul et Virginie . The film had a wide national release , with theaters advertising the film in Indiana , Pennsylvania , Kansas , Maryland , and Wisconsin . 
 Reviews were mixed in trade publications , with Paul 's garb being cited as the weakest aspect by two different reviewers . Walton of The Moving Picture News , praised the film as a success , but did not provide any details as to why it was successful . The Moving Picture World provided a detailed review which praised the adaptation of the novel and found the staging and the acting to be clear and strong . The New York Dramatic Mirror review was negative , criticizing the garb , tempest scene , and describing the acting as lacking in feeling . The Nickelodeon , an uncommon source for Thanhouser reviews , was not fooled by Crane 's outfit . The reviewer said , " It is usually good advice to tell a man to ' keep his shirt on , ' but we decidedly advise the actor who played the part of Paul in this piece to take his shirt off the next time he essays the role of a child of nature whose costume consists principally of his own skin plus a few trimmings . Baggy underwear , where his skin ought to be , looks like the arch @-@ fiend . ... The production was adequate up to the point of the tempest and shipwreck , which fell down deplorably . Better to have left it out all together . From here onward the photoplay adapters have departed from the original story , and maybe they were wise . Paul in his nude underwear would have spoiled Virginia 's funeral . " The film is presumed lost . 
 = Byron Brown = 
 Byron William Brown II ( born September 24 , 1958 ) is the 62nd and current mayor of Buffalo , New York , elected on November 8 , 2005 and is the city 's first African @-@ American mayor . He previously served Western New York as a member of the New York State Senate and Buffalo Common Council . He was the first African @-@ American politician elected to the New York State Senate to represent a district outside New York City and the first member of any minority race to represent a majority white New York State Senate district . 
 Brown was born and raised in Queens , New York . He rose to elective office after serving in a variety of political roles . He began his political career performing as an aide to local representatives in several legislative bodies ( Buffalo Common Council , Erie County Legislature and New York State Assembly ) and later getting involved in a regional political organization . After several roles as a legislative aide , he was appointed to the Erie County cabinet @-@ level Director of Equal Employment Opportunity post . 
 As both a New York State Senator and Buffalo Mayor , he has been closely involved in the development of the three Seneca Nation casinos that have been planned and built in Western New York since 2002 . As someone born and raised downstate who went on to become an upstate political servant , he has been active on the statewide political front . He is a close political ally of New York Governor Andrew Cuomo . He has also been active with the National Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition in efforts to prevent gun @-@ related crime . His plan to revitalize Buffalo by demolishing its abundant vacant buildings has drawn opposition from historic preservationists , but he has made the development of the Buffalo waterfront a priority . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brown was born on September 24 , 1958 in Queens , He was raised in Hollis , a southeastern neighborhood in New York City 's Queens borough , in a double that his family shared with his grandparents , who were immigrants from the Caribbean island of Montserrat . He grew up on 200th Street between 100th and 104th Avenues and has several relatives still in the area . As a Queens resident , he was a New York Mets and New York Knicks fan . 
 Brown 's father rose from a job as a stock boy to one as an executive in the garment industry . He was a Boy Scout at Hollis Presbyterian Church in Queens and was also active in the Central Queens YMCA ( now called Jamaica YMCA ) . In high school , Brown played the trumpet in the school band . Brown attended Public School 134 in Hollis , junior high school PS 109 , and August Martin High School . Brown and his sister Andrea were the first generation in his family to go to college . 
 After graduating from August Martin High School Brown attended Buffalo State College , in part due to grudging admiration for Randy Smith . He played a year of Junior Varsity basketball as a 5 @-@ foot @-@ 11 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) guard . While he had considered a potential medical career , Brown finished , in 1983 , with a dual Bachelor of Arts in political science and journalism . He subsequently completed a certificate program for senior executives in state and local government at Harvard University 's John F. Kennedy School of Government . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After college , Brown worked for Bristol @-@ Myers for a year as a regional sales representative , a job that came with a respectable salary and employee benefits such as an expense account and a company car . Brown was disappointed with his advancement potential in this position . As a result , he quit and took the New York State Troopers exam before becoming Chief of staff for Buffalo Common Council President George Arthur for two years . He then spent two years as an aide to Erie County Legislator Roger Blackwell ( later Erie County Legislature Chairman ) . Then , he worked for two years under Arthur Eve , the Deputy Speaker of the New York State Assembly . Subsequently , he served eight years as director of the Erie County division of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission under Erie County Executive Dennis Gorski . He resigned his directorship in July 1993 to run for public office . 
 Brown became a member of Grassroots , a political organization which was founded in 1986 by a group of block club leaders . Brown eventually served as a vice president of the organization . 
 Brown was recognized in the November 1989 issue of Ebony magazine as one the " 30 Leaders of the Future " with a caption that read " Byron Brown chosen for leadership skills . " The Buffalo Chapter of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1991 honored him with the Martin Luther King , Jr . Award for community service . In 1993 he was selected by Business First for its " 40 Under Forty Honor Roll " . He was awarded the Infinity Broadcasting / <unk> 2001 " Voice of Power Award " and the 2004 " Citizen of the Year " award . He also received the " Political Impact Award " from the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority in 2001 . 
 In 1992 , Brown was a delegate to the 1992 Democratic National Convention from the New York 's 33rd congressional district . He was originally pledged to Bob Kerrey , but switched to Bill Clinton after Kerrey bowed out of the 1992 Democratic Primary campaign on March 5 , 1992 . In 1993 , Brown was invited to attend Bill Clinton 's Inauguration . 
 = = Early elective experience = = 
 In his first attempt at public office in 1993 , Brown ran for the third district of the Erie County Legislature against incumbent William Robinson and George " Butch " Holt , who had Eve 's endorsement . Robinson earned the Democratic Party endorsement in June 1993 , with the help of Holt who voted for Robinson instead of himself . In June , Brown was notified that he must resign his Erie County cabinet @-@ level post in order to run for public office and he did so in July . Holt won the Democratic nomination with a 267 @-@ vote 40 – 37 % margin over Brown in the September 14 , 1993 primary election . 
 Brown won the September 1995 Democratic primary for the Masten District Buffalo Common Council seat . He then took time out from campaigning to attend the October 16 , 1995 Million Man March . Brown ousted 18 @-@ year veteran councilmember , David Collins , to win his seat on the Buffalo Common Council . He beat Collins by a 5 @,@ 391 – 1 @,@ 670 ( 76 – 24 % ) margin in the November 7 , 1995 general election . In his 1997 re @-@ election campaign , he won the September 9 Democratic primary handily , and he was unopposed in the November 4 general election . In his 1999 re @-@ election campaign , he again won the Democratic primary easily on September 14 , and he won the November 2 general election . Beginning in January 2000 , Brown served as part of the first ever African @-@ American majority in the history of the Buffalo Common Council . 
 In 1996 , The Buffalo News described Brown as " Buffalo 's Julian Bond " . While on the council , the future state senator and mayor was called " bright , creative and hardworking " in a 1999 Buffalo News survey . 
 = = State Senate = = 
 In 2000 , he competed for the Democratic nomination for the New York State Senate 57th District against incumbent Al Coppola and Samuel A. Herbert . Coppola was endorsed by Buffalo Mayor Anthony Masiello . Brown won the September 2000 primary by a wide 18 % margin . However , Coppola remained on the ballot in the general election on the Conservative Party of New York , Working Families Party and Green Party lines . The Republican Party nominee was the politically inexperienced Harrison R. Woolworth . Although Brown began the race without organized political support , he earned endorsements from many veteran non @-@ Western New York politicians such as H. Carl McCall , Andrew Cuomo , and Hillary Rodham Clinton . 
 When he was sworn into the State Senate on January 1 , 2001 , Byron Brown became New York 's first African @-@ American State Senator elected outside of New York City . He also became the first minority member of the New York State Senate to represent a majority white district . 
 During Brown 's tenure in the New York State Senate his Democratic Party was in the minority . He was part of the majority that backed New York Governor George Pataki 's 2001 plan to build up to three Western New York casinos on Seneca Indian land . The legislation was controversial because it granted slot machine rights to casino operators for the first time in New York State . Both of the previous casinos used video gambling machines with debit cards . Brown supported the casinos as a way to support the local economy . When the casino was completed in 2003 , he was on the seven @-@ member commission that was to apportion the state 's agreed 18 % share of the slot machine revenue , amounting to approximately $ 40 million . 
 By spring of 2003 , Brown was a rising star in the declining years of the " Harlem Clubhouse " , a loose political fraternity of David Dinkins , Charles Rangel , Basil Paterson , Percy Sutton and sometimes H. Carl McCall that had dominated state politics while forging the careers of its members for much of the late 20th century . He was envisioned as a front @-@ runner for the 2006 Democratic nomination as Lieutenant Governor of New York or as Buffalo 's first black mayor . By 2004 it seemed clear that he was eyeing the mayor 's office . In the 2004 New York State Senate elections , Republican nominee Al Coppola opposed Brown for the redistricted 60th District and garnered only 23 % of the vote . 
 = = Mayoral election = = 
 In February 2005 , Brown announced his candidacy for Mayor of Buffalo . On April 29 , 2005 three @-@ term Democratic Mayor Anthony Masiello announced he would not seek a fourth four @-@ year term . Masiello had run on both major party lines for his final two terms and had twice endorsed Republican Governor George Pataki . During his tenure , the city population and industrial tax base had decreased . Six candidates , including Brown , entered the race to replace him , with Brown accumulating many endorsements and the backing of organized labor . 
 New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer described helping Brown win the Mayoral race as his " biggest campaign priority " in the last month and a half before Primary Day . Buffalo , which had an 8 : 1 Democrat to Republican ratio and a 38 % black population , was 75 % contained in Brown 's State Senate district . Brown carried 59 % of the vote in the September 13 , 2005 Democratic primary , and faced Kevin Helfer , a former City Council colleague , in the general election . Brown was the sixth African @-@ American to win the Democratic Mayor Primary since the 1960s , but all before him had failed to win the general election , even though the city had not elected a Republican since 1961 . His Republican opponent , Helfer , beat him in the Conservative Party Primary as a write @-@ in candidate , although Brown had been endorsed by that party . Brown raised more than five times as much money as Helfer , however , and defeated him 64 % to 27 % in the general election . 
 = = Mayoral service = = 
 = = = Economic development = = = 
 Brown was sworn in on December 31 , 2005 at the Buffalo Convention Center . During his first day in office he toured the Buffalo Waterfront to show his commitment to its development . Before the end of the year , restoration on the original point where the Erie Canal met the Great Lakes was underway . Brown presented his plans for the development during subsequent tours by top state leaders , including future New York State Governors Eliot Spitzer and David Paterson . Erie Canal Harbor eventually opened on July 2 , 2008 . 
 In early 2006 , the Seneca Nation filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to build the third of the three Western New York casinos that had been legislated in 2002 . In 2007 , Brown was not sure he was in favor of the third casino , which seemed to cater to local residents instead of luring tourist revenues . Tom Golisano , founder of <unk> , former owner of the Buffalo Sabres National Hockey League franchise and three @-@ time candidate for New York State Governor , suggested that the Buffalo economy would not benefit from a business designed to transfer money from local citizens to the Seneca Gaming Corporation . Brown withheld support while awaiting clarification of the target consumer for the third casino . In October 2006 , the Seneca Nation and Brown came to terms on the final sale of a two @-@ block stretch of city road that runs amid the 9 @-@ acre ( 36 @,@ 000 m2 ) construction site . As part of the sale the nation agreed to both marketing terms ( regarding marketing beyond the local region ) , and hiring preferences for city residents . However , in January 2007 , a federal judge ruled that the granting of permission to run the third casino by the National Indian Gaming Commission was improper . Seneca Nation received federal approval for their casino on July 2 , 2007 and opened the following day . 
 = = = Crime and poverty = = = 
 Brown was one of the original 15 mayors from United States cities such as Washington , Dallas , Philadelphia , Seattle and Milwaukee who convened at a meeting hosted by Michael Bloomberg and Thomas Menino at Gracie Mansion to confirm their support for more serious attacks on the use of illegal firearms . Bloomberg and Philip A. <unk> , Yonkers Mayor , were the only Republicans . The mayors all signed a six @-@ point " statement of principles " focused on punishing gun possession " to the maximum extent of the law " , prosecuting dealers who knowingly sell guns to criminals through so @-@ called straw purchasers , opposing two United States House of Representatives bills to restrict cities ' access to gun @-@ tracing data , endorsing technologies to detect illegal guns , and coordinating strategies and outreach to other cities in hopes of reconvening with at least 50 mayors by year end . A little over a year later the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition co @-@ chaired by Bloomberg and Menino included 225 bi @-@ partisan municipal leaders in pursuit of legal , political and media strategies to stem gun crime and had a stated goal of " making the public safer by getting illegal guns off the streets " . Brown noted that he learned several techniques that became useful in Buffalo in reducing the homicide rate 21 % from the coalition and talks with specific mayors . Rising homicides had been a disappointment in his first year as mayor . 
 Brown 's first @-@ year review as a mayor was mixed . He was praised for his overhaul of city hall , his follow through on projects and systems , and his influence on statewide redistribution , but he was dogged by crime issues and his efforts for the planned casino . His agenda , hiring and discipline were respected , but rising homicides , continuing decay and evolving bureaucracy were troubling . In addition to public perceptions , Brown had a good working relationship with the Buffalo Common Council . 
 As mayor of Buffalo , he presided over emergency relief from blizzards such as the mid @-@ October 2006 two @-@ foot snow storm . The storm more than doubled the previous record for single @-@ day October snowfall . Despite the fact that about 200 @,@ 000 city residents were without electricity , the city saw no spike in criminal activity , according to Brown . 
 Buffalo is second only to St. Louis among cities nationwide in terms of percentage of vacant properties per capita . Therefore , in fall 2007 , Brown committed to a $ 100 million five @-@ year plan to demolish 5 @,@ 000 houses , which is about half of the city 's total of vacant houses . However , since Buffalo has the second highest residential poverty rate ( to Detroit ) homes continue to be abandoned . The program may benefit the city because abandoned house costs it an approximate average of $ 20 @,@ 060 over five years in lost taxes , debris removal , inspections , and policing . Also , 41 % of all fires in Buffalo are in vacant buildings , and more than 90 % of all arson cases involved abandoned houses . Subsequently , during the first ever " State of Upstate Address " , New York Governor Spitzer suggested committing $ 100 million in state funds to build or rehabilitate 10 @,@ 000 homes and apartments . The mayor 's initial demolition plans met with resistance from preservationists and he had to negotiate with the National Trust for Historic Preservation , which got him attention from coast to coast . 
 In 2008 , Brown convinced Buffalo to use a real @-@ time wireless video surveillance system . The city installed 56 <unk> Rapid Deployment Surveillance Solution <unk> . The system was the result of a request by Brown that the city evaluate surveillance cameras in other cities . By January 2009 State of the City Address , Brown reported that crime had fallen 12 % and homicide by 50 % since he had taken office . 
 = = = Public relations = = = 
 On June 13 , 2008 , upon the death of NBC News Washington Bureau Chief and Meet the Press moderator Tim Russert , who was a proud Buffalo native , Brown ordered that all flags on city property be lowered to half @-@ staff in order to honor Russert 's memory . Brown called Russert one of Buffalo 's finest ambassadors , and his decision to lower the flags in honor of Russert , a civilian who never held elected office , was an unusual gesture that was described as breathtaking on Hardball with Chris Matthews by Tom Brokaw . He was joined by several other officials in recognizing Russert . Chief among those was United States President George W. Bush who signed a bill that named a stretch of U.S. Route 20A that passes in front of Ralph Wilson Stadium ( home stadium of the Buffalo Bills ) Timothy J. Russert Highway . 
 In a public relations controversy , Brown got caught in a fight against the movement to replace traditional lawns with front yard gardens . His office had issued an edict that a resident remove her landscape renovations . However , an e @-@ mail campaign in defense of the resident caused the mayor to rethink his stance . 
 = = = Reelection = = = 
 On September 15 , 2009 , Brown won the Democratic Primary for a second term by a nearly two to one margin over City councilmember Michael P. Kearns . Brown had amassed an early lead amongst voters until several scandals involving former basketball star Leonard Stokes , including the questionable government support of his failed " One Sunset " restaurant and a perceived undue influence in mitigating Stokes 's arrest for possessing a stolen handicapped parking permit , cut away most of his lead . There were no Republican , third @-@ party or independent candidates , so Brown ran unopposed and won the general election . 
 = = Political dealings = = 
 Brown and Erie County Democratic Party chairman Leonard Lenihan were at odds over various political positions after Lenihan played a major role in Brown 's election to the office of mayor . Brown supported Andrew Cuomo for New York Attorney General in the 2006 general election , David Paterson for Lieutenant Governor of New York in the 2006 general election and Antoine Thompson for 60th District New York Senator in a special election on February 28 , 2006 . Lenihan disagreed with each of these choices . Thompson had run Brown 's last common council campaign , and Brown was upset that he did not get to select his successor in the 60th District . Many supporters considered boycotting the special election due to a perceived racial slight against an African American who seemed to be wrongfully shutout of the process . Lenihan pointed out that neither of the previous state senators turned mayor , Anthony Masiello and James D. Griffin , was granted the right to pick their successor , and he noted that Thompson had not been timely in entering the special election process . The Erie and Niagara County Democratic committees bypassed Thompson as their nominee in favor of Marc Coppola despite Brown 's backing in the February special election . Thompson subsequently decided to run for the New York Senate seat in the November general election . 
 The week before the 2006 New York State Democratic Convention , Brown was described as a political confidant of Democratic New York Attorney General candidate Andrew Cuomo . He seconded Cuomo 's nomination at the convention on May 30 , 2006 . Throughout the campaign Brown was described as a close political advisor to Cuomo . He was noted as ( along with Charles Rangel ) one of the important black political leaders that Cuomo courted on his road to victory . 
 During the 2008 United States presidential election , like most of the New York State Democratic establishment , Brown was a supporter of Hillary Rodham Clinton , the United States Senator from New York . This marked a break from his earlier political organization , Grassroots , which supported Barack Obama from the outset . He even ran to be a delegate for Clinton at the 2008 Democratic National Convention . In July 2008 , Golisano announced that he would attempt to create change in Albany by spending $ 5 million on targeted campaigns . During the New York state September primary elections for state office , The New York Times alleged that Brown was aiding Golisano 's attempt to unseat Sam Hoyt in the New York State Assembly . 
 As Hillary Clinton resigned her United States Senate seat on January 21 , 2009 to assume a position in the United States Cabinet under United States President Barack Obama , New York Governor David Paterson was required to appoint a temporary replacement until a special election in 2010 for the balance of her term . Some thought that the New York State Governor would appoint a minority senator such as Brown , Gregory W. Meeks , H. Carl McCall , William C. Thompson , Jr . , José E. Serrano or Nydia M. Velázquez . However , Andrew Cuomo was the front @-@ runner for the seat and the next most likely candidates were Velázquez , Steve Israel , Nita Lowey and Meeks . Prominent women who were mentioned include Carolyn B. Maloney and Caroline Kennedy . The New York Times 's Danny Hakim noted that Cuomo , Paterson and Brown were the three names most often mentioned prior to Paterson 's ascension to the governor 's office . Although these three were the favorites , Brown was considered an unknown outside of Western New York . Nonetheless , Brown 's name was mentioned before Kennedy 's and Cuomo 's in a New York Times article paragraph about Paterson 's final nomination decision thoughts . In fact , in at least one article in The New York Times on the subject , Brown was mentioned and Cuomo wasn 't . When Paterson announced he had selected Blue Dog Democrat Kirsten Gillibrand , Brown was one of the few contenders to attend the event . 
 With Cuomo likely to be running for governor in the 2010 New York gubernatorial election , Brown was mentioned in early 2010 as a possible Lieutenant Governor of New York candidate by numerous sources , including multiple journalists from The New York Times . Meanwhile , in early 2010 , newly transplanted New Yorker Harold Ford , Jr. considered challenging New York 's Junior United States Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand in the 2010 United States Senate special election in New York and met with Brown as part of his statewide political travels . 
 = = Allegations of corruption = = 
 The Buffalo News reported that Brown may have interfered with a police investigation in 2007 . The allegations stem from an incident in which it is alleged Brown ordered police to free a possible friend of the mayor , Leonard Stokes , who had been arrested for possessing a stolen handicapped parking tag . The Buffalo News also reported another scandal involving Stokes and Brown , involving a $ 160 @,@ 000 loan given to Stokes from the City of Buffalo , to open a restaurant in Buffalo . Further controversy arose when it was discovered that Michelle Baron , Vice President of the city backed corporation which gave Stokes , who had no previous experience operating a restaurant , the loan , was involved in securing the loan with a faulty business plan . Evidence also points to Brown green lighting the loan . 
 In June 2009 , Commissioner Tanya Perrin @-@ Johnson wrote a series of e @-@ mails that were sent to about 20 employees in her department directing them to work on the mayor 's re @-@ election campaign . The Office of Special Counsel began an investigation to determine whether the e @-@ mails represented a violation of the federal Hatch Act , which , among other things , prohibits employees involved in federally funded programs from using their authority to influence political campaigns . As a result of the probe , in 2010 the Common Council decided to delay her reappointment as commissioner until the investigation concluded . She had been serving in an interim capacity . In April 2011 , Perrin @-@ Johnson resigned her position . 
 A March 2010 Buffalo News article outlined Brown 's political relationship with Reverend Richard Stenhouse . The article details the over $ 5 million Stenhouse received to develop affordable housing on Buffalo 's East Side . The article goes on to suggest much of the money was wasted due to incompetence and inexperience . Stenhouse is the pastor for one of Buffalo 's largest congregations , Bethel AME Church , and an ally of Brown . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Byron Brown is married to the former Michelle Austin and they have a son , Byron III , who is referred to as Byron , Jr. by some accounts . Brown III enjoys basketball and has attended high @-@ level youth basketball camps . He played for City Honors School . On the national level , he was an unheralded point guard in the 2008 high school graduating class , and he went on to attend Queen City Prep in Charlotte , North Carolina . 
 The Brown family attends St. John Baptist Church . While mayor , Brown has performed at least one wedding ceremony at the church . Byron Brown is a chapter president of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity , a past President of the Buffalo State College Alumni Association Board , and at the time of his mayoral inauguration he sat on the Board of the Boy Scout Council of Western New York and the Community Action Organization of Erie County . Brown collects tropical fish and maintains an aquarium in his Buffalo Mayor 's office . His parents divorced and at the beginning of his mayoral tenure , his mother was living in Buffalo . He also is a member of the Erie County Democratic Committee . He was a delegate to the 1992 , 2000 and 2004 Democratic National Conventions . 
 On Saturday February 24 , 2007 at about 6 : 55 a.m. , Brown 's Chevrolet Equinox was stolen from an on @-@ street parking location by someone with key access and crashed into three parked vehicles before being abandoned a few blocks from the family home . Brown had driven his son to play in a basketball tournament in Jamestown , New York on Friday February 23 . They returned home at approximately 10 : 30 p.m. from the tournament . In interviews at the end of March 2007 , Brown claimed that all members of his family with known key access had alibis . At the time Brown III possessed a learner 's permit . Canisius College security cameras recorded parts of the accident , including the driver leaving the scene of multiple accidents . In April a second video recording with more fluid movement was revealed in contrast to the original recording of 36 frames per minute . In a news conference Brown announced that Byron Brown III took the senior Brown 's car without permission and drove about the area near his house and Canisius College campus . Brown III admitted to the damage and was charged with driving without a driver 's license and leaving the scenes of multiple accidents . Brown III was scheduled to appear on April 16 , 2007 in Buffalo City Court on the charges . He pleaded guilty to unlicensed driving and leaving the scene of an accident . In 2010 , his son was charged with petit larceny for leaving a store with goods that were not paid for . Byron Jr. was spared a criminal conviction when a judge granted him a delayed dismissal on shoplifting charges , as recommended by prosecutors . Buffalo City Judge David M. Manz warned him and Xavier <unk> that they have to complete a four @-@ hour shoplifting class and stay out of trouble for the next six months . He granted each an adjournment in contemplation of dismissal , meaning their petit larceny charges will be dismissed if they comply with his orders . 
 = = Election history = = 
 = Aashiqui 2 = 
 Aashiqui 2 is a 2013 Indian romantic drama film directed by Mohit Suri . Starring Aditya Roy Kapoor and Shraddha Kapoor in the lead roles , it was produced by Bhushan Kumar and Mukesh Bhatt under the T @-@ Series and Vishesh Films banners . Set in the early 2010s , Aashiqui 2 is a love story centering on the turbulent relationship between musicians Rahul and <unk> , a relationship which is affected by Rahul 's issues with alcohol abuse and temperament . 
 The film is a spiritual successor to the 1990 musical film Aashiqui , and initially caused concern in the Indian media that the film could live up to the high standards and success of the original . Production of Aashiqui 2 began in 2011 , with the principal photography taking place in Cape Town , Goa and Mumbai on a budget of ₹ 90 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) . 
 The film which premiered on 26 April 2013 received a positive to mixed critical reception and became a major commercial success at the box @-@ office despite featuring newcomers , earning ₹ 1 @.@ 09 billion ( US $ 16 million ) worldwide within the first four weeks . It was declared as a blockbuster by Box Office India after its three @-@ week box office run , and is the highest grossing film ever produced by Vishesh Films . The soundtrack to the film became very popular after its release ; the songs " Tum Hi Ho " and " Sunn Raha Hai " topped the charts across various platforms in India . It was later remade in Telugu as Nee <unk> <unk> 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens by showing a large crowd waiting for Rahul Jaykar ( Aditya Roy Kapoor ) – a successful musician whose career is waning because of his alcohol addiction – to perform at a stage show in Goa . After nearly completing a song , he is unexpectedly interrupted by Aryan ( Salil Acharya ) , who was losing his career due to Rahul 's , during his performance . Rahul fights him , stops his performance , and drives to a local bar . He meets Aarohi ( Shraddha Kapoor ) , a bar singer who idolises Rahul . After noticing Aarohi looking at a photograph of Lata Mangeshkar in the bar , he assumes that she wants to become a singer . Impressed by her simplicity and voice , Rahul promises to transform her into a singing sensation , and asks her to never perform again in bars . Aarohi leaves her job and returns to Mumbai with Rahul , who convinces record producer Saigal ( Mahesh Thakur ) to meet her . When Aarohi calls Rahul , he is attacked and injured by some thugs , and is unable to receive her call . His friend and manager Vivek ( Shaad Randhawa ) says that news of Rahul 's accident should not be leaked to the media , and instead publicises a false story that Rahul has left the country to participate in stage shows . When Aarohi attempts to contact Rahul again , Vivek ignores the calls . After two months of futilely attempting to contact Rahul , a broken Aarohi is forced to sing in bars again because of her family problems . 
 After recovering from his injuries , Rahul vows to search for Aarohi . He learns that Aarohi is working in a bar again and that Vivek had ignored her calls without informing him . Rahul apologises to Aarohi and fires Vivek , and they meet with Saigal for the recording agreement . Rahul begins to train Aarohi , who signs a music contract to sing in films and becomes a successful playback singer . Her family and Rahul are happy , but when people begin to gossip that Rahul is using her as a servant , he relapses into alcohol addiction . Aarohi , who loves Rahul more than her career , comforts him and they spend the night together . Despite Aarohi 's mother 's disapproval , Aarohi moves in with Rahul and things go well until Rahul 's addiction worsens , causing him to become aggressive and violent . 
 To help Rahul fight his alcoholism , Aarohi attempts to rehabilitate Rahul , sacrificing her singing career in doing so . After Saigal reminds them about their dream of Aarohi becoming a successful singer , Rahul orders her to focus on her work . During Aarohi 's stage show , Rahul meets a journalist backstage , who accuses him of using Aarohi for pleasure and money . Furious , Rahul beats up the journalist and starts drinking . He ends up in jail , and Aarohi comes to bail him out . Rahul overhears Aarohi telling Saigal that she is going to leave her career for him and is ready to give up her celebrity status because Rahul is more important to her . Rahul understands that he has become a burden in her life , and that leaving her is his only option to save her . The next day , he bids her farewell by assuring her that he will change his lifestyle and commits suicide by jumping from a bridge . 
 Distraught by Rahul 's death , Aarohi decides to leave her career but Vivek persuades her to stay . He reminds her that Rahul wanted her to become a successful singer and killed himself as he did not want to be a burden on her and remain an obstacle in the path of her success . Aarohi agrees , and returns to singing . Later , she signs her name as " Aarohi Rahul Jaykar " in a fan 's handbook as a tribute to Rahul and her unsung desire to marry him . As rain starts falling , she watches the couple who took her autograph sharing a romantic moment under a jacket as she and Rahul had done when he was alive . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Aditya Roy Kapoor as Rahul Jaykar 
 Shraddha Kapoor as Aarohi Keshav <unk> / Aarohi Rahul Jaykar 
 Shaad Randhawa as Vivek , Rahul 's Manager and best friend 
 Mahesh Thakur as Saigal 
 <unk> <unk> as Aarohi 's mother 
 <unk> <unk> as Salim Bhai 
 Mahesh Bhatt as Rahul 's father ( voice ) 
 Salil Acharya as Aryan 
 Ashish Bhatt as Reporter 
 Ankit Tiwari as the music director of <unk> Nahin <unk> song . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In September 2011 , the Indian media reported that Mahesh Bhatt and Bhushan Kumar were keen to remake the 1990 musical blockbuster Aashiqui . Kumar approached Bhatt for a possible sequel , although it was <unk> Rafique 's melodramatic romantic script which persuaded him that the film had potential as a sequel and decided to proceed with the project . Given Aashiqui ' s status in Hindi cinematic history as one of the finest Indian musicals of all time , many expressed concerns towards the decision to remake the film , dubious that the producers could come up with a soundtrack on par with the quality of the 1990 film . Bhatt stated that they completely resisted the temptation to use the soundtrack of the earlier film , and promised that Aashiqui 2 would revive the era of melodious film music , as Aashiqui had done 22 years ago . 
 It was reported that Madhur Bhandarkar had been approached to direct the film , but later turned down the offer because of other working commitments . It was confirmed in November 2011 that Vishal <unk> , director of Blood Money , was to direct the picture , but the following month it was announced that Mohit Suri had replaced <unk> as director at the last minute . Bhatt confirmed the development , saying " Earlier we had finalised Vishal for the project . But now we have scrapped that idea and found a fresh one . We got Mohit to direct the film " . Several media outlets falsely reported that the film is a remake of the Vishesh films 1990 love triangle <unk> . However , Mahesh Bhatt denied the rumours and said " Aashiqui 2 is not a remake of any of our films . It 's an original script . A very contemporary love story dealing with mature emotions . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The film 's producers launched a nationwide talent hunt to discover new faces for the film , initially refusing to employ established actors . However , the actors who came to audition were not promising enough for the roles , and the idea was scrapped . Mahesh Bhatt said , " It was a disastrous talent hunt . We discovered that people lacked the courage to audition . Those who are amateurs went for audition ... and people with certain talent were like why should we risk public rejection . " When Suri saw some pictures of Aditya Roy Kapur and met him , he found Kapur perfect for the role and cast him to play the male lead . In June 2012 , Shraddha Kapoor was signed to play the female lead . Bhatt said , " Yes , Shraddha Kapoor is playing the lead with the two boys Aditya Roy Kapur and Shaad Randhawa . We found her to be very talented . All three actors have extremely challenging dramatic roles . " When asked about replacing new actors with known ones , Suri said " People said I couldn 't make a film with new actors and expect an audience to come in . But I was pretty sure I wanted Aditya and Shraddha to play my protagonists . My writer <unk> Rafique and I saw them as the protagonists . See , Aditya and Shraddha may have had unsuccessful films before . But that never took away from their talent . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the film began in October 2012 with film 's lead cast . The film was shot in Goa , Mumbai and Cape Town . During the filming in South Africa , Shraddha Kapoor needed medical attention after kneeling on broken glass fragments during the scene in which she had to kneel on the floor and talk to her co @-@ star Aditya Roy Kapoor . Aditya Roy Kapoor also received burns to his hand during the filming of the scene in which they light some Chinese lanterns in Cape Town . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The first teaser was released on 22 March 2013 , and was well received by critics and audiences . Unlike other films whose theatrical trailers are released first , the makers of the film chose to release the songs before the trailer . The first song , " Tum Hi Ho " , was released on 23 March 2013 to unanimous critical reception from critics and became very popular among the audiences . The song became an instant hit with approximately 2 million views on YouTube within 10 days of release , which helped in the marketing of the film . Various versions of the song were uploaded by amateur singers , guitarists and DJs on social networking sites . It has been trending on Twitter and YouTube since its launch . 
 The film 's preview poster showing Aditya and Shraddha under a jacket in a rain @-@ drenched street with the <unk> casting a glow was released along with music on 8 April 2013 . At the music release event , Aditya and Shraddha recreated the scene from Aashiqui from under a jacket ( much like the poster ) on the stage . The theatrical trailer was released in mid @-@ April 2013 , two weeks before the film 's release , and was well received by critics and audiences . 
 Unlike most Bollywood films which indulge in months of promotion before the release , Aashiqui 2 had less than three weeks for promotion before its release . A music concert where singers ( who sang songs in the soundtrack album ) performed to their respective songs was organised to promote the film . The makers of the film launched the Aashiqui 2 jackets , as seen in the film 's poster . Statues resembling the signature image of the couple hiding under the jacket were placed inside various theatres . Due to the romantic theme of the film , it was originally planned for a Valentine 's day release on 14 February 2013 , but this was postponed because of production delays . The film 's new release date was 10 May 2013 , but it was released a fortnight early on 26 April 2013 in over 2800 screens across India . The film was not released in key markets such as UK , US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics , who praised the performances , chemistry between the lead pair , and the music . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama rated the film 4 out of 5 stars , stating that it " brings romance back on the Hindi screen – intense , pure , selfless and heart wrenching . A stirring account with brilliant moments , bravura performances , strong emotional quotient and addictive music , this one 's an absolute must watch for the romantics . " He praised the lead cast 's performances , writing that " ... Aditya Roy Kapur 's depiction of the intense character is outstanding ... [ which ] clearly demonstrates his potency as an artist of caliber and competence . Shraddha also gets to sink her teeth into this challenging character and the attractive youngster is simply amazing , more so towards the demanding moments in the second hour . Furthermore , the chemistry between Aditya and Shraddha is incredible . " Indiatimes gave the film a rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and said , " Suri pitches the story with old @-@ world romance , high @-@ drama and well @-@ crafted heart @-@ breaking moments . " Indo @-@ Asian News Service rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote , " Director Mohit Suri traverses the angst @-@ soaked territory with a sincere and deep understanding of the dynamics that destroy love and trust between couples in the glamorous and competitive profession " , and that , " Aashiqui 2 makes us grateful for the movement of the love story away from the standard Romeo & Juliet format into the dark destructive domain of A Star Is Born . " 
 The film also received some mixed reactions from critics . Writing for Hindustan Times , Anupama Chopra rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 and believed that the film didn 't fulfill its potential , but said , " It 's an interesting scenario and Suri and his actors set it up well . Aditya gives Rahul 's angst a certain charm . He is earnest and broken . And the real triumph here is Shraddha , whose porcelain face has a haunting vulnerability . She 's very good as the woman in the throes of a grand passion who believes that love will show the way . " <unk> <unk> rated the film 2 @.@ 5 and questioned the logic behind the script and believed that several of the scenes either dragged on excessively or were too abrupt , which affected the quality of the entire film . India Today also gave the film a rating of 2 @.@ 5 stars out of four , and argued that the film was only a success because of its soundtrack , saying that the film " merely banks on the power of saleable music and the novelty of a fresh cast to enable brothers Bhatt , Mahesh and Mukesh , [ to ] make maximum <unk> within minimum budget as they have done all along . " 
 = = Box office = = 
 On its opening day , Aashiqui 2 collected about ₹ 52 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 780 @,@ 000 ) and collected ₹ 179 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 7 million ) during its first weekend . The film collected ₹ 346 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) in its first week . In the second week , despite new releases , it collected ₹ 173 @.@ 5 crore ( US $ 26 million ) , which took its two @-@ week box @-@ office collections to ₹ 470 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 0 million ) . The film remained steady on weekdays and collected ₹ 165 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 5 million ) in its third week and total collections rose to ₹ 635 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 4 million ) . The film had the highest third week collections of 2013 to that date . The film 's revenues remained consistent in its fourth weekend and took its total to ₹ 710 million ( US $ 11 million ) . Box Office India declared the film a blockbuster after its three @-@ week box office run . As of 20 May , the film was the second @-@ highest grossing Hindi film of 2013 and the highest @-@ grossing film produced by Vishesh Films . According to Box Office India , Aashiqui 2 is the best trending film at the box office since 3 Idiots as the fourth week 's collections were nearly ₹ 75 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) nett , which was more than every film released in the last ten years apart from 3 Idiots . The fourth week collections of the film were the third highest of all time . The film collected ₹ 57 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 850 @,@ 000 ) nett approx in its fifth week . The film went on to gross approximately ₹ 780 million ( US $ 12 million ) in its sixth week at the domestic box @-@ office . Internationally , the film collected around US $ 150 @,@ 000 over the first weekend because its limited release meant the film was only released in UAE and Pakistan . The film collected ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) worldwide in its fourth week . During the entire theatrical run , the film earned ₹ 1 @.@ 09 billion ( US $ 16 million ) worldwide . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Filmfare Awards 
 Winner , Filmfare Award for Best Music Director : Ankit Tiwari , Mithoon and Jeet Ganguly 
 Winner , Best Playback Singer ( Male ) : Arijit Singh ( Tum Hi Ho ) 
 Nominated , Best Actress : Shraddha Kapoor 
 Nominated , Best Playback Singer ( Female ) : Shreya Ghoshal ( Sunn Raha Hai ) 
 IIFA Awards 
 Winner , IIFA Award for Best Music Director : Mithoon , Ankit Tiwari , Jeet Ganguly 
 Winner , IIFA Award for Best Lyricist : Mithoon ( Tum Hi Ho ) 
 Winner , IIFA Award for Best Male Playback : Arijit Singh ( Tum Hi Ho ) 
 Winner , IIFA Award for Best Female Playback : Shreya Ghoshal ( Sunn Raha Hai ) 
 Nominated , IIFA Award for Best Actress : Shraddha Kapoor 
 Nominated , IIFA Award for Best Lyricist : Sandeep Nath ( Sunn Raha Hai ) 
 Nominated , IIFA Award for Best Male Playback : Ankit Tiwari ( Sunn Raha Hai ) 
 Screen Awards 
 Winner , Best Playback Singer ( Male ) : Arijit Singh ( Tum Hi Ho ) 
 Winner , Best Playback Singer ( Female ) : Shreya Ghoshal ( Sunn Raha Hai ) 
 Winner , Screen Award for Jodi No. 1 : Aditya Roy Kapur & Shraddha Kapoor 
 Nominated , Best Music Director : Ankit Tiwari , Mithoon and Jeet Ganguly 
 Nominated , Best Actress Female : Shraddha Kapoor 
 Nominated , Most Popular Actor Male : Aditya Roy Kapur 
 Nominated , Most Popular Actress Female : Shraddha Kapoor 
 = The Wrong Goodbye ( Gossip Girl ) = 
 " The Wrong Goodbye " is the 87th episode of The CW television series Gossip Girl . It is also the 22nd and final episode of the fourth season . The episode was directed by Patrick Norris and the second finale in the series written by Joshua Safran . This also marks the second time that the show filmed a scene in California . " The Wrong Goodbye " aired on the CW in the United States on May 16 , 2011 , and was viewed live by an audience of 1 @.@ 36 million Americans . Despite the low ratings , the episode garnered positive reviews from reviewers and critics . 
 " The Wrong Goodbye " picks up where the previous episode had left off . Chuck Bass ( Ed Westwick ) looks for a missing Blair Waldorf ( Leighton Meester ) who has been held hostage by an unstable Russell Thorpe ( Michael Boatman ) . An erratic Charlie Rhodes ( Kaylee DeFer ) escapes the humiliation of being rejected by Dan Humphrey ( Penn Badgley ) . Serena van der Woodsen ( Blake Lively ) and Vanessa Abrams ( Jessica Szohr ) reluctantly join forces after discovering the secret behind Charlie 's behavior . Georgina Sparks ( Michelle <unk> ) unexpectedly turns up at the event looking for trouble . 
 Jessica Szohr makes her final appearance as Vanessa Abrams ; her exit was noted as her highlight of season 4 , with many critics praising <unk> 's acting in her phone conversation with Dan . This episode also marks Connor Paolo 's final appearance as Eric van der Woodsen until the series finale . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After discovering that Charlie has not been taking her medication , Serena and Vanessa reluctantly team up to find her . Chuck , Nate , Vanessa , and Serena soon encircle Dan , exclaiming that they need something from him . Chuck asks him where Blair is while Serena and Vanessa ask for Charlie 's whereabouts . One of Blair 's old friends reveals that Blair left the party . While accompanying Chuck to their apartment to look for Blair , Nate confesses that he told Raina ( Tika Sumpter ) everything behind her mother 's death . Chuck reprimands Nate until Raina interrupts them to apologize . Blair is held hostage by Russell in Chuck 's hotel . Pretending to escape , she calls Chuck on her phone , revealing her location . Russell explains his reason for kidnapping Blair : to burn down the hotel with her in it . A drunk Charlie is seen dancing wildly until Dan confronts her , but she escapes . Serena greets Headmistress <unk> ( Jan Maxwell ) , who expresses her concern with Serena 's choice of staying in New York , having hoped that Serena would find her place outside of the Upper East Side . Georgina offers her aid in their scheme but Dan , Vanessa , and Serena reject her help , going their separate ways to find Charlie . 
 At Chuck 's hotel , Chuck saves Blair while Raina stops her father . With the police arriving , Chuck offers Blair a limo ride , and a homesick Raina breaks up with Nate , intending to return to Chicago . Chuck proposes avoiding the Constance party by going to a bar mitzvah in a similar fashion to Death Takes a Holiday , which Blair accepts . Chuck and Blair have sex while Prince Louis ( Hugo Becker ) waits for Blair at Constance . While looking for Charlie at the loft , Vanessa spots Dan 's novel and reads it . Dan calls her and is upset that she has been reading the novel , which she suggests that he publish despite the possible backlash . Realizing that he no longer cares about writing , Vanessa steals the novel after Dan angrily dismisses her . Serena stops Charlie from jumping off a window and Charlie expresses her envy towards Serena , aspiring to be like her until Serena admits her personal flaws to Charlie , who comforts her . Dan and Nate find Charlie and Serena and return to the party . Charlie makes a suspicious call to her mother and piques Georgina 's interest , who gives her her number . Blair finds herself in a dilemma as her feelings for Chuck have resurfaced , arriving at the party to inform Louis of her decision but Chuck interrupts her , informing him that he has their blessing . Blair confronts Chuck for making a decision for her , but the two eventually settle their issues , and he lets her go . 
 Three weeks later , Blair travels to Monaco to spend the summer with Louis while Serena goes to Montecito , Charlie departs for Miami , Chuck and Nate decide to travel together , and Lily ( Kelly Rutherford ) tells the family that her house arrest will end by autumn . Dan decides to spend summer in The Hamptons with Eric ( Connor Paolo ) and tells Rufus ( Matthew Settle ) that he has moved on from writing . Vanessa has Dan 's novel published and leaves for Spain . While in California , Serena runs into a man who has been trying to convert one of her favorite novels into a movie , but finds herself being given a job instead . In Miami , Carol ( Sheila Kelley ) pays Charlie , who is actually a con artist named Ivy that was hired to gain access to her daughter 's trust fund . Ivy 's bag shows that she has stolen money from Carol and plans on returning to New York . A later scene shows a positive pregnancy test in a trash can at Blair 's bathroom being thrown out by <unk> ( Zuzanna Szadkowski ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Wrong Goodbye " is the second part of the two @-@ part season finale . Gossip Girl executive producer , Joshua Safran notes that the most important returning character of the show was Georgina Sparks and discussed working on a two @-@ part season finale for the first time on the show . 
 " I think that it 's really fun . It 's always fun to have Georgina around . She <unk> stirs the pot in a major way . She sort of threads through all the major stories [ ... ] sort of like a witness until she injects herself . And of course , returning to Constance , you can 't return without Georgina . [ ... ] So a lot of things are in play and a lot of things are happening [ ... ] , since we 've never done a two @-@ parter before , we wanted to load the gun with as many bullets as possible . " 
 Following her role in Green Lantern , news surfaced of Blake Lively leaving the show to further her acting career in Hollywood . <unk> notes " Despite all talk of career trajectories and fanbase , Blake insists her choices are made through far simpler criteria and when asked about playing in a comic @-@ book film says : ' It ’ s not really a suitable question because the decisions I make on parts come from a more emotional place . It has to be a character I connect with or someone I can have empathy with . ' " New York Magazine and various media periodicals have also noted the possibility of Lively leaving the show . Serena and Georgina 's dresses were designed by Jenny Packham and Marchesa , respectively . Blair wore an Alexis <unk> dress while Chuck wore a Ralph Lauren suit . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Oscar @-@ winning director David O. Russell made a cameo appearance in the show . Actor Ethan Peck reportedly landed a role in the show . Both stars were seen filming with Blake Lively in California . Peck made his debut in the season finale together with Russell . Tony Award @-@ winning actress Jan Maxwell reprised her role as Headmistress <unk> for the season finale . Hugo Becker remained ambiguous on whether he would be joining the series as a recurring or regular cast member during an interview with Zap2it , stating " the answer is in the finale . " and hinted the possibility of a recurring role . Cecily von Ziegesar makes a cameo appearance during the finale and filmed her scenes with Lively . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Airborne Toxic Event made a special appearance as the band for the Constance Billard Alumni party , playing the song " Changing " from their sophomore album , All at Once . The band announced that they would performing in the finale on their website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Wrong Goodbye received positive reviews from critics and garnered an audience of 1 @.@ 36 million viewers . New York Magazine drew out the references from past seasons and commented on how the season finale was written . " The Last Episode of the Fourth Season of the Greatest Show of Our Time felt in many ways like it might have been written to end the series , what with the many This Is Your Life moments ( such as the return of Georgina Sparks and Blair 's old minions Izzy and Kati ) , the wry references to episodes past , the wrapping up of story lines ( including the revelation that Dan has been secretly <unk> his observations of the Upper East Side for the entire time we 've thought we 've " known " him ) , and the meaningful departure of its most marketable star to none other than Hollywood . " Critical praise went to the storyline twist behind Charlie 's identity , citing her as " the big “ shocker ” of the Gossip Girl finale " and the cameo appearance of Gossip Girl author , Cecily von Ziegesar . Television Without Pity included the episode in its gallery of " Season Finales 2011 : The Best and Worst " , declaring the finale as one of the best and stating that it " had a lot of storylines pay off " and " was our own little version of a fairy tale . " 
 Television Without Pity and Steve Marsi of TV Fanatic praised the return of Georgina , stating " Michelle had some of the show 's funniest dialogue in a long time . She and Jack Bass have really made the last two weeks for me . It was great to have her back . " When reviewing the final scene , Marsi commended the appearance of the positive pregnancy test to the audience , calling the it " Quite the cliffhanger to leave us with after a finale that was already pretty darn entertaining . The show went out on a high note and next season could be even better . " New York Magazine commented on the pregnancy test , insisting that " we ’ re pretending that positive pregnancy test didn ’ t exist . " 
 The Los Angeles Times ' Judy Berman praised the finale , stating " [ ... ] this year went out with a bang . I had my doubts and reservations , largely concerning Blair and Chuck , but I am surprised and pleased to report that I found the end of " Gossip Girl " Season 4 both exciting and satisfying . " The return of Georgina Sparks was well @-@ received as with Serena 's development , with Berman citing Serena 's confession with Charlie before she could plunge to her death . " This debacle , along with the events of this season in general , seems to have given S some perspective . Friends , she apologizes to Nate and Dan for leading them on and confesses to Charlie that her decision @-@ making skills leave something to be desired ! Even if lazy writing results in Serena falling into old habits next season , it 's a pretty gratifying moment . " Berman also questioned Vanessa 's motive behind publishing Dan 's novel " [ ... ] it 's impossible to know whether she 's trying to do her old friend one last favor or profit from stirring up more drama in his life . Considering that Jessica Szohr won 't be returning to the show in the fall , we may never find out . " Berman also complimented the casting of director David O Russell calling it " one of the show 's most delightfully random cameos ever " . New York Magazine labeled Chuck and Blair 's relationship as the " Longest @-@ Delayed Breakup " of the season , adding that " the big news was that Blair and Prince Louis are somehow still together and engaged , with the wedding scheduled for November sweeps . We feel comfortable assuming that by then , Chuck will have regrouped enough to break things up more definitively . " 
 = British Library Philatelic Collections = 
 The British Library Philatelic Collections is the national philatelic collection of the United Kingdom with over 8 million items from around the world . It was established in 1891 as part of the British Museum Library , later to become the British Library , with the collection of Thomas Tapling . In addition to bequests and continuing donations , the library received consistent deposits by the Crown Agency and has become a primary research collection for British Empire and international history . The collections contain a wide range of artefacts in addition to postage stamps , from newspaper stamps to a press used to print the first British postage stamps . 
 = = History = = 
 The first notable philatelic donation was in 1890 by Hubert <unk> of two albums of postage stamps collected by himself and Walter Van <unk> . It was donated with the request that the British Museum library ( now the British Library ) would create a philatelic collection . 
 The following year the Collections were established with the bequest of the Tapling Collection . The probate value of the Tapling Collection was set at £ 12 @,@ 000 but on arrival Richard Garnett ( Assistant Keeper of Printed Books ) estimated their value at more than £ 50 @,@ 000 and described the bequest as the most valuable gift since the Grenville Library in 1847 . 
 In 1900 the Crown Agents for the Colonies sent three albums of postage stamps made on their order for colonial governments and then sent specimens of all future stamps commissioned . 
 In 1913 , the Crawford Library was received which forms the cornerstone of the British Library 's philatelic literature collection , containing about 4500 works . The Crawford Library was donated by the Earl of Crawford in his Will and was the foremost collection of philatelic books in the world at the time . 
 In 1944 Mrs A. Cunningham donated her father 's collection ( Edward Mosley ) of African stamps and in 1949 Mrs. Clement Williams donated her late brother 's collection ( H. L 'Estrange Ewen ) of railway letter stamps , valued at £ 10 @,@ 000 . After being offered in 1942 but delayed due to the Collections being in secure war storage , in 1951 it was announced that Mrs Augustine Fitzgerald had donated an extensive air mail collection . The Mosley and Fitzgerald collections were valued at the time at £ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 The Department of Printed Books had been in charge of the Philatelic Collections by default rather than design . In 1936 there was an unsuccessful proposal to move the Collections to the Department of Prints and Drawings and in 1946 there was a further proposal for the Department of Coins and Medals to take charge . No decision could be agreed and Printed Books continued to manage the Collections until they were passed to the newly formed British Library in 1973 . 
 = = Curators = = 
 From 1948 , H.R. Holmes had been the curator but in the late 1950s had wished to relinquish the post . A replacement curator was not easily found and the care of the Collections was managed on a part @-@ time basis . A security crisis in 1959 developed after it was discovered that the contents of one of the frames in the Tapling Collection was missing . In 1961 James A. Mackay was recruited as a research assistant to take care of the Collections . In 1971 the police arrested Mackay ( promoted to Assistant Keeper in 1965 ) and charged him with stealing items from the British Museum Philatelic Collections on loan from the Crown Agents . The stolen progressive proofs ( test prints of stamp designs ) should have been returned to the Crown Agents for destruction and were valued at £ 7 @,@ 600 . Mackay had exchanged the proofs for Winston Churchill stamps worth £ 400 . He was fined £ 1 @,@ 000 and dismissed from the Museum . As a result of the thefts , security was improved by recruiting Bob <unk> @-@ West , one of the investigating police officers . The Crown Agents withdrew their agreement for lending new stamps for display in the King 's Library . 
 David Beech joined the British Library as a philatelic curator in 1983 and was appointed Head of the Philatelic Collections in 1991 . Beech is a former President of The Royal Philatelic Society London and joint founder of the International Philatelic Libraries Association . 
 = = Description = = 
 The material is organized in 50 collections and archives which have been acquired by donation , bequest , or transfer from Government Departments . The Collections include postage and revenue stamps , postal stationery , essays , proofs , covers and entries , " <unk> stamp " material , specimen issues , airmails , some postal history materials and official and private posts for almost all countries and periods . <unk> is interpreted in its widest sense and the more unusual artefacts include original unused artwork , horse licences and the pilot 's licence of Captain John Alcock . 
 A permanent exhibit of items from the Collections is on display in the British Library entrance area upper ground floor , which may be the best gallery of diverse classic stamps and philatelic material in the world . Approximately 80 @,@ 000 items on 6 @,@ 000 sheets may be viewed in 1 @,@ 000 display frames ; 2 @,@ 400 sheets are from the Tapling Collection . Other material , which covers the whole world , is available to students and researchers by appointment . 
 The British Library Philatelic Department Photograph Collection is a collection of photographs of philatelic material not in the Library 's collections . Mostly composed of material donated by philatelic auctioneers , the collection is an important resource for researchers . 
 As well as these collections , the library actively acquires literature on the subject . This makes the British Library one of the world 's leading philatelic research centres . 
 = = = Principal collections = = = 
 = = Selected notable items = = 
 The Collections include a unique proof sheet of 26 Revenue 1765 Newspaper and Pamphlet one penny impressions showing the registration certificate . These were issued to apply the Stamp Act of 1765 intended to raise taxes to fund the defence of the American Colonies from the French . The tax applied to legal documents , licences , newspapers , pamphlets and almanacs in the American Colonies , Quebec , Nova Scotia , Newfoundland , Florida , the Bahamas and the West Indian Islands . The taxes resulted in public protest and rioting . The tax was abandoned after a few months due to its unpopularity but the political damage contributed to the War of Independence in 1775 . 
 The largest object in the British Library is the Perkins D cylinder press developed by Jacob Perkins and patented in 1819 . This press was one of several used to print the first postage stamps of Great Britain and Ireland which were issued in 1840 . The press was used for printing many early stamps for British Colonial territories from 1853 including for Cape of Good Hope , Ceylon , Mauritius , St Helena , Trinidad , Western Australia , Ionian Islands , New Brunswick , New South Wales , New Zealand and Victoria . 
 The £ 1 stamp issued in Jamaica ( 1956 – 58 ) in the reign of King George VI shows Tobacco Growing and Cigar Making . The first stamp for Queen Elizabeth II was to be in the same design ( chocolate and violet ) but was abandoned after printing . There are only seven examples in existence . 
 The cover of the British Library pocket guide Treasures in Focus - Stamps features the 1913 King George V seahorse master dye proof , part of the Harrison Collection . The engraver , <unk> Harrison , took proofs during the creation of the die of which this image is one . The engraving was used on the high value stamps 2 / 6 , 5 / - , 10 / - and £ 1 . 
 The Collections feature these rarities which demonstrate international scope : 
 Gold Coast : 1883 ( May ) 1d on 4d magenta , unique 
 India : 1854 4 annas blue and pale red , error head inverted , two used on a cover , unique . 
 Mauritius 1847 1d red used on cover and 2d blue , the " Post Office " issue 1d. orange @-@ red , used on cover . The first British Colonial postage stamps were issued in Mauritius in 1847 . 
 New South Wales : 1850 1d and 3d essays of the Sydney View issue . The first stamps of New South Wales , being 1d , 2d and 3d values , were issued in 1850 . 
 Spain : 1851 2 reales , error of colour , one of three known . 
 St Helena : 1961 Tristan Relief Fund 5c . + 6d . , 7 ½ c . + 9d . , and 10c . + 1 / - , used on a postcard . Only the Colonial Office in London could authorize new stamps , a fact clearly unknown to the Governor , and the issue was withdrawn . These are among the rarest of modern stamps as only 434 sets were sold . 
 Switzerland : Zurich : 1843 4 <unk> , the unique <unk> horizontal strip of five . 
 Uruguay : 1858 120 centavos blue and 180 centavos green , in tête @-@ bêche pairs , two of five known . 
 Western Australia : 1854 @-@ 55 4d blue , error frame inverted . 
 = Star Cops = 
 Star Cops is a British science fiction television series first broadcast on BBC2 in 1987 . It was devised by Chris Boucher , a writer who had previously worked on the science fiction television series Doctor Who and Blake 's 7 as well as crime dramas such as Juliet Bravo and Bergerac . Set in the year 2027 , a time where Interplanetary travel has become commonplace , it starred David Calder as Nathan Spring , commander of the International Space Police Force — nicknamed the “ Star Cops " — who provide law enforcement for the newly developing colonies of the Solar System . The series follows Nathan Spring and the rest of his multinational team as they work to establish the Star Cops and solve whatever crimes come their way . Operating in a relatively accurately realised hard SF , near @-@ future , space environment , many of the cases that the Star Cops investigate arise from opportunities for new crimes presented by the technologically advanced future society the series depicts and from the hostile frontier nature of the environment that the Star Cops live in . 
 In total nine episodes of Star Cops were made . A tenth episode , titled " Death on the Moon " , was planned but industrial relations difficulties during production led to it being abandoned shortly before recording was to commence . A combination of factors , including conflict between Boucher and producer Evgeny Gridneff and poor scheduling , meant that the series never found a satisfactory audience and the series was cancelled after one season . In recent years , Star Cops has undergone something of a critical re @-@ appraisal and is generally hailed for being " a pretty good attempt at a moderately realistic " High Frontier " SF series " . 
 = = Concept and setting = = 
 Spacemen are ten @-@ a @-@ penny . What they need out there is a good copper . 
 Star Cops is set in the year 2027 — some 40 years into the future at time of broadcast — a time in which space travel has become common and mankind is in the process of exploiting and colonising the Solar System . There are five permanently manned space stations orbiting the Earth and there are bases on the Moon and Mars . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 people are living and working in space . This near future setting was influenced by the potential for greater access to space promised by the burgeoning Space Shuttle programme and by the militarisation of space through the US Government 's Strategic Defense Initiative programme ( also known as " Star Wars " ) both of which were underway in the early 1980s . Accordingly , space travel and life in space is portrayed in a realistic manner with depictions of weightlessness and low gravity environments and lengthy space journeys ( months or years in cases of interplanetary travel ) as well as hazards such as spacesuit failures , radiation exposure and explosive decompression . This air of realism has led to Star Cops being frequently compared with the 1973 BBC drama series Moonbase 3 . Similarly , the pioneering spirit evoked by the process of colonising the Solar System seen in the series has led to comparisons with the Western genre among many commentators . 
 Law and order is provided by the International Space Police Force ( ISPF ) , twenty part @-@ time volunteers disparagingly nicknamed the " Star Cops " . The decision has been made to put the ISPF on a permanent full @-@ time footing and a new commander , Nathan Spring , has been appointed to accomplish this . Many of the series episodes deal with Spring 's efforts to establish the Star Cops — he sets up a base of operations on the Moonbase , recruits new staff , roots out and dismisses corrupt officers and works to extend the Star Cops ' reach first into the American space stations and then , at the end of the series , the far @-@ flung reaches of the Mars colonies , all the while investigating whatever crimes occur along the way . 
 Many of the crimes that the Star Cops investigate have a science fiction " twist " to them arising from the unconventional ( for a police show ) environment the series is set e.g. a murder in which the two victims are not yet dead , a ransom demand for kidnapped embryos , a hoax discovery of an alien civilisation , etc . It is out of these scenarios that one of the major themes of the series emerges : the conflict between human emotion and morality on the one hand and machine logic and rogue science on the other . 
 Another major theme of the series is the " sins of the father " : Spring ’ s first assignment as a detective was to arrest his father for industrial espionage , the villain in " Intelligent Listening for Beginners " is motivated by his inability to match his father ’ s reputation , Spring ’ s deputy , David Theroux , watched his father die of radiation poisoning , the kidnapper in " A Double Life " is seeking revenge for his father ’ s murder and Star Cop Anna Shoun betrays the multinational company which employs her ( and with whom she has a paternal relationship ) when she discovers their unethical behaviour . 
 = = Principal characters = = 
 Nathan Spring ( David Calder ) 
 Nathan Spring is a 41 @-@ year @-@ old Chief Superintendent in the British police force who reluctantly accepts promotion to Commander of the International Space Police Force with the brief of turning them into a full @-@ time professional police force . Spring is a career policeman who has become disenchanted with the prevailing methods of policing which , he feels , are too dependent on computer logic and not on human instinct . His first job as a young detective was to arrest his own father , a computer salesman , for industrial espionage . Spring is a man who is driven but lonely , a man who doesn 't make friends easily and whose ability to do so is not easy on account of his choice of career and work environment . His constant companion is Box , a prototype handheld computer ( also voiced by Calder ) , bequeathed to him by his father . The conversations between Box and Spring provide insight into Spring 's emotional state and thought processes as Spring engages in " almost Jacobean @-@ style soliloquies " with the device . 
 David Theroux ( Erick Ray Evans ) 
 Spring 's second in command is Chief Superintendent David Theroux , an American . Theroux , an engineer , started out in the US space program but quit and joined the European space effort instead . When he is introduced in the opening episode , " An Instinct for Murder " , he is working as a traffic controller and part @-@ time Star Cop on the European space station Charles de Gaulle . Movie buff Theroux generally tries to maintain an air of wise @-@ cracking , cool detachment which breaks down only when he is forced in " This Case to be Opened in a Million Years " to face his morbid fear of radioactivity . 
 Colin Devis ( Trevor Cooper ) 
 When Spring 's girlfriend , Lee Jones , is killed in " Conversations with the Dead " , the task of investigating the murder is handed to Chief Inspector Colin Devis of the London Metropolitan Police , " one of the Department 's all @-@ time <unk> " . Devis ' pursuit of the killer , an agent of the British Secret Service , costs him his job but Spring compensates him by hiring him , at the rank of Inspector , for the ISPF . Although Devis is not the sharpest investigator , his heart is in the right place and he is fiercely loyal to Spring . Overweight , sexist and bigoted , five times married Devis is the series ' main comedy element and frequently gets the best lines . 
 Pal Kenzy ( Linda Newton ) 
 Australian Pal Kenzy is briefly glimpsed in " An Instinct for Murder " and then introduced properly in " Intelligent Listening for Beginners " where she is fired by Spring for corruption . Determined not to go quietly , Spring is forced to reinstate her when she foils an attempted hijacking on the Earth @-@ Moon shuttle . She has a stormy relationship with Spring who mistrusts her but over the course of the series they develop a close bond . By the end of the series it is apparent that Spring has saved her from falling into a pit of corruption whereas she has restored his faith in humanity . 
 Anna Shoun ( Sayo Inaba ) 
 Rounding off the team is Dr Anna Shoun , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old general physician from Japan . Spring takes her on when she is fired for betraying her employers , the multinational <unk> corporation , to the Star Cops in the episode " In Warm Blood " . The Shoun character has been criticised as a racial stereotype , a charge that has also been levelled at other aspects of the series such as depicting Italians as members of the Mafia , Arabs as Islamists and Americans as jingoistic warmongers . 
 Alexander Krivenko ( Jonathan Adams ) 
