 Finally , introduced in Trivial Games and Paranoid Pursuits , is Russian Alexander Krivenko , the commander of the Moonbase where the ISPF have their headquarters . A winner of the Nobel Prize for Medicine , it is Krivenko 's research into bone damage that has contributed to enabling humanity to access space easily . Although the Star Cops are independent , Spring 's relationship with Krivenko is often deferential and he frequently seems to capitulate to Krivenko 's wishes . 
 = = Production history = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Chris Boucher began his television writing career in comedy , working on such programmes as Dave Allen at Large and Romany Jones , before moving on to write for drama series , including Shoestring , Juliet Bravo and Bergerac . He was no stranger to television science fiction , having written three serials for Doctor Who and having acted as script editor on the entire four season run of Blake 's 7 as well as writing nine episodes for it himself . Boucher originally pitched Star Cops to the BBC in 1981 as a radio series but , with James Follet 's epic <unk> serial in production that year , it was felt that science fiction was adequately served in the schedules and so Boucher tried to sell it to television instead . He sent the draft script of the first Star Cops story to Jonathan Powell , the Head of Drama at BBC television . Powell responded asking Boucher to write a second script and on the strength of this the series was commissioned . However , Powell insisted that the first story , which Boucher had intended to run over two episodes , be reworked into a single episode . This would be the first of many difficulties Boucher would have with how Star Cops was eventually realised for the screen . Boucher , who at this time was working as script editor on the crime series Bergerac , was also told by Powell he could work on Star Cops or on Bergerac but not on both and so chose to leave Bergerac . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Assigned to produce Star Cops was Evgeny Gridneff , who had previously worked for the BBC on <unk> , Blott on the Landscape and Hold the Back Page . Gridneff and Boucher clashed over their respective visions for the series from the outset when , on their first meeting , Gridneff told Boucher that all his scripts would have to be rewritten . Boucher later remarked that their " relationship started out at the bottom and worked its way down " . 
 Boucher had intended to write all ten scripts for the series himself but the tight timescale under which the episodes had to be recorded meant he could only contribute five , with the rest written by John Collee ( three scripts ) and Philip Martin ( two scripts ) . Having previously qualified and worked as a doctor , Collee was a journalist who wrote for The Observer newspaper and later moved into films , most notably writing the screenplay for Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World . Martin was an experienced scriptwriter , best known for the controversial BBC drama series Gangsters , with previous experience in television science fiction , having written for Doctor Who . Two directors were assigned to the show : Christopher Baker , who had worked with Gridneff before on Hold the Back Page as well as BBC veterinarian dramas All Creatures Great and Small and One by One , and Graeme Harper who had directed two Doctor Who stories . 
 At the time , most British television drama was shot on a combination of film and videotape . Usually location shooting would be on film and studio work would be recorded on video . The effect of the change in medium from film to video ( or vice versa ) during a scene change in a programme could be jarring for some viewers . Boucher structured his scripts carefully so that all the Earth @-@ based scenes would be shot on film on location and all the space scenes would be recorded on video in the studio hoping that the effect would give the space scenes a unique look . He was disappointed , therefore , to discover that Gridneff had decided to record the entire series on videotape . 
 Cast as Nathan Spring was David Calder , an experienced character actor with a reputation for " tough @-@ guy " roles and best known at the time for his role as Detective Inspector George Resnick in the Lynda La Plante television serial Widows . Naming him Nathan after his youngest son , Boucher had originally written Spring as a much younger character , a high @-@ flyer in his early thirties who had risen rapidly through the ranks of the police . Despite this Boucher was pleased with Calder 's performance describing Calder as " a class act " whose " performance was immaculate " . Trevor Cooper was cast as Colin Devis at the suggestion of Graeme Harper who had worked with him on Doctor Who and in theatre . The rest of the cast , with the exception of Jonathan Adams ( who had a semi @-@ regular role on Bergerac ) , were relatively unknown . 
 Given that the series was set in the relatively near future , Gridneff took great pains to ensure that the space scenes were depicted as accurately as possible , seeking advice from NASA and other space agencies as well as arranging a set visit by astronaut Pete Conrad , the third man to set foot on the Moon . Conrad 's input proved useful in making the scenes set in weightlessness as convincing as the budget would allow . Assistance was also received from an aerospace manufacturer , the McDonnell Douglas Corporation , who provided stock footage of astronauts training in a water tank and received an on @-@ screen credit on the first episode " An Instinct for Murder " . 
 Recording of the series began on 12 August 1986 with the first block of episodes — " An Instinct for Murder " , " Conversations with the Dead " and " Intelligent Listening for Beginners " — directed by Christopher Baker . This was followed by a block directed by Graeme Harper comprising " Trivial Games and Paranoid Pursuits " , " This Case to be Opened in a Million Years " and " In Warm Blood " . Christopher Baker then returned to the director 's chair for " A Double Life " and " Other People 's Secrets " . Both directors had differing visions for the overall look and feel of the series , with the initial block directed by Baker favouring a pristine , brightly lit approach . This contrasted with the look preferred by Graeme Harper who drastically reduced the light levels ( leaving many scenes illuminated only by computer monitor screens ) and whose designer , Malcolm Thornton , dressed the sets in a messier and <unk> fashion . When Baker returned for his second block of episodes , he sought to return to the brighter , cleaner look which led to some continuity problems . Meanwhile , Evgeny Gridneff and Chris Boucher 's professional relationship continued to be stormy with Gridneff deciding to introduce a new Star Cop , Anna Shoun , without consulting Boucher . The cast and crew were well aware of the behind the scenes conflicts and David Calder later recalled that there was " uncertainty as to which direction this series should go in " . Chris Boucher has been frequently critical of the way in which the series was realised and has since stated that , in retrospect , he wishes he had volunteered to produce the series himself . In response to Boucher 's criticisms , Gridneff has said , " I respect him as a writer and he 's professional and , you know , it 's his series and if it didn 't quite go the way he thought , you know , that 's unfortunate when you 're dealing , you know , you 're losing your baby " . 
 The final block was to be directed by Graeme Harper and would comprise the final two episodes " Death on the Moon " , written by Philip Martin , and " Information Received " , written by Chris Boucher . However industrial action at the BBC affected Star Cops and many other BBC programmes leaving a backlog of programmes once the strike had ended . Forced to prioritise and despite the fact that the episode had been cast , costumes made and sets constructed , the decision was taken to drop " Death on the Moon " and bring " Information Received " , now titled " Little Green Men and Other Martians " , forward . The three @-@ day recording block for this episode began on 16 February 1987 just two days after recording of episode 8 had finished . Recording was further complicated when Erick Ray Evans fell ill and his lines had to split amongst the rest of the cast at the last minute with most of Theroux 's dialogue going to Pal Kenzy . Production on Star Cops finally wrapped on 18 February 1987 . 
 The theme song for the series , titled " It Won 't be Easy " , was written and performed by Justin Hayward , the lead vocalist with the Moody Blues . The theme was produced by record producer Tony Visconti who also composed , with Hayward , the incidental music for every episode . Gridneff hoped that the theme would act as a gentle method of enticing casual viewers into the series . Reaction to the music and Hayward 's song in particular , has generally been negative . SFX magazine , in particular , has been highly critical of the theme tune : in one issue it was placed twenty @-@ ninth in a list article titled " The 50 Worst Things About SF Ever ! " while in another it was placed sixth in a list article titled " The 10 Worst Things About UK <unk> " . Writer and critic Kim Newman has described the theme as the " worst single theme tune of any TV show ever " . Chris Boucher has said that he " hated the music . The incidental music wasn 't appropriate and it didn 't have the style and feeling it should have had " . 
 = = = Transmission and viewer reaction = = = 
 Star Cops was broadcast on Monday nights at around 8 : 30pm starting on 6 July 1987 on BBC2 . Competition was provided on BBC One by sitcom Terry and June and The Nine O 'Clock News . The fifth episode , " This Case to be Opened in a Million Years " , was broadcast at the later time of <unk> The BBC listings magazine Radio Times promoted the series , giving it the front cover of the 4 – 10 July 1987 edition accompanied by a four @-@ page article by Johnny Black inside . Star Cops performed poorly in the ratings with an average audience across the series of only 2 @.@ 2 million viewers . Chris Boucher has blamed the poor ratings on the timeslot the show was given , stating : " There is nothing that has ever gone out on BBC 2 at half @-@ past eight until twenty @-@ past nine ; it 's a grotesque period . It doesn 't synch with anything on BBC 1 ; it just doesn 't work in relation to anything . You had to badly want to see Star Cops in order to watch it because you had to sacrifice at least two hours of viewing to see it . I can see why people didn 't want to have that problem . " . He has also commented that the poor timeslot and the decision to air the series in July and August ( a time when viewing figures are traditionally lower due to the summer ) reflected the fact that Star Cops didn 't have the confidence of the BBC management . This view is echoed by star David Calder who has described the timeslot as " an act of sabotage and absurdity " . 
 Critical reaction to the show was generally negative : writing in The Times following the broadcast of " Conversations with the Dead " , Andrew Hislop wrote that " Star Cops has neither the campiness of Star Trek nor the imagination of Dr. Who to overcome its technological limitations " . Also in The Times , reviewing " Intelligent Listening for Beginners " , Martin Cropper found that " some of the individual plot @-@ lines show invention of a sort , but the script is uniformly feeble " . Meanwhile , in The Sunday Times , Patrick Stoddart was confused by the plot of " This Case to be Opened in a Million Years " asking readers " if you are following any of this , please write to me and explain " . Letter writers to the Radio Times were split on the merits of the show : some such as P. Tricker of <unk> , Suffolk praising it for having " brilliant special effects , well @-@ written scripts and actors who were convincing " while others like Martin Bower of Allendale , Northumberland slated the " dated designs , poor music [ and ] cheap sets " and P. Curwen of Balloch , Dunbartonshire described it as " boring – too much talk and not enough action " . Science fiction fandom at the time was more positive with Anthony McKay in Time Screen describing the series as " one of the most refreshing <unk> series for years " while the British Science Fiction Association gave the show their Media Award in 1987 . The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction stated " the low @-@ key realism of the show was efficient enough " but argued , in the end , that Star Cops " failed to imagine the future with any real vividness or depth " . The low ratings doomed the show to a single season and , although admired , it has never developed a significant following among science fiction aficionados . Boucher has stated that , in retrospect , he feels that the series was too outlandish for crime drama fans and not outlandish enough for science fiction fans and that ultimately it appealed to neither . 
 = = = Proposals for a second season = = = 
 When recording was completed , Gridneff asked Boucher if he had any ideas for a further season of Star Cops . Boucher felt that were the series to continue he would like to extend the setting further out into the Solar System , visiting the Mars colonies and the Big Ring space colonies under construction . He intended to achieve this either by transferring one of the existing regular characters to the Mars colony or by introducing a new regular who would be based there . The second season was never developed beyond these few basic notions as it was clear to Boucher from an early stage that there was little prospect of the series being renewed . Following Star Cops , Boucher went on to work as script editor on the long @-@ running ITV police drama The Bill before returning to freelance writing while Gridneff moved on to work on the BBC drama series The House of Eliott . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The demise of Star Cops after just nine episodes has been seen as indicative of the decline of British television science fiction in the 1980s and , after Doctor Who followed Star Cops into cancellation in 1989 , there would be no British regular science fiction drama series on British television until Bugs began in 1995 . However , Star Cops has undergone something of a reappraisal – in science fiction circles at least – since it went off the air in 1987 . Reviewing the VHS releases for TV Zone in 1991 , Gary Russell stated that " Star Cops represents excellent science fiction " and recanted his original impression of the series upon broadcast that it was " Bergerac in spacesuits , complete with rather cruddy visual effects and boring performances " . A retrospective article penned by Keith Topping for Dreamwatch to mark the series ' 10th anniversary in 1997 described Star Cops as " a series that could ( and should ) have been one of the BBC 's most popular , influential and entertaining products of the era . On at least one of these points the series failed miserably , but , certainly when it came to entertainment , it succeeded magnificently " . In 1999 , when science fiction magazine SFX asked an expert panel from the SF field , including Terry Pratchett and Stephen Baxter , to compile a list of the top 50 SF shows of all time , Star Cops came thirteenth on the list , with SFX describing it as " the SF TV show SF writers love . It wasn 't perfect but it 's as close as TV will ever get to producing proper written SF " . Later , in 2005 , SFX went on to poll its readers for their list of the top 50 British <unk> shows and Star Cops was voted into twenty @-@ seventh position on the list . The BBC themselves revisited Star Cops in a thirty @-@ minute retrospective documentary about the show , recorded as part of a series titled The Cult of ... , first broadcast on BBC Four on 28 November 2006 as part of that channel 's Science Fiction Britannia season . Reflecting on the show in the programme , the author and critic Kim Newman said that " the strength of Star Cops is the writing . I don 't think any of the episodes are realised as well on screen as they are on the page . [ ... ] If it had come back for another couple of seasons it might well have been the BBC 's best science fiction show " . The documentary concluded that Star Cops was an " overlooked gem " . 
 = = Episode guide = = 
 Star Cops comprised nine episodes and was first broadcast on Monday nights on BBC2 between 6 July 1987 and 31 August 1987 . A tenth episode " Death on the Moon " was planned but abandoned following industrial action at the BBC . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 A very small amount of merchandising has been produced for Star Cops . To coincide with the broadcast of the series in 1987 , BBC Enterprises released Justin Hayward 's theme song " It Won 't Be Easy " as a 7 @-@ inch and 12 @-@ inch single . The 7 @-@ inch included the track " Outer Space " by Hayward and Tony Visconti , which was one of the incidental music tracks written for " An Instinct for Murder " , on the B @-@ side . The 12 @-@ inch had an extended version of " It Won 't Be Easy " on the A @-@ Side and the 7 @-@ inch version of " It Won 't Be Easy " and " Outer Space " on the B @-@ Side . " It Won 't Be Easy " was later released on compact disc as part of the compilation The Best of BBC TV 's Themes . 
 The entire series was released by BBC Video in three volumes , each containing three episodes , on VHS video tape in 1991 . Some purchasers of the VHS tapes also received embroidered ISPF and Moonbase patches made by Stewart Aviation . 
 Chris Boucher 's five Star Cops scripts have been semi @-@ professionally published in two volumes by Judith Proctor . The first volume An Instinct for Murder was adapted from the first Star Cops episode of the same name . The second volume Little Green Men and Other Stories included the four remaining Boucher scripts . There are some changes from the broadcast episodes – neither the characters of Alexander Krivenko nor Anna Shoun appear in these books . Krivenko is replaced by a Chinese character , Jiang Li Ho , as an attempt to update the Star Cops universe to reflect the ending of the Cold War in 1989 . Shoun is replaced by an Irish character , Dana <unk> – Boucher didn 't own the rights to use the Shoun character who had been created by John Collee . 
 The complete series was released on DVD by Network Video in a single , three @-@ disc volume in 2004 . This release contained a number of extras including commentaries by Chris Boucher on " An Instinct for Murder " and " Little Green Men and Other Martians " and by Philip Martin on " This Case to be Opened in a Million Years " as well as a making of documentary , interviews with Chris Boucher , Philip Martin and Trevor Cooper and behind the scenes footage . 
 = Poker Face ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Poker Face " is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her debut studio album , The Fame ( 2008 ) . Produced by RedOne , it was released as the album 's second single in late 2008 for some markets and in early 2009 for the rest of the world . " Poker Face " is an uptempo synthpop song in the key of G ♯ minor , following in the footsteps of her previous single " Just Dance " , but with a darker musical tone . The main idea behind the song is bisexuality and was a tribute by Gaga to her rock and roll boyfriends . Lyrically , the track is about a woman engaged in the practice of <unk> . 
 " Poker Face " was acclaimed by most critics , who praised the robotic hook and the chorus . The song attained worldwide success , topping the charts in twenty countries including the United States , United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , Canada and many European countries . " Poker Face " is the best @-@ selling single of 2009 worldwide , with over 9 @.@ 5 million in sales . It is among the best @-@ selling singles of all time , having sold over 14 million copies . The accompanying music video for the song portrays Gaga singing it in various costumes and playing strip poker in a getaway villa . 
 Gaga performed the song for the eighth season of the television show American Idol as well as the Fame Ball and Monster Ball tours . The live performances included an electronic version and an acoustic version , which she played on the piano . It was nominated for both Song of the Year and Record of the Year at the 52nd Grammy Awards , and won the Award for Best Dance Recording . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Poker Face " was written by Gaga and RedOne , while production was handled also by RedOne . Gaga stated in an interview that " Poker Face " was written by her as a pop song and was a tribute to her " rock ' n ' roll boyfriends " . She also stated that the main idea behind the song was sex and gambling . In an interview with UK 's Daily Star , Gaga noted of the song , " It 's about a lot of different things . I gamble but I 've also dated a lot of guys who are really into sex and booze and gambling , so I wanted to write a record my boyfriends would like too . " In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine , when asked about the meaning of the line " <unk> ' with my muffin " , Gaga explained that it really was a metaphor for her vulva . 
 " Obviously , it 's my pussy 's poker face ! I took that line from another song I wrote but never released , called ' Blueberry Kisses . ' It was about a girl singing to her boyfriend about how she wants him to go down on her , and I used the lyric . [ Gaga sings ] ' Blueberry kisses , the muffin man misses them kisses ' . " 
 During her Fame Ball Tour performance at Palm Springs , California , on April 11 , 2009 , Gaga explained to the crowd the true meaning behind the term " Poker Face " used in the song . She suggested that the song dealt with her personal experience with bisexuality . The idea behind the song was to be with a man but fantasizing about a woman , hence the man in the song needs to read her " Poker Face " to understand what is going through her mind . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Poker Face " is a synthpop song , and follows the footsteps of Gaga 's previous single " Just Dance " . Whereas " Just Dance " was predominately electropop , " Poker Face " carries a dark sound with clear vocals on the chorus and a pop hook while combining the synths from " Just Dance " and the more dance @-@ oriented beat of the next single " LoveGame " . According to Kerri Mason of Billboard , the composition " carr [ ies ] the pleather @-@ and @-@ sequins vibe of the downtown New York scene out of the underground and onto the FM dial without losing its smut and sass . " 
 According to the sheet music published in Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a fast tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is written in the key of G ♯ minor with Gaga 's vocal range spanning from the note G3 to the note C5 . It begins with a medium tempo followed by electronic chord arrangement and the " Mum @-@ mum @-@ mum @-@ mah " hook . The chords follow in this order : G ♯ m – E / G ♯ – F ♯ , and then for the chorus G ♯ m – E – B – F ♯ . This is followed by the sound of dance music , produced by a powerful beat from the instruments , and a stuttering hook following the chorus . 
 Lyrically , " Poker Face " is all about sexual innuendo and teasing . According to Daily Star , the chorus repeats two alternating lyrics . After the hook " Can 't read my Poker Face " the backup singer says " He 's got me like nobody " and then in the next line says " She 's got me like nobody " . Gaga explained in an interview with them that the line carries a bit of an undertone of confusion about love and sex . However , the liner notes from the album booklet indicate both these lines only repeat " she 's got me like nobody " . According to BBC , the " Mum @-@ mum @-@ mum @-@ mah " hook used in the song references Boney M. ' s 1977 hit " Ma Baker " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , " Poker Face " received critical acclaim . Priya Elan from The Times , in a review for The Fame , said that " Poker Face " was one of the finest moments of the album with its " love @-@ as @-@ card @-@ game cheek " . BBC Music reviewed the " strut @-@ tastic " single as " expressing her overwhelming desire for celebrity and fortune . " Bill Lamb of About.com said , " ' Poker Face ' works well on pop radio , but with slight mixing alterations it would be equally at home in a dark , sweaty , late night party atmosphere . She has refreshed the pop world in the US and UK at one of the slowest times of the year . ' Poker Face ' keeps the motors humming as everyone waits for the next step forward from Lady Gaga . " Chris Williams of Billboard also gave a positive review of the song saying , " Once again , hooks are aplenty , with ' 80s @-@ inspired synthesizers , robotic verses and a warm , sunny hook in the chorus , which is even more addictive than the previous single ( ' Just Dance ' ) ... With a focused artistic vision , a swagger in her interview style and above all , a fantastic collection of diverse pop nuggets , Gaga is playing her cards right — and " Poker " is another obvious ace . " 
 Slant Magazine music reviewer Sal Cinquemani included " Poker Face " among the songs that work in The Fame , namely tracks like " Starstruck , " " Paper Gangsta " and " Summerboy " . Matthew Chisling from Allmusic called the song " infectious " and along with the title track " The Fame " , complimented them for " rejuvenating the vibe on the album for its second half . " Andy Downing from The Chicago Tribune called the song " jaunty " while reviewing Gaga 's Fame Ball tour . Evan Sawdey from PopMatters.com felt that " Poker Face " along with the track " Paparazzi " , duplicate much of the same " glitzy territory that previous single ' Just Dance ' had covered , but never once does it feel like Gaga is deliberately repeating herself . " Rolling Stone in a review for The Fame Ball Tour compared the live acoustic " bluesy " version of " Poker Face " with the music of singer Amy Winehouse . Erika Hobert from the New Times Broward @-@ Palm Beach newspaper called the song " <unk> Europop . " The song was nominated for Grammy Awards in the categories for Song of The Year , Record of The Year , and Best Dance Recording , ultimately winning the last of these . Rolling Stone ranked it number ninety @-@ six on their list of 100 Best Songs of the 2000s decade . In October 2011 , NME placed it at number 103 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at ninety @-@ two and reached number six on the issue dated March 7 , 2009 . The next week the song climbed another three places to reach a peak of three and stayed there for two additional weeks . On the Billboard issue dated April 11 , 2009 , the song topped the chart . " Poker Face " became Gaga 's second consecutive number one song on the Hot 100 , marking the first time a new artist has had their first two charting singles hit number one on the Hot 100 since Christina Aguilera did so with " Genie In a Bottle " and " What a Girl Wants " in 1999 – 2000 . The song stayed on the Hot 100 for 40 weeks . " Poker Face " also peaked on both the Hot Dance Airplay and Hot Dance Club Play charts . It became the first single since Madonna 's 2006 single " Sorry " , to top all the three dance charts in a single week including the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . The song has been certified ten times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and sold 7 @.@ 3 million paid digital downloads in the United States as of April 2016 , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Gaga is the first artist in digital history to top the six and seven million mark in paid downloads with two songs , the first being " Just Dance " . " Poker Face " is Gaga 's most digitally @-@ sold track in the United States . 
 In Canada , the song debuted at number forty @-@ one on the Canadian Hot 100 . On the chart dated December 13 , 2008 , " Poker Face " ascended to the number one spot and then spent nine non @-@ consecutive weeks at the top . The song was certified eight times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for paid digital downloads of 320 @,@ 000 . " Poker Face " entered the Australian charts at number 26 , and in its seventh week peaked at number one . " Poker Face " has shipped over 420 @,@ 000 copies in Australia , earning six @-@ times Platinum certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . It held the record for the longest @-@ charting song in ARIA Chart history of 106 weeks until this was broken in May 2015 by Vance Joy 's " Riptide " . In New Zealand , the song debuted on the official chart at number twenty @-@ one . In its sixth week , it peaked the chart spending ten consecutive weeks at number one . " Poker Face " was certified two times platinum after twenty @-@ seven weeks on the chart , selling over 30 @,@ 000 copies , according to the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Poker Face " debuted at number thirty on the UK Singles Chart . After three weeks , it climbed to number one , thus giving Gaga her second consecutive British number one single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold over 1 @.@ 12 million copies there . It was the biggest selling digital single in the United Kingdom , before being overtaken by " I Gotta Feeling " by The Black Eyed Peas in June 2010 . However , the song became the country 's biggest @-@ selling single of 2009 , and was awarded The Record of the Year . In Italy the song debuted at number nineteen and peaked at number two . The song has also reached the peak in a number of European countries including Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Sweden and Switzerland . In Germany " Poker Face " became the most successful download single of all time and the first one to sell more than 500 @,@ 000 downloads . The song also peaked on the Billboard European Hot 100 Singles and was on the top for sixteen weeks making it the longest running single in the chart . Worldwide , the song had sold 9 @.@ 8 million copies by November 2009 according to IFPI . It has since gone on to sell over 13 @.@ 4 million copies as of September 2013 , making it one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Poker Face " , directed by Ray Kay and aided by Anthony Mandler , was filmed at the luxury villa on <unk> <unk> <unk> also provided the poker equipment and obtained product placements in return . The video premiered on October 22 , 2008 . It is set by a pool , as well as in a mansion . It begins with Gaga emerging from the pool wearing a mirror masquerade mask and a black full @-@ body leotard , with two Great Danes beside her . She throws the mask aside and the song begins with a facial shot of Gaga singing it . Gaga wears a metallic sticker on her left cheek in this shot . Featured in the video are scenes of Gaga in a mansion and dancing poolside with her dancers in a turquoise leotard . Gaga attends a wild party where every man and woman tries their luck on a strip poker game . The party gets wilder when all the party 's guests strip down to their underwear , dance around , and share kisses with each other . The video also features several white mannequins on her swimming pool deck . During the musical interlude before the " I won 't tell you that I love you " hook , Gaga is shown in her trademark " Pop Music Will Never Be Low Brow " sunglasses while sitting beside the pool . The video ends with the head shot of Gaga singing the Mum @-@ mum @-@ mum @-@ ma hook . 
 Gaga explained in the nineteenth episode of her " Transmission Gagavision " series , the main idea behind the music video of " Poker Face " . She said that " I knew I wanted it to be sexy , so I thought no pants , because that 's sexy , [ ... ] And I knew I wanted it to be futuristic , so I thought shoulder pads , because that 's my thing . " The music video premiered on MTV UK on February 17 , 2009 . In some versions of the song , the words " muffin " ( being a slang term for the woman 's vagina ) , " Russian Roulette " and " gun " are censored out ( bleeped ) . On June 21 , 2009 , the video won the Best International Artist Video at the 2009 MuchMusic Video Awards . The video received four nominations at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , in the categories of Video of the Year , Best New Artist , Best Female Video and Best Pop Video . Along with five other nominations for " Paparazzi " , Gaga was tied with Beyoncé for most nominations each for that year . 
 In June 2010 , Gaga held a reverse auction for one of the necklaces worn in the music video , designed by Brian Lichtenberg . All the proceeds from the auction went to the Lupus Foundation of America . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Poker Face " has been performed by Gaga at a number of shows including the AOL Sessions , the Cherrytree House of Interscope Records , and also the MTV sessions . The song was performed by Gaga both in the original version and the acoustic piano version in her headlining The Fame Ball tour . She performed the piano version wearing a dress made of plastic transparent bubbles and playing the glass piano with her <unk> with a glowing mannequin , like the music video , standing in front of the stage . Gaga claimed that the transparent bubble filled piano was specifically made to match her dress . The actual version was performed by Gaga as the final song of the encore , after " Boys , Boys , Boys " . She started the performance saying " Some say Lady Gaga is a lie , and they ’ re right : I am a lie , and every day I kill to make it true . " Gaga wore a nude corseted leotard embellished with crystals and an admiral 's hat during the performance . The hat as well as the fingerless gloves worn were decorated with the word Gaga on it . 
 On April 1 , 2009 , both the acoustic and normal version of " Poker Face " was performed live on Fox 's American Idol . The performance started with Gaga sitting at a Plexiglass piano filled with bubbles and bathed in pink light . She started singing the second verse of " Poker Face " in a Bette Midler style accompanied by a violin player while wearing a shiny aluminum shoulder pad and platinum bleached blond wig . After the first chorus , the pace increased whence the original intro for the song started . Gaga got up from her seat and proceeded to perform the song in the middle of the stage . She wore a silvery leotard with a giant star on her shoulder and tassels . As the song progressed to the intermediate verse , the violist played a hoe @-@ down version of the music and Gaga danced around frantically over the stage . The performance ended with Gaga staring towards the audience while revealing an open zipper , patched over her left eye . The performance was described an " alien @-@ disco performance art . " Cortney Harding of Billboard wrote , " [ it was ] Gaga 's crowning TV moment ... show [ ing ] middle America that she was a bona fide pop star . " 
 The acoustic version was performed by Gaga at BBC Live & In @-@ Session on April 19 , 2009 . In the same day , she had her first appearance on Italian TV , on the TV program Quelli che ... il Calcio . She also performed " Poker Face " in the United Kingdom on The Paul O 'Grady Show . First she played an acoustic version first before going on to the normal version , and a rock version on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross . On May 12 , 2009 , Gaga performed " Poker Face " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show while wearing a gyroscope on her head , designed by theatrical hat designer Nasir Mazhar and playing the piano while standing on the stool . Gaga referred to the gyroscope as her " Gaga barrier " . It prevented Ellen DeGeneres from greeting her because of the size of the gear . A remixed version of " Poker Face " and " LoveGame " was performed at the 2009 MuchMusic Video Awards , during the indoor @-@ outdoor <unk> show . This performance , which included Gaga being trapped in a fake subway car surrounded by fake police officers , was billed as a tribute to New York City . <unk> of the song was performed by Gaga at the thirty @-@ fifth season of American comedy show Saturday Night Live , while wearing a giant contraption ( " The Orbit " ) of several metallic concentric rings that rotated around her . 
 It was also performed on Gaga 's The Monster Ball Tour . The piano version was played by Gaga while balancing on the piano stool and holding one leg up in the air . Rapper Kid Cudi joined her then to perform his song " Make Her Say " which contains a sample of " Poker Face " . The actual version was performed at the last segment of the show . Gaga wore a dress made of guns and during the performance she pumped her hands in the air . It was also performed at the 52nd Grammy Awards , where she opened the show with the song while standing on a pedestal . In the middle , she was then flung into the garbage chute of the Fame Factory set , before emerging seated at a piano , facing Elton John . In May 2011 , Gaga performed the song during Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . The song was included on the set list of her 2012 Born This Way Ball Tour in which she sports a modified version of her famous meat dress . At the end of the song Her dancers dump her down a giant meat grinder . 
 = = Cover versions and adaptations = = 
 Rock musician Chris Daughtry performed an acoustic version of the song while at a radio station in Germany . In 2009 , a single by rapper Kid Cudi featuring Kanye West and Common titled " Make Her Say " was released ; it contains a vocal sample of the acoustic version of " Poker Face " from The Cherrytree Sessions EP . The song was originally entitled " I Poke Her Face " but was changed to make it more acceptable for radio . It features Kanye West , who also produced the track , and Common , as well as scratches from DJ A @-@ Trak . Actor Christopher Walken performed a special a capella rendition of " Poker Face " on BBC1 's Friday Night with Jonathan Ross for Halloween 2009 . The song was also covered by British singer Mika during his visit to the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge . It was later released as a track on his single " Rain " . 
 The song was also featured in the South Park episode titled " Whale Whores " , sung by series character Eric Cartman . On March 16 , 2010 , South Park 's version of " Poker Face " became available as a downloadable song for the video game Rock Band , in the same day a Lady Gaga track pack featuring the original song was released . On a live special Family Guy episode , the song was performed by Alex Borstein who was parodying Marlee Matlin who interrupted the performance in a guest stint . Lea Michele and Idina Menzel , in character as Rachel Berry and Shelby Corcoran respectively , covered an acoustic version of " Poker Face " in the " Theatricality " episode of Glee . Their version debuted at position 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and moved up to a peak of 20 on the next week . It went on to become one of the show 's most popular recordings ; having sold 410 @,@ 000 U.S. downloads , it remains the tenth best @-@ selling song in the show 's history . " Weird Al " Yankovic included the chorus in his , ironically titled , polka medley " Polka Face " from his 2011 album Alpocalypse . During the end credits of the 2012 The Simpsons season @-@ finale episode " Lisa Goes Gaga " , Homer Simpson performed a parody version entitled " Homer Face " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Fame . 
 Lady Gaga – lead vocals , backing vocals 
 Gene Grimaldi – mastering 
 Robert Orton – mixing 
 RedOne – backing vocals , engineering , instrumentation , production , programming 
 Dave Russell – engineering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 1988 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1988 Atlantic hurricane season was a moderately active season that proved costly and deadly , with 15 tropical cyclones directly affecting land . The season officially began on June 1 , 1988 , and lasted until November 30 , 1988 , although activity began on May 30 when a tropical depression developed in the Caribbean Sea . The June through November dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The first cyclone to attain tropical storm status was Alberto on August 8 , nearly a month later than usual . The final storm of the year , Tropical Storm Keith , became extratropical on November 24 . 
 The season produced 19 tropical depressions of which 12 attained tropical storm status . One tropical storm was operationally classified as a tropical depression but was reclassified in post @-@ analysis . Five tropical cyclones reached hurricane status of which three became major hurricanes reaching Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 The most notable cyclone of the season was Hurricane Gilbert , which at the time was the strongest Atlantic hurricane on record . The hurricane tracked through the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico and caused devastation in Mexico and many island nations , particularly Jamaica . Its passage caused US $ 5 billion in damage ( 1988 USD ; $ 10 billion 2016 USD ) and more than 300 deaths , mostly in Mexico . Hurricane Joan , striking Nicaragua as a Category 4 hurricane , caused about US $ 2 billion in damage ( 1988 USD ; $ 4 billion 2016 USD ) and more than 200 deaths . The hurricane crossed into the eastern Pacific Ocean and was reclassified as Tropical Storm Miriam . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Preseason forecasts = = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts such as Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University . A normal season as defined by NOAA has six to fourteen named storms of which four to eight reach hurricane strength and one to three become major hurricanes . The June 1988 forecast was that eleven storms would form and that seven would reach hurricane status . The forecast did not specify how many hurricanes would reach major hurricane status . 
 = = = Season activity = = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , but activity in 1988 began two days earlier with the formation of Tropical Depression One on May 30 . It was an above average season in which 19 tropical depressions formed . Twelve depressions attained tropical storm status , and five of these attained hurricane status . For the first time in 27 years three hurricanes reached major hurricane status . Four hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 550 deaths and $ 7 billion in damage ( 1988 USD ) . The last storm of the season , Tropical Storm Keith , dissipated on November 24 , only 6 days before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 The activity in the first two months of the season was limited because of strong wind shear from an upper tropospheric flow . Although vigorous tropical waves moved off the coast of Africa , most of them quickly diminished in intensity as they crossed the tropical Atlantic Ocean . As a result , no tropical depressions formed in June or July . Decreased wind shear in August allowed tropical waves to develop into tropical cyclones . The official storm track forecast errors were 30 to 40 percent lower than the average for the previous 10 years . The 24- , <unk> , and 72 @-@ hour forecasts were the most accurate in more than 18 years and were also more accurate than in each subsequent season until 1996 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 103 , which is classified as " near normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is calculated for all named storms at 6 @-@ hourly <unk> , when a system exceeds 34 knots ( 39 miles per hour ; 63 kilometres per hour ) . 
 = = Storms = = 
 Timeline of tropical activity in 1988 Atlantic hurricane season 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 The first tropical depression of the season formed on May 30 in the northwest Caribbean Sea . The system encountered unfavorable conditions as it moved northward toward Cuba , and a reconnaissance airplane sent to investigate it could not find a well @-@ defined center . The depression remained weak and degenerated on June 2 into an open trough of low pressure in the Florida Straits . 
 Rainfall from the depression and its precursor peaked at 40 @.@ 35 in ( 1025 mm ) , including a daily peak of 34 @.@ 13 in ( 867 mm ) . The rainfall most affected the province of Cienfuegos , though the provinces of Villa Clara , Sancti Spíritus , Ciego de Ávila , and Camagüey were also impacted . A tornado in the city of Camagüey destroyed five Soviet planes and multiple buildings . Flooding prompted officials to use rescue crews , helicopters , and amphibious vehicles to evacuate 65 @,@ 000 residents in low @-@ lying areas to higher grounds . The storm left many without power and communications , severely damaged the country 's transportation infrastructure , and destroyed six bridges . Flooding from the depression damaged 1 @,@ 000 houses and destroyed 200 homes in Camagüey Province alone . Throughout Cuba , the depression affected about 90 @,@ 000 people , injuring dozens and killing a total of 37 people , including three who died from electrocution . In Florida , the depression produced light rain , including 3 @.@ 18 in ( 81 mm ) at Pompano Beach . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Alberto = = = 
 The season 's first named storm originated on August 4 within a weak trough of low pressure that formed off the coast of South Carolina . The next day a low level circulation was detected by satellite , indicating that a tropical depression was forming . By August 6 the storm was designated the second tropical depression of the season . An approaching weak frontal trough pushed the depression northeastward and enhanced its upper level outflow . On August 7 the system was designated Tropical Storm Alberto while located just south of Nantucket , Massachusetts . The storm accelerated northeastward at 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) and struck western Nova Scotia that evening with little impact . On August 8 Alberto became extratropical over the cold waters of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . Shortly thereafter it dissipated just north of Newfoundland . 
 In Maine , Alberto produced light rainfall , reaching 2 @.@ 4 inches ( 60 mm ) near <unk> . The storm produced peak wind gusts of 48 mph ( 78 km / h ) at Yarmouth , Nova Scotia . Rainfall reached 1 @.@ 78 inches ( 45 @.@ 1 mm ) in Saint John , New Brunswick , most of which fell in a short amount of time . The rainfall caused localized flooding , which briefly closed some streets . The extratropical remnants of Alberto also produced light rain and some clouds along western Newfoundland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beryl = = = 
 The third tropical depression of the season formed on August 7 from a surface low over southeastern Louisiana . The slow moving system organized as it drifted toward the mouth of the Mississippi River . It soon had enough convective organization for the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to issue an initial advisory on Tropical Depression Three . By August 8 surface winds increased enough to issue tropical storm warnings for Louisiana to the Florida Panhandle . Over the open Gulf , Beryl produced sustained winds of minimal tropical storm force and tropical storm force gusts over coastal Louisiana , Mississippi , and Alabama . Excessive rain fell along the central Gulf Coast , including local amounts of 16 in ( 410 mm ) at Dauphin Island , Alabama . 
 Maintaining a well @-@ structured outflow , Beryl 's circulation on August 9 moved over warm water , where conditions were favorable for further intensification . However , a front approached from the northwest and reversed the storm 's course into southeastern Louisiana . The next morning Beryl had weakened to a tropical depression as it moved over the Bayou <unk> . Heavy downpours from system 's remnants brought more than 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rain to parts of eastern Texas . Overall damage from the storm was light , and only one known death was attributed to the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four = = = 
 On August 12 a westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Four near the southern Bahamas . The depression tracked north @-@ northwest along Florida 's coast and made landfall near Jacksonville , Florida , the next day . The system spawned gusty winds and thunderstorms along the coasts of Florida and Georgia but caused little damage . The storm moved over south Georgia and the central Gulf Coast while dropping up to 7 in ( 178 mm ) of rain on the Southeast . According to the National Weather Service , winds in some squalls to the north and east of the center reached up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . The system finally dissipated as it reemerged over water near the mouth of the Mississippi . 
 Early predictions from hurricane forecasters said that the depression would strengthen into the season 's third tropical storm . Because of unfavorable upper level conditions and interaction with Bahama islands , the system lost its well defined center as it moved towards Florida 's east coast . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Five = = = 
 A tropical wave in the far eastern Atlantic developed into the fifth tropical depression on August 20 . The storm drifted north @-@ northwest of the Cape Verde islands for the next three days with little change in strength . Forecasters were concerned because the depression formed in the breeding ground where other powerful East Coast hurricanes have started . Though the storm was still very weak , they initially predicted it would strengthen . 
 By August 24 the depression 's forward speed had increased to 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) as its movement turned west . Cool ocean temperatures weakened the system and diminished its prospects for restrengthening , and on August 26 Tropical Depression Five degenerated into a tropical wave . The remnants redeveloped on August 30 about 180 miles ( 290 km ) southeast of North Carolina , and the Washington office of the National Weather Service continued to track the system as a gale center until it merged with a front off the East Coast on September 1 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six = = = 
 Tropical Depression Six developed from a tropical wave that moved off the northwest African coast on August 12 . The system crossed the tropical Atlantic as a wave until it began organizing near 55 ° W on August 19 . The next day this system was designated a tropical depression while it approached the Windward Islands . After crossing the islands , the depression continued westward into the central Caribbean and encountered less @-@ favorable conditions . Though poorly organized on August 21 , the depression was expected to strengthen into a tropical storm over the western Caribbean 's warmer waters . Nevertheless , it was downgraded to a tropical wave at 80 ° W near the island of Jamaica on August 23 . The disturbance moved over Central America with minimal convection but redeveloped into Hurricane Kristy once it reached the eastern Pacific . The system 's main effect on land was squally weather on the Windward Islands . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chris = = = 
 Chris formed from a strong tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on August 15 . By August 21 convection in the northern part of the wave detached and organized into Tropical Depression Seven . The storm tracked westward along the southern periphery of a subtropical high pressure ridge over the mid @-@ Atlantic . For the next seven days , surface and reconnaissance observations found little evidence that the storm was strengthening . As a result , it remained a tropical depression as it moved across portions of the Lesser and Greater Antilles as well as the Bahamas . 
 The depression passed south of Puerto Rico on August 24 and dumped more than 14 in ( 360 mm ) of rain on parts of the island . Three deaths in Puerto Rico were attributed to the weather . On August 28 the storm was upgraded to Tropical Storm Chris as it traveled northward just offshore of Florida . It made landfall near Savannah , Georgia , bringing light wind and rain damage to the area . Weakening to a depression , Chris poured heavy rains on South Carolina , where it merged with a cold front and became extratropical . The low accelerated over the Eastern Seaboard through Nova Scotia and finally dissipated on August 30 . Heavy thunderstorms spawned a tornado in South Carolina that resulted in another death . 
 = = = Hurricane Debby = = = 
 Debby formed from the southern part of a tropical wave that became Tropical Storm Chris . In the mid @-@ tropical Atlantic , the northern area of convection detached and became Tropical Depression Seven . The southern portion continued moving westward as a disorganized area of showers . The system did not develop until the low @-@ level center emerged from the Yucatán into the Bay of Campeche on August 31 . It is estimated that the storm became Tropical Depression Eight just offshore at around 12 p.m. local time . 
 Drifting west @-@ northwest over the Gulf of Mexico , the depression organized and reached tropical storm @-@ strength early on September 2 . Later that day , based on observations from aircraft reconnaissance , Debby was upgraded to a hurricane . At peak intensity , the hurricane 's center was just 30 mi ( 48 km ) from the coast . With little change in intensity , Debby made landfall near Tuxpan , Veracruz , six hours later . The storm brought high winds , inland flooding , and mudslides and caused 10 deaths . 
 Debby weakened considerably over the Sierra Madre Oriental mountains , although the remnants continued moving across Mexico . The tight center tracked towards the Pacific coast and reemerged near Manzanillo on September 5 . Upon entering the Eastern Pacific , the system became Tropical Depression Seventeen @-@ E before dissipating in the Gulf of California on September 8 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ernesto = = = 
 On September 2 a cluster of thunderstorms associated with a northwestward @-@ moving tropical wave developed a surface low near Bermuda . Though the surface low remained poorly defined and separate from the convection , the system became a tropical depression on September 3 . Under the influence of southwesterlies , the depression accelerated northeastward at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Late on September 3 it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Ernesto . The storm continued to strengthen as it lost tropical characteristics . A large extratropical storm over the North Atlantic absorbed Ernesto on September 5 . 
 Throughout its life , Ernesto remained at sea and brought strong winds to the open waters of the ocean . The only land area affected by the storm was in the Azores , where it brought near storm @-@ force winds to Flores Island . No damage or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Ten = = = 
 A broad low pressure area formed in the western Gulf of Mexico on September 2 and quickly developed through the next day . By September 3 convection was organized enough to declare the system a tropical depression about 160 mi ( 260 km ) west @-@ southwest of Morgan City , Louisiana . Forecasters issued tropical storm warnings for the coast from Cameron , Louisiana , to Apalachicola , Florida , while the storm moved rapidly northeastward at 15 to 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . However , the depression degenerated a few hours later when it merged with the cold front that had caused its acceleration . Oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico reported winds gusts to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , and moderate to heavy rains drenched large portions of southeast Texas and Louisiana . The wave dampened over the next 24 hours and brought heavy rain to the rest of the southeast , including a maximum of 8 @.@ 4 in ( 210 mm ) in Biloxi , Mississippi . No major damage was reported . 
 = = = Unnamed Tropical Storm = = = 
 A well @-@ organized disturbance moved off the African coast on September 6 and rapidly developed into Tropical Depression Eleven . The NHC began issuing advisories on September 8 while it was 350 mi ( 560 km ) northeast of Cape Verde . An after @-@ the @-@ fact review of satellite and ship reports indicated that the depression reached tropical storm @-@ strength on September 7 . However , because of its extreme eastern track , the storm 's observational track did not include this information . 
 For three days a large trough of low pressure northwest of the system steered it north @-@ northwest towards cooler waters . Moderate to heavy rain was reported along the west coast of Africa , but no damage was reported . The system eventually weakened and merged with the low pressure trough . This unnamed storm was later added to the list of tropical storms in the annual summary for the Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = = Hurricane Florence = = = 
 A cloud band accompanying a cold front exited the coast of Texas into the Gulf of Mexico on September 4 . The band split into two over the central Gulf when the southern portion stalled and the northern portion developed into a frontal wave that tracked northeastward . Convection over the southern portion increased and wrapped around the center of the cloud band . On September 7 the system formed a surface circulation , and tropical depression advisories began that day . 
 The depression drifted eastward under the influence of the dissipating frontal trough and intensified into Tropical Storm Florence , as confirmed by Hurricane Hunters . The storm turned northward on September 9 and accelerated toward the northern Gulf Coast under the influence of a mid- to upper @-@ level trough . Florence became a hurricane just hours before landfall on the western Mississippi Delta . The storm rapidly weakened over southeastern Louisiana and lost all its deep convection as it passed over the New Orleans area . Florence became a depression on September 10 near Baton Rouge and dissipated the next day over northeast Texas . 
 Early in its duration the system dropped moderate amounts of rainfall across the Yucatán Peninsula . Upon striking Louisiana , storm surge water levels rose moderately above normal just east of where the center moved ashore . Gusty winds caused power outages to more than 100 @,@ 000 people . In Alabama one man died while trying to secure his boat . Rainfall from the hurricane caused severe river flooding in portions of the Florida Panhandle in an area already severely affected by heavy rainfall , and the flooding damaged or destroyed dozens of houses in Santa Rosa County . 
 = = = Hurricane Gilbert = = = 
 The 12th tropical depression formed just east of the Lesser Antilles on September 8 . As it moved west @-@ northwest , it became Tropical Storm Gilbert over the islands on September 9 . The tropical storm turned west and rapidly intensified to a major hurricane on September 11 . Gilbert continued to strengthen as it brushed the southern coast of Hispaniola . It passed directly over Jamaica as a Category 3 hurricane and brought torrential rains to the island 's mountainous areas . When the center reemerged over water , Gilbert rapidly intensified again . On September 13 the central pressure dropped 72 millibars ( 2 @.@ 1 inHg ) , the fastest deepening of an Atlantic hurricane on record until 2005 's Hurricane Wilma . Gilbert 's pressure of 888 millibars ( 26 @.@ 2 inHg ) at the time was the lowest sea level pressure ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere . 
 Gilbert weakened slightly before landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula , although it struck at Category 5 strength . As the eye moved over land , the storm rapidly lost strength , reemerging on September 15 in the Gulf of Mexico as a Category 2 hurricane . Hurricane Gilbert continued its northwest track and restrengthened to a minimal Category 4 hurricane . On September 16 , Gilbert made its final landfall in northeast Mexico near the town of La Pesca with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . The center passed south of Monterrey , Mexico , on September 17 and brought heavy flooding to the city . Gilbert 's remnants turned north and eventually merged with a developing frontal low pressure system over Missouri . 
 Hurricane Gilbert was the most intense hurricane ever observed in the Atlantic basin until Hurricane Wilma broke this record in 2005 . The storm caused $ 5 billion ( 1988 USD ) in damage across the Caribbean and into Central America . Gilbert was the first hurricane to make landfall in Jamaica since Hurricane Charlie in 1951 . Until 2007 's Hurricane Dean , it was also the most recent storm to make landfall as a Category 5 hurricane in Mexico . The death toll from Gilbert was reported to be 318 people , mostly from Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane Helene = = = 
 A tropical wave with deeply organized convection crossed the coast of Africa on September 15 . The system was forced west due to a strong ridge in the eastern Atlantic . On September 19 at 1800 UTC , the system was upgraded to Tropical Depression Fourteen . By 0600 UTC on September 20 , the depression was strengthened , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Helene . Helene began to turn to the northwest on September 21 due to a major trough in the eastern Atlantic . Later on September 21 , Helene intensified into a hurricane . Favorable conditions allowed the storm to continue strengthening , and on September 22 , Helene became a major hurricane . Late on the following day , Helene attained its peak intensity maximum sustained winds were at 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) and the minimum pressure of 938 mbar ( 27 @.@ 7 inHg ) . 
 After reaching peak intensity , Helene weakened as it tracked generally northward through the open Atlantic . By early on September 29 , Helene briefly restrengthened into a Category 2 hurricane and reached a secondary peak of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) . However , later that day , Helene weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane while accelerating to the northeast . At 1200 UTC on September 30 , Helene transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while centered well south of Iceland . The precursor tropical wave produced thunderstorms and gusty winds ranging between 23 and 34 mph ( 37 and 55 km / h ) in Cape Verde on September 17 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fifteen = = = 
 While Hurricane Helene was spinning in the central Atlantic , a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa in late September rapidly organized . On September 27 the storm became the fifteenth tropical depression of the season while it was about 265 mi ( 426 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Verde . The depression tracked westward at 15 to 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) but weakened rapidly . The next day it was downgraded to a tropical wave while still in the far eastern Atlantic , and never reformed in the Atlantic . Aside from a brief threat to the Cape Verde islands , the system remained far from any landmasses throughout its life . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Isaac = = = 
 Isaac moved off the coast of Africa on September 23 . It traveled westward at a low latitude along the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( or ITCZ ) , and its convection gradually grew more organized . On September 29 it was identified as Tropical Depression Sixteen about 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) southeast of Barbados . The westward path of the storm shifted two degrees northward , possibly as a result of the formation of a new center . On September 30 the depression was upgraded when an Air Force reconnaissance plane discovered tropical storm @-@ force winds . Westerly vertical wind shear prevented deep convection at the center of the storm . As Isaac approached the islands , northern parts of the Lesser Antilles were issued tropical storm warnings . Nevertheless , the storm lasted only a short time in the shearing environment . Isaac was downgraded to a depression on October 1 and completely dissipated shortly thereafter . The remnants of Isaac eventually regenerated in the eastern Pacific Ocean basin as Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E. 
 As a tropical cyclone , Isaac did not significantly affect land . However , the remnants dropped heavy rainfall across Trinidad and Tobago , causing flooding and mudslides that injured 20 people and left at least 30 homeless . Flash flooding in <unk> killed two people . Across the country , the storm damaged roads and bridges . 
 = = = Hurricane Joan = = = 
 On October 10 the 17th tropical depression of the season organized from a disturbance in the ITCZ . For the next two days the system traveled northwest while it strengthened into Tropical Storm Joan . After passing through the southern Lesser Antilles , Joan traveled westward along the South American coast as a minimal tropical storm . It crossed the Guajira Peninsula on October 17 and quickly attained hurricane strength just 30 mi ( 48 km ) from the coast . Hurricane Joan strengthened into a major hurricane on October 19 while drifting westward . The hurricane executed a tight cyclonic loop in which it weakened greatly but rapidly strengthened upon resuming its westward track . Joan reached its peak intensity just before making landfall near Bluefields , Nicaragua , on October 22 as a Category 4 hurricane . Joan at the time was the southernmost Category 4 hurricane ever recorded , but this record has since been broken by Hurricane Ivan . Joan remained well organized as it crossed Nicaragua and emerged in the eastern Pacific Ocean basin as Tropical Storm Miriam . Miriam gradually weakened until dissipating on November 2 . 
 Hurricane Joan killed 148 people in Nicaragua and 68 others in affected nations . The hurricane damage in Nicaragua amounted to half of the $ 2 billion ( 1988 USD ; $ 4 billion 2016 USD ) total . Joan also brought heavy rainfall and mudslides to countries along the extreme southern Caribbean . Its track along the northern coast of South America was very rare ; Joan was one of only a few Atlantic tropical cyclones to move in this way . Joan was also the first tropical cyclone to cross from the Atlantic basin since Hurricane Greta of 1978 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eighteen = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave that left the coast of Africa in early October tracked closely behind Hurricane Joan through the southern Caribbean . In an unusual occurrence the disturbance developed into the 18th tropical depression about 500 mi ( 800 km ) behind the powerful hurricane . An Air Force reconnaissance check of tropical weather on October 19 spotted the depression near Colombia 's Guajira Peninsula . Hurricane Joan 's small size allowed the depression to remain out @-@ of @-@ reach as it developed . However , the outflow of the hurricane sheared the depression and sapped its energy . The system gradually dissipated on October 21 while Joan was experiencing rapid strengthening just before its arrival on the coast of Nicaragua . The depression brought heavy rain to the Netherlands Antilles . News reports blamed Tropical Depression Eighteen and other tropical systems for bringing swarms of pink locusts from Africa to Trinidad and other Caribbean nations . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Keith = = = 
 The last storm of the season formed from a tropical wave on November 17 to the south of Haiti . It moved westward through the Caribbean Sea and became organized enough to attain tropical storm status on November 20 . Keith rapidly organized and peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) before making landfall on the northeastern portion of the Yucatán Peninsula on November 21 . An upper level trough forced it to the northeast , where upper @-@ level shear and cooler drier air weakened it to minimal storm strength in a pattern typical for November . Keith restrengthened over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico and struck near Sarasota , Florida , on November 23 . After crossing the state , it became extratropical on November 24 near Bermuda and became an intense extratropical system over the Atlantic with sustained winds of minimal hurricane force . 
 Early in its duration Keith produced moderate to heavy rainfall in Honduras , Jamaica , and Cuba . Minimal damage was reported in Mexico , still recovering from the devastating effects of Hurricane Gilbert two months earlier . Keith , the last of four named tropical cyclones to hit the United States during the season , produced moderate rainfall , a rough storm surge , and gusty winds across central Florida . Overall damage was widespread but fairly minor , totaling about $ 7 @.@ 3 million ( 1988 USD , $ 12 @.@ 7 million 2007 USD ) . Damage near the coast occurred mainly from storm surge and beach erosion , while damage further inland was limited to flooding and downed trees and power lines . No fatalities were reported . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1988 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1994 season . This is the same list used for the 1982 season . Storms were named Gilbert , Isaac , Joan , and Keith for the first time in 1988 . Florence and Helene were not used in 1982 but had been used in previous lists . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired two names in the spring of 1989 : Gilbert and Joan . They were replaced by Gordon and Joyce in the 1994 season . 
 = = Season impact = = 
 = The Fabian Strategy = 
 " The Fabian Strategy " is the first episode of the fifth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 81st overall episode of the series . It was directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , and written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on September 23 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Mario Brassard , Matt Damon , Jan Owen , Paula Pell , and Jeffrey <unk> . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) interferes in Liz Lemon 's ( Fey ) relationship with Carol ( Damon ) as he is determined to help Liz have a relationship that lasts for once . At the same time , Jack struggles to compromise with his girlfriend Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) as she redecorates his apartment . Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) has trouble coming to terms with Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) getting fired as an NBC page and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) becomes a producer of the fictional sketch comedy show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) . This episode also continued a story arc involving Carol as a love interest for Liz , which began in the previous episode , the season finale of the show 's fourth season " I Do Do " . 
 Before the airing , NBC moved the program to a new timeslot at 8 : 30 p.m. , moving it from its 9 : 30 p.m. slot . This episode of 30 Rock received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 5 @.@ 85 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , the head writer of the sketch show TGS with Tracy Jordan , goes back to work following the summer break and prepares for the show 's fifth season . At the 30 Rock building , where she works , Liz and TGS producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) meet their boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) to discuss cutting the show 's expenses . During the meeting , Pete reveals that star Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) now has a producer credit because of changes in her contract that were not set to start until the fifth season of TGS ( nobody thought that the show would last that long ) . Jenna takes this role seriously and takes on the job of firing people . Eventually , on reviewing the budget , she realizes that her producer credit is costly — and unnecessary — and asks Pete to fire her . 
 Later , Jack asks Liz about her relationship with her boyfriend Carol ( Matt Damon ) , an airline pilot . She tells him that during the summer break the two met twice a month in a hotel . Jack does not believe that the relationship is serious since Carol never stays at Liz 's apartment . He decides to force Carol to stay with Liz and reserves all the rooms of the hotel that Liz and Carol stay in when he is in New York . During his stay with Liz , Carol bursts into tears and asks her where their relationship is heading as he believes that she is resisting him , which she denies . The next day , Carol decides to leave New York early , but tells Liz that they need to work on their relationship . The two go their separate ways and agree to meet again on October 14 . 
 During the summer break , Jack 's girlfriend CNBC host Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) moved in with him . Avery decides to redecorate Jack 's apartment . He is not keen on the idea , but not wanting to say no or give into Avery 's demands , decides to employ the Fabian strategy — named after Fabius Maximus , a Roman general who employed a strategy of avoiding battles , instead wearing the enemy down by attrition . Jack is successful in avoiding redecorating the apartment ; he agrees to knock down a wall instead . At the end of the episode , however , he realizes that Avery has emulated the military genius of Hannibal , outmaneuvering his Fabian strategy , and he ecstatically realizes they are a perfect match , far beyond the level of mere soul @-@ mates . 
 Elsewhere , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is missing Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , a former NBC page who was fired in the previous episode , " I Do Do " . When Tracy returns to work for the new season of TGS , he begins to hallucinate Kenneth everywhere he goes , mistaking the new page ( Jeffrey <unk> ) and Liz for him . Later , Tracy roams the city and sees Kenneth , who is now working as a page at CBS . Tracy believes Kenneth is a hallucination . Later , the two run into each other again and Kenneth tries to talk to Tracy , but Tracy refuses to acknowledge him as he believes his mind is playing tricks on him . To prove he is real , Kenneth throws himself in front of a car , thus making Tracy believe him . He pleads with Kenneth to come back to NBC , but Kenneth says he is happy working at CBS . At the end of the credits , Kenneth admits to himself that he lied to Tracy and that he misses everyone at TGS . Kenneth then starts hallucinating Tracy . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Fabian Strategy " was written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , a long @-@ time television director who worked with Fey on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . This was Fey 's twenty @-@ second writing credit , and McCarthy @-@ Miller 's thirteenth helmed episode . " The Fabian Strategy " originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 23 , 2010 , as the season premiere episode of the show 's fifth season and the 81st overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on August 30 , 2010 . 
 In March 2010 , it was announced that actor Matt Damon would guest star on 30 Rock . He made his debut in the fourth season finale episode " I Do Do " as Carol , an airline pilot and love interest for Fey 's character , Liz Lemon , and reprised the role in " The Fabian Strategy " . In December 2009 , prior to the confirmation of his first guest appearance , Entertainment Weekly informed Damon that he was at the top of Fey 's guest star wish list for the show . A fan of the series , Damon replied " I would do [ 30 Rock ] in a heartbeat if they asked me to come on . She should call my people — or even better me . Or I could call her . Let 's make this happen . " A day after the airing of " I Do Do " he was asked if he would reprise his role as Carol in the upcoming season and responded " If they 'll have me , I would love to pop in and see the gang again . I had a great time doing it . " In August 2010 , Fey confirmed Damon 's return saying that he would play her boyfriend once the new season began . 
 Jane Krakowski , who plays Jenna Maroney , revealed to Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello her character 's plot in which Jenna becomes a television producer as part of her contract as TGS begins its fifth season . " [ Jenna ] has all these wacky things built into her contract [ that kick in at this point ] , because nobody thought we 'd still be on the air . So I get to be a producer . " Series producer Paula Pell reprised her role as Paula Hornberger , the wife of Scott Adsit 's character Pete Hornberger . The episode references the ongoing storyline of Liz 's desire to become a mother when she tells Carol that she is on a waiting list to adopt a child . This story first began in the show 's first season , and continued in the third season . 
 Two months after the airing of the fourth season finale episode , co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock was asked if Jack McBrayer 's character Kenneth Parcell would return in the upcoming season after he was fired as an NBC page in " I Do Do " . Carlock said " We haven 't cracked [ how ] he is getting [ his job ] back , but of course he will get back somehow . We wanted a fun thing to shuffle the deck a little bit and send him off into the world . Of course , he will miss it and he will be missed . Events will bring him back . " In " The Fabian Strategy " , Kenneth is now working at CBS as a page for the Late Show with David Letterman . The scene in which Kenneth throws himself in front of a car to prove to Tracy Jordan that he is real and not Tracy 's imagination was filmed on August 27 , 2010 , in front of the Ed Sullivan Theater . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the start of the episode , Liz says while sleeping , " No , Tom Jones , no ! " before waking up . This is a reference to a future plot in the episode " Reaganing " in which Liz is having intimacy issues because of a traumatic incident from her childhood that involved a poster of singer Tom Jones . Throughout the episode , Jack refers to the Fabian strategy , a strategy named after Roman general Fabius Maximus , which avoids direct battle in favor of attrition warfare . Jack uses the strategy as he does not want to say no to Avery or give in to her demands . In addition , Jack hails Fabius Maximus as his role model . When Carol surprises Liz at the TGS writers ' room , staff writer J.D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) asks Carol if he is on Facebook , the latter being a social networking website . Later , Liz tells Jack not to interfere in her relationship with Carol , as she believes she has the perfect relationship with him . She reveals that she is modeling her life on that of chef Ina Garten of the Food Network show Barefoot Contessa . Jack responds by saying that Liz will never be like Garten , including the " barefoot " part , referring to the fact that Liz has never let anyone see her feet , which is a real life trait of Fey 's . 
 Liz and Carol discover that one of the things they have in common is that they both love to watch The Muppets presenting award shows . Later , Liz reveals that she has a Life Alert Emergency Response necklace ; this necklace helps the elderly contact emergency services in case of an accident . Carol wonders why Geico — an auto insurance company — has multiple mascots , a reference to Geico 's advertising campaigns . Jack plans to seduce the gay interior designer that Avery hired and hopes to get the designer to agree with him to leave the apartment the way it is , explaining to Liz " Do you know what a prize I am in the gay community ? There 's a term for it . I 'm a bear . And I 'm a daddy . I 'm a daddy bear . " Before parting ways , Liz says to Carol " See you October 14 " , a reference to the live episode of 30 Rock entitled " Live Show " that aired on October 14 , 2010 . 
 30 Rock and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip — both of which debuted on 2006 – 07 NBC lineup — revolved around the off @-@ camera happenings on a sketch comedy series . Evidence of the overlapping subject matter between the shows , as well as the conflict between them , arose when Aaron Sorkin , the creator of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , asked Lorne Michaels to allow him to observe Saturday Night Live for a week , a request Michaels , the creator of Saturday Night Live and executive producer of 30 Rock , denied . Despite this , Sorkin sent Fey flowers after NBC announced it would pick up both programs , and wished her luck with 30 Rock . Fey succeeded where Sorkin did not when Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip was canceled after one season and 30 Rock was renewed for a second . Though 30 Rock 's first season ratings proved lackluster and were lower than those of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , the latter was more expensive to produce . In the ending sequence of " The Fabian Strategy " , Kenneth watches the credits for TGS , which include Ricky Tahoe and Ronnie Oswald as writers , the two former head writers on Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Before the airing of this episode , NBC unveiled its 2010 – 11 primetime schedule in May 2010 with the network moving the program from the 9 : 30 p.m. time to the 8 : 30 p.m. timeslot . According to the Nielsen Media Research , this episode of 30 Rock was watched by 5 @.@ 85 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . A contributor from Variety reported that Community , an NBC show that airs at 8 : 00 p.m. , and 30 Rock " held up nicely " in their respective timeslots and that the two programs " were up over last year 's opening Thursday hour for NBC in premiere week . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin reported that past season premieres of 30 Rock had a solid track record as being the worst episodes of the season , nonetheless Rabin found " The Fabian Strategy " hilarious and breaking that barrier . He wrote that Matt Damon has been great on the show as Carol ; however , his only complaint was Carol 's character flaw as being too sensitive . Rabin , who has complained " extensively " about Jenna 's character in the past , said the character was in " fine form " in her role as a TGS producer . Rabin gave the episode an A- grade rating . Bob Sassone of TV Squad deemed this episode a " solid season @-@ opener " that featured " lots of great lines and plot development " . Meredith Blake , a contributor from the Los Angeles Times , was thrilled that the Jack and Avery relationship " not only lasted the summer , but is thriving " , and wrote that she was looking forward to the pregnancy storyline involving Avery . Blake noted that Damon 's character was " darn @-@ near perfect , by which I mean ' a male version of Liz . ' " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for HitFix said that " The Fabian Strategy " did not " live up to the good old days " of past episodes , nonetheless reported that he " laughed enough " and was pleased with the direction the show took Liz and Carol 's relationship . Sepinwall did not like Tracy and Kenneth 's story , calling it a complete miss , but was appreciative of the other storylines , choosing Pete and Jenna 's as his favorite . Alessandra Stanley from The New York Times was positive about Damon 's role on the show , noting that he has been a " hoot " . Scott Eidler of The Cornell Daily Sun commented that the episode was a " nice start to the [ fifth ] season " of 30 Rock as it was " perhaps more plot @-@ driven than packed with the emotional and uproariously funny episodes that concluded last season . " Eidler commented that " The Fabian Strategy " never did " [ reach ] the utter <unk> of last season , but I hope that wasn 't the climax ... and it can eventually return to its previous heights of hilarity " . TV Guide 's Bruce Fretts was complimentary towards Damon 's role as Tina Fey 's love interest , writing that Damon " showed a refreshingly silly side in keeping with 30 Rock 's anything @-@ goes spirit . " Matt <unk> of The Huffington Post called the premiere " a very solid first episode " , enjoying Damon 's part on the show and the Kenneth story of him still being fired by NBC . 
 Time contributor James Poniewozik reported that the Pete / Jenna and Tracy / Kenneth plots were a " hit @-@ and @-@ miss " , however noted it was good to see the show giving the Jack and Liz characters " ongoing direction , not just in their personal lives " . The Atlantic 's <unk> Smith was skeptical about Liz and Carol 's relationship lasting , saying that Damon " who commands more than $ 20 million per movie , won 't stick around for long , leaving Liz Lemon Carol @-@ less and in for another round of the entertaining self @-@ loathing that we 've all been coming back for four seasons . " 
 = Vannevar Bush = 
 Vannevar Bush ( / <unk> / van @-@ NEE @-@ var ; March 11 , 1890 – June 28 , 1974 ) was an American engineer , inventor and science administrator , who during World War II headed the U.S. Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , through which almost all wartime military R & D was carried out , including initiation and early administration of the Manhattan Project . He is also known in engineering for his work on analog computers , for founding Raytheon , and for the memex , a hypothetical adjustable microfilm viewer with a structure analogous to that of hypertext . In 1945 , Bush published the essay " As We May Think " in which he predicted that " wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear , ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them , ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified " . The memex influenced generations of computer scientists , who drew inspiration from its vision of the future . He was chiefly responsible for the movement that led to the creation of the National Science Foundation . 
 For his master 's thesis , Bush invented and patented a " profile tracer " , a mapping device for assisting surveyors . It was the first of a string of inventions . He joined the Department of Electrical Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) in 1919 , and founded the company now known as Raytheon in 1922 . Starting in 1927 , Bush constructed a differential analyzer , an analog computer with some digital components that could solve differential equations with as many as 18 independent variables . An offshoot of the work at MIT by Bush and others was the beginning of digital circuit design theory . Bush became vice president of MIT and dean of the MIT School of Engineering in 1932 , and president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in 1938 . 
 Bush was appointed to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ( NACA ) in 1938 , and soon became its chairman . As chairman of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , and later director of OSRD , Bush coordinated the activities of some six thousand leading American scientists in the application of science to warfare . Bush was a well @-@ known <unk> and public intellectual during World War II , when he was in effect the first presidential science advisor . As head of NDRC and OSRD , he initiated the Manhattan Project , and ensured that it received top priority from the highest levels of government . In Science , The Endless Frontier , his 1945 report to the President of the United States , Bush called for an expansion of government support for science , and he pressed for the creation of the National Science Foundation . 
 = = Early life and work = = 
 Vannevar Bush was born in Everett , Massachusetts , on March 11 , 1890 , the third child and only son of Perry Bush , the local Universalist pastor , and his wife Emma Linwood née Paine . He had two older sisters , Edith and Reba . He was named after John Vannevar , an old friend of the family who had attended Tufts College with Perry . The family moved to Chelsea , Massachusetts , in 1892 , and Bush graduated from Chelsea High School in 1909 . He then attended Tufts , like his father before him . A popular student , he was vice president of his sophomore class , and president of his junior class . During his senior year , he managed the football team . He became a member of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity , and dated Phoebe Clara Davis , who also came from Chelsea . Tufts allowed students to gain a master 's degree in four years simultaneously with a bachelor 's degree , so for his master 's thesis , Bush invented and patented a " profile tracer " . This was a device for assisting surveyors that looked like a lawn mower . It had two bicycle wheels , and a pen that plotted the terrain over which it traveled . It was the first of a string of inventions . On graduation in 1913 he received both bachelor of science and master of science degrees . 
 After graduation , Bush worked at General Electric ( GE ) in Schenectady , New York , for $ 14 a week . As a " test man " , his job was to assess equipment to ensure that it was safe . He transferred to GE 's plant in Pittsfield , Massachusetts , to work on high voltage transformers , but after a fire broke out at the plant , Bush and the other test men were suspended . He returned to Tufts in October 1914 to teach mathematics , and spent the 1915 summer break working at the Brooklyn Navy Yard as an electrical inspector . He was awarded a $ 1 @,@ 500 scholarship to study at Clark University as a doctoral student of Arthur Gordon Webster , but Webster wanted Bush to study acoustics . Bush preferred to quit rather than study a subject that did not interest him , and he subsequently enrolled in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) electrical engineering program . Spurred by the need for enough financial security to marry , he submitted his thesis , entitled Oscillating @-@ Current Circuits : An Extension of the Theory of Generalized Angular <unk> , with Applications to the Coupled Circuit and the Artificial Transmission Line , in April 1916 . His adviser , Arthur Edwin Kennelly , tried to demand more work from him , but Bush refused , and Kennelly was overruled by the department chairman ; Bush received his doctorate in engineering jointly from MIT and Harvard University . He married Phoebe in August 1916 . Their marriage produced two sons : Richard Davis Bush and John Hathaway Bush . 
 Bush accepted a job with Tufts , where he became involved with the American Radio and Research Corporation ( AMRAD ) , which began broadcasting music from the campus on March 8 , 1916 . The station owner , Harold Power , hired him to run the company 's laboratory , at a salary greater than that which Bush drew from Tufts . In 1917 , following the United States ' entry into World War I , he went to work with the National Research Council . He attempted to develop a means of detecting submarines by measuring the disturbance in the Earth 's magnetic field . His device worked as designed , but only from a wooden ship ; attempts to get it to work on a metal ship such as a destroyer failed . 
 Bush left Tufts in 1919 , although he remained employed by AMRAD , and joined the Department of Electrical Engineering at MIT , where he worked under Dugald C. Jackson . In 1922 , he collaborated with fellow MIT professor William H. <unk> on Principles of Electrical Engineering , an introductory textbook . AMRAD 's lucrative contracts from World War I had been cancelled , and Bush attempted to reverse the company 's fortunes by developing a <unk> switch invented by Al Spencer , an AMRAD technician , on his own time . AMRAD 's management was not interested in the device , but had no objection to its sale . Bush found backing from Laurence K. Marshall and Richard S. Aldrich to create the Spencer <unk> Company , which hired Bush as a consultant . The new company soon had revenues in excess of a million dollars . It merged with General Plate Company to form Metals & Controls Corporation in 1931 , and with Texas Instruments in 1959 . Texas Instruments sold it to Bain Capital in 2006 , and it became a separate company again as <unk> Technologies in 2010 . 
 In 1924 , Bush and Marshall teamed up with physicist Charles G. Smith , who had invented a device called the S @-@ tube . This enabled radios , which had previously required two different types of batteries , to operate from mains power . Marshall raised $ 25 @,@ 000 to set up the American Appliance Company on July 7 , 1922 , to market the invention , with Bush and Smith among its five directors . The venture made Bush wealthy , and the company , now known as Raytheon , ultimately became a large electronics company and defense contractor . 
 Starting in 1927 , Bush constructed a differential analyzer , an analog computer that could solve differential equations with as many as 18 independent variables . This invention arose from previous work performed by Herbert R. Stewart , one of Bush 's masters students , who at Bush 's suggestion created the <unk> , a device for solving first @-@ order differential equations , in 1925 . Another student , Harold Hazen , proposed extending the device to handle second @-@ order differential equations . Bush immediately realized the potential of such an invention , for these were much more difficult to solve , but also quite common in physics . Under Bush 's supervision , Hazen was able to construct the differential analyzer , a table @-@ like array of shafts and pens that mechanically simulated and plotted the desired equation . Unlike earlier designs that were purely mechanical , the differential analyzer had both electrical and mechanical components . Among the engineers who made use of the differential analyzer was General Electric 's Edith Clarke , who used it to solve problems relating to electric power transmission . For developing the differential analyzer , Bush was awarded the Franklin Institute 's Louis E. Levy Medal in 1928 . 
 An offshoot of the work at MIT was the beginning of digital circuit design theory by one of Bush 's graduate students , Claude Shannon . Working on the analytical engine , Shannon described the application of Boolean algebra to electronic circuits in his landmark master 's thesis , A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits . In 1935 , Bush was approached by OP @-@ 20 @-@ G , which was searching for an electronic device to aid in codebreaking . Bush was paid a $ 10 @,@ 000 fee to design the Rapid Analytical Machine ( RAM ) . The project went over budget and was not delivered until 1938 , when it was found to be unreliable in service . Nonetheless , it was an important step toward creating such a device . 
 The reform of the administration of MIT began in 1930 with the appointment of Karl T. Compton as president . Bush and Compton soon clashed over the issue of limiting the amount of outside consultancy by professors , a battle Bush quickly lost , but the two men soon built a solid professional relationship . Compton appointed Bush to the newly created post of vice president in 1932 . That year Bush also became the dean of the MIT School of Engineering . The two positions came with a salary of $ 12 @,@ 000 plus $ 6 @,@ 000 for expenses per annum . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Carnegie Institution for Science = = = 
 In May 1938 , Bush accepted a prestigious appointment as president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington ( CIW ) , which had been founded in Washington , D.C. Also known as the Carnegie Institution for Science , it had an endowment of $ 33 million , and annually spent $ 1 @.@ 5 million in research , most of which was carried out at its eight major laboratories . Bush became its president on January 1 , 1939 , with a salary of $ 25 @,@ 000 . He was now able to influence research policy in the United States at the highest level , and could informally advise the government on scientific matters . Bush soon discovered that the CIW had serious financial problems , and he had to ask the Carnegie Corporation for additional funding . 
 Bush clashed over leadership of the institute with Cameron Forbes , CIW 's chairman of the board , and with his predecessor , John Merriam , who continued to offer unwanted advice . A major embarrassment to them all was Harry H. Laughlin , the head of the Eugenics Record Office , whose activities Merriam had attempted to curtail without success . Bush made it a priority to remove him , regarding him as a scientific fraud , and one of his first acts was to ask for a review of Laughlin 's work . In June 1938 , Bush asked Laughlin to retire , offering him an annuity , which Laughlin reluctantly accepted . The Eugenics Record Office was renamed the Genetics Record Office , its funding was drastically cut , and it was closed completely in 1944 . Senator Robert Reynolds attempted to get Laughlin reinstated , but Bush informed the trustees that an inquiry into Laughlin would " show him to be physically incapable of directing an office , and an investigation of his scientific standing would be equally conclusive . " 
 Bush wanted the institute to concentrate on hard science . He gutted Carnegie 's archeology program , setting the field back many years in the United States . He saw little value in the humanities and social sciences , and slashed funding for Isis , a journal dedicated to the history of science and technology and its cultural influence . Bush later explained that " I have a great reservation about these studies where somebody goes out and interviews a bunch of people and reads a lot of stuff and writes a book and puts it on a shelf and nobody ever reads it . " 
 = = = National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics = = = 
 On August 23 , 1938 , Bush was appointed to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ( NACA ) , the predecessor of NASA . Its chairman Joseph Sweetman Ames became ill , and Bush , as vice chairman , soon had to act in his place . In December 1938 , NACA asked for $ 11 million to establish a new aeronautical research laboratory in Sunnyvale , California , to supplement the existing Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory . The California location was chosen for its proximity to some of the largest aviation corporations . This decision was supported by the chief of the United States Army Air Corps , Major General Henry H. Arnold , and by the head of the navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics , Rear Admiral Arthur B. Cook , who between them were planning to spend $ 225 million on new aircraft in the year ahead . However , Congress was not convinced of its value , and Bush had to appear before the Senate Appropriations Committee on April 5 , 1939 . It was a frustrating experience for Bush , since he had never appeared before Congress before , and the senators were not swayed by his arguments . Further lobbying was required before funding for the new center , now known as the Ames Research Center , was finally approved . By this time , war had broken out in Europe , and the inferiority of American aircraft engines was apparent , in particular the Allison V @-@ 1710 which performed poorly at high altitudes and had to be removed from the P @-@ 51 Mustang in favor of the British Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin engine . The NACA asked for funding to build a third center in Ohio , which became the Glenn Research Center . Following Ames 's retirement in October 1939 , Bush became chairman of the NACA , with George J. Mead as his deputy . Bush remained a member of the NACA until November 1948 . 
 = = = National Defense Research Committee = = = 
 During World War I , Bush had become aware of poor cooperation between civilian scientists and the military . Concerned about the lack of coordination in scientific research and the requirements of defense mobilization , Bush proposed the creation of a general directive agency in the federal government , which he discussed with his colleagues . He had the secretary of NACA prepare a draft of the proposed National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) to be presented to Congress , but after the Germans invaded France in May 1940 , Bush decided speed was important and approached President Franklin D. Roosevelt directly . Through the President 's uncle , Frederic Delano , Bush managed to set up a meeting with Roosevelt on June 12 , 1940 , to which he brought a single sheet of paper describing the agency . Roosevelt approved the proposal in 15 minutes , writing " OK – FDR " on the sheet . 
 With Bush as chairman , the NDRC was functioning even before the agency was officially established by order of the Council of National Defense on June 27 , 1940 . The organization operated financially on a hand @-@ to @-@ mouth basis with monetary support from the president 's emergency fund . Bush appointed four leading scientists to the NDRC : Karl T. Compton ( president of MIT ) , James B. Conant ( president of Harvard University ) , Frank B. Jewett ( president of the National Academy of Sciences and chairman of the Board of Directors of Bell Laboratories ) , and Richard C. Tolman ( dean of the graduate school at Caltech ) ; Rear Admiral Harold G. Bowen , Sr. and Brigadier General George V. Strong represented the military . The civilians already knew each other well , which allowed the organization to begin functioning straight away . The NDRC established itself in the administration building at the Carnegie Institution of Washington . Each member of the committee was assigned an area of responsibility , while Bush handled coordination . A small number of projects reported to him directly , such as the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee . Compton 's deputy , Alfred Loomis , said that " of the men whose death in the summer of 1940 would have been the greatest calamity for America , the President is first , and Dr. Bush would be second or third . " 
 Bush was fond of saying that " if he made any important contribution to the war effort at all , it would be to get the Army and Navy to tell each other what they were doing . " He established a cordial relationship with Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , and Stimson 's assistant , Harvey H. Bundy , who found Bush " impatient " and " vain " , but said he was " one of the most important , able men I ever knew " . Bush 's relationship with the navy was more turbulent . Bowen , the director of the Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) , saw the NDRC as a bureaucratic rival , and recommended abolishing it . A series of bureaucratic battles ended with the NRL placed under the Bureau of Ships , and Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox placing an unsatisfactory fitness report in Bowen 's personnel file . After the war , Bowen would again try to create a rival to the NDRC inside the navy . 
 On August 31 , 1940 , Bush met with Henry Tizard , and arranged a series of meetings between the NDRC and the Tizard Mission , a British scientific delegation . At a meeting On September 19 , 1940 , the Americans described Loomis and Compton 's microwave research . They had an experimental 10 cm wavelength short wave radar , but admitted that it did not have enough power and that they were at a dead end . Taffy Bowen and John Cockcroft of the Tizard Mission then produced a cavity magnetron , a device far in advance of anything the Americans had ever seen , with an amazing power output of around 10 KW at 10 cm , enough to spot the periscope of a surfaced submarine at night from an aircraft . To exploit the invention , Bush decided to create a special laboratory . The NDRC allocated the new laboratory a budget of $ 455 @,@ 000 for its first year . Loomis suggested that the lab should be run by the Carnegie Institution , but Bush convinced him that it would best be run by MIT . The Radiation Laboratory , as it came to be known , tested its airborne radar from an Army B @-@ 18 on March 27 , 1941 . By mid @-@ 1941 , it had developed SCR @-@ 584 radar , a mobile radar fire control system for antiaircraft guns . 
 In September 1940 , Norbert Wiener approached Bush with a proposal to build a digital computer . Bush declined to provide NDRC funding for it on the grounds that he did not believe that it could be completed before the end of the war . The supporters of digital computers were disappointed at the decision , which they attributed to a preference for outmoded analog technology . In June 1943 , the Army provided $ 500 @,@ 000 to build the computer , which became ENIAC , the first general @-@ purpose electronic computer . Having delayed its funding , Bush 's prediction proved correct as ENIAC was not completed until December 1945 , after the war had ended . His critics saw his attitude as a failure of vision . 
 = = = Office of Scientific Research and Development = = = 
 On June 28 , 1941 , Roosevelt established the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) with the signing of Executive Order 8807 . Bush became director of the OSRD while Conant succeeded him as chairman of the NDRC , which was subsumed into the OSRD . The OSRD was on a firmer financial footing than the NDRC since it received funding from Congress , and had the resources and the authority to develop weapons and technologies with or without the military . Furthermore , the OSRD had a broader mandate than the NDRC , moving into additional areas such as medical research and the mass production of penicillin and <unk> drugs . The organization grew to 850 full @-@ time employees , and produced between 30 @,@ 000 and 35 @,@ 000 reports . The OSRD was involved in some 2 @,@ 500 contracts , worth in excess of $ 536 million . 
 Bush 's method of management at the OSRD was to direct overall policy , while delegating supervision of divisions to qualified colleagues and letting them do their jobs without interference . He attempted to interpret the mandate of the OSRD as narrowly as possible to avoid overtaxing his office and to prevent duplicating the efforts of other agencies . Bush would often ask : " Will it help to win a war ; this war ? " Other challenges involved obtaining adequate funds from the president and Congress and determining apportionment of research among government , academic , and industrial facilities . His most difficult problems , and also greatest successes , were keeping the confidence of the military , which distrusted the ability of civilians to observe security regulations and devise practical solutions , and opposing conscription of young scientists into the armed forces . This became especially difficult as the army 's manpower crisis really began to bite in 1944 . In all , the OSRD requested deferments for some 9 @,@ 725 employees of OSRD contractors , of which all but 63 were granted . In his obituary , The New York Times described Bush as " a master craftsman at steering around obstacles , whether they were technical or political or bull @-@ headed generals and admirals . " 
 = = = = Proximity fuze = = = = 
 In August 1940 , the NDRC began work on a proximity fuze , a fuze inside an artillery shell that would explode when it came close to its target . A radar set , along with the batteries to power it , was miniaturized to fit inside a shell , and its glass vacuum tubes designed to withstand the 20 @,@ 000 g @-@ force of being fired from a gun and 500 rotations per second in flight . Unlike normal radar , the proximity fuze sent out a continuous signal rather than short pulses . The NDRC created a special Section T chaired by Merle Tuve of the CIW , with Commander William S. Parsons as special assistant to Bush and liaison between the NDRC and the Navy 's Bureau of Ordnance ( BuOrd ) . One of CIW staff members that Tuve recruited to Section T in 1940 was James Van Allen . In April 1942 , Bush placed Section T directly under the OSRD , and Parsons in charge . The research effort remained under Tuve but moved to the Johns Hopkins University 's Applied Physics Laboratory ( APL ) , where Parsons was BuOrd 's representative . In August 1942 , a live firing test was conducted with the newly commissioned cruiser USS Cleveland ; three pilotless drones were shot down in succession . 
 To preserve the secret of the proximity fuze , its use was initially permitted only over water , where a dud round could not fall into enemy hands . In late 1943 , the Army obtained permission to use the weapon over land . The proximity fuze proved particularly effective against the V @-@ 1 flying bomb over England , and later Antwerp , in 1944 . A version was also developed for use with howitzers against ground targets . Bush met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October 1944 to press for its use , arguing that the Germans would be unable to copy and produce it before the war was over . Eventually , the Joint Chiefs agreed to allow its employment from December 25 . In response to the German Ardennes Offensive on December 16 , 1944 , the immediate use of the proximity fuze was authorized , and it went into action with deadly effect . By the end of 1944 , VT fuzes were coming off the production lines at the rate of 40 @,@ 000 per day . " If one looks at the proximity fuze program as a whole , " historian James Phinney Baxter III wrote , " the magnitude and complexity of the effort rank it among the three or four most extraordinary scientific achievements of the war . " 
 The German V @-@ 1 flying bomb demonstrated a serious omission in OSRD 's portfolio : guided missiles . While the OSRD had some success developing unguided rockets , it had nothing comparable to the V @-@ 1 , the V @-@ 2 or the Henschel Hs 293 air @-@ to @-@ ship gliding guided bomb . Although the United States trailed the Germans and Japanese in several areas , this represented an entire field that had been left to the enemy . Bush did not seek the advice of Dr. Robert H. Goddard . Goddard would come to be regarded as America 's pioneer of rocketry , but many contemporaries regarded him as a crank . Before the war , Bush had gone on the record as saying , " I don 't understand how a serious scientist or engineer can play around with rockets " , but in May 1944 , he was forced to travel to London to warn General Dwight Eisenhower of the danger posed by the V @-@ 1 and V @-@ 2 . Bush could only recommend that the launch sites be bombed , which was done . 
 = = = = Manhattan Project = = = = 
 Bush played a critical role in persuading the United States government to undertake a crash program to create an atomic bomb . When the NDRC was formed , the Committee on Uranium was placed under it , reporting directly to Bush as the Uranium Committee . Bush reorganized the committee , strengthening its scientific component by adding Tuve , George B. Pegram , Jesse W. Beams , Ross Gunn and Harold Urey . When the OSRD was formed in June 1941 , the Uranium Committee was again placed directly under Bush . For security reasons , its name was soon changed to the S @-@ 1 Section . 
 Bush met with Roosevelt and Vice President Henry A. Wallace on October 9 , 1941 , to discuss the project . He briefed Roosevelt on Tube Alloys , the British atomic bomb project and its Maud Committee , which had concluded that an atomic bomb was feasible , and on the German nuclear energy project , about which little was known . Roosevelt approved and expedited the atomic program . To control it , he created a Top Policy Group consisting of himself — although he never attended a meeting — Wallace , Bush , Conant , Stimson and the Chief of Staff of the Army , General George Marshall . On Bush 's advice , Roosevelt chose the army to run the project rather than the navy , although the navy had shown far more interest in the field , and was already conducting research into atomic energy for powering ships . Bush 's negative experiences with the Navy had convinced him that it would not listen to his advice , and could not handle large @-@ scale construction projects . 
 In March 1942 , Bush sent a report to Roosevelt outlining work by Robert Oppenheimer on the nuclear cross section of uranium @-@ 235 . Oppenheimer 's calculations , which Bush had George Kistiakowsky check , estimated that the critical mass of a sphere of uranium @-@ 235 was in the range of 2 @.@ 5 to 5 kilograms , with a destructive power of around 2 @,@ 000 tons of TNT . Moreover , it appeared that plutonium might be even more fissile . After conferring with Brigadier General Lucius D. Clay about the construction requirements , Bush drew up a submission for $ 85 million in fiscal year 1943 for four pilot plants , which he forwarded to Roosevelt on June 17 , 1942 . With the Army on board , Bush moved to streamline oversight of the project by the OSRD , replacing the S @-@ 1 Section with a new S @-@ 1 Executive Committee . 
 Bush soon became dissatisfied with the dilatory way the project was run , with its indecisiveness over the selection of sites for the pilot plants . He was particularly disturbed at the allocation of an AA @-@ 3 priority , which would delay completion of the pilot plants by three months . Bush complained about these problems to Bundy and Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson . Major General Brehon B. Somervell , the commander of the army 's Services of Supply , appointed Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves as project director in September . Within days of taking over , Groves approved the proposed site at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , and obtained a AAA priority . At a meeting in Stimson 's office on September 23 attended by Bundy , Bush , Conant , Groves , Marshall Somervell and Stimson , Bush put forward his proposal for steering the project by a small committee answerable to the Top Policy Group . The meeting agreed with Bush , and created a Military Policy Committee chaired by him , with Somervell 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer , representing the army , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell representing the navy . 
 At the meeting with Roosevelt on October 9 , 1941 , Bush advocated cooperating with the United Kingdom , and he began corresponding with his British counterpart , Sir John Anderson . But by October 1942 , Conant and Bush agreed that a joint project would pose security risks and be more complicated to manage . Roosevelt approved a Military Policy Committee recommendation stating that information given to the British should be limited to technologies that they were actively working on and should not extend to post @-@ war developments . In July 1943 , on a visit to London to learn about British progress on antisubmarine technology , Bush , Stimson and Bundy met with Anderson , Lord Cherwell and Winston Churchill at 10 Downing Street . At the meeting , Churchill forcefully pressed for a renewal of interchange , while Bush defended current policy . Only when he returned to Washington did he discover that Roosevelt had agreed with the British . The Quebec Agreement merged the two atomic bomb projects , creating the Combined Policy Committee with Stimson , Bush and Conant as United States representatives . 
 Bush appeared on the cover of Time magazine on April 3 , 1944 . He toured the Western Front in October 1944 , and spoke to ordnance officers , but no senior commander would meet with him . He was able to meet with Samuel Goudsmit and other members of the Alsos Mission , who assured him that there was no danger from the German project ; he conveyed this assessment to Lieutenant General Bedell Smith . In May 1945 , Bush became part of the Interim Committee formed to advise the new president , Harry S. Truman , on nuclear weapons . It advised that the atomic bomb should be used against an industrial target in Japan as soon as possible and without warning . Bush was present at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range on July 16 , 1945 , for the Trinity nuclear test , the first detonation of an atomic bomb . Afterwards , he took his hat off to Oppenheimer in tribute . 
 In " As We May Think " , an essay published by the Atlantic Monthly in July 1945 , Bush wrote : " This has not been a scientist 's war ; it has been a war in which all have had a part . The scientists , burying their old professional competition in the demand of a common cause , have shared greatly and learned much . It has been exhilarating to work in effective partnership . " 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 = = = <unk> concept = = = 
 Bush introduced the concept of the memex during the 1930s , which he imagined as a form of memory augmentation involving a microfilm @-@ based " device in which an individual stores all his books , records , and communications , and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility . It is an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory . " He wanted the memex to emulate the way the brain links data by association rather than by indexes and traditional , hierarchical storage paradigms , and be easily accessed as " a future device for individual use ... a sort of mechanized private file and library " in the shape of a desk . The memex was also intended as a tool to study the brain itself . 
 After thinking about the potential of augmented memory for several years , Bush set out his thoughts at length in " As We May Think " , predicting that " wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear , ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them , ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified " . A few months later , Life magazine published a condensed version of " As We May Think " , accompanied by several illustrations showing the possible appearance of a memex machine and its companion devices . 
 Shortly after " As We May Think " was originally published , Douglas Engelbart read it , and with Bush 's visions in mind , commenced work that would later lead to the invention of the mouse . Ted Nelson , who coined the terms " hypertext " and " <unk> " , was also greatly influenced by Bush 's essay . 
 " As We May Think " has turned out to be a visionary and influential essay . In their introduction to a paper discussing information literacy as a discipline , Bill Johnston and Sheila Webber wrote in 2005 that 
 Bush 's paper might be regarded as describing a microcosm of the information society , with the boundaries tightly drawn by the interests and experiences of a major scientist of the time , rather than the more open knowledge spaces of the 21st century . Bush provides a core vision of the importance of information to industrial / scientific society , using the image of an " information explosion " arising from the unprecedented demands on scientific production and technological application of World War II . He outlines a version of information science as a key discipline within the practice of scientific and technical knowledge domains . His view encompasses the problems of information overload and the need to devise efficient mechanisms to control and channel information for use . 
 Bush was concerned that information overload might inhibit the research efforts of scientists . Looking to the future , he predicted a time when " there is a growing mountain of research . But there is increased evidence that we are being bogged down today as specialization extends . The investigator is staggered by the findings and conclusions of thousands of other workers . " 
 = = = National Science Foundation = = = 
 The OSRD continued to function actively until some time after the end of hostilities , but by 1946 – 47 it had been reduced to a minimal staff charged with finishing work remaining from the war period ; Bush was calling for its closure even before the war had ended . During the war , the OSRD had issued contracts as it had seen fit , with just eight organizations accounting for half of its spending . MIT was the largest to receive funds , with its obvious ties to Bush and his close associates . Efforts to obtain legislation exempting the OSRD from the usual government conflict of interest regulations failed , leaving Bush and other OSRD principals open to prosecution . Bush therefore pressed for OSRD to be wound up as soon as possible . 
 With its dissolution , Bush and others had hoped that an equivalent peacetime government research and development agency would replace the OSRD . Bush felt that basic research was important to national survival for both military and commercial reasons , requiring continued government support for science and technology ; technical superiority could be a deterrent to future enemy aggression . In Science , The Endless Frontier , a July 1945 report to the president , Bush maintained that basic research was " the pacemaker of technological progress " . " New products and new processes do not appear full @-@ grown , " Bush wrote in the report . " They are founded on new principles and new conceptions , which in turn are painstakingly developed by research in the purest realms of science ! " In Bush 's view , the " purest realms " were the physical and medical sciences ; he did not propose funding the social sciences . In Science , The Endless Frontier , science historian Daniel <unk> later wrote , Bush " insisted upon the principle of Federal patronage for the advancement of knowledge in the United States , a departure that came to govern Federal science policy after World War II . " 
 In July 1945 , the Kilgore bill was introduced in Congress , proposing the appointment and removal of a single science administrator by the president , with emphasis on applied research , and a patent clause favoring a government monopoly . In contrast , the competing Magnuson bill was similar to Bush 's proposal to vest control in a panel of top scientists and civilian administrators with the executive director appointed by them . The Magnuson bill emphasized basic research and protected private patent rights . A compromise Kilgore – Magnuson bill of February 1946 passed the Senate but expired in the House because Bush favored a competing bill that was a virtual duplicate of the original Magnuson bill . A Senate bill was introduced in February 1947 to create the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) to replace the OSRD . This bill favored most of the features advocated by Bush , including the controversial administration by an autonomous scientific board . The bill passed the Senate and the House , but was pocket vetoed by Truman on August 6 , on the grounds that the administrative officers were not properly responsible to either the president or Congress . The OSRD was abolished without a successor organization on December 31 , 1947 . 
 Without a National Science Foundation , the military stepped in , with the Office of Naval Research ( ONR ) filling the gap . The war had accustomed many scientists to working without the budgetary constraints imposed by pre @-@ war universities . Bush helped create the Joint Research and Development Board ( <unk> ) of the Army and Navy , of which he was chairman . With passage of the National Security Act on July 26 , 1947 , the <unk> became the Research and Development Board ( RDB ) . Its role was to promote research through the military until a bill creating the National Science Foundation finally became law . By 1953 , the Department of Defense was spending $ 1 @.@ 6 billion a year on research ; physicists were spending 70 percent of their time on defense related research , and 98 percent of the money spent on physics came from either the Department of Defense or the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , which took over from the Manhattan Project on January 1 , 1947 . Legislation to create the National Science Foundation finally passed through Congress and was signed into law by Truman in 1950 . 
 The authority that Bush had as chairman of the RDB was much different from the power and influence he enjoyed as director of OSRD and would have enjoyed in the agency he had hoped would be independent of the Executive branch and Congress . He was never happy with the position and resigned as chairman of the RDB after a year , but remained on the oversight committee . He continued to be skeptical about rockets and missiles , writing in his 1949 book , Modern Arms and Free Men , that intercontinental ballistic missiles would not be technically feasible " for a long time to come ... if ever " . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 With Truman as president , men like John R. Steelman , who was appointed chairman of the President 's Scientific Research Board in October 1946 , came to prominence . Bush 's authority , both among scientists and politicians , suffered a rapid decline , though he remained a revered figure . In September 1949 , he was appointed to head a scientific panel that included Oppenheimer to review the evidence that the Soviet Union had tested its first atomic bomb . The panel concluded that it had , and this finding was relayed to Truman , who made the public announcement . Bush was outraged when a security hearing stripped Oppenheimer of his security clearance in 1954 ; he issued a strident attack on Oppenheimer 's accusers in the The New York Times . Alfred Friendly summed up the feeling of many scientists in declaring that Bush had become " the Grand Old Man of American science " . 
 Bush continued to serve on the NACA through 1948 and expressed annoyance with aircraft companies for delaying development of a turbojet engine because of the huge expense of research and development as well as retooling from older piston engines . He was similarly disappointed with the automobile industry , which showed no interest in his proposals for more fuel @-@ efficient engines . General Motors told him that " even if it were a better engine , [ General Motors ] would not be interested in it . " Bush likewise deplored trends in advertising . " Madison Avenue believes , " he said , " that if you tell the public something absurd , but do it enough times , the public will ultimately register it in its stock of accepted <unk> . " 
 From 1947 to 1962 , Bush was on the board of directors for American Telephone and Telegraph . He retired as president of the Carnegie Institution and returned to Massachusetts in 1955 , but remained a director of Metals and Controls Corporation from 1952 to 1959 , and of Merck & Co. from 1949 to 1962 . Bush became chairman of the board at Merck following the death of George W. Merck , serving until 1962 . He worked closely with the company 's president , Max Tishler , although Bush was concerned about Tishler 's reluctance to delegate responsibility . Bush distrusted the company 's sales organization , but supported Tishler 's research and development efforts . He was a trustee of Tufts College from 1943 to 1962 , of Johns Hopkins University from 1943 to 1955 , of the Carnegie Corporation of New York from 1939 to 1950 , the Carnegie Institution of Washington from 1958 to 1974 , and the George Putnam Fund of Boston from 1956 to 1972 , and was a regent of the Smithsonian Institution from 1943 to 1955 . 
 Bush received the <unk> 's Edison Medal in 1943 , " for his contribution to the advancement of electrical engineering , particularly through the development of new applications of mathematics to engineering problems , and for his eminent service to the nation in guiding the war research program . " In 1945 , Bush was awarded the Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences . In 1949 , he received the <unk> Medal from the Industrial Research Institute in recognition of his contributions as a leader of research and development . President Truman awarded Bush the Medal of Merit with bronze oak leaf cluster in 1948 , President Lyndon Johnson awarded him the National Medal of Science in 1963 , and President Richard Nixon presented him with the Atomic Pioneers Award from the Atomic Energy Commission in February 1970 . Bush was also made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1948 , and an Officer of the French Legion of Honor in 1955 . 
 After suffering a stroke , Bush died in Belmont , Massachusetts , at the age of 84 from pneumonia on June 28 , 1974 . He was survived by his sons Richard , a surgeon , and John , president of <unk> Corporation , and by six grandchildren and his sister Edith . Bush 's wife had died in 1969 . He was buried at South Dennis Cemetery in South Dennis , Massachusetts , after a private funeral service . At a public memorial subsequently held by MIT , Jerome Wiesner declared " No American has had greater influence in the growth of science and technology than Vannevar Bush " . 
 In 1980 , the National Science Foundation created the Vannevar Bush Award to honor his contributions to public service . The Vannevar Bush papers are located in several places , with the majority of the collection held at the Library of Congress . Additional papers are held by the MIT Institute Archives and Special Collections , the Carnegie Institution , and the National Archives and Records Administration . 
 = You Are Not Alone = 
 " You Are Not Alone " is the second single from Michael Jackson 's album HIStory . The R & B ballad 's composition has been attributed by R. Kelly in response to difficult times in his personal life . He then forwarded a bare demo tape to Jackson , who liked the song and decided to produce it with Kelly . Jackson 's interest in the song was also linked to recent events in his personal life . The song was later covered by Kelly himself as a hidden track on his tenth solo studio album Love Letter . 
 The vast majority of critical reaction to " You Are Not Alone " was positive , although it did not attain unanimous praise . The song was the recipient of Grammy and American Music Award nominations . The corresponding music video , which featured Jackson and his then @-@ wife Lisa Marie Presley was also notable for its scenes of semi @-@ nudity . 
 Commercially , the song was a significant success . It holds a Guinness World Record as the first song in the 37 @-@ year history of the Billboard Hot 100 to debut at number one ; it was later certified platinum by the RIAA . The song peaked highly in all major markets . " You Are Not Alone " was Michael Jackson 's 13th and last number one hit song in the United States during his lifetime . 
 A clip of the song was remixed and released in 2011 , as a song with " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , on the Immortal album . 
 = = Production and music = = 
 " You Are Not Alone " is a R & B ballad about love and isolation . The song was written by R. Kelly and produced by Kelly and Jackson . Kelly wrote the song after the loss of close people in his life . Kelly was delighted to be able to work with his idol , explaining " I was psyched ... I feel I could have done his whole album . Not being selfish . I was just that <unk> about it . It was an experience out of this world ... It 's amazing to know that five years ago I was writing songs in a basement in the ghetto and now I 'm writing for Michael Jackson ... I 'd be a fool not to say it 's a dream come true . " Jackson contacted Kelly to see if he had any material available . Kelly forwarded a tape recording of the song and Jackson then agreed to work with Kelly on the piece . On the tape sent to Jackson , Kelly sung " You Are Not Alone " mimicking Jackson 's vocal style , explaining , " I think I am him . I become him . I want him to feel that as well . " Jackson found the interpretation amusing . They spent the last week of November 1994 together in the studio working on the track . 
 Jackson explained that he instantly liked the song , but listened to it twice before making his final decision . Although the song was written by Kelly , Jackson was adamant that the production should be a collaborative effort amongst the two musicians . The tape sent to him had no harmony or modulations , so Jackson added a choir in the final portion and added a sense of climax and structure to the final piece . The song has a tempo of 60 beats per minute , making it one of Jackson 's slowest songs . 
 In 2007 , a Belgian court ruled that R. Kelly had plagiarized the 1993 song " If We Can Start All Over " when composing " You Are Not Alone " . The court transferred rights of Jackson 's hit to the twin composer brothers , Eddy and Danny Van Passel . The judgment is only recognized in Belgium and airplay of the hit has been banned in that nation . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 'You Are Not Alone ' received positive views from music critics . James Hunter of Rolling Stone noted that , " the excellent current single ' Scream ' or the first @-@ rate R & B ballad ' You Are Not Alone ' – manage to link the incidents of Jackson 's infamous recent past to universal concepts like injustice or isolation . When he bases his music in the bluntness of hip @-@ hop , Jackson sketches funky scenarios denouncing greed , blanket unreliability and false accusation " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that it was the only conventional love song on the new material on HIStory . He compared it to Mariah Carey 's song " Hero " and said it " sounds like a surefire hit " . In more recent years , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic expressed the opinion that " You Are Not Alone " was amongst some the best songs Jackson ever released , calling the song seductive . The R & B critic and journalist Nelson George described the song as lovely and supple . 
 Writer and journalist J. Randy Taraborrelli wrote of the song in 2004 , " [ it ] remains among Michael 's best songs ... On listening to ' You Are Not Alone ' , one wonders how many times Michael tried to tell himself , during his most desperate and anguished times , that he did have support in his life , from a higher power , or even friends and family , whether he actually believed it or not " . Fred Shuster of the Daily News of Los Angeles described it as the best song on the album . Conversely , while Steve <unk> of Michigan Chronicle gave the album a positive review , he described the song as the worst on the album , calling the Kelly penned lyrics " trite " and below the standard set by Jackson 's own lyrical skills . " You Are Not Alone " received an American Music Award nomination and a Grammy nomination both for " Best Pop Vocal Performance " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Commercially , " You Are Not Alone " remains one of Jackson 's best selling singles and it is also his 13th number one hit . It holds the Guinness World Record for the first song ever to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . First week sales were 120 @,@ 000 copies ; it was certified platinum by the RIAA and sold one million copies domestically . It broke the record set by his previous single " Scream / Childhood , " which was the first song in the 37 @-@ year history of Billboard to debut at number five — where it peaked . It peaked at number one in the UK after a debut at number three in the prior week . The song also reached number one in Wallonia , France , New Zealand , Spain and Switzerland . In Canada it peaked at number 2 . With the exception of Italy , it became a top ten hit in every major market . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Wayne Isham on July 12 , 1995 and begins with a large number of paparazzi taking photographs of Jackson . The plot then centers around two locations : a temple where Jackson appears in an affectionate semi @-@ nude scene with his then @-@ wife Lisa Marie Presley and a theater where Jackson performs the song to an empty hall . Jackson also appears alone in other locations such as deserts and along tide pools . The slightly extended version that appeared on HIStory on Film , Volume II was notable for a scene where special effects were used to give Jackson white , feathery , almost angelic wings . The other version of the video is included on Number Ones and Michael Jackson 's Vision . The temple scenes were a homage to Maxfield Parrish 's 1922 painting " Daybreak " . The theater scenes was filmed at the Pantages Theatre , in Los Angeles . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Michael first performed " You Are Not Alone " at the 1995 Soul Train Music Awards , then at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards . At the latter awards ceremony , the song was performed without the second verse . Jackson then performed the song at the Royal Brunei concert in 1996 where it was performed as a complete song . Jackson also performed it during the HIStory World Tour as a complete song , during which one lucky girl was allowed to dance with him on stage , similar to the Soul Train Music Awards performance . Michael 's next performance of " You Are Not Alone " , which also turned out to be the song 's last performance by Jackson himself occurred in 1999 during the two MJ & Friends concerts in Seoul and Munich , the former performance being ten years to the day of his death . The song was performed without the second verse , similar to the " 1995 MTV Awards " performance . The song was also due to be performed at the This Is It concert series , however the shows were cancelled due to his untimely death . 
 Diana Ross recorded a version of this song on her international @-@ only released album , " Voice of Love " produced by Nick Martinelli . Diana would also close her successful 2010 @-@ 12 " More Today Than Yesterday : The Greatest Hits Tour with this song as a tribute to Jackson . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = The X Factor UK 2009 finalists version = = 
 The final twelve acts from the sixth series of TV talent show The X Factor in the United Kingdom released a cover version of the song on November 15 , 2009 in aid of Great Ormond Street Hospital . The finalists premiered the song live on the November 15 edition of the programme ; the single was available for digital download that day and a physical release followed the day after . The release of the song follows a similar occurrence a year earlier , when the final twelve acts from the fifth series released a cover version of Mariah Carey 's " Hero " in aid of Help for Heroes and raised over £ 1 million . It has been confirmed to have sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies , therefore achieving a Gold single certification . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The video is very similar to the video of the cover version of the charity single of the year before . It shows various contestants performing their part in front of a plain black background , then shows the 12 finalists together performing the song in front of a screen of photos . Photos and video footage of the finalists at the Great Ormond Street Hospital are shown throughout the video . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = End @-@ of @-@ year charts = = = 
 = = R. Kelly version = = 
 R. Kelly recorded his own version of the song and put it on his critically acclaimed 2010 album Love Letter , he recorded it as a tribute to Jackson following his death . The songs was a hidden bonus song on the album , shown as the final song on the album 's track list . The song starts with Kelly paying tribute to Jackson , saying " In loving memories of my hero ... MJ " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The song has received positive reviews from critics and fans alike . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 Digital single from Love Letter 
 = Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency = 
 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency ( MIGA ) is an international financial institution which offers political risk insurance and credit enhancement guarantees . Such guarantees help investors protect foreign direct investments against political and non @-@ commercial risks in developing countries . MIGA is a member of the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1988 as an investment insurance facility to encourage confident investment in developing countries . MIGA 's stated mission is " to promote foreign direct investment into developing countries to support economic growth , reduce poverty , and improve people 's lives " . It targets projects that endeavor to create new jobs , develop infrastructure , generate new tax revenues , and take advantage of natural resources through sustainable policies and programs . 
 MIGA is owned and governed by its member states , but has its own executive leadership and staff which carry out its daily operations . Its shareholders are member governments which provide paid @-@ in capital and have the right to vote on its matters . It insures long @-@ term debt and equity investments as well as other assets and contracts with long @-@ term periods . The agency is assessed by the World Bank 's Independent Evaluation Group each year . 
 = = History = = 
 In September 1985 , the Board of Governors of the World Bank endorsed the Convention establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency . MIGA was established and became operational on April 12 , 1988 under the leadership of then @-@ Executive Vice President Yoshio Terasawa , becoming the fifth member institution of the World Bank Group . MIGA initially had $ 1 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 94 billion in 2012 dollars ) in capital and 29 member states . All members of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) were eligible to become members of the agency . MIGA was established as an effort to complement existing sources of non @-@ commercial risk insurance for investments in developing countries , and thereby improve investor confidence . The agency 's mandate to be apolitical has been said to be an advantage over private and national risk insurance markets . By serving as a multilateral guarantor , the agency reduces the likelihood of confrontations among the investor 's country and the host country . 
 MIGA 's inaugural investment guarantees were issued in 1990 to cover $ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 83 billion in 2012 dollars ) worth of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) comprising four individual projects . The agency also issued its first reinsurance contracts signed in collaboration with Export Development Canada and the United States ' Overseas Private Investment Corporation ( <unk> ) . That same year , MIGA held a conference in Ghana to promote investment . The agency joined the Berne Union , an international community of export credit and investment insurance providers in 1994 . In 1997 , MIGA issued the inaugural contract under its Cooperative Underwriting Program to support an energy project in Indonesia . In collaboration with the European Union Investment Trust Fund for Bosnia and Herzegovina , the agency set up a fund for investment guarantees amounting to $ 12 million ( $ 17 million in 2012 dollars ) . The agency also established the West Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund with a capacity of $ 20 million ( $ 29 million in 2012 dollars ) . In 1998 the Council of Governors of MIGA adopted a resolution establishing a general capital increase of $ 850 million ( $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2012 dollars ) , and transferring a grant of $ 150 million ( $ 212 million in 2012 dollars ) from the IBRD . MIGA exceeded $ 1 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in 2012 dollars ) in investment guarantees within a single year for the first time in 1999 . The agency also approved an Environmental Assessment and Disclosure Policy and began attempting to implement such standards for new projects . 
 In 2000 MIGA paid its first insurance claim since the agency 's founding . In 2001 MIGA 's issuance of new investment guarantees grew to $ 2 billion . The agency launched its Small Investment Program in 2005 in an effort to promote investment among small and medium enterprises . That same year , MIGA set up its Afghanistan Investment Guarantee Facility in an effort to promote FDI into Afghanistan . In 2007 MIGA issued investment guarantees for a Djibouti port , marking its first support in the form of Islamic finance . The agency also launched PRI @-@ <unk> as a portal for information on political risk management and investment insurance , which also contains its FDI information services . In 2009 , the Board of Directors enacted changes to MIGA 's operating procedures and authorized coverage for default of sovereign financial obligations . The agency also launched an annual publication titled World Investment and Political Risk which reports on trends in worldwide investment and corporate perceptions of prospects and risk , as well as shifts in the political risk insurance industry . 
 Although once dominated by large public and multilateral underwriters , private insurance firms accounted for approximately half of the political risk insurance market in 2007 . As a result , MIGA has paid closer attention to exceptionally risky countries that have little appeal to foreign investors , and has insured projects among nations in the global south . MIGA conducted a survey in 2010 which showed that political risk is the most important deterrent of long @-@ term foreign direct investment in developing countries , even more than economic uncertainty and poor public infrastructure . MIGA 's Council of Governors amended the agency 's convention in 2010 in an attempt to improve the organization 's effectiveness by expanding the range of investments eligible for political risk insurance . 
 = = Governance = = 
 MIGA is governed by its Council of Governors which represents its member countries . The Council of Governors holds corporate authority , but primarily delegates such powers to MIGA 's Board of Directors . The Board of Directors consists of 25 directors and votes on matters brought before MIGA . Each director 's vote is weighted in accordance with the total share capital of the member nations that director represents . MIGA 's board is stationed at its Washington , D.C. headquarters where it meets regularly and oversees the agency 's activities . The agency 's Executive Vice President directs its overall strategy and manages its daily operations . As of 15 July 2013 , Keiko Honda serves as Executive Vice President of MIGA . 
 = = Membership = = 
 MIGA is owned by its 181 member governments , consisting of 156 developing and 25 industrialized countries . The members are composed of 180 United Nations member states plus Kosovo . Membership in MIGA is available only to countries who are members of the World Bank , particularly the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development . 
 As of 2015 , the seven World Bank member states that are not MIGA members are Brunei , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , San Marino , Somalia , Tonga , and Tuvalu . ( The UN states that are non @-@ members of the World Bank , and thus MIGA , are Andorra , Cuba , Liechtenstein , Monaco , Nauru , and North Korea . ) The Holy See and Palestine are also non @-@ MIGA members . Bhutan is the most recent country to have joined MIGA , having done so in December 2014 . 
 = = Investment guarantees = = 
 MIGA offers insurance to cover five types of non @-@ commercial risks : currency <unk> and transfer restriction ; government expropriation ; war , terrorism , and civil disturbance ; breaches of contract ; and the non @-@ honoring of financial obligations . MIGA will cover investments such as equity , loans , shareholder loans , and shareholder loan guarantees . The agency may also insure investments such as management contracts , asset securitization , bonds , leasing activities , franchise agreements , and license agreements . The agency generally offers insurance coverage lasting up to 15 years with a possible five @-@ year extension depending on a given project 's nature and circumstances . When an event occurs that is protected by the insurance , MIGA can exercise the investor 's rights against the host country through <unk> to recover expenses associated with covering the claim . However , the agency 's convention does not require member governments to treat foreign investments in any special way . As a multilateral institution , MIGA is also in a position to attempt to sort out potential disputes before they ever turn into insurance claims . 
 The agency 's Small Investment Program aims to promote FDI into specifically small and medium enterprises . The program offers standard MIGA coverage types except it does not cover breaches of contract . Under the program , small and medium enterprises may take advantage of discounted insurance premiums and no application fees , which are not available to larger investors . To qualify an investment for the Small Investment Program , MIGA defines small and medium enterprise projects as having 300 or fewer employees , total assets not to exceed $ 15 million and annual revenues not to exceed $ 15 million . MIGA limits the request amount for the investment guarantee to $ 10 million , and will guarantee only up to 10 years with a possible 5 @-@ year extension . 
 MIGA 's annual reports offer an overview of the agency 's business . 
 = = Financial performance = = 
 MIGA prepares consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States GAAP which are audited by KPMG . 
 = The Office ( U.S. TV series ) = 
 The Office is an American television comedy series that aired on NBC from March 24 , 2005 to May 16 , 2013 . It is an adaptation of the BBC series of the same name . The Office was adapted for American audiences by Greg Daniels , a veteran writer for Saturday Night Live , King of the Hill , and The Simpsons . It is co @-@ produced by Daniels ' Deedle @-@ Dee Productions , and Reveille Productions ( later Shine America ) , in association with Universal Television . The original executive producers were Greg Daniels , Howard Klein , Ben Silverman , Ricky Gervais , and Stephen Merchant , with numerous others being promoted in later seasons . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . To simulate the look of an actual documentary , it is filmed in a single @-@ camera setup , without a studio audience or a laugh track . The show debuted on NBC as a mid @-@ season replacement and ran for nine seasons , and 201 episodes . The Office features Steve Carell , Rainn Wilson , John Krasinski , Jenna Fischer , B. J. Novak , Ed Helms , and James Spader on the main cast . 
 The first season of The Office was met with mixed reviews , but the following four seasons received widespread acclaim from television critics , and were included on several critics ' year @-@ end top TV series lists , winning several awards including four Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Comedy Series in 2006 . While later seasons were criticized for a decline in quality , earlier writers oversaw the final season and ended the show 's run with a positive reception . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Greg Daniels served as the senior series showrunner for the first four seasons of the series and developed the British series for American television . He then left the position when he co @-@ created the comedy series Parks and Recreation with fellow Office writer Michael Schur and divided his time between the two series . Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta were named the series showrunners for the fifth season . Celotta left the series after the sixth season and Lieberstein stayed on as showrunner for the following two seasons . He left the showrunner spot after the eighth season for the potential Dwight Schrute spin @-@ off , The Farm , which was eventually passed up by NBC . Daniels returned to the showrunner position for the ninth and final season . Other executive producers include cast members B. J. Novak and Mindy Kaling . Kaling , Novak , Daniels , Lieberstein and Schur made up the original team of writers . Kaling , Novak and Lieberstein also serve multiple roles on the series , as they play regular characters on the show , as well as write , direct and produce episodes . Credited with twenty @-@ four episodes , Kaling is the most prolific writer on the staff . Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , who created the original British series , are credited as executive producers , and wrote the pilot and the third season episode , " The Convict " . Merchant later directed the episode " Customer Survey " while Gervais appeared in the episodes " The Seminar " and " Search Committee " . 
 Randall Einhorn is the most frequent director of the series , with 15 credited episodes . The series has also had several guest directors , including Lost co @-@ creator J. J. Abrams , Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator Joss Whedon , both of whom are fans of the series , and filmmakers Jon Favreau , Harold Ramis , Jason Reitman , and Marc Webb . Episodes have been directed by several of the actors on the show including Steve Carell , John Krasinski , Rainn Wilson , Ed Helms , and Brian Baumgartner . 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 Before the series aired its second episode , the writers spent time researching in offices . This process was used for Daniels ' other series King of the Hill and Parks and Recreation . The pilot is a direct adaptation of the first episode of the British version . Daniels had decided to go this route because " completely starting from scratch would be a very risky thing to do " due to the show being an adaptation . He had briefly considered using the idea for " The Dundies " as the pilot episode . After the writers knew who the cast was , they were allowed to write for the actors , which allowed the show to be more original for the following episode , " Diversity Day " . Following the mixed reaction towards the first season , the writers attempted to make the series more " optimistic " and to make Michael Scott more likable . They also established the supporting characters of the series more , giving them actual personalities , and they made the lights in the office brighter , which allowed the series to differentiate itself from the British version . 
 A common problem with the scripts , according to Novak , is that they tend to run too long for the regular 22 @-@ minute time slot , leading to several cuts . For example , the script for the episode " Search Committee " was initially 75 pages — 10 pages too long . A complete script is written for each episode ; however , actors are given opportunities to improvise during the shooting process . Fischer said , " Our shows are 100 percent scripted . They put everything down on paper . But we get to play around a little bit , too . Steve and Rainn are brilliant improvisers . " This leads to a large number of deleted scenes with almost every episode of The Office , all of which are considered part of the show 's canon and storyline by Daniels . Deleted scenes have sometimes been restored in repeats to make episodes longer or draw back people who have seen the episode before to see the bonus footage . In an experiment , a deleted scene from " The Return " was made available over NBC.com and iTunes , explaining the absence of a character over the next several episodes . Daniels hoped that word of mouth among fans would spread the information , but eventually considered the experiment a failure . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 According to Jenna Fischer , the series used an unusual casting process which did not involve a script . The producers would ask the actors several questions and they would respond as the characters they were auditioning for . NBC programmer Kevin Reilly originally suggested Paul Giamatti to producer Ben Silverman for the role of Michael Scott , but the actor declined . Martin Short , Hank Azaria , and Bob Odenkirk were reported to be interested in the part . In January 2004 , Variety reported that Steve Carell , of the popular Comedy Central program The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , was in talks to play the role . At the time , he was already committed to another NBC mid @-@ season replacement comedy , Come to Papa , but the series was quickly canceled , allowing his full commitment to The Office . Carell later stated that he had only seen about half of the original pilot episode of the British series before he auditioned . He did not continue watching for fear that he would start copying Gervais ' characterizations . Other people who were considered or auditioned for the role included Ben Falcone , Alan Tudyk , Jim <unk> , and Paul F. Tompkins . Rainn Wilson was cast as power @-@ hungry sycophant Dwight Schrute , and he watched every episode of the series before he auditioned . Wilson had originally auditioned for Michael , a performance that he described as a " terrible Ricky Gervais impersonation " ; however , the casting directors liked his audition as Dwight much more and hired him . Seth Rogen , Matt Besser , Patton Oswalt , and Judah Friedlander also auditioned for the role . 
 John Krasinski and Jenna Fischer were virtually unknown before being cast in their respective roles as Jim and Pam , the central love interests . Krasinski had attended school with B. J. Novak , and the two were friends . Fischer prepared for her audition by looking as boring as possible , creating the original Pam hairstyle . In an interview on NPR 's Fresh Air , Fischer recalled the last stages of the audition process for Pam and Jim , with the producers partnering the different potential <unk> and Jims ( four of each ) together to gauge their chemistry . When Fischer finished her scene with Krasinski , he told her that she was his favorite Pam , to which she reciprocated that he was her favorite Jim . Adam Scott and John Cho both auditioned for the role of Jim , and Kathryn Hahn also auditioned for the role of Pam . 
 The supporting cast includes actors known for their improv work : Angela Kinsey , Kate Flannery , Oscar Nunez , Leslie David Baker , Brian Baumgartner , Melora Hardin , and David Denman . Kinsey had originally auditioned for Pam . The producers thought she was " too feisty " for the character , but they called her back for the part of Angela Martin , which she won . Flannery first auditioned for the part of Jan Levinson @-@ Gould , before landing the role of Meredith Palmer . Baumgartner originally auditioned for Stanley , but was eventually cast as Kevin . Ken Kwapis , the director of the pilot episode , liked the way Phyllis Smith , a casting associate , read with other actors auditioning so much that he cast her as Phyllis . At the beginning of the third season , Ed Helms and Rashida Jones joined the cast as members of Dunder Mifflin Stamford . While Jones would later leave the cast for a role on Parks and Recreation , in February 2007 , NBC announced that Helms was being promoted to a series regular . 
 Four of the show 's writers have also performed in front of the camera . B. J. Novak was cast as reluctant temp Ryan Howard after Daniels saw his stand @-@ up act . Paul Lieberstein was cast as human resources director Toby Flenderson on Novak 's suggestion after his cold readings of scripts . Greg Daniels was originally unsure where to use Mindy Kaling on @-@ screen in the series until the opportunity came in the script for the second episode , " Diversity Day " , where Michael needed to be slapped by a minority . " Since [ that slap ] , I 've been on the show " ( as Kelly Kapoor ) , says Kaling . Michael Schur has also made occasional appearances as Dwight 's cousin Mose , and consulting producer Larry Wilmore has played diversity trainer Mr. Brown . Plans were made for Mackenzie Crook , Martin Freeman , and Lucy Davis , from the British version of The Office , to appear in the third season , but those plans were scrapped due to scheduling conflicts . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The Office was filmed with a single @-@ camera setup in a cinéma vérité allowing the look of an actual documentary , with no studio audience or laugh track , allowing its " deadpan " and " absurd " humor to fully come across . The primary vehicle for the show is that a camera crew has decided to film Dunder Mifflin and its employees , seemingly around the clock . The presence of the camera is acknowledged by the characters , especially Michael Scott , who enthusiastically participates in the filming . The characters , especially Jim and Pam , also look towards the camera when Michael creates an awkward situation . The main action of the show is supplemented with talking @-@ head interviews or " confessionals " in which characters speak one on one with the camera crew about the day 's events . 
 In order to get the feel of an actual documentary , the producers hired cinematographer Randall Einhorn , who is known for directing episodes of Survivor , which allowed the show to have the feel of " rough and jumpy " like an actual documentary . According to producer Michael Schur , the producers to the series would follow the documentary format strictly . The producers would have long discussions over whether a scene could work under the documentary format . For example , in the fourth season episode " Did I Stutter ? , " a scene featured Michael going through a long process to go to the bathroom and not pass by Stanley . The producers debated whether that was possible and Einhorn walked through the whole scene in order to see if a camera man could get to all the places in time to shoot the whole scene . Despite the strict nature in the early years of the series , later seasons seem to have loosened the rules on the format , with the camera crew often going into places that actual documentary crews would not , which also changed the writing and comedy @-@ style of the series . This inconsistency has received criticism from critics and fans . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme song for The Office was written by Jay Ferguson and performed by The <unk> . It is played over the title sequence , which features scenes of Scranton , various tasks around the office and often the main cast members . Some episodes of the series use a shortened version of the theme song . Starting with the fourth season , the theme song is played over the closing credits , which previously rolled in silence . The exteriors of buildings in the title sequence are actual buildings in Scranton , Pennsylvania , and were shot by cast member John Krasinski . The mockumentary format of the show contains no laugh track , and most of the music is diegetic , with songs either sung or played by the characters or heard on radios , computers , or other devices . However , songs have been played during montages or the closing credits , such as " Tiny Dancer " by Elton John ( " The Dundies " ) and " Islands in the Stream " by Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton ( " E @-@ mail Surveillance " ) . Featured music tends to be well known , and often songs reflect the character , such as Michael 's attempt to seem hip by using " Mambo No. 5 " and later " My Humps " as his cell phone ringtone . Daniels has said that it does not count as film score as long as it already appeared in the episode . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The Office employs an ensemble cast . Many characters portrayed by The Office cast are based on the British version of the show . While these characters normally have the same attitude and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show . The show is known for its generally large cast size , with many of its actors and actresses known particularly for their improvisational work . Steve Carell stars as Michael Scott , Regional Manager of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton Branch . Loosely based on David Brent , Gervais ' character in the British version , Scott is a well @-@ intentioned man whose attempts at humor , while seemingly innocent to himself , often offend and annoy his peers and employees , and in some situations lead to reprimanding from his superiors . Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is a salesman and the Assistant ( to the ) Regional Manager , a fictional title created by Michael . John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a salesman and , in later seasons , co @-@ manager who is often known for his <unk> and his hijinks on Schrute ( often accompanied by Pam Beesly ) . Halpert is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is known to have feelings for Pam , the receptionist . Pam , played by Jenna Fischer , is based on Dawn Tinsley . She is shy , but in many cases a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight . B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard , who for the first two seasons is a temporary worker , but is promoted to sales representative in the third season and later ascends to the position of Vice President , North East Region and Director of New Media until his treachery was exposed for corporate fraud and he was fired , ending up again as the temporary worker at the Scranton branch . 
 The accounting department features Angela Martin , an admitted uptight and often hypocritical Christian who wishes to keep things orderly and make sure situations remain as serious as possible ; Kevin Malone , a lovable , but dim @-@ witted man who revels in juvenile humor and frequently indulges himself with gambling and M & Ms ; and Oscar Martinez is intelligent but often patronising and whose homosexuality and Hispanic heritage made him a favorite target for Michael 's unintentional off @-@ color comments . Rounding out the office are the stern salesman Stanley Hudson , who barely stood for Michael 's constant references to his Black @-@ American heritage ( he also doesn 't like to take part in time wasting meetings and sometimes sleeps in them or works crossword puzzles ) ; eccentric quality assurance representative Creed Bratton ; the kind and caring saleswoman Phyllis Lapin @-@ Vance , who marries Bob Vance from Vance Refrigeration across the hall from the office ; Andy Bernard is a salesman introduced in season three after the closing of the Stamford , Connecticut branch of Dunder Mifflin and the merging of the two ; the bubbly and talkative customer service representative Kelly Kapoor ; the promiscuous alcoholic supply relations representative Meredith Palmer ; human resources representative Toby Flenderson , who is admittedly hated by , and often the target of abuse by Michael Scott ; warehouse foreman Darryl Philbin ; Warehouse dock worker and Pam 's ex @-@ fiancé Roy Anderson , who was fired in the third season ; and Michael 's former love interest and former Vice President for Regional Sales for Dunder Mifflin Jan Levinson ( Jan Levinson @-@ Gould until her divorce in season 2 ) . 
 Toward the end of season five , bubbly and naive new receptionist Erin Hannon is introduced as Pam 's replacement . A story arc at the end of season four has Holly Flax transferred to the office as Toby 's replacement . She acts as a love interest for Michael , as they share very similar personalities . Jo Bennett is the CEO of Sabre and Gabe Lewis , introduced in the middle of season six , is a Sabre employee who is assigned to the Dunder Mifflin Scranton branch as the Regional Director of Sales . In season nine Clark Green and Pete Miller joined as two new customer service representatives to attempt to catch up on the ignored customer services complaints that Kelly had dismissed while she worked at Dunder Mifflin . 
 Initially the actors who portray the other office workers were credited as guest stars before they were named series regulars during the second season . The show 's large ensemble has been mainly praised by critics and led to the series winning two Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series . Carell was reportedly paid $ 175 @,@ 000 per episode starting with the third season . Krasinski and Fischer were paid around $ 20 @,@ 000 for the beginning of the series . Starting with the fourth season , the two started getting paid around $ 100 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 = = Season synopses = = 
 A typical episode for a half @-@ hour time slot runs 20 @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . The final episode of season two introduces the first of what would be several super @-@ sized episodes that are approximately 28 @-@ minute running time for a 40 @-@ minute time slot . Season three introduces the first of occasional hour @-@ long episodes ( approximately 42 @-@ minute running time ; suitable for being shown as two separate normal episodes ) . 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 The first season consists of six episodes . 
 The series begins by mostly introducing the office 's workers via a tour given by branch manager Michael Scott for both the camera crew and a first @-@ day temp ( Ryan Howard ) . The audience learns salesman Jim Halpert has a crush on receptionist Pam Beesly ( who helps him play pranks on co @-@ worker Dwight Schrute ) , even though she is engaged to Roy ( who works in the building 's lower @-@ level warehouse ) . News spreads throughout the office that Dunder Mifflin 's corporate headquarters is planning to downsize an entire branch , leading to general anxiety , but Michael chooses to deny or downplay the realities of the situation in order to maintain employee morale . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 The second season is the series ' first twenty @-@ two episode season , and has its first 40 @-@ minute " super @-@ sized " episode . 
 Many workers seen in the background of the first season are developed into secondary characters , and romantic relationships begin to develop between some of the characters . Michael spends the night with his boss Jan , in the wake of the latter 's divorce , but does not sleep with her . Dwight and Angela become romantically involved , but keep the relationship a secret from everyone else . Kelly develops a crush on Ryan , and they start dating . When Roy sets a date for his wedding to Pam , Jim grows depressed and considers transferring to the Stamford , Connecticut branch , but tells Pam in the season finale that he loves her , even though Pam still insists she will marry Roy . The two kiss , but Jim transfers to the Stamford branch soon after . The general threat of downsizing continues throughout the season as well . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 The third season consists of 25 half @-@ hours of material , divided into 17 half @-@ hour episodes , four 40 @-@ minute " super @-@ sized " episodes , and two one @-@ hour episodes . 
 Jim briefly transfers to Stamford branch after Pam confirms her commitment to Roy . Corporate is later forced to merge the Stamford branch and staff into the Scranton branch . Included in the transfer to Scranton are Karen Filippelli , with whom Jim has developed a relationship , and the anger @-@ prone Andy Bernard . Pam is newly single after calling off her marriage and relationship to Roy prior to the merger , and Jim 's unresolved feelings for her and new relationship with Karen lead to shifting tensions amongst the three . Meanwhile , Michael and Jan 's relationship escalates which causes them both to behave erratically on the job while Dwight and Angela continue their secret relationship . In the season 's finale , Jim , Karen , and Michael interview for a corporate position that turns out to be Jan 's , who is fired that day for poor performance . Jim wins and rejects the offer off @-@ screen , opting instead to return to Scranton without Karen and asks Pam out on a date , which she joyfully accepts . In the final scene , we learn Ryan has been awarded Jan 's job due to his business school credentials . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 NBC ordered a full fourth season of 30 half @-@ hour episodes , but ended with only 19 due to a halt in production caused by the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The season consists of 9 half @-@ hour episodes , and 5 hour @-@ long episodes to comprise the 19 total episodes of material created . 
 Karen has left the Scranton branch after her breakup with Jim , and becomes regional manager at the Utica branch . Pam and Jim date happily . An unemployed Jan moves in with Michael , until the dissolution of their relationship midway through the season . After Dwight 's crude ( though well @-@ intentioned ) method of euthanasia of Angela 's ailing cat without her permission , she leaves him for Andy , leading Dwight into depression . Ryan , in his new corporate life in New York City , attempts to modernize Dunder Mifflin with a new website for online sales ; he also learns that his boss , David Wallace , favors Jim , and thus Ryan attempts to sabotage Jim 's career . Ryan is soon arrested and fired for committing fraud related to the website 's sales numbers . Toby , embarrassed after accidentally revealing an affection for Pam , announces he is moving to Costa Rica , and is replaced by Holly Flax , who quickly shows fondness towards Michael . Pam decides to follow her artistic interests and attend a three @-@ month graphic design course at the Pratt Institute in New York City . In the season finale Andy proposes to Angela , who reluctantly agrees . Phyllis then catches Dwight and Angela having sex in the office . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 The fifth season consists of 28 half @-@ hours of material , divided into 24 half @-@ hour episodes and two hour @-@ long episodes , one of which aired after Super Bowl XLIII . 
 Jim and Pam become engaged , and she ultimately returns from New York to Scranton , where Jim has bought his parents ' house for the two of them . Having avoided jail and only been sentenced to community service , Ryan returns to Dunder Mifflin as a temp . Michael initiates a romance with Holly until she is transferred to the Nashua , New Hampshire branch and the relationship ends . When Andy is made aware of Dwight and Angela 's continued affair , both men leave her . Newly hired Vice President Charles Miner implements a rigid managerial style over the branch that causes Michael to resign in protest . Michael opens the Michael Scott Paper Company , enticing Pam and Ryan to join as salespeople , and though his business model is ultimately unsustainable , Dunder Mifflin 's profits are immediately threatened . In a buyout of the Michael Scott Paper Company , the three are rehired with Pam promoted to sales and Ryan returning as a temp . During the chaos , new receptionist Erin is hired to fill the vacancy originally left by Pam . The season 's finale ends with a cliffhanger ending hinting that Pam might be pregnant . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 The sixth season consists of 26 half @-@ hours of material , divided into 22 half @-@ hour episodes and two hour @-@ long episodes . 
 Jim and Pam marry and have a baby named Cecelia Marie Halpert . Meanwhile , Andy and Erin develop mutual interest in one another , but find their inherent awkwardness inhibits his attempts to ask her out on a date . Rumors of bankruptcy begin to surround Dunder Mifflin . By Christmas , Wallace announces to the branch that Dunder Mifflin has accepted a buyout from Sabre Corporation , a printer company . While Wallace and other executives are let go , the Scranton office survives due to its relative success within the company . In the season finale , Dwight buys the office park . Michael agrees to make an announcement to the press regarding a case of faulty printers . When Jo Bennet , Sabre CEO , asks how she can repay him , Michael responds that she could bring Holly back to the Scranton branch . 
 = = = Season 7 = = = 
 The seventh season consists of 26 half @-@ hours of material , divided into 21 half @-@ hour episodes , one " super @-@ sized " episode , and two hour @-@ long episodes . 
 This is the final season for Steve Carell , who plays the lead character Michael Scott , as Carell wanted to move on after his contract expired during this season . Beginning with this season , Zach Woods , who portrays Gabe Lewis , was promoted to a series regular . Erin and Gabe have begun a relationship , much to Andy 's chagrin , and he attempts to win her affection back . Michael 's former girlfriend , Holly returns to Scranton to fill in for Toby who is doing jury duty for the " Scranton Strangler " trial . Michael and Holly eventually restart their relationship . After the two get engaged , he then reveals he will be leaving Scranton to go to Colorado with Holly in order to support her elderly parents . Pam and Jim are still adjusting to parenthood as Angela starts dating the Senator . After Michael 's replacement ( Will Ferrell ) is seriously injured , Jo creates a search committee to interview candidates and choose a new manager for the office . 
 = = = Season 8 = = = 
 The eighth season consists of 24 episodes . 
 James Spader reprises his role as Robert California , the new CEO of Dunder Mifflin / Sabre . Andy is then promoted to Regional Manager and works hard to make a good impression on Robert , and asks Dwight to be his number two . Pam and Jim are expecting their second child , Phillip , at the start of the season , to coincide with Fischer 's real life pregnancy . Angela is pregnant with her first son , also named Philip , with State Senator Robert Lipton ( although it is implied that Dwight Schrute is actually the child 's biological father ) . Darryl starts falling for new warehouse foreman Val . Dwight is tasked with traveling to Tallahassee , Florida in order to assist Sabre Special Projects Manager Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) in launching a chain of retail stores , along with Jim , Ryan , Stanley , Erin , and new office temp Cathy Simms . Cathy is also revealed to have ulterior motives for the trip , as she intends to seduce Jim , but fails . Robert later kills the retail store project , and Erin decides to stay in Florida as an elderly woman 's live @-@ in helper . Andy goes to Florida and wins back Erin , but this allows Nellie to claim the manager position as her own . Robert tells Andy that he has been demoted back to a salesman , but he refuses to accept the news , which causes him to be fired . Andy becomes motivated to begin a Dunder Mifflin comeback and joins with former CFO , David Wallace , to buy Dunder Mifflin back from Sabre putting Sabre completely out of business and giving Andy the manager position once again . 
 = = = Season 9 = = = 
 The final season consists of 25 episodes . 
 Andy , recently returning from Outward Bound manager 's training , reverts to his arrogant earlier season personality , abandoning both Erin and the office to travel around the Caribbean with his brother . In his absence , Erin strikes up a romance with new customer service rep Pete , who along with Clark , another new character , replaces Kelly , who left for Ohio with her new husband ( Ryan also moves to Ohio for " unrelated reasons " ) . Meanwhile , Jim receives an exciting opportunity from an old college friend , who offers him a job at Athlead , a sports marketing company based in Philadelphia . Darryl also jumps on board , but the distance and dedication to Athlead hurts Jim 's relationship with Pam . Angela also must deal with her husband 's infidelity with Oscar . She also deals with her lingering attraction to Dwight , who inherits his family 's beet farm . Dwight receives more good news when David Wallace <unk> him to be the new manager after Andy quits to pursue an acting career , which quickly ends when he embarrasses himself at an a cappella singing competition that turns into a viral web sensation . Dwight later makes Jim his Assistant to the Regional Manager and the two officially end their grudge . After Jim reconciles with Pam , choosing to stay in Scranton over Philadelphia , Dwight professes his love for Angela , and finally marries her . In the series finale , taking place one year after the release of the documentary , the employees reunite for Dwight and Angela 's wedding , for which Michael returns ( with help from Jim who was the person Dwight first asked to be his best man ) to serve as the best man . Kelly and Ryan run away together , Nellie now lives in Poland and " adopts " Ryan 's abandoned baby , Erin meets her birth parents , Andy gets a job at Cornell , Stanley retires to Florida , Kevin and Toby are both fired with the former buying a bar and the latter moving to New York City to become an author , Oscar runs for State Senate , Jim and Pam , at her persuasion , move to Austin to open a new branch of Athleap ( previously Athlead ) with Darryl ( Dwight " fires " them to give them both severance packages ) , and Creed is arrested for his many crimes . 
 = = Product placement = = 
 The Office has had product placement deals with Staples and the Olympic <unk> , as well as mentioning in dialogue or displaying clear logos for products such as Sandals Resorts , HP , Apple , and Gateway computers , and Activision 's Call of Duty video game series . In " The Merger " , Kevin Malone uses a Staples @-@ branded shredding machine to shred a Staples @-@ branded CD @-@ R and many other non @-@ paper items , including a salad . As with HP , Cisco Systems , a supplier of networking and telephone equipment , pays for product placement , which can be seen on close @-@ up shots of the Cisco IP Telephones . Some products have additional branding labels attached ; this can be clearly seen with the HP photo printer on Toby 's desk in season 6 , and is less noticeable with the Cisco phones . In " The Secret " Michael takes Jim to Hooters to discuss Jim 's feelings for Pam . 
 Many products featured are not part of product placement agreements , but rather inserted by writers as products the characters would use to create realism under the guise of a documentary . Chili 's restaurants were used for filming in " The Dundies " and " The Client " , as the writers believed they were realistic choices for a company party and business lunch . Though not an explicit product placement , the producers of the show had to allow Chili 's to have final approval of the script before filming , causing a scene of " The Dundies " to be hastily rewritten when the chain objected to the original version . Apple Inc. received over four minutes of publicity for the iPod when it was used as a much @-@ desired gift in " Christmas Party " , though the company did not pay for the placement . The travel website TripAdvisor.com was featured during Season 4 when after a visit to Dwight 's " agritourism " bed and breakfast , Schrute Farms , Jim and Pam post an online review about their stay . The show reportedly approached the travel review website about using their name on the show and TripAdvisor set up a review page for the fictional B & B which itself received hundreds of reviews . The appearance of Second Life in the episode " Local Ad " was rated eighth in the top ten most effective product placements of 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reviews and commentary = = = 
 Before the show aired , Gervais acknowledged that there were feelings of hesitation from certain viewers . The first season of The Office was met with a mixed response from critics with some of them comparing it to the short @-@ lived NBC series Coupling which was based on a British version . The New York Daily News called it " so diluted there 's little left but muddy water , " and USA Today called it a " passable imitation of a miles @-@ better BBC original . " A Guardian Unlimited review panned its lack of originality , stating , " ( Steve Carell ) just seems to be trying too hard ... Maybe in later episodes when it deviates from Gervais and Merchant 's script , he 'll come into his own . But right now he 's a pale imitation . " Tom Shales of the Washington Post said it was " not the mishmash that [ Americanized version of Coupling ] turned out to be , but again the quality of the original show causes the remake to look dim , like when the copying machine is just about to give out . " 
 The second season was better received . James Poniewozik of Time remarked , " Producer Greg Daniels created not a copy but an interpretation that sends up distinctly American work conventions [ ... ] with a tone that 's more satiric and less mordant . [ ... ] The new boss is different from the old boss , and that 's fine by me . " He named it the second best TV show of 2006 after Battlestar Galactica . Entertainment Weekly writer Mark Harris echoed these sentiments a week later , stating , " Thanks to the fearless Steve Carell , an ever @-@ stronger supporting cast , and scripts that spew American corporate absurdist vernacular with perfect pitch , this undervalued remake does the near impossible — it honors Ricky Gervais ' original and works on its own terms . " The A.V. Club reviewer Nathan Rabin expressed its views on the show 's progression : " After a rocky start , The Office improved immeasurably , instantly becoming one of TV 's funniest , sharpest shows . The casting of Steve Carell in the Gervais role proved to be a masterstroke . The American Office is that rarest of anomalies : a remake of a classic show that both does right by its source and carves out its own strong identity . " 
 The series has been included on several top TV series lists . The show placed # 61 on Entertainment Weekly 's " New TV Classics " list . Time 's James Poniewozik named it the second best TV series of 2006 , and the sixth best returning series of 2007 , out of ten TV series . He also included it on his " The 100 Best TV Shows of All @-@ TIME " list . The show was also named the best show of 2006 by <unk> while Paste named it the sixth best sitcom of 2010 . In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America placed it at # 66 on their list of 101 Best Written TV Series . 
 The show has some superficial similarities to the comic @-@ strip Dilbert , which also features employees coping with an inept superior . John Spector , CEO of The Conference Board , says that both show the impact a leader can have , for good or bad . Dilbert creator Scott Adams also touts the similarities : " The lesson from The Office and from Dilbert is that people are often dysfunctional , and no amount of training can fix it . " A labor @-@ affiliated group praised the episode " Boys and Girls " for what it considered an unusually frank depiction of union busting on American television . Metacritic , a review aggregation website , only graded the first , third , sixth , and final seasons . However , it denoted that all four of them received " generally favorable reviews " from critics , awarding a 61 , 85 , 78 , and 64 score — out of 100 — to each of them , respectively . It later named it the thirteenth most mentioned series on " Best of Decade " top @-@ ten lists . 
 The last few seasons were criticized for a dip in quality . The sixth season received criticisms for a lack of stakes for the characters . Other critics and fans have also criticized the dragging out of the Jim and Pam romance . The Office co @-@ creator Ricky Gervais wrote in his blog , referring to " Search Committee , " particularly Warren Buffett 's guest appearance , " If you 're going to jump a shark , jump a big one . " and compared the episode to the Chris Martin episode of Gervais 's other series , Extras . He later said " I fucking didn 't [ diss The Office ] , that 's for sure " . Some critics said the series should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell . Rainn Wilson felt that the eighth season possessed some mistakes " creatively " , such as the chemistry between Spader and Helms , which he called " a bit dark " and argued that the show should have gone for a " brighter and more energized " relationship . Despite this , there are later @-@ series episodes that have received critical acclaim , including " Stress Relief " , " Niagara " , " Garage Sale " , " Goodbye , Michael " , " Dwight Christmas " , " A.A.R.M. " , and " Finale " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The series received 42 Primetime Emmy Awards nominations , with five wins . It won for Outstanding Comedy Series in season two , Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series ( Greg Daniels for " Gay Witch Hunt " ) , Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Jeffrey Blitz for " Stress Relief " ) and Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series ( David Rogers and Claire Scanlon for " Finale " ) . Many cast and crew members have expressed anger that Carell did not receive an Emmy award for his performance in the series . Despite this , Carell won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Comedy or Musical in 2006 . The series was also named the best TV series by the American Film Institute in 2006 and 2008 , won two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2006 and 2007 and won a Peabody Award in 2006 . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Premiering on Thursday , March 24 , 2005 , after an episode of The Apprentice on NBC , The Office brought in 11 @.@ 2 million viewers in the U.S. , winning its time slot . When NBC moved the series to its intended Tuesday night slot , it lost nearly half its audience with only 5 @.@ 9 million viewers . The program averaged 5 @.@ 4 million viewers , ranking it # 102 for the 2004 – 05 U.S. television season . " Hot Girl " , the first season 's finale , rated a 2 @.@ 2 with a 10 audience measurement share . Episodes were also rerun on CNBC . 
 As the second season started , the success of Carell 's hit summer movie The 40 @-@ Year @-@ Old Virgin and online sales of episodes at iTunes helped the show . The increase in viewership led NBC to move the series to the " Must See TV " Thursday night in January 2006 , where ratings continued to grow . By the 2005 – 06 season , it placed # 67 ( tied with 20 / 20 ) . It averaged 8 million viewers with a 4 @.@ 0 / 10 rating / share among viewers ages 18 – 49 , and was up 80 % in viewers from the year before and up 60 % in viewers ages 18 – 49 . The series ranked as NBC 's highest rated scripted series during its run . The highest rated episode of the series was " Stress Relief " , which was watched by 22 @.@ 9 million viewers , because of the episode airing right after Super Bowl XLIII . While later seasons dropped in the ratings , the show was still one of NBC 's highest rated shows and in October 2011 it was reported that it cost $ 178 @,@ 840 per @-@ 30 second commercial , the most for any NBC scripted series . 
 = = = = Nielsen ratings = = = = 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 The city of Scranton , long known mainly for its industrial past as a coal mining and rail center , has eagerly embraced , and ultimately has been redefined by the show . " We 're really hip now , " says the mayor 's assistant . The Dunder Mifflin logo is on a lamppost banner in front of Scranton City Hall , as well as the pedestrian bridge to The Mall at Steamtown . The Pennsylvania Paper & Supply Company , whose tower is shown in the opening credits , plans to add it to the tower as well . Newspapers in other Northeastern cities have published travel guides to Scranton locations for tourists interested in visiting places mentioned in the show . Scranton has become identified with the show outside the United States as well . In a 2008 St. Patrick 's Day speech in its suburb of Dickson City , former Taoiseach ( Irish prime minister ) Bertie Ahern identified the city as the home of Dunder Mifflin . 
 The inaugural The Office convention was held downtown in October 2007 . Notable landmarks , some of which have been settings for the show , that served as venues include the University of Scranton , the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel and the Mall at Steamtown . Cast appearances were made by B.J. Novak , Ed Helms , Oscar Nunez , Angela Kinsey , Brian Baumgartner , Leslie David Baker , Mindy Kaling , Craig Robinson , Melora Hardin , Phyllis Smith , Creed Bratton , Kate Flannery , Bobby Ray Shafer , and Andy Buckley . Writer appearances , besides Novak and Kaling , were made by Greg Daniels , Michael Schur , Jennifer Celotta , Lee Eisenberg , Gene Stupnitsky , Justin Spitzer , Anthony Ferrell , Ryan Koh , Lester Lewis , and Jason Kessler . Not present were writer @-@ actor Paul Lieberstein ( who was originally going to make an appearance ) , Steve Carell , John Krasinski , Rainn Wilson , and Jenna Fischer . 
 On an episode of The Daily Show , Republican presidential candidate John McCain , reportedly a devoted fan of the show , jokingly told Jon Stewart he might take Dwight Schrute as his running mate . Rainn Wilson later accepted on Dwight Schrute 's behalf while on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . After the airing of " Garage Sale " , Colorado governor John Hickenlooper issued a press release appointing Michael Scott to the position of Director of Paper Distribution in the Department of Natural Resources . 
 The show is often paid tribute to by the band Relient K. Band member Matt Thiessen is a fan of The Office , and , during concerts , will often perform a self @-@ described " love song " about the series , titled " The Ballad of Dunder Mifflin " , followed by him and the band playing the show 's opening theme . 
 = = = International broadcasts = = = 
 Aside from NBC , The Office has gone into off @-@ network syndication in the United States . It has reruns on local stations and TBS . In the United Kingdom , the show was named in listings magazines ( but not onscreen ) as The Office : An American Workplace when it was originally aired on ITV2 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Online releases = = = 
 Episodes from The Office were among the first shows available for download from the iTunes Store beginning in December 2005 . In 2006 , ten internet @-@ exclusive webisodes featuring some of the characters on The Office aired on NBC.com. " Producer 's Cuts " ( containing approximately ten additional minutes of material ) of the episodes " Branch Closing " and " The Return " were also made available on NBC.com. The Office also became available for download from Amazon.com 's <unk> video downloads in 2006 . Sales of new The Office episodes on iTunes ceased in 2007 due to a dispute between NBC and Apple ostensibly over pricing . As of September 9 , 2008 The Office was put back on the iTunes Store , and can be bought in HD and Regular format . Netflix also offers the show for online viewing by subscribers , in addition to traditional DVD rental . The Office is also available on <unk> Zune Marketplace . 
 Of the 12 @.@ 4 million total viewings of " Fun Run " , the fourth season 's premiere , 2 @.@ 7 million , or 22 % , were on a computer via online streaming . " The Office , " said The New York Times , " is on the leading edge of a sharp shift in entertainment viewing that was thought to be years away : watching television episodes on a computer screen is now a common activity for millions of consumers . " It was particularly popular with online viewers , an NBC researcher said , because as an episode @-@ driven sitcom without special effects it was easy to watch on smaller monitors such as those found on laptops and iPods . Between the online viewings and those who use digital video recorders , 25 – 50 % of the show 's viewers watch it after its scheduled airtime . 
 The show 's Internet success became an issue in the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Daniels and many of the cast members who double as writers posted a video to YouTube shortly after the strike began , pointing out how little , if any , they received in residuals from online and DVD viewing . " You 're watching this on the Internet , a thing that pays us zero dollars , " Schur said . " We 're supposed to get 11 cents for every two trillion downloads . " The writers were particularly upset that they weren 't compensated for the Daytime Emmy Award winning summer webisodes " The Accountants " , which NBC considered promotional material despite the embedded commercials . 
 = = = Promotional = = = 
 The show 's success has resulted in expansion outside of television . Characters have appeared in promotional materials for NBC , and a licensed video game — The Office — was released in 2007 . In 2008 two games were introduced via Pressman Toy Corp : The Office Trivia Board Game and The Office DVD Board Game . In 2009 , The Office Clue was released , and The Office Monopoly was released in 2010 . Other merchandise , from T @-@ shirts and a bobblehead doll of Dwight Schrute to more office @-@ specific items such as Dunder Mifflin copy paper and parodies of the <unk> motivational poster series featuring the cast are available . Dunder Mifflin has two websites , and the cast members maintain blogs both as themselves and in character . 
 = = = Cast blogs = = = 
 Several members of the cast maintained blogs . These include Jenna Fischer , Angela Kinsey , and Brian Baumgartner , who posted regularly during the season . Rainn Wilson wrote in character on " Schrute Space " on NBC.com , which is updated periodically . However , he stopped writing the blog himself . It is unknown whether Creed Bratton authors " Creed Thoughts " , the blog attributed to his character . 
 = = = Home video releases = = = 
 = = Proposed spin @-@ offs = = 
 A spin @-@ off to the series was proposed in 2008 , with a pilot episode expected to debut as the Super Bowl lead @-@ out program in 2009 . However , The Office 's creative team instead decided to develop Parks and Recreation as a separate series . 
 Another spin @-@ off starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute running a bed @-@ and @-@ breakfast and beet farm , titled The Farm , was proposed in early 2012 . In October 2012 , however , NBC decided not to go forward with the series . The backdoor pilot episode instead aired as part of the ninth and final season of The Office on March 14 , 2013 . 
 = Emilie Autumn = 
 Emilie Autumn Liddell ( born on September 22 , 1979 ) , better known by her stage name Emilie Autumn , is an American singer @-@ songwriter , poet , violinist , and actress . Autumn 's musical style has been described by her as " Fairy Pop " , " Fantasy Rock " or " <unk> " . It is influenced by glam rock — from plays , novels , and history , particularly the Victorian era . Performing with her all @-@ female backup dancers The Bloody Crumpets , Autumn incorporates elements of classical music , cabaret , electronica , and glam rock with theatrics , and burlesque . 
 Growing up in Malibu , California , she began learning the violin at the age of four and left regular school five years later with the goal of becoming a world @-@ class violinist ; she practiced eight or nine hours a day and read a wide range of literature . Progressing to writing her own music , she studied under various teachers and went to Indiana University , which she left over issues regarding the relationship between classical music and the appearance of the performer . Through her own independent label Traitor Records , Autumn debuted with her classical album On a Day : Music for Violin & Continuo , followed by the release in 2003 of her album Enchant . 
 She appeared in singer Courtney Love 's backing band on her 2004 America 's Sweetheart tour and returned to Europe . She released the 2006 album Opheliac with the German label Trisol Music Group . In 2007 , she released Laced / Unlaced ; the re @-@ release of On a Day ... appeared as Laced with songs on the electric violin as Unlaced . She later left Trisol to join New @-@ York @-@ based The End Records in 2009 and release Opheliac in the United States , where previously it had only been available as an import . In 2012 , she released the album Fight Like a Girl . She played the role of Painted Doll in Darren Lynn Bousman 's 2012 film The Devil 's Carnival , as well as its 2015 sequel , Alleluia ! The Devil 's Carnival . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1979 – 2000 : Beginnings = = = 
 Emilie Autumn was born in Los Angeles , California , on September 22 , 1979 . Autumn grew up in Malibu , California , and according to her , " being surrounded by nature and sea had a lot to do with [ her ] development as a ' free spirit . ' " Her mother worked as a seamstress , and she has said that her father was a German immigrant with whom she did not share a close relationship . While not musicians , her family enjoyed various genres of music . 
 When she was four years old , she started learning the violin , and later commented : " I remember asking for a violin , but I don 't remember knowing what one was . I might have thought it was a kind of pony for all I know , but I don 't remember being disappointed . " Four years later , Autumn made her musical debut as a solo violinist performing with an orchestra , and won a competition . At the age of nine or ten , she left regular school with the goal of becoming a world @-@ class violinist . On her time at the school , she remarked , " I hated it anyway , what with the status as ' weird , ' ' antisocial , ' and the physical threats , there seemed to be no reason to go anymore , so I just didn 't . " She practiced eight or nine hours a day , had lessons , read a wide range of literature , participated in orchestra practice , and was home @-@ schooled . Growing up , she owned a large CD collection of " violin concertos , symphonies , chamber music , opera , and a little jazz " . She began writing her own music and poetry at age thirteen or fourteen , though she never planned to sing any of her songs . She studied under various teachers and attended Indiana University in Bloomington , but left after two years there , because she disagreed with the prevailing views on individuality and classical music . She believed that neither the audience nor the original composer would be insulted by the clothing and appearance of the performer . 
 While convinced that she would only play violin , eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Autumn decided to sing on one of her songs as a way of demonstrating to a major music producer , who wanted to sign her on a label , how it should sound . She became unhappy with the changes done to her songs , and decided to break away from the label and create her own independent record label , Traitor Records . Through it , she debuted with her classical album On a Day : Music for Violin & Continuo , which she recorded in 1997 when she was seventeen years old ; its title refers to the fact that the album took only a day to record . It consists of her performing works for the baroque violin accompanied by Roger <unk> on the baroque cello , Edward Murray on harpsichord , and Michael Egan on lute . She considered it " more of a demo despite its length " , and released it as " a saleable album " after fans who enjoyed her " rock performances starting asking for a classical album so that they could hear more of the violin . " She also debuted with her poetry book Across the Sky & Other Poems in 2000 , later re @-@ released in 2005 as Your Sugar Sits Untouched with a music @-@ accompanied audiobook . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : Enchant and collaborations = = = 
 As part of a recording project , Autumn traveled to Chicago , Illinois , in 2001 , and decided to stay because she enjoyed the public transportation system and music scene there . She released the 2001 EP Chambermaid while finishing Enchant — she alternatively labeled the musical style on Chambermaid as " fantasy rock " and cabaret — and wrote the 2001 charity single " By the Sword " after the events of September 11 , 2001 . According to her , the song is about strength , not violence ; the act of swearing by the sword represents " an unbreakable promise to right a wrong , to stay true " . 
 On February 26 , 2003 , she released her concept album Enchant , which spanned multiple musical styles : " new @-@ age , pop and trip hop chamber music " . Written during her late teenage years , Enchant revolved around the supernatural realm and its effect on the modern @-@ day world . Autumn labeled it as " fantasy rock " , which dealt with " dreams and stories and ghosts and faeries who 'll bite your head off if you dare to touch them " . The faery @-@ themed " Enchant Puzzle " appeared on the artwork of the album ; her reward for the person who would solve it consisted of faery @-@ related items . Her bandmates consisted of cellist Joey Harvey , drummer Heath Jansen , guitarist Ben <unk> , and bassist Jimmy <unk> , who also worked on the electronics . At the same time of Enchant 's release , Autumn had several side projects : Convent , a musical group for which she recorded all four voices ; <unk> , " a classical baroque ensemble " that she formed with friends in California ; and The Jane Brooks Project , which she dedicated to the real @-@ life , 16th @-@ century Jane Brooks — a woman executed for witchcraft . 
 On the night of the Enchant release party , Autumn learned that Courtney Love had invited her to record an album , America 's Sweetheart , and embark on the tour to promote it . Contributing violin and vocals , Autumn appeared in Love 's backing band The Chelsea — Radio Sloan , Dvin <unk> , Samantha Maloney , and Lisa <unk> — on the 2004 tour . Much of Autumn 's violin work did not get released on the album ; she commented : " This had to do entirely with new producers taking over the project after our little vacation in France , and carefully discarding all of our sessions . " She performed live with Love and The Chelsea on Late Show with David Letterman on March 17 , 2004 , and at Bowery Ballroom the next day . In September 2004 , her father died from lung cancer , even though he had quit smoking twenty years earlier . Near the end of 2004 , she was filmed for an appearance on an episode of HGTV 's <unk> Coast to Coast , showing viewers how to create faery wings and sushi @-@ styled soap — both products she sold in her online " web design and couture fashion house " , <unk> House . On December 23 , 2004 , she appeared on the Chicago @-@ based television station WGN as part of the string quartet backing up Billy Corgan and Dennis DeYoung 's duet of " We Three Kings " . 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : Opheliac , Laced / Unlaced , and A Bit O ' This & That = = = 
 Autumn began work on her concept album Opheliac in August 2004 , and recorded it at Mad Villain Studios in Chicago . In August 2005 , she created the costumes for Corgan 's music video for the track " Walking Shade " ; she also contributed violin and vocals for the track " DIA " from his 2005 album TheFutureEmbrace . In late 2005 , Autumn also recorded vocals and violin for " The Gates of Eternity " from Attrition 's 2008 album All Mine <unk> Whispers : The Story of Mary Ann Cotton , a concept album focusing on the Victorian serial killer Mary Ann Cotton . Autumn later protested the release of the song , claiming that it was unfinished , " altered without her permission " , and had been intended only as a possible collaboration with Martin Bowes . 
 In January 2006 , she performed a song from the album , " Misery Loves Company " , on WGN , before the album 's release by the German label Trisol Music Group in September . She released the limited @-@ edition , preview EP Opheliac through her own label , Traitor Records , in spring 2006 ; while the Opheliac EPs were being shipped , Autumn claimed that her offices had been robbed , causing the delay in the album release and the shipping of the EPs . According to her , Opheliac " was the documentation of a completely life @-@ changing and life @-@ ending experience " . At one time , Autumn did have plans to film a music video for her song " Liar " , which included " bloody bathtubs " . Her song " Opheliac " later appeared on the 2007 albums 13th Street : The Sound of Mystery , Vol . 3 , published by ZYX Music , and Fuck the Mainstream , Vol . 1 , published by Alfa Matrix on June 19 . On October 9 , 2006 , she appeared on the Adult Swim cartoon Metalocalypse as a guest artist and on the subsequent 2007 album The <unk> . November 2006 saw the release of the EP Liar / Dead Is the New Alive , which featured remixes of songs from Opheliac and new material . 
 She released her instrumental album , Laced / Unlaced in March 2007 ; it consisted of two discs : Laced , the re @-@ release of On a Day ... , and Unlaced , new songs for the electric violin . She decided to re @-@ release On a Day as Laced because she " felt that it made a nice contrast to the metal shredding fiddle album , " Unlaced " , and [ ... ] loved that it was the perfect representation of " then " versus " now " . She also performed live at the German musical events Wave <unk> <unk> and M <unk> Luna Festival in 2007 . She later released A Bit O ' This & That : a rarities album of her covers , including songs from The Beatles and The Smiths , classical pieces , and her own songs . In 2008 , she released the EP 4 o 'Clock , which contained remixes of songs from Opheliac , new songs , and a reading from her autobiographical novel The Asylum for Wayward Victorian Girls . She also released another EP , Girls Just Wanna Have Fun & Bohemian Rhapsody , the same year . A year later , Autumn broke away from Trisol Music Group to join The End Records and re @-@ release Opheliac in the United States on October 27 , 2009 ; previously , it was only available there as an import . The re @-@ release included extras such as pictures , bonus tracks , an excerpt from The Asylum for Wayward Victorian Girls , and a video . 
 In addition to releasing her own material , Autumn collaborated with other musicians . She contributed backing vocals and violin to the track " Dry " by Die <unk> and made an appearance in the band 's music video for " Born Again " . She played violin on the song " UR A <unk> NOW " from <unk> 's 2009 album , Smash the Control Machine . Additionally , two of her tracks appeared in film soundtracks : " Organ Grinder " from 4 o 'Clock on the European edition of Saw III and a remixed version of " Dead Is The New Alive " from Opheliac on the international version of Saw IV . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Fight Like a Girl = = = 
 In June 2010 , Autumn released the acronym of her upcoming album , <unk> , on her Twitter account , before revealing the full title as Fight Like a Girl . In her words , the meaning behind the title is " about taking all these things that make women the underdogs and using them to your advantage " . Based on her fictional novel , The Asylum for Wayward Victorian Girls , the album has been described as " an operatic feminist treatise set inside an insane asylum , wherein the female inmates gradually realize their own strength in numbers " . On August 30 , 2010 , she announced that she would be undergoing jaw surgery , and recovered from it . In September 2011 , she posted the full lyrics to the album 's title track , " Fight Like a Girl " , on her Twitter account . Autumn appeared at the 2011 Harvest Festival in Australia , and had planned to debut two songs from Fight Like a Girl during those performances . On April 11 , 2012 , Autumn released the single " Fight Like a Girl " , with the song " Time for Tea " appearing as a B @-@ side . 
 On April 16 , 2012 , Autumn announced her plans to debut a three @-@ hour musical adaptation of her autobiographical novel on London 's West End theatre in 2014 . According to her interview with <unk> , she has plans to play the roles of both protagonists , Emilie and Emily . 
 She also appeared in the twelve @-@ minute teaser for Darren Lynn Bousman and Terrance <unk> 's project The Devil 's Carnival , and for which she played the role of The Painted Doll . Bloody Crumpets members The Blessed Contessa and Captain Maggot also appear in the film as Woe @-@ Maidens . 
 On June 13 , 2012 , Emilie Autumn announced on her blog the release date of Fight Like a Girl , which was on July 24 of the same year and included a new addition ; a song called " The Key " . Autumn released an instrumental snippet of the song on a forum post , which is hidden in the last line of the lyrics , in which she posted . 
 In 2014 , it was announced that she would be appearing at a handful of dates on the 2014 Vans Warped Tour with an installation called " The Asylum Experience " , which will include music , burlesque , circus sideshow attractions and theater . 
 = = Influences and musical style = = 
 Her music encompasses a wide range of styles . Autumn 's vocal range is contralto , but also has the ability to perform in the dramatic soprano range . Her vocal work has been compared to Tori Amos , Kate Bush , and The Creatures . She has released two instrumental albums ( On a Day ... and Laced / Unlaced ) , and four featuring her vocals : Enchant , Opheliac , A Bit o ' This & That , and " Fight Like A Girl " . The 2003 album Enchant drew on " new age chamber music , trip hop baroque , and experimental space pop " . Autumn layers her voice frequently , and incorporates electronics and electronic effects into her work on Enchant ; she also combines strings and piano for some songs , while others feature mainly the piano or violin . The 2006 release Opheliac featured " cabaret , electronic , symphonic , new age , and good ol ' rock & roll ( and heavy on the theatrical bombast ) " . 
 A classically trained musician , Autumn is influenced by plays , novels , and history , particularly the Victorian era . She enjoys the works of Shakespeare , Elizabeth Barrett Browning and her husband Robert , and Edgar Allan Poe . She incorporates sounds resembling Victorian machinery such as locomotives , which she noted was " sort of a steampunk thing " . While a young Autumn cited Itzhak Perlman as an influence because of the happiness she believed he felt when he played , her main musical influence and inspiration is the English violinist Nigel Kennedy . Her favorite singer is Morrissey from The Smiths . She takes inspiration for her songs from her life experiences and mixes in " layers and layers of references , connections , other stories and metaphors " . Autumn describes her music and style as " Psychotic Vaudeville Burlesque " . She alternatively labels her music and style as " <unk> ' " , a term she coined , and glam rock because of her use of glitter onstage . According to Autumn , her music " wasn 't meant to be cutesy " and is labeled as " industrial " mainly because of her use of drums and yelling . Her adaption of " O Mistress Mine " was praised by author and theater director Barry Edelstein as " a ravishing , guaranteed tearjerker " . 
 For her live performances , which she calls dinner theatre because of her practice of throwing tea and tea @-@ time snacks offstage , Autumn makes use of burlesque — " a show that was mainly using humour and sexuality to make a mockery of things that were going on socially and politically " — to counterbalance the morbid topics such as abuse and self @-@ mutilation . She incorporates handmade costumes , fire tricks , theatrics , and a female backing band , The Bloody Crumpets : Veronica <unk> , Jill <unk> ( Moth ) , and formerly The Blessed Contessa , Lady <unk> , Little Lucina , Lady Joo Hee , Captain <unk> , Little Miss <unk> , Mistress Jacinda , and the model <unk> Vex . Another crumpet , Captain Maggot , has taken a leave . Her wish for the live shows is to be an " anti @-@ repression statement " and empowerment . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 She keeps a ritual of drawing a heart on her cheek as a symbol of protection . 
 Autumn became vegetarian at age eleven after being unable to rationalize why she should eat farm animals but not her pet dog ; in her late @-@ teens , she became vegan . She believes that there is a link between the treatment of women and animals in society . In August 2014 , Autumn said she had developed copper toxicity and was no longer vegan . She cares for two pet rats , Sir Edward and Basil , and a cat named Fish / Fishy , and endorses companies such as Manic Panic and Samson Tech . 
 = = = Fiction novel = = = 
 Autumn wrote a novel entitled The Asylum for Wayward Victorian Girls , which was self @-@ published in 2010 . Because of the book 's nature and possible autobiographical parts , she claimed its release was delayed because some did not want it published . The book incorporated anthropomorphized rats and leeches , and the diary of a fictional Victorian @-@ era asylum inmate named " Emily " . Autumn said one of the main messages was that many of the patients were not insane and that the subject of mental illness remains misunderstood . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Enchant ( 2003 ) 
 Opheliac ( 2006 ) 
 Fight Like a Girl ( 2012 ) 
 Instrumental albums 
 On a Day ... ( 2000 ) 
 Laced / Unlaced ( 2007 ) 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 The Asylum Tour 
 The Plague Tour 
 The Gate Tour 
 The Key Tour 
 The Door Tour 
 The Fight Like a Girl Tour 
 = = Filmography = = 
 11 @-@ 11 @-@ 11 as <unk> in Video ( 2011 ) Uncredited 
 The Devil 's Carnival ( 2012 ) as Painted Doll 
 Alleluia ! The Devil 's Carnival as June / The Painted Doll 
 = Lara Croft = 
 Lara Croft is a fictional character and the protagonist of the Square Enix ( previously Eidos Interactive ) video game franchise Tomb Raider . She is presented as a beautiful , intelligent , and athletic English archaeologist @-@ adventurer who ventures into ancient , hazardous tombs and ruins around the world . Created by a team at UK developer Core Design that included Toby Gard , the character first appeared in the 1996 video game Tomb Raider . She has also appeared in video game sequels , printed adaptations , a series of animated short films , feature films ( portrayed by Angelina Jolie ) , and merchandise related to the series . Official promotion of the character includes a brand of apparel and accessories , action figures , and model portrayals . Croft has also been licensed for third @-@ party promotion , including television and print advertisements , music @-@ related appearances , and as a spokesmodel . As of June 2016 , Lara Croft has been featured on over 1 @,@ 100 magazine covers surpassing any supermodel . 
 Core Design handled initial development of the character and the series . Inspired by Neneh Cherry and comic book character Tank Girl , Gard designed Lara Croft to counter stereotypical female characters . The company modified the character for subsequent titles , which included graphical improvements and gameplay additions . American developer Crystal Dynamics took over the series after the 2003 sequel Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness was received poorly . The new developer rebooted the character along with the video game series . The company altered her physical proportions , and gave her additional ways of interacting with game environments . Croft has been voiced by six actresses in the video game series : Shelley Blond ( 1996 ) , Judith Gibbins ( 1997 – 98 ) , Jonell Elliott ( 1999 – 2003 ) , Keeley Hawes ( 2006 – 14 ) , Camilla Luddington ( 2013 – present ) and Abigail Stahlschmidt ( 2015 ) . 
 Critics consider Lara Croft a significant game character in popular culture . She holds six Guinness World Records , has a strong fan following , and is among the first video game characters to be successfully adapted to film . Lara Croft is also considered a sex symbol , one of the earliest in the industry to achieve widespread attention . The character 's influence in the industry has been a point of contention among critics ; viewpoints range from a positive agent of change in video games to a negative role model for young girls . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lara Croft is depicted as an athletic and fast woman with brown eyes and reddish @-@ brown hair , frequently kept in a plait or ponytail . The character 's classic costume is a turquoise tank top , light brown shorts , calf @-@ high boots , and tall white socks . Accessories include fingerless gloves , a backpack , a utility belt with holsters on either side , and two pistols . The video game sequels introduced new outfits designed for different environments , such as underwater and cold weather . In the later games , Croft wears a crop top , camouflage pants and black or light brown shirts . When exploring , she often carries two pistols , but has used other weaponry throughout the series . She is fluent in several languages . 
 Lara 's backstory has changed dramatically over the course of the series . During the first era , game manuals describe the character as the Wimbledon , London @-@ born daughter of Lord <unk> Croft ( Lord Richard Croft in Legend and its sequels ) . She was raised as an aristocrat and betrothed to the fictitious Earl of Farringdon . Lara attended the Scottish boarding school Gordonstoun and a Swiss finishing school . At the age of twenty @-@ one , she survived a plane crash , which left her stranded in the Himalayas for two weeks ; the experience spurred her to shun her former life and seek other adventures around the world . Croft published books and other written works based on her exploits as a mercenary , big @-@ game hunter , and master thief . 
 During the second era , Lara 's story was changed to be the daughter of archaeologist Lord Richard Croft , the Earl of <unk> , and someone who was quickly identified as a highly talented individual while attending the <unk> Girls School . The plane crash was changed to when Lara was nine years old , and with her mother , Amelia Croft . While searching for shelter , Lara and her mother took refuge in an ancient Nepalese temple , where Lara witnesses her mother vanish after tampering with an ancient sword . Her father later disappears in search of his wife . This spurs Lara on to seek the reason for her mother 's disappearance . 
 The third era deviates from the original plot considerably . When Lara was young she traveled with her parents on many of their archeological expeditions which helped to shape the woman she was becoming . It was on one of these expeditions that her mother vanished and was presumed dead and a few years later her father presumably took his own life , she was then left in the care of Conrad Roth . Even though she was left with a vast fortune , giving her the means to attend Cambridge with ease , Lara chose to study at University College London . This decision required her to pay her tuition and rent by working many jobs . Though this was a much tougher choice , it helped her become more grounded and level @-@ headed than she might otherwise have been . It also allowed her to remain with Sam , her friend since boarding school . It was because of Sam 's free spirit and wild streak that Lara was able to experience much more of London than just the universities and museums that she loved so much . After travelling the world both Lara and Sam end up on an expedition to the Dragon 's Triangle off the Japanese coast in search of the lost civilization of Yamatai . It is on this expedition that Lara is stranded on a remote island full of natural , human and supernatural dangers , which enables her to develop from a vulnerable girl to a survivor . And after experiencing the supernatural powers of the ancient world , she comes to realise her father was right about his theories and her hunger for adventure awakens . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Lara Croft primarily appears in the Tomb Raider video game series published by Square Enix Europe ( previously Eidos Interactive ) . The action @-@ adventure games feature the protagonist travelling the world in search of rare objects and mystical artefacts . Croft first appeared in the 1996 video game Tomb Raider , in which she competes against a rival archaeologist in search of an Atlantean artifact . Tomb Raider II ( 1997 ) centres on the search for the Dagger of Xian , which is sought by thieves . Tomb Raider III ( 1998 ) focuses on meteorite fragments that endow humans with supernatural powers . In Tomb Raider : The Last Revelation ( 1999 ) , the first depiction of a young Croft , she is accompanied by her mentor , Werner Von Croy . Lara searches for artifacts associated with the Egyptian god Horus , and later encounters Von Croy as an antagonist . In Tomb Raider Chronicles ( 2000 ) , most of the game relates adventures told via flashbacks . The first portable game , Tomb Raider ( 2000 ) , was released on the Game Boy Color , and follows the character 's search for the Nightmare Stone . A second Game Boy Color title , Tomb Raider : Curse of the Sword ( 2001 ) , sees Lara Croft facing off against a cult . The next portable game , Tomb Raider : The Prophecy ( 2002 ) , was released on the Game Boy Advance , and focuses on three magical stones . Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness ( 2003 ) was released on home platforms , centring on the murder of Professor Von Croy . 
 Eidos rebooted the series with Tomb Raider : Legend ( 2006 ) , which focuses on Lara Croft 's search for Excalibur and her mother , altering the character 's backstory as part of the redesign . Tomb Raider : Anniversary ( 2007 ) , a remake of the first game in the series , carried over design elements from Legend . Tomb Raider : Underworld ( 2008 ) continues the plot introduced in Legend . The story centres on Croft 's search for information about her mother 's disappearance . In the process she learns of the existence of Thor 's hammer , Mjölnir . Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light ( 2010 ) is a downloadable game that is set in a Central American jungle , and features an ancient warrior who works with Lara Croft . In 2013 , the series was rebooted a second time with the game Tomb Raider , which retold the story of Lara 's origins and began a new continuity . Its sequel Rise of the Tomb Raider was released in 2015 . 
 = = = In other adaptations = = = 
 Beginning in 1997 , the character regularly appeared in comics by Top Cow Productions . Lara Croft first appeared in a crossover in Sara <unk> 's Witchblade , and later starred in her own comic book series in 1999 . The series began with Dan Jurgens as the writer , featuring artwork by Andy Park and Jon Sibal . The stories were unrelated to the video games until issue 32 of the Tomb Raider series , which adapted Angel of Darkness 's plot . The series ran for 50 issues in addition to special issues . Other printed adaptations are Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Amulet of Power , a 2003 novel written by Mike Resnick ; Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Lost Cult , a 2004 novel written by E. E. Knight ; and Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Man of Bronze , a 2005 novel written by James Alan Gardner . 
 Lara Croft has appeared in two motion pictures . The first , Lara Croft : Tomb Raider , was released in 2001 , and follows Croft as she encounters the Illuminati , a group searching for a relic able to control time . The film depicted Croft 's backstory differently from the version in the early games . In the films , Lara Croft 's mother died in a plane crash and her father disappeared in Cambodia ; in the games , both parents are alive . A similar backstory was adopted in 2006 in Legend . The sequel , Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life , depicts Croft in search of Pandora 's box in competition with a Chinese crime syndicate . Development for a third movie was announced in 2009 . Producer Graham King plans to release the film in 2013 . GameTap released Re \ <unk> : Tomb Raider Animated Series in 2007 via the GameTap TV section of its website . The web series is a collection of ten short animated films that features re @-@ imagined versions of Croft by well @-@ known animators , comic book artists , and writers , including Jim Lee , Warren Ellis , and Peter Chung . Episodes ranged from five to seven and half minutes in length , featuring Minnie Driver as Croft . The creative staff was given considerable freedom to re @-@ interpret the character ; they did not consult the video game designers , but were given a guide listing acceptable and unacceptable practices . 
 = = Development history = = 
 Core Design , a subsidiary of Eidos , created Lara Croft as the lead protagonist of its video game Tomb Raider , which began development in 1993 . Lead graphic artist Toby Gard went through about five designs before arriving at the character 's final appearance . He initially envisioned a male lead character with a whip and a hat . Core Design co @-@ founder Jeremy Smith characterized the design as derivative of Indiana Jones , and asked for more originality . Gard decided that a female character would work better from a design standpoint . He also expressed a desire to counter stereotypical female characters , which he has characterized as " bimbos " or " dominatrix " types . Smith was sceptical of a female lead at first because few contemporary games featured them . He came to regard a female lead as a great hook and put faith in Gard 's idea . Inspired by pop artist Neneh Cherry and comic book character Tank Girl , Gard experimented with different designs , including a muscular woman and a Nazi @-@ like militant . He settled on a tough South American woman with a braid named Laura Cruz . Eidos management preferred a more " UK friendly " name , and selected Lara Croft from similar @-@ sounding British names found in an English telephone directory . Along with the name change , the character 's backstory was altered to incorporate a British origin . 
 Gard was keen to animate the character realistically , an aspect he felt the industry at the time had disregarded . He sacrificed quick animations in favour of more fluid movement , believing that players would empathize with the character more easily . In the first Tomb Raider , Croft 's three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) character model is made of around 230 polygons . The graphical limits at the time required the removal of the character 's braid from the model ; it was added to the model for subsequent iterations . While adjusting the character model , Gard accidentally increased the breasts ' dimensions by 150 percent . After seeing the increase , the rest of the creative team argued to keep the change . Core Design hired Shelley Blond to voice Croft after the game entered the beta phase of development . Gard left Core Design after completing Tomb Raider , citing a lack of creative freedom and control over marketing decisions related to the ideas he developed ( especially Lara Croft ) . 
 Core Design improved and modified the character with each instalment . Developers for Tomb Raider II increased the number of polygons in the character 's model and added more realistic curves to its design . Other changes included new outfits and manoeuvres . Core Design reportedly planned to implement crawling as a new gameplay option , but the option did not appear until Tomb Raider III . Actress Judith Gibbins took over voice acting responsibilities and stayed on through the third game . For Tomb Raider III , the developers increased the number of polygons in Croft 's 3D model to about 300 , and introduced more abilities to the gameplay . Core Design wanted to reintroduce the character to players in Tomb Raider : The Last Revelation and included a flashback scenario with a younger Lara . The developers expanded the character 's set of moves threefold to allow more interaction with the environment , like swinging on ropes and kicking open doors . The character model was altered to feature more realistic proportions , and Jonell Elliott replaced Gibbins as the voice of Lara Croft . By the time development for The Last Revelation began , Core Design had worked on the series constantly for four years and the staff felt they had exhausted their creativeness . Feeling the series lacked innovation , Core Design decided to kill the character and depicted Croft trapped by a cave @-@ in during the final scenes of the game . 
 The next title , Tomb Raider Chronicles , depicted the late Lara Croft via her friends ' flashbacks . The game introduced stealth attacks , which would carry over to the next game , Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness . While the original development team worked on Chronicles , Core Design assigned a new team to develop Angel of Darkness for the PlayStation 2 . Anticipating innovative changes from next generation consoles , Adrian Smith — co @-@ founder of Core Design — wanted to reinvent the character to keep pace with the updated technology . Core Design conducted market research , including fan polls , to aid in Angel of Darkness 's development . The development team felt it could not alter the character and instead opted to place her in a situation different from previous games . The PlayStation 2 hardware allowed for more manoeuvres and a more detailed character model ; the number of polygons in Croft 's model increased to 4 @,@ 400 . The team sought to add more melee manoeuvres to better match Lara Croft 's portrayal as an expert fighter in her backstory . Movement control was switched from the directional pad to the analog control stick to provide more precision . After the original team finished Chronicles , it joined the development of Angel of Darkness . Excess content , missed production deadlines , and Eidos 's desire to time the game 's launch to coincide with the release of the 2003 Tomb Raider film resulted in a poorly designed game ; Croft was brought back to life without explanation and the character controls lacked precision . 
 = = = Developer switch to Crystal Dynamics = = = 
 Angel of Darkness was received poorly , prompting Eidos — fearing financial troubles from another unsuccessful game — to give development duties for future titles to Crystal Dynamics , another Eidos subsidiary . The Legacy of Kain development team began work on a new title ( Tomb Raider : Legend ) , and Toby Gard returned to work as a consultant . The development team reassessed the brand value of the franchise and its protagonist . Chip Blundell , Eidos 's vice @-@ president of brand management , commented that the designers understood that fans saw the character and brand as their own , rather than Eidos 's . With that in mind , the team retooled the franchise and character to emphasize aspects of the original game that made them unique . The storyline intended for a trilogy of games that started with Angel of Darkness was abandoned and a new plot was created for Legend . 
 Crystal Dynamics focused on believability rather than realism to re @-@ develop the character , posing decisions around the question , " What could Lara do ? " , and giving her action more freedom . The designers updated Lara Croft 's move set to make her movements appear more fluid and continuous . The animations were also updated so the character could better interact with environmental objects . The developers introduced a feature that causes the character 's skin and clothing to appear wet after swimming and dirty after rolling on the ground . Responding to criticism directed at the character controls in Angel of Darkness , Crystal Dynamics redesigned the character 's control scheme to provide what it felt was the best third @-@ person action experience . The developers also introduced close @-@ quarter melee manoeuvres . Crystal Dynamics updated the character model to add more realism , but retained past design elements . The polygon count increased to over 9 @,@ 800 . More attention was paid to the character 's lip synching and facial expressions to allow for dynamic emotional responses to in @-@ game events . In redesigning the character 's appearance , Crystal Dynamics updated Croft 's hairstyle , wardrobe , and accessories . Her shirt was changed to a V @-@ neck crop top , her body was given more muscle tone , and her hair braid was switched to a pony tail . The voice actor for Lara Croft was initially rumoured to be Rachel Weisz , but the role was eventually given to Keeley Hawes . Crystal Dynamics retained the design changes for the next game , Tomb Raider : Anniversary , a remake of the first game . The designers aimed to portray Croft with more emotional depth , and focused on the character 's desire to achieve the end goal of the game , culminating in killing one of the antagonists . The developers used the death to evoke guilt in Croft afterward and illustrate that shooting a person should be a difficult choice . 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld continued the plot line established in Legend . Crystal Dynamics used new technology to improve the character for seventh generation consoles , focusing on improving realism . The dirt accumulation and water cleansing mechanic from Legend was altered to be a real @-@ time mechanic that can involve the entire game environment . To achieve a more natural appearance , the developers added spherical harmonics to provide indirect lighting to in @-@ game objects like Lara Croft . Crystal Dynamics made the character model more complex and detailed than previous instalments , featuring more texture layers that determine the appearance of shadows and reflective light on it , and using skeletal animation to portray believable movement . The number of polygons in the model increased to 32 @,@ 000 . The developers enhanced Croft 's facial model by increasing the number of polygons , bones used in the animation skeleton , and graphical shaders in the face to add more detail and expressive capabilities . The hair was created as a real @-@ time cloth simulation to further add realism to its shape and movement . The developers kept Croft 's hair tied back because they felt a real person would not want it flying around while performing dangerous manoeuvres . The character 's body size was increased and breast size reduced to portray more realistic proportions . 
 The developers tried to redefine Lara Croft 's actions by questioning what they felt the character was capable of . While previous games used hand @-@ animated movement for the character , Underworld introduced motion capture @-@ based animation to display more fluid , realistic movement and facial expressions . <unk> and Olympic Gold medalist Heidi Moneymaker was the motion capture actress , and advised the designers on practical movements . Animators adjusted and blended the recorded animation to create seamless transitions between the separate moves and their simultaneous combinations . The blends and additional animations give the character more flexible movement . Actions were overlapped to allow for multitasking , such as aiming at two separate targets and shooting with one hand while the other holds an object collected from the environment . Other additions include more melee attacks , as well as contextual offensive and climbing manoeuvres . Crystal Dynamics sought to make the visual appearance of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions identical , although the systems use different techniques to achieve this . In response to Underworld 's lackluster sales figures , Eidos reportedly considered altering the character 's appearance to appeal more to female fans . 
 = = = Publisher switch to Square Enix = = = 
 Japanese game company Square Enix acquired Eidos in April 2009 , restructuring Eidos into Square Enix Europe . Crystal Dynamics remained the developer of the Tomb Raider games . Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light introduced co @-@ operative gameplay to the series , a move that brand director Karl Stewart said was meant to " show [ Lara ] as a more humanistic character " by placing her in a situation that differed from previous installments . The game uses the same technology featured in the studio 's past Tomb Raider games . Despite the changes implemented in the titles , Crystal Dynamics believed that the series required further reinvention to stay relevant . 
 In late 2010 , Square Enix announced a franchise reboot titled Tomb Raider ; the new Lara Croft would be a darker , grittier reimagining of the character . In examining the character , Crystal Dynamics concluded that Croft 's largest failing was her " Teflon coating " , and that it needed a more human version that players would care about . The studio sought a new voice actress , trialling dozens of relatively unknown performers . The second reboot focuses on the origin of the character , and as a result , changes the previous back story . Staff opted to first work on the character 's biography rather than cosmetic aspects . Crystal Dynamics sought to avoid the embellished physique of past renditions and pushed for realistic proportions . In redesigning the character 's appearance , the designers began with simple concepts and added features that it felt made Lara Croft iconic : a ponytail , " M @-@ shaped " lips , and the spatial relationship between her eyes , mouth , and nose . The company also changed the character 's wardrobe , focusing on what it believed was more functional and practical . In designing the outfits , staff aimed to create a look that was " relevant " and " youthful " , but not too " trendy " or " hip " . To gauge the redesign , Crystal Dynamics conducted eye tracking studies on subjects who viewed the new version and previous ones . 
 Similar to Underworld , the new Tomb Raider features motion capture @-@ based animation . In an effort to present realism and emotion in the character , Crystal Dynamics captured face and voice performances to accompany the body performances . The company plans to revamp Croft 's in @-@ game combat abilities . Crystal Dynamics aims to make the " combat fresh to the franchise , competitive amongst [ similar games ] , and relevant to the story . " Among the changes is the implementation of a free aiming system . The studio reasoned that such a system would cause players to be more invested in the action by fostering a " raw , brutal , and desperate " style . Global brand director Karl Stewart stated that such desperation relates to the updated character 's inexperience with violence . He further commented that Lara Croft is thrust into a situation where she is forced to kill , which will be a traumatic and defining moment for her . 
 = = Promotion and merchandising = = 
 Eidos 's German branch and the KMF agency handled marketing for Lara Croft . Eidos marketing manager David Burton oversaw marketing efforts , which attempted to portray the character as attractive and pleasant . However , interaction with the press , especially those in Europe , resulted in less clothing depicted in promotional images . Concerned with diluting Croft 's personality , Eidos avoided products it felt did not fit the character . Ian Livingstone , Eidos 's product acquisition director , commented that the company declines most merchandising proposals . He stated that Eidos primarily focused on game development and viewed such promotion outside video games as exposure for the character . Following Square Enix 's acquisition , Eidos 's marketing duties were transferred to the Square Enix Europe subsidiary . As part of the second reboot , Crystal Dynamics planned to align all products , promotions , and media ventures with its new version of the character . 
 Lara Croft has appeared on the cover of multiple video game magazines . The character has also been featured on the cover of non @-@ video game publications such as British style magazine The Face , American news magazines Time and Newsweek , German magazine Focus , and the front page of British newspaper the Financial Times . Eidos licensed the character for third party advertisements , including television ads for Visa , Lucozade drinks , G4 TV , Brigitte magazine , and SEAT cars . Retro Gamer staff attributes Croft 's " iconic " status in part to the Lucozade commercials , calling them one of the most memorable advertisements to use video game elements . Picture advertisements appeared on the sides of double @-@ decker buses and walls of subway stations . Irish rock band U2 commissioned custom renders for video footage displayed on stage in its 1997 PopMart tour . German punk band Die Ärzte 's 1998 music video for " Men are pigs " ( German : " Männer sind <unk> " ) also features Croft . Music groups have dedicated songs to the character , culminating in the release of the album A Tribute to Lara Croft . Bands and artists including Depeche Mode , Moby , Faith No More , Jimi Tenor , and Apollo 440 donated their songs for the album . In conjunction with the release of the 2001 film adaptation , Eidos licensed Lara Croft free @-@ of @-@ charge to the Gordonstoun boarding school for a commercial . The school approached Eidos about use of the character . Eidos allowed the one @-@ time licence due to Core Design 's inclusion of Gordonstoun in Croft 's fictional biography without the school 's permission . Near the end of 2006 , Lara Croft became the spokesmodel for the Skin Cancer Awareness Foundation of Minden , Nevada as part of its Sun Smart Teen Program . The foundation felt that the character personified the benefits of a healthy body , and that young teenagers could relate to Croft . 
 Lara Croft 's likeness has been a model for merchandise . The first action figures were produced by Toy Biz , based on the video game version of the character . Playmates Toys released a series of action figures that depict Croft in different outfits and accessories from the video games , later producing figures modelled after Jolie for Lara Croft : Tomb Raider . Graphic designer Marc <unk> of Studio <unk> released 1 ⁄ 6 scale model kits of the character , and later built a full @-@ scale version . Arcade : The Videogame Magazine and PlayStation Magazine promoted life @-@ size Croft statues as contest prizes . Spurred by a rumour that Eidos provided Lara Croft autographs , fans wrote to the company to obtain them . The quantity prompted Eidos to quickly produce autographed cards to meet demand . Tomb Raider : Underworld themes and wallpapers featuring the character were released for the PlayStation 3 . Xbox Live Marketplace released Xbox 360 avatars in conjunction with Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light . Eidos released a brand of Lara Croft apparel and accessories , marketed under the label " <unk> " . The line included wallets , watches , bathrobes , and Zippo lighters . Other third @-@ party apparel are hiking boots , backpacks , leather jackets , and thermoses . Croft 's likeness has also appeared on French postage stamps , PlayStation memory cards , and trading cards as part of a collectible card game . In October 1997 , Eidos held an art exhibition titled " Lara Goes Art " in Hamburg , Germany to promote Tomb Raider II . The exhibit featured selected artwork of the character submitted by artists and fans . Pieces included oil and airbrushed paintings , photo @-@ stories , and <unk> 's model ; <unk> Studios provided the computer @-@ generated footage it had created for Die Ärzte 's music video and the Brigitte magazine television commercial . 
 = = = Model portrayal = = = 
 Eidos hired several models to portray Lara Croft at publicity events , promotions , trade shows , and photo shoots . Nathalie Cook was the first model , portraying the character from 1996 to 1997 . Cook was followed by British actress Rhona Mitra from 1997 to 1998 . Eidos then updated the Croft costume to match its video game depiction . Core Design reportedly restricted Mitra 's dialogue as the character at trade shows and out of costume . French model Vanessa <unk> succeeded Mitra for a brief time until fashion model Nell McAndrew took over the role at the 1998 Electronic Entertainment Expo . McAndrew portrayed Croft from 1998 until 1999 , when Eidos fired her for posing in Playboy , which used the character and Tomb Raider franchise to promote the McAndrew 's issue without Eidos 's approval . Core Design was granted an injunction against the magazine to protect the character 's image ; Playboy was ordered to place stickers on the cover of the issue to conceal the reference to Tomb Raider . Eidos later donated McAndrew 's Tomb Raider costume to a UNICEF charity auction . 
 Lara Weller followed McAndrew from 1999 to 2000 . Subsequent models were Lucy Clarkson from 2000 to 2002 and Jill de Jong , who wore a new costume based on Lara Croft 's new appearance in Angel of Darkness from 2002 to 2004 . Karima Adebibe became the model from 2006 to 2008 , and wore a costume based on the updated version of Croft in Legend . She was the first model Eidos allowed to portray Lara Croft outside posing for photography . To prepare for the role , Adebibe trained in areas the character was expected to excel in like combat , motorcycling , elocution , and conduct . Gymnast Alison Carroll , succeeded Adebibe in 2008 and featured apparel based on the character 's appearance in Underworld . Similar to Adebibe , Carroll received special training — Special Air Service ( SAS ) survival , weapons , and archaeology — to fill the role . Crystal Dynamics discontinued the use of models as part of the franchise 's second reboot . The number of models prompted Guinness World Records to award the character an official record for the " most official real life stand @-@ ins " in 2008 . 
 = = = Film portrayal = = = 
 Paramount Pictures acquired the film rights for Tomb Raider in 1998 , which was released as Lara Croft : Tomb Raider in 2001 . Producer Lloyd Levin stated that the film makers tried to capture the essence of the video game elements rather than duplicate them . Acknowledging the character 's " huge fan base " and recognizable appearance , director Simon West sought an actress with acting ability as well as physical attributes similar to Croft . Paramount also received input from developer Core Design on casting . Rumoured actresses included Pamela Anderson , Demi Moore , Jeri Ryan and Carla <unk> . Academy Award @-@ winning actress Angelina Jolie was eventually cast to play Lara Croft . She had not been a fan of the character , but considered the role as a " big responsibility " , citing anxiety about fans ' high expectations . Producer Lawrence Gordon felt she was a perfect fit for the role . Jolie braided her hair and used minimal padding to increase her bust a cup size to <unk> for the role . She felt that Croft 's video game proportions were unrealistic , and wanted to avoid showing such proportions to young girls . Jolie trained rigorously for the action scenes required for the role , occasionally sustaining injuries . Her training focused on practicing the physical skills necessary to perform the film 's stunts . The difficulty of the training and injuries discouraged her , but she continued working through production . Jolie also encountered difficulties when working the guns , bungee jumping , and manoeuvring with the braid . West had not anticipated that Jolie would do her own stunts , and was impressed , as was stunt coordinator Simon Crane , by the effort she put into them . 
 Angelina Jolie reprised her role for a sequel , Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life . Directed by Jan de Bont , the 2003 film focused more on the character 's development . De Bont praised Jolie 's understanding of Lara Croft , as well as the character 's strength , saying he " hates women in distress . " Producer Levin commented that the film staff tried to handle the character properly , and consulted with the video game developers on what would be appropriate . Despite the second film 's poor reception , Paramount remained open to releasing a third . Jolie was still optioned to play the character in a third film as late as 2007 , though she had commented in 2004 that she had no intention of reprising the role again . Development for a third movie was announced in 2009 , with Dan Lin as the producer . However , a new actress is currently being sought to play the title character . Lin intends to reboot the film series with a young Croft in an origin story . In 2011 , Olivia Wilde denied rumors that she would play the role , but still expressed interest . The film , originally meant for a 2013 release , is currently to be produced by Graham King , written by Marti Noxon and produced by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Meyer in partnership with King 's studio GK Films . On April 28 , 2016 , it was announced that Academy Award winner Alicia Vikander would be playing Croft in the next film adaptation . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Lara Croft 's 1996 debut is often cited as a catalyst for more female leads in video games . Kaiser Hwang of PlayStation Magazine commented that she " brought girl power " to video games . IGN argued that Croft helped redefine gender in video games by providing a different interpretation of what women could do . Several publications have used her as the standard to which later female video game characters have been compared . Video game publications like PlayStation Magazine , IGN , Edge , and PlayStation : The Official Magazine have labelled the character a video game and cultural icon . Jeremy Smith credits Croft with exposing the Tomb Raider games and video games in general to a wider audience . Computer and Video Games commented that Croft 's appearance on the cover of The Face signalled a change in the perception of video games from " geeky " to mainstream . The character is honoured in the British city Derby , previous home to Core Design . In 2007 , <unk> Homes placed a blue plaque for Croft at the site of Core Design 's former offices , now a block of flats . The Derby City Council opened a public vote in 2009 to name its new ring road . The winning choice , with 89 % of over 27 @,@ 000 votes , was " Lara Croft Way " , and opened in July 2010 . 
 Yahoo ! Movies and IGN credit Jolie 's role in the first Tomb Raider film with significantly raising her profile and propelling her to international super @-@ stardom , respectively . Jolie commented that young children would ask her to sign objects as Lara Croft . After filming for the first movie at the Cambodian temple Ta <unk> , the local inhabitants called it the " Angelina Jolie Temple " and local restaurants served Jolie 's favorite alcoholic beverage advertised as " Tomb Raider cocktails " . IGN 's Jesse Schedeen described Croft as one of few characters to receive a decent videogame @-@ to @-@ movie adaptation . By 2008 , the first Tomb Raider movie was the highest @-@ grossing video game movie and the largest opening ever for a movie headlined by a woman . It became the second highest @-@ grossing video game movie in 2010 , after the release of Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time . 
 = = = Reception and legacy = = = 
 Lara Croft 's introduction was widely regarded as an innovation in the video game market , with Rob Smith of PlayStation : The Official Magazine describing her as a video game icon of that generation of games . IGN credited a rise in PlayStation sales in part to Croft 's debut on the system , and PlayStation Magazine attributed the first title 's success to the character . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine stated alternatively that Tomb Raider 's PlayStation success propelled the character to prominence , making her a mascot for the system . PlayStation Magazine credits coverage in the Financial Times in 1997 as the starting point of the character 's mainstream attention . As years progressed , Lara Croft 's popularity declined due to a string of poorly received video game sequels . The Angel of Darkness is often cited as the character 's low point . IGN editor Colin Moriarty stated that while she began as an intelligent and strong female character , her games grew bland and Lara Croft became more like a " virtual blow @-@ up doll " . 
 Crystal Dynamics ' rendition of Croft in Legend garnered wide , though not universal , praise ; many publications described the portrayal as a successful reboot . Game Informer named Lara Croft the number six top video game hero of 2006 , citing the character 's successful reprise in popularity . The magazine cited the character 's alterations in Legend as the reason for her resurgent success . Chris Slate of PlayStation Magazine lauded the character changes in Legend , commenting that " Lara is finally back " . He praised Eidos 's decision to switch developers and Crystal Dynamics ' contributions , especially the character 's new gameplay manoeuvres and updated appearance . Others , like Schedeen and GamePro 's Patrick Shaw , felt that the makeover did not improve the character . Fans also disapproved of the changes , especially the switch from the braid . 
 Dr. Mark Griffiths of Nottingham Trent University described Lara Croft as a psychological tabula rasa . Richard Rouse of Midway Games attributed the character 's appeal to a loosely defined personality , which permits players to imprint their own onto her . Jeremy Smith stated that the minimal personality allows players to form a relationship with the character . Burton added that Croft is perceived differently around the world . French demographics focus on her sex appeal , while German and British audiences are drawn to her aggressiveness and aloofness , respectively . <unk> dedicated to Lara Croft appeared on the internet in several languages after the release of Tomb Raider , and contained official and fan @-@ created images of Croft , model photographs , and fan fiction starring the character . More than 100 such sites were present by the end of 1998 . By 2000 , search engine <unk> yielded around 4 @,@ 700 pages for a search of the character 's name . Admirers discussed rumours related to Lara Croft via usenet newsgroups and <unk> chats . Enthusiasts also collected merchandise and paraphernalia , submitted fan art to video game magazines , participated in Croft cosplay , and obtained tattoos depicting the character . One admirer rode a bike over 500 miles ( 800 km ) from Amsterdam to Derby wearing Lara Croft brand clothing to meet the developers , who welcomed him after learning of the trip . 
 Lara Croft holds a Guinness World Record as the " most recognized female video game character " , and received a star on the Walk of Game in San Francisco . Game Informer commented that the character is well liked around the world , particularly in England . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine described Croft as " one of today 's premier videogame and movie heroes " , and Play magazine described her as " 3D gaming 's first female superstar " . <unk> called Croft one of the most famous game women , praising her independence . Karen Jones of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine described the character as " one of the biggest stars on the PlayStation " . In 1998 , PlayStation Magazine commented that Lara Croft was one of the most memorable characters on the PlayStation console , and echoed a similar statement in 2004 . Time magazine writer Chris Taylor called her " the foundation of one of the most successful franchises in video @-@ game history . " In June 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named her one of the 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years . In 2011 , Empire ranked her as the fifth greatest video game character . 
 = = = Sex symbol = = = 
 Lara Croft has become a sex symbol for video games , despite Toby Gard 's intentions for her to be sexy " only because of her power " . Time magazine 's Kristina Dell considered her the first sex symbol of video games . Schedeen stated that Croft is among the first video game icons to be accepted as a mainstream sex symbol . Robert Ashley of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine described Lara Croft as the first video game character openly thought of as sexy , and attributed the appearance of similar 3D characters to her . Publications like Play , GameTrailers , and PlayStation Magazine listed big breasts as one of the character 's most famous attributes . After interviewing players in 1998 , Griffiths commented that players regularly mention Croft 's breasts when discussing her . In 2008 , the character was first and second on two UGO Networks lists of hottest video game characters . GameDaily placed Lara Croft number one on a similar list that same year , and PlayStation : The Official Magazine awarded her honorable mention for Game Babe of the Year . Croft has appeared in several issues of Play 's Girls of Gaming special and PlayStation Magazine 's Swimsuit special . <unk> portray the character partially nude , in bikinis , and in revealing cocktail dresses , though Tomb Raider : Underworld 's creative director Eric Lindstrom criticized such poses as out of character . He further stated that they conflict with Croft 's popular strengths , and felt that fans respond more strongly to images of the character dressed more conservatively than to ones with provocative poses . PlayStation Magazine 's staff agreed , commenting that better use of the character 's sex appeal would please fans more . 
 Male players have performed in @-@ game actions to make Lara Croft repeatedly say phrases and view closer camera angles of her bust , while pornography featuring the character has been distributed via the internet . After the first game 's release , rumours appeared on the internet about a cheat code to remove the character 's clothes . Despite Core Design 's denial of such a code , the rumour persisted , fueled by manipulated nude images . The rumour lingered by the time Legend was released . PlayStation Magazine featured an April Fool 's parody of Croft and the rumoured code referred to as " Nude Raider " . Fans developed software patches to remove Lara Croft 's clothing in the personal computer game releases . 
 Reaction from groups have been mixed . The journal Leonardo noted some feminists ' negative reaction to her design ; though males were identifying with their feminine side through Croft , she reinforced unrealistic ideals about the female body . Australian feminist scholar Germaine Greer criticized her as an embodiment of male fantasies . PlayStation Magazine staff commented that Croft could be seen as either a role model for young independent girls or the embodiment of a male adolescent fantasy , though later stated that the character does little to attract female demographics and was obviously designed with a male audience in mind . The editors also criticized Core Design 's hypocritical attempts to downplay the character 's sex appeal in public statements while releasing advertisements that prominently featured Lara Croft 's sexuality . Graphic artist Heather Gibson attributed the " sexism " to participation from Eidos 's marketing department . 
 Author Mark Cohen attributed Lara Croft 's eroticism among male fans to the character 's appearance and a male protective instinct . German psychologist Oscar <unk> described the protective behaviour as the result of the opportunity to act as a hero in virtual worlds and a fear of powerful , emancipated women . Jonathan Smith of Arcade : The Videogame Magazine similarly noted that male players often see themselves as " chivalrous protectors " while playing the game . <unk> further stated that the lower psychological investment inherent to virtual characters is more comfortable for males . Cohen affirmed that despite blatant male appeal , Croft garnered a serious female audience . Eidos estimated by 2000 , female consumers comprised 20 – 25 percent of Tomb Raider game purchases . Jeremy Smith argued that the series attracted more female players to video gaming , especially in Japan . Smith believed that Croft does not alienate prospective female players , representing an emancipated heroine and not simply an attractive character . According to Adrian Smith , the character was also popular with younger demographics that did not view her sexually . Cohen reasoned that Croft differs from other erotic characters and attractive leads , as the Tomb Raider games also feature rich action , impressive graphics , and intelligent puzzles ; other such characters were unsuccessful because the game content was lacking . Amy Hennig of developer Naughty Dog and Griffiths echoed similar statements . GamesRadar editor Justin <unk> nonetheless commented that he couldn 't imagine a Tomb Raider game without a sexualized female lead . 
 Griffith described Lara Croft as a flawed female influence . He stated that though the character is a step in the right direction , too many women view her as a " crudely realised male fantasy figure " . Women in the video game industry describe the character as both a positive and negative influence . <unk> Roby of <unk> commented that Croft was not a sexist influence in 1996 , attributed to the lack of prominent female characters in video games at the time . She stated that the over @-@ sexualized appearance was overlooked because the character was a " breath of fresh air " . However , Roby felt that though Lara Croft 's proportions have become more realistic , the character 's personality was diluted by the developer 's actions to appeal to a male audience . <unk> 's Tracy Whitelaw called the character a dichotomy , stating that though Croft is viewed as " idealized " with an " unattainable body " , the character was a great stride for the propagation of female characters as video game protagonists . 
 = Definition of planet = 
 The definition of planet , since the word was coined by the ancient Greeks , has included within its scope a wide range of celestial bodies . Greek astronomers employed the term asteres <unk> ( ἀστέρες πλανῆται ) , " wandering stars " , for star @-@ like objects which apparently moved over the sky . Over the millennia , the term has included a variety of different objects , from the Sun and the Moon to satellites and asteroids . 
 By the end of the 19th century the word planet , though it had yet to be defined , had become a working term applied only to a small set of objects in the Solar System . After 1992 , however , astronomers began to discover many additional objects beyond the orbit of Neptune , as well as hundreds of objects orbiting other stars . These discoveries not only increased the number of potential planets , but also expanded their variety and peculiarity . Some were nearly large enough to be stars , while others were smaller than Earth 's moon . These discoveries challenged long @-@ perceived notions of what a planet could be . 
 The issue of a clear definition for planet came to a head in January 2005 with the discovery of the trans @-@ Neptunian object Eris , a body more massive than the smallest then @-@ accepted planet , Pluto . In its August 2006 response , the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) , recognised by astronomers as the world body responsible for resolving issues of nomenclature , released its decision on the matter during a meeting in Prague in the Czech republic . This definition , which applies only to the Solar System , states that a planet is a body that orbits the Sun , is massive enough for its own gravity to make it round , and has " cleared its neighbourhood " of smaller objects around its orbit . Under this new definition , Pluto and the other trans @-@ Neptunian objects do not qualify as planets . The IAU 's decision has not resolved all controversies , and while many scientists have accepted the definition , some in the astronomical community have rejected it outright . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planets in antiquity = = = 
 While knowledge of the planets predates history and is common to most civilizations , the word planet dates back to ancient Greece . Most Greeks believed the Earth to be stationary and at the center of the universe in accordance with the geocentric model and that the objects in the sky , and indeed the sky itself , revolved around it . ( An exception was Aristarchus of Samos who put forward an early version of <unk> . ) Greek astronomers employed the term asteres <unk> ( ἀστέρες πλανῆται ) , " wandering stars " , to describe those starlike lights in the heavens that moved over the course of the year , in contrast to the asteres <unk> ( ἀστέρες <unk> ) , the " fixed stars " , which stayed motionless relative to one another . The five bodies currently called " planets " that were known to the Greeks were those visible to the naked eye : Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn . 
 Graeco @-@ Roman cosmology commonly considered seven planets , with the Sun and the Moon counted among them ( as is the case in modern astrology ) ; however , there is some ambiguity on that point , as many ancient astronomers distinguished the five star @-@ like planets from the Sun and Moon . As the 19th @-@ century German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt noted in his work Cosmos , 
 Of the seven <unk> bodies which , by their continually varying relative positions and distances apart , have ever since the remotest antiquity been distinguished from the " <unk> orbs " of the heaven of the " fixed stars " , which to all sensible appearance preserve their relative positions and distances unchanged , five only — Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn — wear the appearance of stars — " <unk> <unk> <unk> " — while the Sun and Moon , from the size of their disks , their importance to man , and the place assigned to them in mythological systems , were classed apart . 
 In his Timaeus , written in roughly 360 BC , Plato mentions , " the Sun and Moon and five other stars , which are called the planets " . His student Aristotle makes a similar distinction in his On the Heavens : " The movements of the sun and moon are fewer than those of some of the planets " . In his <unk> , which set to verse an astronomical treatise written by the philosopher Eudoxus in roughly 350 BC , the poet Aratus describes " those five other orbs , that intermingle with [ the constellations ] and wheel wandering on every side of the twelve figures of the Zodiac . " 
 In his Almagest written in the 2nd century , Ptolemy refers to " the Sun , Moon and five planets . " Hyginus explicitly mentions " the five stars which many have called wandering , and which the Greeks call Planeta . " Marcus Manilius , a Latin writer who lived during the time of Caesar Augustus and whose poem Astronomica is considered one of the principal texts for modern astrology , says , " Now the <unk> is divided into five parts , for so many are the stars called wanderers which with passing brightness shine in heaven . " 
 The single view of the seven planets is found in Cicero 's Dream of Scipio , written sometime around 53 BC , where the spirit of Scipio Africanus proclaims , " Seven of these spheres contain the planets , one planet in each sphere , which all move contrary to the movement of heaven . " In his Natural History , written in 77 AD , Pliny the Elder refers to " the seven stars , which owing to their motion we call planets , though no stars wander less than they do . " Nonnus , the 5th century Greek poet , says in his <unk> , " I have oracles of history on seven tablets , and the tablets bear the names of the seven planets . " 
 = = = Planets in the Middle Ages = = = 
 Medieval and Renaissance writers generally accepted the idea of seven planets . The standard medieval introduction to astronomy , Sacrobosco 's De <unk> , includes the Sun and Moon among the planets , the more advanced <unk> <unk> presents the " theory of the seven planets , " while the instructions to the Alfonsine Tables show how " to find by means of tables the mean <unk> of the sun , moon , and the rest of the planets . " In his Confessio Amantis , 14th @-@ century poet John Gower , referring to the planets ' connection with the craft of alchemy , writes , " Of the <unk> ben <unk> / The gold is tilted to the Sonne / The <unk> of <unk> hath his part ... " , indicating that the Sun and the Moon were planets . Even Nicolaus Copernicus , who rejected the geocentric model , was ambivalent concerning whether the Sun and Moon were planets . In his De Revolutionibus , Copernicus clearly separates " the sun , moon , planets and stars " ; however , in his Dedication of the work to Pope Paul III , Copernicus refers to , " the motion of the sun and the moon ... and of the five other planets . " 
 = = = Earth = = = 
 Eventually , when Copernicus 's heliocentric model was accepted over the geocentric , Earth was placed among the planets and the Sun and Moon were reclassified , necessitating a conceptual revolution in the understanding of planets . As the historian of science Thomas Kuhn noted in his book , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions : 
 The <unk> who denied its traditional title ' planet ' to the sun ... were changing the meaning of ' planet ' so that it would continue to make useful distinctions in a world where all celestial bodies ... were seen differently from the way they had been seen before ... Looking at the moon , the convert to Copernicanism ... says , ' I once took the moon to be ( or saw the moon as ) a planet , but I was <unk> 
 Copernicus obliquely refers to Earth as a planet in De Revolutionibus when he says , " Having thus assumed the motions which I ascribe to the Earth later on in the volume , by long and intense study I finally found that if the motions of the other planets are correlated with the orbiting of the earth ... " Galileo also asserts that Earth is a planet in the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems : " [ T ] he Earth , no less than the moon or any other planet , is to be numbered among the natural bodies that move circularly . " 
 = = = Modern planets = = = 
 In 1781 , the astronomer William Herschel was searching the sky for elusive stellar parallaxes , when he observed what he termed a comet in the constellation of Taurus . Unlike stars , which remained mere points of light even under high magnification , this object 's size increased in proportion to the power used . That this strange object might have been a planet simply did not occur to Herschel ; the five planets beyond Earth had been part of humanity 's conception of the universe since antiquity . As the asteroids had yet to be discovered , comets were the only moving objects one expected to find in a telescope . However , unlike a comet , this object 's orbit was nearly circular and within the ecliptic plane . Before Herschel announced his discovery of his " comet " , his colleague , British Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne , wrote to him , saying , " I don 't know what to call it . It is as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as a Comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis . I have not yet seen any coma or tail to it . " The " comet " was also very far away , too far away for a mere comet to resolve itself . Eventually it was recognised as the seventh planet and named Uranus after the father of Saturn . 
 <unk> induced irregularities in Uranus 's observed orbit led eventually to the discovery of Neptune in 1846 , and presumed irregularities in Neptune 's orbit subsequently led to a search which did not find the perturbing object ( it was later found to be a mathematical artefact caused by an overestimation of Neptune 's mass ) but did find Pluto in 1930 . Initially believed to be roughly the mass of the Earth , observation gradually shrank Pluto 's estimated mass until it was revealed to be a mere five hundredth as large ; far too small to have influenced Neptune 's orbit at all . In 1989 , Voyager 2 determined the irregularities to be due to an overestimation of Neptune 's mass . 
 = = = Satellites = = = 
 When Copernicus placed Earth among the planets , he also placed the Moon in orbit around Earth , making the Moon the first natural satellite to be identified . When Galileo discovered his four satellites of Jupiter in 1610 , they lent weight to Copernicus 's argument , because if other planets could have satellites , then Earth could too . However , there remained some confusion as to whether these objects were " planets " ; Galileo referred to them as " four planets flying around the star of Jupiter at unequal intervals and periods with wonderful swiftness . " Similarly , Christiaan Huygens , upon discovering Saturn 's largest moon Titan in 1655 , employed many terms to describe it , including " planeta " ( planet ) , " stella " ( star ) , " luna " ( moon ) , and the more modern " satellite " ( attendant ) . Giovanni Cassini , in announcing his discovery of Saturn 's moons Iapetus and Rhea in 1671 and 1672 , described them as Nouvelles <unk> autour de <unk> ( " New planets around Saturn " ) . However , when the " Journal de <unk> " reported Cassini 's discovery of two new Saturnian moons in 1686 , it referred to them strictly as " satellites " , though sometimes Saturn as the " primary planet " . When William Herschel announced his discovery of two objects in orbit around Uranus in 1787 , he referred to them as " satellites " and " secondary planets " . All subsequent reports of natural satellite discoveries used the term " satellite " exclusively , though the 1868 book " Smith 's Illustrated Astronomy " referred to satellites as " secondary planets " . 
 = = = Minor planets = = = 
 One of the unexpected results of William Herschel 's discovery of Uranus was that it appeared to validate Bode 's law , a mathematical function which generates the size of the semimajor axis of planetary orbits . Astronomers had considered the " law " a meaningless coincidence , but Uranus fell at very nearly the exact distance it predicted . Since Bode 's law also predicted a body between Mars and Jupiter that at that point had not been observed , astronomers turned their attention to that region in the hope that it might be vindicated again . Finally , in 1801 , astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi found a miniature new world , Ceres , lying at just the correct point in space . The object was hailed as a new planet . 
 Then in 1802 , Heinrich Olbers discovered Pallas , a second " planet " at roughly the same distance from the Sun as Ceres . That two planets could occupy the same orbit was an affront to centuries of thinking ; even Shakespeare had ridiculed the idea ( " Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere " ) . Even so , in 1804 , another world , Juno , was discovered in a similar orbit . In 1807 , Olbers discovered a fourth object , Vesta , at a similar orbital distance . 
 Herschel suggested that these four worlds be given their own separate classification , asteroids ( meaning " starlike " since they were too small for their disks to resolve and thus resembled stars ) , though most astronomers preferred to refer to them as planets . This conception was entrenched by the fact that , due to the difficulty of distinguishing asteroids from yet @-@ uncharted stars , those four remained the only asteroids known until 1845 . Science textbooks in 1828 , after Herschel 's death , still numbered the asteroids among the planets . With the arrival of more refined star charts , the search for asteroids resumed , and a fifth and sixth were discovered by Karl Ludwig <unk> in 1845 and 1847 . By 1851 the number of asteroids had increased to 15 , and a new method of classifying them , by affixing a number before their names in order of discovery , was adopted , inadvertently placing them in their own distinct category . Ceres became " ( 1 ) Ceres " , Pallas became " ( 2 ) Pallas " , and so on . By the 1860s , the number of known asteroids had increased to over a hundred , and observatories in Europe and the United States began referring to them collectively as " minor planets " , or " small planets " , though it took the first four asteroids longer to be grouped as such . To this day , " minor planet " remains the official designation for all small bodies in orbit around the Sun , and each new discovery is numbered accordingly in the IAU 's Minor Planet Catalogue . 
 = = = Pluto = = = 
 The long road from planethood to reconsideration undergone by Ceres is mirrored in the story of Pluto , which was named a planet soon after its discovery by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930 . Uranus and Neptune had been declared planets based on their circular orbits , large masses and proximity to the ecliptic plane . None of these applied to Pluto , a tiny and icy world in a region of gas giants with an orbit that carried it high above the ecliptic and even inside that of Neptune . In 1978 , astronomers discovered Pluto 's largest moon , Charon , which allowed them to determine its mass . Pluto was found to be much <unk> than anyone had expected : only one sixth the mass of Earth 's Moon . However , as far as anyone could yet tell , it was unique . Then , beginning in 1992 , astronomers began to detect large numbers of icy bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune that were similar to Pluto in composition , size , and orbital characteristics . They concluded that they had discovered the long @-@ hypothesised Kuiper belt ( sometimes called the Edgeworth – Kuiper belt ) , a band of icy debris that is the source for " short @-@ period " comets — those with orbital periods of up to 200 years . 
 Pluto 's orbit lay within this band and thus its planetary status was thrown into question . Many scientists concluded that tiny Pluto should be reclassified as a minor planet , just as Ceres had been a century earlier . Mike Brown of the California Institute of Technology suggested that a " planet " should be redefined as " any body in the Solar System that is more massive than the total mass of all of the other bodies in a similar orbit . " Those objects under that mass limit would become minor planets . In 1999 , Brian G. Marsden of Harvard University 's Minor Planet Center suggested that Pluto be given the minor planet number 10000 while still retaining its official position as a planet . The prospect of Pluto 's " demotion " created a public outcry , and in response the International Astronomical Union clarified that it was not at that time proposing to remove Pluto from the planet list . 
 The discovery of several other trans @-@ Neptunian objects approaching the size of Pluto , such as Quaoar and Sedna , continued to erode arguments that Pluto was exceptional from the rest of the trans @-@ Neptunian population . On July 29 , 2005 , Mike Brown and his team announced the discovery of a trans @-@ Neptunian object confirmed to be more massive than Pluto , named Eris . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the object 's discovery , there was much discussion as to whether it could be termed a " tenth planet " . NASA even put out a press release describing it as such . However , acceptance of Eris as the tenth planet implicitly demanded a definition of planet that set Pluto as an arbitrary minimum size . Many astronomers , claiming that the definition of planet was of little scientific importance , preferred to recognise Pluto 's historical identity as a planet by " <unk> " it into the planet list . 
 = = IAU definition = = 
 The discovery of Eris forced the IAU to act on a definition . In October 2005 , a group of 19 IAU members , which had already been working on a definition since the discovery of Sedna in 2003 , narrowed their choices to a shortlist of three , using approval voting . The definitions were : 
 A planet is any object in orbit around the Sun with a diameter greater than 2000 km . ( eleven votes in favour ) 
 A planet is any object in orbit around the Sun whose shape is stable due to its own gravity . ( eight votes in favour ) 
 A planet is any object in orbit around the Sun that is dominant in its immediate neighbourhood . ( six votes in favour ) 
 Since no consensus could be reached , the committee decided to put these three definitions to a wider vote at the IAU General Assembly meeting in Prague in August 2006 , and on August 24 , the IAU put a final draft to a vote , which combined elements from two of the three proposals . It essentially created a medial classification between planet and rock ( or , in the new parlance , small Solar System body ) , called dwarf planet and placed Pluto in it , along with Ceres and Eris . The vote was passed , with 424 astronomers taking part in the ballot . 
 The IAU also resolved that " planets and dwarf planets are two distinct classes of objects " , meaning that dwarf planets , despite their name , would not be considered planets . 
 On September 13 , 2006 , the IAU placed Eris , its moon Dysnomia , and Pluto into their Minor Planet Catalogue , giving them the official minor planet designations ( 134340 ) Pluto , ( 136199 ) Eris , and ( 136199 ) Eris I Dysnomia . Other possible dwarf planets , such as 2003 EL61 , 2005 FY9 , Sedna and Quaoar , were left in temporary limbo until a formal decision could be reached regarding their status . 
 On June 11 , 2008 , the IAU executive committee announced the establishment of a subclass of dwarf planets comprising the aforementioned " new category of trans @-@ Neptunian objects " to which Pluto is a prototype . This new class of objects , termed plutoids , would include Pluto , Eris and any other future trans @-@ Neptunian dwarf planets , but excluded Ceres . The IAU also determined that , for naming purposes , only those TNOs with an absolute magnitude brighter than H = + 1 would be allowed into the category . To date , only two other TNOs , 2003 EL61 and 2005 FY9 , meet the absolute magnitude requirement , while other potential dwarf planets , such as Sedna , Orcus and Quaoar , do not . On July 11 , 2008 , the Working Group on Planetary Nomenclature included 2005 FY9 in the plutoid class , naming it Makemake . On September 17 , 2008 , 2003 EL61 joined the category with the name Haumea . 
 = = Acceptance of the definition = = 
 Among the most vocal proponents of the IAU 's decided definition are Mike Brown , the discoverer of Eris ; Steven Soter , professor of astrophysics at the American Museum of Natural History ; and Neil deGrasse Tyson , director of the Hayden Planetarium . 
 In the early 2000s , when the Hayden Planetarium was undergoing a $ 100 million renovation , Tyson refused to refer to Pluto as the ninth planet at the planetarium . He explained that he would rather group planets according to their commonalities rather than counting them . This decision resulted in Tyson receiving large amounts of hate mail , primarily from children . In 2009 , Tyson wrote a book detailing the demotion of Pluto . 
 In an article in the January 2007 issue of Scientific American , Soter cited the definition 's incorporation of current theories of the formation and evolution of the Solar System ; that as the earliest protoplanets emerged from the swirling dust of the protoplanetary disc , some bodies " won " the initial competition for limited material and , as they grew , their increased gravity meant that they accumulated more material , and thus grew larger , eventually outstripping the other bodies in the Solar System by a very wide margin . The asteroid belt , disturbed by the gravitational tug of nearby Jupiter , and the Kuiper belt , too widely spaced for its constituent objects to collect together before the end of the initial formation period , both failed to win the accretion competition . 
 When the numbers for the winning objects are compared to those of the losers , the contrast is striking ; if Soter 's concept that each planet occupies an " orbital zone " is accepted , then the least <unk> dominant planet , Mars , is larger than all other collected material in its orbital zone by a factor of 5100 . Ceres , the largest object in the asteroid belt , only accounts for one third of the material in its orbit ; Pluto 's ratio is even lower , at around 7 percent . Mike Brown asserts that this massive difference in orbital dominance leaves " absolutely no room for doubt about which objects do and do not belong . " 
 = = Ongoing controversies = = 
 Despite the IAU 's declaration , a number of critics remain unconvinced . The definition is seen by some as arbitrary and confusing . A number of Pluto @-@ as @-@ planet proponents , in particular Alan Stern , head of NASA 's New Horizons mission to Pluto , have circulated a petition among astronomers to alter the definition . Stern 's claim is that , since less than 5 percent of astronomers voted for it , the decision was not representative of the entire astronomical community . Even with this controversy excluded , however , there remain several ambiguities in the definition . 
 = = = Clearing the neighbourhood = = = 
 One of the main points at issue is the precise meaning of " cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit " . Alan Stern objects that " it is impossible and contrived to put a dividing line between dwarf planets and planets , " and that since neither Earth , Mars , Jupiter , nor Neptune have entirely cleared their regions of debris , none could properly be considered planets under the IAU definition . 
 Mike Brown counters these claims by saying that , far from not having cleared their orbits , the major planets completely control the orbits of the other bodies within their orbital zone . Jupiter may coexist with a large number of small bodies in its orbit ( the Trojan asteroids ) , but these bodies only exist in Jupiter 's orbit because they are in the sway of the planet 's huge gravity . Similarly , Pluto may cross the orbit of Neptune , but Neptune long ago locked Pluto and its attendant Kuiper belt objects , called plutinos , into a 3 : 2 resonance , i.e. , they orbit the Sun twice for every three Neptune orbits . The orbits of these objects are entirely dictated by Neptune 's gravity , and thus , Neptune is gravitationally dominant . 
 In October 2015 , astronomer Jean @-@ Luc Margot of the University of California Los Angeles proposed a metric for orbital zone clearance derived from whether an object can clear an orbital zone of extent 2 √ 3 of its Hill radius in a specific time scale . This metric places a clear dividing line between the dwarf planets and the planets of the solar system . The calculation is based on the mass of the host star , the mass of the body , and the orbital period of the body . An Earth @-@ mass body orbiting a solar @-@ mass star clears its orbit at distances of up to 400 astronomical units from the star . A Mars @-@ mass body at the orbit of Pluto clears its orbit . This metric , which leaves Pluto as a dwarf planet , applies to both the Solar System and to extrasolar systems . 
 Some opponents of the definition have claimed that " clearing the neighbourhood " is an ambiguous concept . Mark Sykes , director of the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson , Arizona , and organiser of the petition , expressed this opinion to National Public Radio . He believes that the definition does not categorise a planet by composition or formation , but , effectively , by its location . He believes that a Mars @-@ sized or larger object beyond the orbit of Pluto would not be considered a dwarf planet , because he believes that it would not have time to clear its orbit . 
 Brown notes , however , that were the " clearing the neighbourhood " criterion to be abandoned , the number of planets in the Solar System could rise from eight to more than 50 , with hundreds more potentially to be discovered . 
 = = = Hydrostatic equilibrium = = = 
 The IAU 's definition mandates that planets be large enough for their own gravity to form them into a state of hydrostatic equilibrium ; this means that they will reach a round , ellipsoidal shape . Up to a certain mass , an object can be irregular in shape , but beyond that point gravity begins to pull an object towards its own centre of mass until the object collapses into an ellipsoid . ( None of the large objects of the Solar System are truly spherical . Many are spheroids , and several , such as the larger moons of Jupiter and Saturn and the dwarf planet Haumea , have been further distorted into <unk> by rapid rotation or tidal forces , but still in hydrostatic equilibrium . ) 
 However , there is no precise point at which an object can be said to have reached hydrostatic equilibrium . As Soter noted in his article , " how are we to quantify the degree of roundness that distinguishes a planet ? Does gravity dominate such a body if its shape deviates from a spheroid by 10 percent or by 1 percent ? Nature provides no unoccupied gap between round and <unk> shapes , so any boundary would be an arbitrary choice . " Furthermore , the point at which an object 's mass compresses it into an ellipsoid varies depending on the chemical makeup of the object . Objects made of ices , such as Enceladus and Miranda , assume that state more easily than those made of rock , such as Vesta and Pallas . Heat energy , from gravitational collapse , impacts , tidal forces , or radioactive decay , also factors into whether an object will be ellipsoidal or not ; Saturn 's icy moon Mimas is ellipsoidal , but Neptune 's larger moon Proteus , which is similarly composed but colder because of its greater distance from the Sun , is irregular . In addition , the much larger Iapetus is ellipsoidal but does not have the dimensions expected for its current speed of rotation , indicating that it was once in hydrostatic equilibrium but no longer is . 
 = = = Double planets and moons = = = 
 The definition specifically excludes satellites from the category of dwarf planet , though it does not directly define the term " satellite " . In the original draft proposal , an exception was made for Pluto and its largest satellite , Charon , which possess a barycenter outside the volume of either body . The initial proposal classified Pluto – Charon as a double planet , with the two objects orbiting the Sun in tandem . However , the final draft made clear that , even though they are similar in relative size , only Pluto would currently be classified as a dwarf planet . 
 However , some have suggested that the Moon nonetheless deserves to be called a planet . In 1975 , Isaac Asimov noted that the timing of the Moon 's orbit is in tandem with the Earth 's own orbit around the Sun — looking down on the ecliptic , the Moon never actually loops back on itself , and in essence it orbits the Sun in its own right . 
 Also many moons , even those that do not orbit the Sun directly , often exhibit features in common with true planets . There are 19 moons in the Solar System that have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium and would be considered planets if only the physical parameters are considered . Both Jupiter 's moon Ganymede and Saturn 's moon Titan are larger than Mercury , and Titan even has a substantial atmosphere , thicker than the Earth 's . Moons such as Io and Triton demonstrate obvious and ongoing geological activity , and Ganymede has a magnetic field . Just as stars in orbit around other stars are still referred to as stars , some astronomers argue that objects in orbit around planets that share all their characteristics could also be called planets . Indeed , Mike Brown makes just such a claim in his dissection of the issue , saying : 
 It is hard to make a consistent argument that a 400 km <unk> should count as a planet because it might have interesting geology , while a 5000 km satellite with a massive atmosphere , methane lakes , and dramatic storms [ Titan ] shouldn 't be put into the same category , whatever you call it . 
 However , he goes on to say that , " For most people , considering round satellites ( including our Moon ) " planets " violates the idea of what a planet is . " 
 Alan Stern has argued that location should not matter and that only geophysical attributes should be taken into account in the definition of a planet , and proposes the term satellite planet for a planet @-@ sized satellite . 
 = = = Extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs = = = 
 The discovery since 1992 of extrasolar planets , or planet @-@ sized objects around other stars ( 3 @,@ 472 such planets in 2 @,@ 597 planetary systems including 589 multiple planetary systems as of 15 July 2016 ) , has widened the debate on the nature of planethood in unexpected ways . Many of these planets are of considerable size , approaching the mass of small stars , while many newly discovered brown dwarfs are , conversely , small enough to be considered planets . The material difference between a low @-@ mass star and a large gas giant is not clearcut ; apart from size and relative temperature , there is little to separate a gas giant like Jupiter from its host star . Both have similar overall compositions : hydrogen and helium , with trace levels of heavier elements in their atmospheres . The generally accepted difference is one of formation ; stars are said to have formed from the " top down , " out of the gases in a nebula as they underwent gravitational collapse , and thus would be composed almost entirely of hydrogen and helium , while planets are said to have formed from the " bottom up , " from the accretion of dust and gas in orbit around the young star , and thus should have cores of silicates or ices . As yet it is uncertain whether gas giants possess such cores , though the Juno mission to Jupiter could resolve the issue . If it is indeed possible that a gas giant could form as a star does , then it raises the question of whether such an object should be considered an orbiting low @-@ mass star rather than a planet . 
 Traditionally , the defining characteristic for <unk> has been an object 's ability to fuse hydrogen in its core . However , stars such as brown dwarfs have always challenged that distinction . Too small to commence sustained hydrogen fusion , they have been granted star status on their ability to fuse deuterium . However , due to the relative rarity of that isotope , this process lasts only a tiny fraction of the star 's lifetime , and hence most brown dwarfs would have ceased fusion long before their discovery . Binary stars and other multiple @-@ star formations are common , and many brown dwarfs orbit other stars . Therefore , since they do not produce energy through fusion , they could be described as planets . Indeed , astronomer Adam Burrows of the University of Arizona claims that " from the theoretical perspective , however different their modes of formation , extrasolar giant planets and brown dwarfs are essentially the same . " Burrows also claims that such stellar remnants as white dwarfs should not be considered stars , a stance which would mean that an orbiting white dwarf , such as Sirius B , could be considered a planet . However , the current convention among astronomers is that any object massive enough to have possessed the capability to sustain atomic fusion during its lifetime should be considered a star . 
 The confusion does not end with brown dwarfs . Maria Rosa <unk> @-@ Osorio et al. have discovered many objects in young star clusters of masses below that required to sustain fusion of any sort ( currently calculated to be roughly 13 Jupiter masses ) . These have been described as " free floating planets " because current theories of Solar System formation suggest that planets may be ejected from their star systems altogether if their orbits become unstable . However , it is also possible that these " free floating planets " could have formed in the same manner as stars . 
 In 2003 , the IAU officially released a statement to define what constitutes an extrasolar planet and what constitutes an orbiting star . To date , it remains the only official decision reached by the IAU on this issue . The 2006 committee did not attempt to challenge it , or to incorporate it into their definition , claiming that the issue of defining a planet was already difficult to resolve without also considering extrasolar planets . 
 Like defining a planet by having cleared its neighbourhood , this definition creates ambiguity by making location , rather than formation or composition , the determining characteristic for planethood . A free @-@ floating object with a mass below 13 Jupiter masses is a " sub @-@ brown dwarf , " whereas such an object in orbit around a fusing star is a planet , even if , in all other respects , the two objects may be identical . Further , in 2010 , a paper published by Burrows , David S. Spiegel and John A. Milsom called into question the 13 @-@ Jupiter @-@ mass criterion , showing that a brown dwarf of three times solar metallicity could fuse deuterium at as low as 11 Jupiter masses . 
 Also , the 13 Jupiter @-@ mass cutoff does not have precise physical significance . Deuterium fusion can occur in some objects with mass below that cutoff . The amount of deuterium fused depends to some extent on the composition of the object . The Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia includes objects up to 25 Jupiter masses , saying , " The fact that there is no special feature around 13 MJup in the observed mass spectrum reinforces the choice to forget this mass limit , " . The Exoplanet Data Explorer includes objects up to 24 Jupiter masses with the advisory : " The 13 Jupiter @-@ mass distinction by the IAU Working Group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky cores , and observationally problematic due to the sin i ambiguity . " The NASA Exoplanet Archive includes objects with a mass ( or minimum mass ) equal to or less than 30 Jupiter masses . 
 Another criterion for separating planets and brown dwarfs , rather than deuterium burning , formation process or location , is whether the core pressure is dominated by coulomb pressure or electron degeneracy pressure . 
 = = = = Planetary @-@ mass stellar objects = = = = 
 The ambiguity inherent in the IAU 's definition was highlighted in December 2005 , when the Spitzer Space Telescope observed Cha 110913 @-@ 773444 ( above ) , only eight times Jupiter 's mass with what appears to be the beginnings of its own planetary system . Were this object found in orbit around another star , it would have been termed a planet . 
 In September 2006 , the Hubble Space Telescope imaged <unk> 73 b ( left ) , an object orbiting a young companion star at a distance of roughly 200 AU . At 12 Jovian masses , <unk> 73 b is just under the threshold for deuterium fusion , and thus technically a planet ; however , its vast distance from its parent star suggests it could not have formed inside the small star 's protoplanetary disc , and therefore must have formed , as stars do , from gravitational collapse . 
 In 2012 , Philippe Delorme , of the Institute of <unk> and Astrophysics of Grenoble in France announced the discovery of <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ; an independently moving 4 @-@ 7 Jupiter @-@ mass object that likely forms part of the AB Doradus moving group , less than 100 light years from Earth . Although it shares its spectrum with a spectral class T brown dwarf , Delorme speculates that it may be a planet . 
 In October 2013 , astronomers led by Dr. Michael Liu of the University of Hawaii discovered PSO <unk> @-@ 22 , a solitary free @-@ floating L dwarf estimated to possess only 6 @.@ 5 times the mass of Jupiter , making it the least massive sub @-@ brown dwarf yet discovered . 
 = = = Semantics = = = 
 Finally , from a purely linguistic point of view , there is the dichotomy that the IAU created between ' planet ' and ' dwarf planet ' . The term ' dwarf planet ' arguably contains two words , a noun ( planet ) and an adjective ( dwarf ) . Thus , the term could suggest that a dwarf planet is a type of planet , even though the IAU explicitly defines a dwarf planet as not so being . By this formulation therefore , ' dwarf planet ' and ' minor planet ' are best considered compound nouns . Benjamin Zimmer of Language Log summarised the confusion : " The fact that the IAU would like us to think of dwarf planets as distinct from ' real ' planets lumps the lexical item ' dwarf planet ' in with such oddities as ' Welsh rabbit ' ( not really a rabbit ) and ' Rocky Mountain oysters ' ( not really oysters ) . " As Dava Sobel , the historian and popular science writer who participated in the IAU 's initial decision in October 2006 , noted in an interview with National Public Radio , " A dwarf planet is not a planet , and in astronomy , there are dwarf stars , which are stars , and dwarf galaxies , which are galaxies , so it 's a term no one can love , dwarf planet . " Mike Brown noted in an interview with the Smithsonian that , " Most of the people in the dynamical camp really did not want the word " dwarf planet , " but that was forced through by the pro @-@ Pluto camp . So you 're left with this ridiculous baggage of dwarf planets not being planets . " 
 Conversely , astronomer Robert Cumming of the Stockholm Observatory notes that , " The name ' minor planet ' [ has ] been more or less synonymous with ' asteroid ' for a very long time . So it seems to me pretty insane to complain about any ambiguity or risk for confusion with the introduction of ' dwarf planet ' . " 
 = Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari = 
 Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected spelling : Syair Cerita Siti Akbari , Malay for Poem on the Story of Siti Akbari ; also known as Siti Akbari ) is an 1884 Malay @-@ language syair ( poem ) by Lie Kim Hok . Adapted indirectly from the Sjair Abdoel Moeloek , it tells of a woman who passes as a man to free her husband from the Sultan of Hindustan , who had captured him in an assault on their kingdom . 
 Written over a period of several years and influenced by European literature , Siti Akbari differs from earlier syairs in its use of suspense and emphasis on prose rather than form . It also incorporates European realist views to expand upon the genre , although it maintains several of the hallmarks of traditional syairs . Critical views have emphasised various aspects of its story , finding in the work an increased empathy for women 's thoughts and feelings , a call for a unifying language in the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) , and a polemic regarding the relation between tradition and modernity . 
 Siti Akbari was a commercial and critical success , seeing two reprints and a film adaptation in 1940 . When Sjair Abdoel Moeloek 's influence became clear in the 1920s , Lie was criticised as unoriginal . However , Siti Akbari remains one of the better known syairs written by an ethnic Chinese author . Lie was later styled as the " father of Chinese Malay literature " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Sultan of Hindustan , Bahar Oedin , is infuriated after his uncle Safi , a trader , dies while imprisoned in Barbari . As the Abdul Aidid , the Sultan of Barbari , has greater military power , Bahar Oedin <unk> his time and plans his revenge . Meanwhile , Abdul Aidid 's son Abdul Moelan marries his cousin , Siti Bida Undara . Two years later , after Abdul Aidid dies , Abdul Moelan goes on an extended sea voyage , leaving his wife behind . 
 In the nearby kingdom of Ban , Abdul Moelan meets and falls in love with Siti Akbari , daughter of the Sultan of Ban . The two soon marry and , after six months in Ban , return to Barbari . Siti Bida Undara , at first upset at the thought of sharing her husband , soon becomes close friends with Siti Akbari . Shortly thereafter Bahar Oedin takes his revenge , capturing Abdul Moelan and Siti Bida Undara . When the sultan tries to capture Siti Akbari , he discovers a body in her room and believes it to be hers . He takes his captives back to Hindustan and imprisons them . 
 Unknown to him , the pregnant Siti Akbari has faked her death and escaped . After several months she finds protection under <unk> ( Sheikh ) <unk> , under whose protection she gives birth . He trains her in silat ( traditional martial arts ) so she can free her husband . Leaving her son in <unk> 's care , she begins her travels . When seven men accost and attempt to rape her , she kills them . Taking their clothes and cutting her hair , she disguises herself as a man and takes the name Bahara . After arriving in Barbam , she stops a war between two claimants to the region 's throne . She kills the usurper , then takes his head to the rightful heir to the throne , Hamid Lauda . In thanks Hamid Lauda rewards Siti Akbari with rule over Barbam and allows the " Bahara " to take his sister , Siti <unk> , in marriage . 
 Siti Akbari , keeping her disguise as Bahara , leaves Barbam to go to Hindustan and recover her husband . With the help of two advisors who have found the Sultan 's disfavour , she is able to reconnoitre the area . She eventually captures Hindustan with her army , conquering the sultanate on her own , killing Bahar Oedin , and freeing Abdul Moelan and Siti Bida Undara . While still disguised , Siti Akbari repudiates Siti <unk> and gives her to Abdul Moelan before revealing her true identity . The different kingdoms are then divided amongst the male protagonists , while Siti Akbari returns to her role as a wife . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Siti Akbari was written by Lie Kim Hok , a Bogor @-@ born peranakan Chinese who was taught by Dutch missionaries . The missionaries introduced him to European literature , including the works of Dutch writers such as Anna Louisa Geertruida <unk> @-@ Toussaint and Jacob van <unk> , as well as works by French authors like Jules Verne , Alexandre Dumas , and Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail . In his doctoral thesis , J. Francisco B. Benitez suggests that Lie may have also been influenced by Malay and Javanese oral traditions , such as the travelling bangsawan theatrical troupes or wayang puppets . 
 Evidence uncovered after Lie 's death in 1912 suggested that Siti Akbari was heavily influenced by the earlier Sjair Abdoel Moeloek ( 1847 ) , variously credited to Raja Ali Haji or <unk> . This tale was transliterated by Arnold <unk> , then later translated into Sundanese . Sources disagree on the translator . The documentarian Christiaan <unk> , writing in a letter to literary critic Nio Joe Lan , suggested that Lie 's inspiration had come from a version of Sjair Abdoel Moeloek held in the Royal Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences Library in Batavia . Biographer Tio Ie Soei , meanwhile , suggested that the version which inspired Lie was translated in 1873 by Lie 's teacher , Sierk Coolsma . According to Tio , Coolsma had based his translation off a stage performance and written it hurriedly , such that it was nearly illegible . As he had better handwriting , Lie purportedly copied the story for Coolsma and kept the original in his own collection . The literary historian Monique Zaini @-@ Lajoubert writes that none of these intermediary versions has been found . 
 Work on Siti Akbari was completed over a period of several years . Lie stated that the story had taken him three years , writing sporadically . Tio , however , reports rumours that the writing took some seven years , with Lie sometimes taking long breaks and sometimes writing in a fervor , writing from dawn until dusk . 
 = = Style = = 
 The literary critic G. Koster writes that , when writing Siti Akbari , Lie Kim Hok was limited by the formulaic Pandji romances and syair poems common in Malay literature at the time . Koster notes basic structural similarities between Siti Akbari and the existing poetic forms . The work followed the archetype of a hero or heroine going from a lawful kingdom into exile then into a chaotic kingdom , one which Koster suggests is representative of the cycle of oral law . Such an archetype and formulas were used in contemporary works such as Syair Siti Zubaidah Perang Cina ( Poem on Siti Zubaidah and the War against China ) . The plot device of a woman passing herself as a man to do war was likewise common in Malay and Javanese literature . Lie deviated greatly from the established traditions , mixing European and native literary influences . 
 The story consists of 1 @,@ 594 <unk> quatrains divided into two couplets , with each couplet consisting of two lines , and each line consisting of two half @-@ lines separated by a caesura . Most of these lines are complete syntactic units , either clauses or sentences . Koster notes that the form is freer than in more traditional works , and as a result it becomes a sort of prose poem . An unnamed narrator tells the story from a third @-@ person omniscient perspective ; unlike most contemporary works , the narrator " assumes authority on his own account " by putting himself and his ideas forth , rather than acting as an uninvolved party . 
 Siti Akbari differs from contemporary works by introducing a feeling of suspense . Koster gives the identity of the Hindustani trader as an example : the man 's identity as the uncle of the Sultan is not revealed until after it is convenient for the story . Koster describes the period in which a reader believes Siti Akbari to be dead , which spans several pages , as the work 's most remarkable break from tradition . He notes that unlike most contemporary works , the syair begins with a quote , rather than an invocation to Allah . This quote is eventually shown as a fulfilled prophecy : 
 Koster sees effects of realism , especially the idealistic realism held at the time in the Netherlands , in the work . He notes that motives and causality are given more weight in the narrative than in most contemporary works . He observes that this is also reflected in the characters , who – although royalty and holy men – were given the traits of persons one could find in real @-@ life Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . The use of punctuation , another trait uncommon in the local literature of the time , may also have served to give a more realistic reading and reflected the work 's origin as a written manuscript and not from oral literature . Tio Ie Soei described the work 's rhythm as more akin to speech than song . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Benitez writes that the market in Siti Akbari " provides possibilities for exchange and connections " between persons of all cultures and backgrounds , connecting them . He describes this a representation of the <unk> offered by bazaar Malay , which had originated in the markets . As Lie also wrote a grammar of bazaar Malay , Benitez suggests that Lie may have hoped for the dialect to become a lingua franca in the Dutch East Indies . 
 Benitez considers the poem to highlight the tensions between the " <unk> and autonomous subjectivity " of European culture and the " social subjectivity " of adat , or tradition , with the character of Siti Akbari " a site of instability that makes manifest both the possibilities of social transformation , as well as the anxiety over the possibility of social reproduction gone awry " . As an individual , she is able to fight her enemies and reclaim her husband . Ultimately , however , she chooses to return to her polygamous relationship with Abdul Moelan , an affirmation of tradition over modernism . In opposition to Siti Akbari , the trader Safi Oedin refuses to live in accordance with the local customs while he is in a foreign land and ultimately dies . Benitez writes that this " may be read as a warning to those who refuse to live in accordance with local adat . " Koster notes that – as usual with syairs – Siti Akbari works to increase awareness of adat and traditional value systems . 
 Zaini @-@ Lajoubert opines that the story promotes a treatment of women as persons with feelings and opinions , as opposed to the <unk> view common during the period that women were unfeeling objects . She finds that the story 's female characters feel grief and joy , quoting several passages , including one where Siti Akbari confesses that she felt she had waited " dozens of years " for Abdul Moelan . Zaini @-@ Lajoubert notes that the female characters are not all of the same opinion : although Siti Akbari was willing to enter a polygamous relationship , Siti Bida Undara had to be coaxed . Ultimately , however , she finds that Siti Akbari conveys the message that women should be faithful and obedient to their husbands . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Siti Akbari was first published in four volumes in 1884 . It proved to be Lie 's most popular work , and received the most reprints out of any of his publications . The first reprinting was in 1913 by Hoa Siang In Kiok , and the second was in 1922 by Kho Tjeng Bie . Both of these new printings consisted of a single volume , and , according to Tio , contained numerous inaccuracies . 
 The story was well received by readers , and although Lie was not the only ethnic Chinese to write in the traditionally Malay poetry form of syair , he became one of the more accomplished . Lie considered it amongst his best works . Writing in 1923 , Kwee Tek Hoay – himself a proficient author – wrote that he had been fascinated by the story as a child , to the point he had " memorised more than half of its contents by heart " . Kwee considered it " full of good maxims and advice " unavailable elsewhere . Nio Joe Lan described it as the " jewel of Chinese Malay poetry " , of far higher quality than other Chinese @-@ written Malay poems – both contemporary and subsequent . 
 The story was adapted for the stage soon after publication , when it was performed by a group named Siti Akbari under Lie 's leadership . Lie also made a simplified version for a troupe of teenaged actors , whom he led in Bogor . In 1922 the Sukabumi branch of the Shiong Tih Hui published another stage adaptation under the title Pembalesan Siti Akbari ( Revenge of Siti Akbari ) ; by 1926 it was being performed by Miss <unk> 's Orion , a theatrical troupe led by Tio Tek <unk> . The story remained popular well into the late 1930s . It likely inspired Joshua and Othniel Wong 's 1940 film Siti Akbari , starring Roekiah and Rd . Mochtar . The extent of this influence is uncertain , and the film is likely lost . 
 Lie continued experimenting with European @-@ style prose . In 1886 he published Tjhit Liap Seng ( Seven Stars ) , which Claudine Salmon of the School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences describes as the first Chinese Malay novel . Lie went on to publish another four novels , as well as several translations . When ethnic Chinese writers became common in the early 1900s , critics named Lie the " father of Chinese Malay literature " for his contributions , including Siti Akbari and Tjhit Liap Seng . 
 After the rise of the nationalist movement and the Dutch colonial government 's efforts to use Balai Pustaka to publish literary works for native consumption , the work began to be marginalised . The Dutch colonial government used Court Malay as a " language of administration " , a language for everyday dealings , while the Indonesian nationalists appropriated the language to help build a national culture . Chinese Malay literature , written in " low " Malay , was steadily marginalised . Benitez writes that , as a result , there has been little scholarly analysis of Siti Akbari . Despite this , sinologist Leo Suryadinata wrote in 1993 that Siti Akbari has remained one of the best @-@ known syairs written by an ethnic Chinese . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Although both Sjair Abdoel Moeloek and Siti Akbari were often performed on stage , the similarities between the two were not discovered for several years . Zaini @-@ Lajoubert writes that Tio Ie Soei uncovered these similarities while working as a journalist for the Chinese Malay newspaper Lay Po in 1923 . Kwee Tek Hoay followed this article with another discussion of the work 's origins in 1925 . Later writers criticised Lie 's other works as blatant adaptations . Tan <unk> Bing and Tan <unk> Tjeng , for instance , wrote that none of his works were original . Tio Ie Soei , in response , stated that Lie had changed the stories he had adapted , and thus shown originality . 
 In exploring the similarities between Sjair Abdoel Moeloek and Siti Akbari , Zaini @-@ Lajoubert notes that the names of the individual kingdoms , save Barham ( Barbam in Siti Akbari ) , are taken directly from the earlier work . Names of characters , such as Abdul Muluk ( in Siti Akbari , Abdul Moelan ) and Siti <unk> ( Siti Akbari ) , are simply replaced , although some minor characters are present in one story and not the other . The main plot elements in both stories are the same ; some elements , such as the birth and childhood of Abdul Muluk and the later adventures of Siti <unk> 's son , are present in one story and not the other – or given more detail . The two differ greatly in their styles , especially Lie 's emphasis on description and realism . 
 = Wishin ' and Hopin ' ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Wishin ' and Hopin ' " is the fourteenth episode of the third season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 50th episode overall . It was written by Tony Phelan and Joan Rater and directed by Julie Anne Robinson . The episode originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on February 1 , 2007 . In the episode , Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) struggles with her Alzheimer 's @-@ stricken mother , Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) , becoming temporarily lucid . Further storylines include Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) continuously seeking patients for their new clinic , Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) dealing with the repercussions of his upcoming retirement , and Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) facing negative response from colleagues on his unexpected marriage to Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . 
 Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle , filming occurred in Los Angeles , California . Burton reprised her role as Dr. Ellis Grey in a guest star capacity , in addition to Sarah Utterback , who portrayed Olivia Harper . The title of the episode refers to the song " Wishin ' and Hopin ' " , by British pop musician Dusty Springfield . The episode received mixed to favorable reviews , with the storyline involving Ellis being particularly praised by television critics . Upon its original airing , the episode was watched by 24 @.@ 18 million viewers in the United States , ranked first in its time @-@ slot and garnered an 8 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " Wishin ' and Hopin ' " opens to a voice @-@ over narration from Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) about extraordinary events . The Denny Duquette Memorial Clinic has been opened , after a US $ 8 million funding from Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) . Four of the hospital 's attending surgeons , Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , and Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) are all seen competing for the position of chief of surgery , after the current chief Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) announces his plans for retirement . Meredith arrives to the Alzheimer 's support home that her ill mother Dr. Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) is living at , and to her surprise , her mother has become lucid , but faints . Ellis is taken to Seattle Grace Hospital , her former source of employment . Residents Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , and Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) are awaiting the arrival of patients at the clinic , and Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) walks in to announce his unexpected marriage with Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . 
 A cancerous patient , Marina Wagner ( Amanda Collins ) , is admitted into the hospital and is revealed to have toxic blood - presumably caused by a chemical reaction between an herbal supplement and chemotherapy - making several physicians fall ill . O 'Malley is exposed to the neurotoxin , and quickly becomes anxious , fearing that his marriage is the cause of the sickness . Ellis is diagnosed with a heart condition , in which surgery or medication are options . Ellis does not want the surgery , but Meredith fears that she will not be compliant with her medication . Shepherd and Burke try to close up Wagner as the OR was evacuated before her surgery was completed , by entering the operating room with sealed , airtight suits . Ellis agrees to the surgery , but opts to speak with Webber , her former lover . A teenage patient is brought into the clinic by her father , hoping that a doctor can teach her how to use tampons . When her father leaves the room , she explains to Bailey that she had sex , but her pregnancy test is negative . Shepherd and Burke run out of air whilst operating on Wagner , so Yang , Stevens , and Meredith enter holding their breath to close the patient 's incision . O 'Malley 's colleagues act in a rude manner to his new marriage , and displeased , he lectures them , standing up for Torres . Sloan is seen to be having sex with Montgomery , and Yang agrees to marry Burke . At the conclusion of the episode , Ellis ' lucidity has vanished , leaving Meredith and Webber distraught . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Tony Phelan and Joan Rater , while filmmaker Julie Anne Robinson directed it . Featured music includes Psapp 's " King of You " , The <unk> Boy Alive 's " Fireworks " , Iain Archer 's " Canal Song " , Miho <unk> 's " Barracuda " and Sybarite 's " Runaway " . Rater described that she got the idea after being told that her husband had to undergo a craniotomy . She noted that the plan for the episode was to focus on Ellis ' inner feelings , mainly her fright , frustration and stress . " The concept of someone with this disease having a lucid day is real . The disease varies for everyone , but experts we talked to said that patients have bad days and good days and then sometimes they have great days where it seems like they are their old selves . Maybe it 's a moment , maybe an hour , for some a whole afternoon , but we were fascinated with the idea of getting this time , this gift , and knowing that it 's only temporary . What would you do with that one day ? And what would it mean for Meredith ? " , stated Rater , explaining the premise of the episode . She also stated that " the cool idea " to have Meredith and Ellis connect again had been considered for almost a year before the actual concept of the episode was written , after numerous attempts to include the storyline in other episodes that " didn 't feel quite right " : " If you 're going to give Meredith her mother back and then take her away again , you 'd better have a pretty good reason . " Rater also explained that , in her vision , the episode introduces a new period in the interns ' lives , focusing on their finding an identity as surgeons , becoming more central than in the beginning of the season , which revolved around the aftermath of Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) ' s death and Meredith 's involvement in the love triangle between her , Shepherd and Finn Dandridge ( Chris O 'Donnell ) . 
 Rater noted that the balance Meredith had just found in her life , finally having a chance at happiness with the man she loves , is shaken by her mother 's unexpected lucidity , which was stated to have been written in the series in order to remind Meredith about the troubled years of her growing up : " If Meredith is ever going to be happy , she 's got to deal with the fact that she had a really terrible childhood . " In addition , Rater explained that Ellis ' " awful , raw , ugly and terrible " statements towards her daughter were intended to make everyone realize the reason behind Meredith 's alcoholism in college and her continuous one @-@ night stands with inappropriate men . She also deemed Pompeo 's performance in the episode " exceptional " , describing what she regarded an " exceptional moment " which sees Meredith stand up to her mother . In response to the scene that sees Ellis interacting with Webber , Rater wrote that it is the first time she lets her guard down , exposing the previously hidden vulnerability , which allows her express the desire to be as happy and ordinary as her daughter . She also praised the performances of the cast , by deeming their acting " remarkable " . " That is really what it 's all about . We have to cherish the time that we have here , and love the people who surround and support us , even if they make us crazy , because things happen . Brain surgery , Alzheimer 's and weddings . And the worst thing is to come to the of your life , and realize , like Ellis , that you should have tried harder " , stated Rater , putting the emphasis on the main aspects of the episode , characterizing it as " not ordinary " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its original broadcast on February 1 , 2007 at 9 : 00 ET , the episode averaged 24 @.@ 18 million viewers , ranking ninth in weekly viewership with an 8 @.@ 5 rating , according to Nielsen . The episode was the fifth most @-@ watched episode of the season , airing in the fourth week after the winter hiatus . The episode showed a significant increase in ratings , attracting 2 @.@ 68 million more viewers than " Great Expectations " , which received a 7 @.@ 6 rating . " Wishin ' and Hopin ' " was also the leading show in the time slot , with 2 @.@ 69 more million viewers than <unk> ' CSI , which ranked tenth in weekly viewership with a 7 @.@ 6 rating . Kate Burton , who portrayed Ellis Grey , received a nomination at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series category , but ultimately lost to Law & Order : Special Victims Unit 's Leslie Caron . Variety listed the episode in its top 10 most bizarre medical maladies encountered in the series . 
 Staci Krause of IGN had a positive outlook on the episode , mainly due to the heavy development the episode 's plot had in the season 's progressive arc . She described the storylines involving the cancer patient 's intoxication and Ellis ' lucidity as achieving a balance , and moving the show " at a lightning quick pace " . Krause deemed the episode " stellar " , noting how it avoided the possibility of having negative points . Regarding the episode an " epic " one , she praised the scene which depicts O 'Malley realizing the intoxication provoked by the patient 's blood . " This is what we come to expect from medical dramas and it is great to see Grey 's get back to this , while not sacrificing the personal stories " , stated Krause , putting the emphasis on how " this case brought out the <unk> in just about everyone , pushing their limits for a patient " . Krause noted that O 'Malley has developed into a hero , stating that " pulling all the people in the operating room out , even though he was already sick and could have easily died from the effort " in a comparison to Sloan , described as being a man with no appealing traits and " unlikable ways " , which attracted criticism from Krause . 
 On the topic , Krause elaborated : " The only one who didn 't do anything particularly heroic was Sloan . That made him being with Addison at the end even better , because she was using him to sate a desire and that was very clear . " Krause positively reviewed the idea of Ellis Grey 's becoming temporarily lucid , deeming it " amazing " : " She was not very endearing when she was lucid , that 's for certain . She was unbelievably cruel to Meredith , telling her how disappointed she was that Meredith was merely ordinary . Ouch . But she did a great thing this episode too , during her short time as a sane person . She gave Cristina the answer she was looking for . " The arc involving Callie and George 's sudden marriage , named by Krause " a roller coaster " , was described as being a way to emphasize the contrast between the two . Krause also noted the contrast between Stevens ' kindhearted personality in the past , and the cruelty she proves to have in the episode , which was noted to have been " a highlight in perfect fashion " , as well as a reminder for the multi @-@ dimensional personalities of the characters . Also noted was Cristina 's way of accepting Burke 's proposal , following Ellis ' answer , which gave her the hope she had been previously looking for . 
 Kelly West of Cinema Blend also expressed a good perspective on the episode , considering it to have been the best episode of the season . Deeming the episode an " eye @-@ opening experience " , West described Ellis ' surprising personality as having worse repercussions on her daughter than the control issues and the intense disapproval that had previously been noted on the character : " You would think after Ellis had a few hours to digest the news that she has essentially lost her mind , she would take advantage of the gift that is her brief lucidity to patch things up with Meredith . Meredith was hesitant to sit and talk with her mother about the last five years but finally she decides this could be her only chance . " Comparing Ellis ' previous appearances in the series with the version presented in the episode , West stated she is " far worse " as a lucid person , noting how frustration and confusion are her main characteristics . 
 Also noted was the " completely erratic and borderline insane " behavior of Ellis at the realization that her daughter is focusing more on her love life than on her career , learning that the specialty , which she considers to be defining for a surgeon , is not a concern of Meredith 's : " If this is how she was treating Meredith during her childhood and adolescence , it completely explains why Meredith is so dark and twisty . " In addition , West noted the realism in Ellis ' troubled personality , when she considers refusing the heart surgery , due to not being sure of wanting to continue her life in a state of forgetfulness and confusion . The scene which depicts Ellis interacting with Webber was negatively received by West , which regarded the whole conversation to have been based on his convincing lies , determined to give her peace . In response to Miranda Bailey 's storyline in the episode , involving the sexually active teenager , West noted how the character was " direct , somewhat stern , but not unkind about the subject as she educates and consoles the girl " . 
 = Myst ( series ) = 
 Myst is a franchise centered on a series of adventure video games . The first game in the series , Myst , was released in 1993 by brothers Rand and Robyn Miller and their video game company Cyan , Inc . Riven , the sequel to Myst , was released in 1997 , and was followed by three more direct sequels : Myst III : Exile in 2001 , Myst IV : Revelation in 2004 , and Myst V : End of Ages in 2005 . A spinoff featuring a multiplayer component , Uru : Ages Beyond Myst , was released in 2003 and followed by two expansion packs . 
 Myst 's story concerns an explorer named Atrus who has the ability to write books which serve as links to other worlds , known as Ages . This practice of creating linking books was developed by an ancient civilization known as the D 'ni , whose society crumbled after being ravaged by disease . The player takes the role of an unnamed person referred to as the Stranger and assists Atrus by traveling to other Ages and solving puzzles . Over the course of the series Atrus writes a new Age for the D 'ni survivors to live on , and players of the games set the course the civilization will follow . 
 The brothers developed Myst after producing award @-@ winning games for children . Drawing on childhood stories , the brothers spent months designing the Ages players would investigate . The name Myst came from Jules Verne 's novel The Mysterious Island . After Riven was released , Robyn left Cyan to pursue other projects and Cyan began developing Uru ; developers Presto Studios and Ubisoft created Exile and Revelation before Cyan returned to complete the series with End of Ages . Myst and its sequels were critical and commercial successes , selling more than twelve million copies ; the games drove sales of personal computers and CD @-@ ROM drives , as well as attracting casual gamers with its nonviolent gameplay . The video games ' success has led to three published novels in addition to soundtracks , a comic series , television and movie pitches . 
 = = Story = = 
 Myst 's story begins with the arrival of a people known as the D 'ni on Earth , more than 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The D 'ni / <unk> / are an ancient race who used a special skill to create books which serve as portals to the worlds they describe , known as Ages . The D 'ni build a great city and thriving civilization in underground caverns . A young geologist from the surface , Anna , stumbled upon the D 'ni civilization . Learning the D 'ni language , Anna becomes known as Ti 'ana and marries a D 'ni named Aitrus ; the couple have a son named Gehn . Soon after , D 'ni is ravaged by a plague created by a man named A 'Gaeris . Aitrus sacrifices himself to save his wife and child , killing A 'Gaeris while Ti 'ana and Gehn escape to the surface as the D 'ni civilization falls . 
 Ti 'ana raises Gehn until he runs away as a teenager , learning the D 'ni Art of writing linking books . Ti 'ana also cares for Gehn 's son , Atrus , until Gehn arrives to teach Atrus the Art . Atrus realizes that his father is reckless and power @-@ hungry , and with the help of Ti 'ana and a young woman , Catherine , Atrus traps Gehn on his Age of Riven with no linking books . Atrus and Catherine marry and have two children , Sirrus and Achenar . The brothers grow greedy and after plundering their father 's Ages they trap Catherine on Riven . When Atrus returns to investigate , the brothers strand him in a D 'ni cavern before they themselves are trapped by special " prison " books . Through the help of a Stranger , Atrus is freed and sends his benefactor to Riven to retrieve Catherine from the clutches of Gehn . Sirrus and Achenar are punished for their crimes by being imprisoned in separate Ages until they reform . 
 Atrus writes a new Age called Releeshahn for the D 'ni survivors to rebuild their civilization as he and Catherine settle back on Earth , raising a daughter named Yeesha . As Atrus prepares to take the Stranger to Releeshahn , a mysterious man named Saavedro appears and steals the Releeshahn Descriptive Book . The Stranger follows Saavedro through several Ages ( which were used to train Sirrus and Achenar in the art of writing Ages ) , before finally recovering the book . Ten years later , Atrus asks for the Stranger 's help in determining if his sons have repented after their lengthy imprisonment ; the Stranger saves Yeesha from Sirrus ' machinations , but Sirrus and a repentant Achenar are killed . D 'ni is not fully restored until the creatures the D 'ni enslaved , known as the Bahro , are freed . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = Development = = 
 Myst was originally conceptualized by brothers Rand and Robyn Miller . The Millers had created fictional worlds and stories as young children , influenced by the works of authors such as J. R. R. Tolkien , Robert A. Heinlein , and Isaac Asimov . They formed a video game company together called Cyan , Inc . ; their first game , called The Manhole , won the Software Publishers Association award in 1988 for best use of the digital medium . Cyan produced other games , aimed at children ; the Millers eventually decided their next project would be made for adults . 
 The brothers spent months designing the Ages comprising the game , which were influenced by earlier whimsical " worlds " Cyan had made for children 's games . The game 's name , as well as the overall solitary and mysterious atmosphere of the island , was inspired by the book The Mysterious Island by Jules Verne . Robyn 's unfinished novel , <unk> , influenced aspects of Myst 's story , which was developed bit by bit as the brothers conceptualized the various worlds . As development progressed , the Millers realized that they would need to have even more story and history than would be revealed in the game itself . Realizing that fans would enjoy getting a deeper look at the story not in the games , the Millers produced a rough draft of what would become a novel , Myst : The Book of Atrus . 
 After the enormous response to Myst , work quickly began on the next Myst game . Cyan moved from their cramped garage to a new office and hired additional programmers , designers , and artists . The game was to ship in late 1996 , but the release was pushed back a year . Development costs were between $ 5 and $ 10 million , many times Myst 's budget . After the release of Riven , Robyn Miller left the company to pursue other projects , while Rand stayed behind to work on a Myst franchise . 
 While Rand Miller stated Cyan would not make another sequel to Myst , Mattel ( then the owner of the Myst franchise ) offered the task of developing a sequel to several video game companies who created detailed story proposals and technology demonstrations . Presto Studios , makers of the Journeyman Project adventure games , was hired to develop Myst III . Presto spent millions developing the game and used the studio 's entire staff to complete the project , which took two and a half years to develop . Soon after Myst III : Exile was released , Presto was shut down , and Exile publisher Ubisoft developed the sequel , Myst IV : Revelation , internally . Meanwhile , Cyan produced the spinoff title Uru : Ages Beyond Myst , which included an aborted multiplayer component allowing players to cooperatively solve puzzles . 
 Cyan returned to produce what was billed as the final game in the series , discarding live action sequences embedded in prerendered graphics for a world rendered in realtime . The actors ' faces were turned into textures and mapped onto digital characters , with the actor 's actions synchronized by motion capture . Shortly before release , Cyan closed down development , although this did not impact the release of the game ; the company was able to rehire its employees a few weeks later , and continued to work on non @-@ Myst projects and an attempted resurrection of Uru 's multiplayer component , Myst Online . Servers paid for by donation were set up in 2010 , and the game went open @-@ source in 2011 . 
 Among the detailed elements of the Myst universe Cyan created was the language and culture of the D 'ni . The civilization 's numbers and writing first appeared in Riven , and were important to solving some of the game 's puzzles . The D 'ni language was the language presented in various games and novels of the Myst franchise , created by Richard A. Watson . Several online D 'ni dictionaries have been developed as part of the ongoing fan @-@ based culture associated with the game . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music for each game in the Myst series has fallen to various composers . Originally , the Millers believed that any music or sound besides ambient noise would distract the player from the game and ruin the sense of reality ; Myst , therefore , was to have no music at all . A sound test eventually persuaded the developers that music heightened the sense of immersion rather than lessening it , and as such Robyn Miller composed 40 minutes of synthesized music for the game . He would also produce the music for Riven , which featured leitmotifs for each of the main characters . Virgin Records bought the rights to the music and produced the soundtracks , which were released in 1998 . 
 For Myst III : Exile and Myst IV : Revelation , composer Jack Wall created the music , developing a more active musical style different from Miller 's ambient themes . Wall looked at the increasing complexity of games as an opportunity to give players a soundtrack with as much force as a movie score , and tried to create a distinctive sound that was still recognizable as Myst music . In Revelation , Wall adapted the themes for the recurring characters of Myst , and collaborated with Peter Gabriel , who provided a song to the game as well as voicework . 
 The music for Uru : Ages Beyond Myst and Myst V : End of Ages was composed by Tim Larkin , who had gotten involved in the series doing sound design for Riven . Larkin stepped away from his background as a jazz composer and musician to create music with less structure and without a definite beginning and end . Larkin created different music depending on the location , giving each setting and Age a distinctive tone . For End of Ages , Larkin was unable to afford a full orchestra to perform his score , so he combined individual instrumentation with an array of synthesizers . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Rand and Robyn Miller both wanted to develop Myst 's back story into novels . After the success of Myst , publisher Hyperion signed a three @-@ book , US $ 1 million deal with the brothers . David Wingrove worked from the Miller brothers ' story outlines . The three books , entitled Myst : The Book of Atrus , Myst : The Book of Ti 'ana , and Myst : The Book of D 'ni , were released in 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 , respectively . The books were later packaged together as The Myst Reader . A fourth novel , entitled Myst : The Book of Marrim , is planned . 
 Cyan partnered with Dark Horse Comics in 1993 to release a limited four @-@ part comic series called Myst : The Book of Black Ships . The series would have focused on Atrus and his young sons , taking place before the events of Myst . The first issue was released on September 3 , 1997 , but further books were canceled after Cyan decided the first issue did not live up to expectations . Another comic , Myst # 0 : Passages , was later released online . 
 After the Myst series ' success , various proposals for films and television series based on the franchise were planned or rumored . The Sci Fi Channel announced in 2002 that a TV miniseries would be produced based on Myst , to be produced by Mandalay Television Pictures in association with Columbia TriStar Domestic Television and Cyan , but never materialized . According to Rand Miller , none of the various proposals met Cyan 's approval , or were too formulaic or silly . Independent filmmakers Patrick McIntire and Adrian <unk> , themselves Myst fans , took it upon themselves to produce a motion picture based on the story revealed in the Myst novels . In 2006 , the filmmakers sent a DVD proposal to Cyan . The developers gave the filmmakers permission to begin production . The film was set to be based on the novel Myst : The Book of Ti 'ana , but no longer appears to be in production . 
 In October 2014 , Legendary Entertainment announced that it was developing a television series based on Myst , with the involvement of the Miller brothers and Cyan . Legendary stated that they plan to use transmedia companion pieces for the show , such as new video games . 
