 = = Reception and impact = = 
 Overall , the Myst series has been commercially and critically successful . Rand and Robyn Miller were expecting Myst to perform as well as previous Cyan titles , making enough money to fund the next project . Instead , Myst sold more than six million units , becoming the top @-@ selling PC game of all time until The Sims surpassed its sales in 2002 . The first three games in the series have sold more than twelve million copies . 
 1UP.com writer Jeremy Parish noted that there have been two main opinions of Myst 's slow , puzzle @-@ based gameplay ; " Fans consider Myst an elegant , intelligent game for grown @-@ ups , while detractors call it a soulless stroll through a digital museum , more art than game . " Game industry executives were confused by Myst 's success , not understanding how an " interactive slide show " turned out to be a huge hit . Online magazine writer Russell Pitts of The Escapist called Myst " unlike anything that had come before , weaving video almost seamlessly into a beautifully rendered world , presenting a captivating landscape filled with puzzles and mystery . In a game market dominated by Doom clones and simulators , Myst took us by the hand and showed us the future of gaming . It took almost a decade for anyone to follow its lead . " Critics from Wired and Salon considered the games approaching the level of art , while authors Henry Jenkins and Lev <unk> pointed out the series as exemplifying the promise of new media to create unseen art forms . 
 The series caused a major trend shift in the adventure game genre . Unlike previous games , Myst attempted to keep players immersed in the world by removing all information not associated with the fictional world itself — no explanatory text , inventory , or score counters . Myst has also been cited as the reason for the decline of the adventure game genre ; eager to capitalize on Myst 's success , publishers churned out mediocre Myst clones , which flooded the market . By Exile 's release , games like Myst were considered to be an " antiquated " form of gaming by some critics . 
 Myst 's effects extended to those who played the games and technology . The title was widely credited as one of the first games to appeal not just to hardcore gamers but to casual players and demographics that generally did not play games , such as women . Myst 's lack of conventional game elements — violence , dying , and failure — appealed to <unk> and those contemplating buying a computer . The Millers ' decision to develop Myst for the nascent CD @-@ ROM format helped boost interest and adoption of disc drives . 
 The game inspired a CD parody game entitled <unk> , written by comedian Peter Bergman and featured John Goodman in video scenes . Players traveled across the spoiled island of Myst after millions of players walked over it , with the parody game poking fun at elements of the prototype . 
 = = Fan conventions = = 
 The game has spawned annual fan conventions around the world . Mysterium has been held since 2000 , which grew out of the plans of a small group of fans who wanted to meet face to face . Word spread , and eventually approximately 200 people attended the meeting in Spokane , Washington , which was held at the headquarters of Cyan Worlds , developers of the game . Subsequent conventions have been more formally planned , involving presentations and live music . Similar to Mysterium , <unk> is a gathering for Australia and New Zealand and has been held since 2005 . 
 = It Takes a Church = 
 It Takes a Church is an American dating game show hosted by Natalie Grant and broadcast by Game Show Network . The show travels to multiple churches across the country looking for single members of congregations looking for a partner . The congregation of the church is primarily in charge of looking at potential <unk> and judging which one would be the best match . The first season , sponsored by Christian Mingle , began airing on June 5 , 2014 . The series was later renewed for a second season , which began airing March 26 , 2015 . 
 The series received mixed reviews ; one critic gave the series an " Amen ! " while another argued the viewers should " pass " on watching it . Ratings for the first season provided 6 million total viewers for the eight episodes , while the second season saw a decline in the ratings . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The series travels to various churches and congregations to have a single , unsuspecting member of the church presented with potential suitors . Each episode begins at the setting of a church service , with host Natalie Grant appearing to introduce the show . A single member of the congregation is introduced to his or her surprise , while members of the congregation then nominate other single members of the congregation as suitors . The number of suitors is immediately narrowed down to four ; they are the top three as voted by the congregation and a fourth chosen by the pastor or minister . 
 In the first round , the single member spends time in the community ( usually at a charitable event ) with two suitors at a time . During this time , a group of matchmakers watches the events as they are recorded on camera . Once all four suitors have interacted with the single member , the matchmakers provide their input before the single member eliminates a suitor of his or her choice . The church 's pastor moderates the second round , setting up the suitors on their own dates with the single member before spending time one @-@ on @-@ one with each of the suitors . The pastor then makes recommendations to the single member , who in turn eliminates another suitor . The final round consists of actual one @-@ on @-@ one dates between the single member and each of the suitors . After the dates , the congregation gathers to see who the single member has deemed the " winner , " while the matchmaker who originally suggested the winner at the start of the episode earns the church a $ 10 @,@ 000 donation in his or her name . Additionally , the suitors who are not selected receive a free , one @-@ year membership to the online dating website Christian Mingle . 
 = = Production = = 
 GSN first announced the show in their upfront presentation on April 9 , 2013 . The network then ordered eight episodes on December 17 , the first of which premiered on June 5 , 2014 . During the first season , the series was sponsored by Christian Mingle . On August 21 , 2014 , the series was renewed for a second season , which premiered March 26 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 It Takes a Church has received mixed reviews from critics . Tom Conroy of Media Life Magazine enjoyed the premiere episode , arguing that it may even attract a secular audience : " Even secular viewers will be curious to see which one Angela picks , and they ’ ll get a glimpse into a subculture that is largely invisible on TV . Members of that subculture , on the other hand , will watch It Takes a Church and say , ' Amen ! ' " . <unk> , Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times called the series " utterly frivolous , " and called into question the " state of America 's spiritual health " after watching an episode . Genzlinger also argued that the show was a not much more than a " desperate " effort to find something the conservative Christian audience will watch . Carrie Grosvenor of About Entertainment added that viewers should " pass " on the series , calling GSN 's The American Bible Challenge a better " solid game format . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The series garnered over six million total viewers for its first season , posting significant gains in multiple demographics ( including women ages 18 − 49 and 25 − 54 ) versus the time period the previous year . Ratings during the second season dropped significantly ; the April 23 , 2015 airing earned only 207 @,@ 000 viewers and a 0 @.@ 03 rating among adults 18 − 49 . 
 = Lieutenant Governor of Indiana = 
 The Lieutenant Governor of Indiana is a constitutional office in the US State of Indiana . Republican Eric Holcomb , who assumed office in March 2016 , is the incumbent . The office holder 's constitutional roles are to serve as President of the Indiana Senate , become acting governor during the incapacity of the governor , and became governor should the incumbent governor resign , die in office , or be impeached and removed from office . Lieutenant governors have succeeded ten governors following their deaths or resignations . The lieutenant governor holds statutory positions , serving as the head of the state agricultural and rural affairs bureaus , and as the chairman of several state committees . The annual salary of the lieutenant governor of Indiana is $ 88 @,@ 000 . 
 The lieutenant governor is elected on the same election ticket as the Governor in a statewide election held every four years , concurrent with United States presidential elections . Should a lieutenant governor die while in office , resign , or succeed to the governorship , the constitution specifies no mechanism by which to fill vacancies in the lieutenant governor 's office . Historically , the position has generally remained vacant during such events . The last attempt to fill such a vacancy in 1887 led to the outbreak of violence in the state legislature known as the Black Day of the General Assembly . 
 = = Requirements = = 
 The position of lieutenant governor was created with the adoption of the first Constitution of Indiana in August 1816 . The position was filled by an October election . The position was retained and the current requirements established in the state 's second and current constitution adopted in 1851 . 
 To become lieutenant governor of Indiana , a candidate must have been a United States citizen and lived within Indiana for the period of five consecutive years before the election . The candidate must also be at least thirty years old when sworn into office . The lieutenant governor may not hold any federal office during his term , and must resign from any such position before being eligible to be sworn in as lieutenant governor . Before taking the office , the candidate must swear an oath of office administered by the Chief Justice of the Indiana Supreme Court , promising to uphold the constitution and laws of Indiana . 
 = = Succession = = 
 The lieutenant governor of Indiana serves as acting governor when the governor becomes incapacitated . In the state 's early history , lieutenant governors would serve as acting governor while the governor was away from the capital . Christopher Harrison was the first lieutenant governor to serve as acting governor while Jonathan Jennings negotiated treaties far from the capital . 
 If the governor dies in office , becomes permanently incapacitated , resigns , or is impeached , the lieutenant governor becomes governor . In total , ten lieutenant governors become governor by succession . The first occurrence was when Jonathan Jennings resigned to become a congressman and was succeeded by Ratliff Boon . 
 In the event that both the governorship and lieutenant @-@ governorship are vacant , the constitution stipulates that the Senate President pro tempore becomes governor . Historically , governors appointed the pro tempore to serve as acting lieutenant governor as a formality . This practice ended in the early twentieth century . Although the constitution did not specify a method to fill a vacancy in the lieutenant governorship , an attempt to fill a vacancy occurred in 1887 . When the winner of the election attempted to be seated , the Senate erupted into violence known as the Black Day of the General Assembly ; the lieutenant governor @-@ elect was sworn in but never seated . 
 Should the lieutenant governorship become vacant for any reason , including death , resignation , or succession , the governor may nominate a replacement who must be approved by both houses of the General Assembly . 
 = = Authority = = 
 = = = Constitutional = = = 
 The lieutenant governor has two constitutional functions . The primary function is to serve as the President of the Indiana Senate . In the Senate the lieutenant governor is permitted to debate on legislation , introduce legislation , and vote on matters to break ties . As presiding officer in the Senate , lieutenant governors also have partial control over what legislation will be considered , and influence on the legislative calendar . Unless a special session is called by the governor , the Senate meets for no more than 91 days in any two years period , leaving the lieutenant governor free from his or her senatorial duties in the remainder of the year . 
 The secondary function is to serve as a successor to the governorship should it become vacant , or act as governor if necessary . If a lieutenant governor should succeed to the governorship , the office of lieutenant governor and President of the Senate become vacant ; the duties are taken over by the Senate President pro tempore . 
 = = = Statutory = = = 
 The majority of the powers exercised by the lieutenant governor are statutory and have been assigned by the Indiana General Assembly . The first additional powers granted to the lieutenant governor were added in 1932 when the office holder was made the head of the state 's agricultural commission . The office 's powers have since expanded to include the chairmanship of the Office of Community and Rural Affairs , the Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority , Office of Energy and Defense Development , and the Office of Tourism Development . As head of the various office and committees , the lieutenant governor controls many patronage positions and is permitted to fill them by appointment . Important positions filled by the lieutenant governor include the members of the Corn Marketing Council , the Main Street Council , Steel Advisory Commission , and the Indiana Film Commission . 
 In addition to the chairmanship of the committees , the lieutenant governor is also a participating member of the Natural Resources Committee , State Office Building Commission , Air Pollution Control Board , Water Pollution Control Board , and Solid Waste Management Board . 
 The annual salary of the lieutenant governor of Indiana is set by the Indiana General Assembly and was $ 76 @,@ 000 in 2007 . 
 = = List of Lieutenant Governors of Indiana = = 
 There have been forty @-@ nine Lieutenant Governors of Indiana since Indiana became a state in 1816 . 
 Democratic @-@ Republican Democratic Whig Republican Independent 
 = = Living former U.S. Lieutenant Governors of Indiana = = 
 As of August 2014 , there are five former U.S. lieutenant governors of Indiana who are currently living at this time , the oldest U.S. lieutenant governor of Indiana being John <unk> ( served 1981 – 1989 , born 1935 ) . The most recent death of a former U.S. lieutenant governor of Indiana was that of Robert L. Rock ( served 1965 – 1969 , born 1927 ) , on January 9 , 2013 . The most recently serving lieutenant governor to die was Frank O 'Bannon ( 1989 @-@ 1997 ) on September 13 , 2003 . 
 = Final Fantasy IV = 
 Final Fantasy IV ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Fō , also known as Final Fantasy II for its initial North American release ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Released in 1991 , it is the fourth main installment of the Final Fantasy series . The game 's story follows Cecil , a dark knight , as he tries to prevent the sorcerer Golbez from seizing powerful crystals and destroying the world . He is joined on this quest by a frequently changing group of allies . Final Fantasy IV introduced innovations that became staples of the Final Fantasy series and role @-@ playing games in general . Its " Active Time Battle " system was used in five subsequent Final Fantasy games , and unlike prior games in the series , IV gave each character their own unchangeable character class . 
 Final Fantasy IV has been ported to several other platforms with varying differences . An enhanced remake , also called Final Fantasy IV , with 3D graphics was released for the Nintendo DS in 2007 and 2008 . The game was re @-@ titled Final Fantasy II during its initial release outside Japan as the original Final Fantasy II and Final Fantasy III had not been released outside Japan at the time . However , later localizations used the original title . 
 With its character @-@ driven plot , use of new technologies and critically acclaimed score by Nobuo Uematsu , Final Fantasy IV is regarded as a landmark of the series and the role @-@ playing genre . The various incarnations of the game have sold more than four million copies worldwide . A sequel , Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , was released for Japanese mobile phones in 2008 , and worldwide via the Wii Shop Channel on June 1 , 2009 . In 2011 , both Final Fantasy IV and The After Years were released for the PlayStation Portable as part of the compilation Final Fantasy IV : The Complete Collection , which also included a new game , set between the two ; Final Fantasy IV : Interlude . Ports of the Nintendo DS remake were released for iOS in 2012 , for Android in 2013 and for Windows in 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Final Fantasy IV , the player controls a large cast of characters and completes quests to advance the story . Characters move and interact with people and enemies on a field map , which may represent a variety of settings , such as towers , caves , and forests . Travel between areas occurs on a world map . The player can use towns to replenish strength , buy equipment , and discover clues about their next destination . Conversely , the player fights monsters at random intervals on the world map and in dungeons . In battle , the player has the option to fight , use magic or an item , retreat , change character positions , parry , or pause . Certain characters have special abilities . The game was the first in the series to allow the player to control up to five characters in their party ; previous games had limited the party to four . 
 Player characters and monsters have hit points ( HP ) , with the characters ' HP captioned below the main battle screen . Attacks reduce remaining HP until none are left , at which point the character faints or the monster dies . If all characters are defeated , the game must be restored from a saved game file . The player can restore the characters ' hit points by having them sleep in an inn or use items in the party 's inventory , such as potions , as well as using healing magic spells . Equipment ( such as swords and armor ) bought in towns or found in dungeons can be used to increase damage inflicted on monsters or minimize damage received . The player can choose whether characters appear on the front line of a battle or in the back . A character 's placement impacts damage received and inflicted depending on the type of attack . 
 Final Fantasy IV introduced Square 's Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system , which differed from the turn @-@ based designs of previous RPGs . The ATB system centers on the player inputting orders for the characters in real time during battles . The system was used in many subsequent Square games . 
 Each character has certain strengths and weaknesses ; for instance , a strong magic user may have low defense , while a physical fighter may have low agility . Like other Final Fantasy games , characters gain new , more powerful abilities with battle experience . Magic is classified as either " White " for healing and support ; " Black " for offense ; or " Summon " ( or " call " ) for summoning monsters to attack or carry out specialized tasks . A fourth type , " Ninjutsu , " consists of support and offensive magic and is available to only one character . Magic users , who account for eight of the twelve playable characters , gain magic spells at preprogrammed experience levels or fixed story events . The game includes balanced point gains , items , and rewards to eliminate long sessions of grinding . Due to the Super NES ' greater processing power , Final Fantasy IV contains improved graphics when compared to previous Final Fantasy titles , all of which were released on the NES . The game employs the Super NES ' Mode 7 technology to give enhanced magic spell visuals and to make airship travel more dramatic by scaling and tilting the ground for a bird 's eye view . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Most of Final Fantasy IV takes place on Earth , also known as the Blue Planet , which consists of a surface world ( or Overworld ) , inhabited by humans , and an underground world ( or Underworld ) , inhabited by the Dwarves . An artificial moon orbits the planet , upon which the Lunarians live . The Lunarians are a race of beings originally from a world which was destroyed , becoming the asteroid belt surrounding the Blue Planet , and are identified by a moon @-@ shape crest on their foreheads . They created the artificial moon , resting until a time when they believe their kind can co @-@ exist with humans . A second , natural moon orbits the Blue Planet as well , although it is never visited in the game . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Final Fantasy IV offers twelve playable characters , each with a unique , unchangeable character class . During the game , the player can have a total of five , or fewer , characters in the party at any given time . The main character , Cecil Harvey , is a dark knight and the captain of the Red Wings , an elite air force unit of the kingdom of Baron . He serves the king alongside his childhood friend Kain Highwind , the commander of the Dragoons . Rosa Farrell is a white mage and archer , as well as Cecil 's love interest . The Red Wings ' airships were constructed by Cecil 's friend , the engineer Cid <unk> . 
 During his quest , Cecil is joined by others , including Rydia , a young summoner from the village of Mist ; Tellah , a legendary sage ; Edward Chris von Muir , the prince of Damcyan and a bard ; Yang Fang Leiden , the head of the monks of <unk> ; Palom and Porom , a white mage and a black mage , twin apprentices from the magical village of Mysidia ; Edward " Edge " Geraldine , the ninja prince of <unk> ; and Fusoya , the guardian of the Lunarians during their long sleep . 
 Zemus is the main antagonist of the game . He wishes to destroy the human race so that his people can populate the earth . He uses Golbez to do this by controlling him and Kain with his psychic powers to activate the Giant of Babil , a huge machine created to carry out the genocide . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Final Fantasy IV begins as the Red Wings are returning to Baron after attacking the city of Mysidia to steal their Water Crystal . When Cecil , Captain of the Red Wings , afterwards questions the king 's motives , he is stripped of his rank and sent with Kain , his friend and Captain of the Dragoons , to deliver a ring to the Village of Mist . There , Kain and Cecil watch in horror as monsters burst forth from inside the ring and lay waste to the village . A young girl , Rydia , is the only survivor and summons a monster named Titan in anger . This monster causes an earthquake , separating Cecil and Kain . Cecil awakens afterward and takes the wounded Rydia to a nearby inn . Baron soldiers come for Rydia but Cecil defends her , and she joins him on his journey . 
 It is revealed that Rosa , Cecil 's love interest , had followed him and is extremely ill with a fever . Soon after this , Cecil and Rydia meet Tellah , who is going to Damcyan Castle to retrieve his eloping daughter , Anna . However , Anna is killed when the Red Wings bomb the castle . Edward , Anna 's lover and the prince of Damcyan , explains that the Red Wings ' new commander , Golbez , did this to steal the Fire Crystal for Baron as they had stolen the Water Crystal from Mysidia . Tellah leaves the party to exact revenge on Golbez for Anna 's death . After finding a cure for Rosa , the party decides to go to <unk> to protect the Wind Crystal . Here they meet Master Yang , a warrior monk serviced to the kingdom and the protection of the crystal . The Red Wings attack , and Kain reappears as one of Golbez 's servants . He attacks and defeats Cecil ; when Rosa intervenes , Golbez kidnaps her and Kain takes the crystal . On the way back to Baron , the party is attacked by Leviathan and separated . 
 Cecil awakes alone near Mysidia . When he enters the town , he finds that its residents hold him in utter contempt for the prior attack on their town . Through the Elder of Mysidia , he learns that to defeat Golbez , he must climb Mt . Ordeals and become a Paladin . Before embarking on his journey , he is joined by the twin mages , Palom and Porom . On the mountain he encounters Tellah , who is searching for the forbidden spell Meteor to defeat Golbez . Casting aside the darkness within himself , Cecil becomes a Paladin , while Tellah learns the secret of Meteor . Upon reaching Baron , the party discovers an amnesiac Yang and restores his memory . The party then confronts the King , only to discover that he had been replaced by one of Golbez 's minions , <unk> . After defeating him , Cid arrives and takes them to one of his airships , the Enterprise . On the way , the party enters a room booby @-@ trapped by <unk> , where Palom and Porom sacrifice themselves to save Cecil , Tellah , Cid , and Yang . 
 On the airship , Kain appears and demands Cecil retrieve the final crystal in exchange for Rosa 's life , which the party obtains with assistance from a bedridden Edward . Kain then leads the party to the Tower of <unk> , where Rosa is imprisoned . At the tower 's summit , Golbez takes the crystal and attempts to flee . Tellah casts Meteor to stop Golbez , sacrificing his own life in the process . However , the spell only weakens Golbez , ending his mind control of Kain . Kain helps Cecil rescue Rosa , who teleports the party out of the collapsing tower to Baron . 
 In Baron , Kain reveals that Golbez must also obtain four subterranean " Dark Crystals " to achieve his goal of reaching the moon . The party travels to the underworld and encounter the Dwarves , who are currently fighting the Red Wings . They defeat Golbez thanks to a sudden appearance by Rydia , now a young woman due to her time spent in the <unk> , the home of the Eidolons . However , the party ultimately fails to prevent Golbez from stealing the Dwarves ' crystal . With the help of the Dwarves , they enter the Tower of Babil in order to obtain the crystals Golbez has stored there , only to find that they have been moved to a surface portion of the tower . Yang later sacrifices himself in order to stop the tower 's cannons from firing on the Dwarves ( though he 's later revealed to have survived ) . After escaping a trap set by Golbez , the party flees the underworld aboard the Enterprise , with Cid sacrificing himself to <unk> the passage between the two worlds and to prevent the Red Wings from continuing their pursuit . The party , now joined by Edge , the prince of <unk> , travels back to the Tower of Babil in order to take back the stolen crystals . Upon reaching the crystal room , however , the party falls through a trap door to the underworld . Meeting with the Dwarves once again and finding Cid to be alive , the party sets out to retrieve the eighth crystal before Golbez can . When the crystal is obtained , Golbez appears and reveals he still has control over Kain , while taking the crystal for himself . After learning of the Lunar Whale , a ship designed to take travelers to and from the moon , the party is rejoined by Cid . They travel to the surface and board the Lunar Whale . 
 On the moon , the party meets the sage Fusoya , who explains that Cecil 's father was a <unk> . Fusoya also explains that a <unk> named Zemus plans to destroy life on the Blue Planet so that the Lunarians can take over , using Golbez to summon the Giant of Babil , a colossal robot . The party returns to Earth and the forces of the two worlds attack the Giant , including Palom and Porom , who have been revived . After the party breaks the robot , Golbez and Kain confront them , only to have Fusoya break Zemus ' control over Golbez , in turn releasing Kain . Cecil learns that Golbez is his older brother . Golbez and Fusoya head to the core of the moon to defeat Zemus , and Cecil 's party follows . In the moon 's core , the party witnesses Golbez and Fusoya kill Zemus , but then quickly fall to his resurrected form , the spirit Zeromus , the embodiment of all of Zemus ' hatred and rage . Back on Earth , the Elder of Mysidia commands all of Cecil 's allies and friends to pray for the party , which gives Cecil and his allies the strength to fight and slay Zeromus . Following the battle , Fusoya and Golbez opt to leave Earth with the moon . Cecil , at last accepting the truth , acknowledges Golbez as his brother , and bids him farewell . 
 During the epilogue , most of the cast reunites to celebrate Cecil and Rosa 's wedding and their coronation as Baron 's new king and queen , while Kain is seen atop Mt . Ordeals , having vowed to atone for his misdeeds . 
 = = Development = = 
 After completing Final Fantasy III in 1990 , Square planned to develop two Final Fantasy games — one for the Nintendo Entertainment System and the other for the forthcoming Super NES , to be known as Final Fantasy IV and Final Fantasy V respectively . Due to financial and scheduling constraints , Square dropped plans for the NES game and continued development of the SNES version , retitled Final Fantasy IV . A mock @-@ up screenshot of the cancelled title was produced for a Japanese magazine , but little other information exists about it . Series creator and director Hironobu Sakaguchi has stated that the NES version was approximately 80 % complete and certain ideas were reused for the SNES version . 
 Final Fantasy IV was lead designer Takashi Tokita 's first project at Square as a full @-@ time employee . Before this , Tokita wanted a career as a theater actor , but working on the game made him decide to become a " great creator " of video games . Initially Hiromichi Tanaka , the main designer of Final Fantasy III , was also involved in the development of the game . However , Tanaka wanted to create a seamless battle system that had no separate battle screen and was not menu @-@ driven , and since Final Fantasy IV was not going in that direction , he changed development teams to work on the action RPG Secret of Mana instead . The development team of Final Fantasy IV contained 14 people in total , and the game was completed in roughly one year . 
 Initial ideas were contributed by Sakaguchi , including the entire story and the name of Baron 's royal air force , the " Red Wings " . The Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system was conceived and designed by Hiroyuki Ito when he was inspired while watching a Formula One race and seeing racers pass each other at different speeds . This gave him the idea of different speed values for the individual characters . The system was developed by Kazuhiko Aoki , Ito and Akihiko Matsui . As the game 's lead designer , Tokita wrote the scenario and contributed pixel art . He stated that there was a lot of pressure and that the project would not have been completed if he did not work diligently on it . According to Tokita , Final Fantasy IV was designed with the best parts of the previous three installments in mind : the job system of Final Fantasy III , the focus on story of Final Fantasy II , and the four elemental bosses acting as " symbols for the game " as in the first installment . Other influences include Dragon Quest II . The themes of Final Fantasy IV were to go " from darkness to light " with Cecil , a focus on family and friendship among the large and diverse cast , and the idea that " brute strength alone isn 't power . " Tokita feels that Final Fantasy IV is the first game in the series to really pick up on drama , and the first Japanese RPG to feature " such deep characters and plot . " 
 The game 's script had to be reduced to one fourth of its original length due to cartridge storage limits , but Tokita made sure only " unnecessary dialogue " was cut , rather than actual story elements . As the graphical capacities of the Super Famicom allowed regular series character designer Yoshitaka Amano to make more elaborate character designs than in the previous installments , with the characters ' personalities already evident from the images , Tokita felt the reduced script length improved the pacing of the game . Still , he acknowledges that some parts of the story were " unclear " or were not " looked at in depth " until later ports and remakes . One of the ideas not included , due to time and space constraints , was a dungeon near the end of the game where each character would have to progress on their own — this dungeon would only be included in the Game Boy Advance version of the game , as the Lunar Ruins . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score of Final Fantasy IV was written by longtime series composer Nobuo Uematsu . Uematsu has noted that the process of composing was excruciating , involving trial and error and requiring the sound staff to spend several nights in sleeping bags at Square 's headquarters . His liner notes were humorously signed as being written at 1 : 30 AM " in the office , naturally . " The score was well received ; reviewers have praised the quality of the composition despite the limited medium . The track " Theme of Love " has even been taught to Japanese school children as part of the music curriculum . Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Final Fantasy concert series . 
 Three albums of music from Final Fantasy IV have been released in Japan . The first album , Final Fantasy IV : Original Sound Version , was released on June 14 , 1991 and contains 44 tracks from the game . The second album , Final Fantasy IV : Celtic Moon , was released on October 24 , 1991 , and contains a selection of tracks from the game , arranged and performed by Celtic musician Máire Breatnach . Lastly , Final Fantasy IV Piano Collections , an arrangement of tracks for solo piano performed by Toshiyuki Mori , was released on April 21 , 1992 and began the Piano Collections trend for each successive Final Fantasy game . Several tracks have appeared on Final Fantasy compilation albums produced by Square , including The Black Mages and Final Fantasy : Pray . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy IV music have been orchestrated by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dōjin music , and on English remixing websites such as OverClocked ReMix . 
 = = = North American localization = = = 
 Because the previous two installments of the Final Fantasy series had not been localized and released in North America at the time , Final Fantasy IV was distributed as Final Fantasy II to maintain naming continuity . This remained the norm until the release of Final Fantasy VII in North America ( after the release of Final Fantasy VI under the title of Final Fantasy III ) and subsequent releases of the original Final Fantasy II and III on various platforms . Final Fantasy II has since gone under the title Final Fantasy IV . 
 The English localization of Final Fantasy IV retains the storyline , graphics , and sound of the original , but the developers significantly reduced the difficulty for beginning gamers . Square were worried that western fans would find it difficult to adjust to the game 's complexity due to not having played the previous two entries , so decreased the overall depth considerably . Other changes include the removal of overt Judeo @-@ Christian religious references and certain potentially objectionable graphics . For example , the magic spell " Holy " was renamed " White " , and all references to prayer were eliminated ; the Tower of Prayers in Mysidia was renamed the Tower of Wishes . Direct references to death were also omitted , although several characters clearly die during the course of the game . The translation was changed in accordance with Nintendo of America 's censorship policies ( at a time before the formation of the ESRB and its rating system ) . 
 = = Re @-@ releases = = 
 In addition to its original release , Final Fantasy IV has been remade into many different versions . The first of these was Final Fantasy IV Easytype , a modified version of the game which was released for the Super Famicom in Japan . The Easytype was designed to be even easier than its North American counterpart . In this version , the attack powers of weapons have been enhanced , while the protective abilities of certain accessories and armor are amplified . 
 A PlayStation port debuted in Japan on March 21 , 1997 . Ported by Tose and published by Square , it was designed and directed by Kazuhiko Aoki , supervised by <unk> Fukaya , and produced by Akihiro Imai . This version is identical to the original game , although minor tweaks introduced in the Easytype are present . The most notable changes in the PlayStation release are the inclusion of a full motion video opening and ending sequence , the ability to move quickly in dungeons and towns by holding the Cancel button , and the option of performing a " memo " save anywhere on the world map . On March 11 , 1999 , this version was released a second time in Japan as part of the Final Fantasy Collection package , which also included the PlayStation versions of Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy VI . Fifty @-@ thousand limited edition copies of the collection were also released and included a Final Fantasy @-@ themed alarm clock . 
 The PlayStation port was later released with Chrono Trigger in North America as part of Final Fantasy Chronicles in 2001 and with Final Fantasy V in Europe and Australia as part of Final Fantasy Anthology in 2002 . The English localizations feature a new translation , although certain translated lines from the previous localization by Kaoru Moriyama , such as " You <unk> bard ! " , were kept , as they had become fan favorites . A remake for the WonderSwan Color , with few changes from the PlayStation version , was released in Japan on March 28 , 2002 . Character sprites and backgrounds were graphically enhanced through heightened details and color shading . 
 Final Fantasy IV was ported again by Tose for the Game Boy Advance and published as Final Fantasy IV Advance ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Fō Adobansu ) . It was released in North America by Nintendo of America on December 12 , 2005 ; in Japan by Square Enix on December 15 , 2005 ; in Australia on February 23 , 2006 ; and in Europe on June 2 , 2006 . In Japan , a special version was available which included a limited edition Game Boy Micro with a themed face plate featuring artwork of Cecil and Kain . The enhanced graphics from the WonderSwan Color port were further improved , and minor changes were made to the music . The localization team revised the English translation , improving the flow of the story , and restoring plot details absent from the original . The abilities that were removed from the original North American release were re @-@ added , while spells were renamed to follow the naming conventions of the Japanese version , changing " <unk> " to " <unk> " for example . A new cave at Mt . Ordeals was added featuring powerful armor and stronger weapons for five additional characters , as was the Lunar Ruins , a dungeon accessible only at the end of the game . 
 The game was remade with 3D graphics for the Nintendo DS as part of the Final Fantasy series ' 20th anniversary , and was released as Final Fantasy IV in Japan on December 20 , 2007 , in North America on July 22 , 2008 , and in Europe on September 5 , 2008 . The remake adds a number of features not present in the original , such as voice acting , minigames , and some changes to the basic gameplay . The game was developed by Matrix Software , the same team responsible for the Final Fantasy III DS remake , and was supervised by members of the original development team : Takashi Tokita served as executive producer and director , Tomoya Asano as producer and Hiroyuki Ito as battle designer . Animator Yoshinori Kanada storyboarded the new cutscenes . 
 The original version of the game was released on the Wii Virtual Console in Japan on August 4 , 2009 , in North America on March 8 , 2010 and in PAL regions on June 11 , 2010 . An enhanced port for i @-@ mode compatible phones was released in Japan on October 5 , 2009 . It retains features introduced in the Wonderswan Color and Game Boy Advance ports , while incorporating enhanced character graphics on par with those found in The After Years , as well as an exclusive " extra dungeon " available after completing the game . 
 Along with Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , the game was released for the PlayStation Portable as part of the compilation Final Fantasy IV : The Complete Collection . This version used updated 2D graphics , as opposed to the 3D graphics seen in the DS remake . The collection also includes a new episode called Final Fantasy IV : Interlude , which takes place between the original game and The After Years . Masashi Hamauzu arranged the main theme for the game . It was released in Japan on March 24 , 2011 , in North America on April 19 , 2011 , in Europe on April 21 , 2011 , and in Australia on April 28 , 2011 . On December 18 , 2012 the PlayStation port was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package . 
 In December 2012 , the Nintendo DS version of Final Fantasy IV was released for the iOS and Android ( June 2013 ) mobile platforms , introducing an optional easier difficulty level . On September 17 , 2014 , with no prior advertisement , Final Fantasy IV was also released for Microsoft Windows . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was critically acclaimed upon release . Famitsu 's panel of four reviewers gave it ratings of 9 , 9 , 10 , and 8 , adding up to an overall score of 36 out of 40 , one of the highest scores it awarded to any game in 1991 , second only The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past . In its November 1991 issue , Nintendo Power proclaimed it set a " new standard of excellence " for role @-@ playing games . They praised the battles as being " more interesting than in previous RPGs " because the player " must make snap decisions " and the " enemies don 't wait for you to make up your mind , " and concluded that the " story , graphics , play and sound will keep fans riveted . " Electronic Gaming Monthly ' panel of four reviewers gave it ratings of 8 , 9 , 7 , and 8 , out of 10 , adding up to 32 out of 40 overall . In its December 1991 issue , Ed Semrad , who gave it a 9 , stated that " Square has just redefined what the ultimate RPG should be like , " noting the " spectacular Mode 7 effects , outstanding graphics and a quest unequalled in a video game , " concluding that it " makes use of all the Super NES has to offer " and is " the best made to date ! " Ken Williams ( as Sushi @-@ X ) , who gave it an 8 , stated that it is " a totally awesome RPG , " the " storyline is actually coherent and the plot moves along with a combination of speaking sequences and battles . " On the other hand , Martin Alessi , who disliked role @-@ playing games , gave it a 7 . They gave the game an award for 1991 's Best RPG Video Game , stating that the " Mode 7 is great here and Square does a spectacular job in using it to zoom in and away from the planet " and that the " quest is huge and also one of the most difficult ever attempted in a video game . " 
 GamePro rated it a perfect 5 out of 5 score in its March 1992 issue . The reviewer Monty Haul stated that it " truly redefines the standards for fantasy adventure games , " proclaiming that " one @-@ dimensional characters , needless hack ' em combat , and linear gameplay will be things of the past if other RPGs learn a lesson or two from this cart , " concluding that it " is one small step for Square Soft , and one giant leap for SNES role @-@ playing games . " In the November 1993 issue of Dragon , Sandy Petersen gave it an " Excellent " rating . He criticized the " stylized " combat system and the graphics as " inferior " to Zelda , but praised how every " spell has a different on @-@ screen effect " and the difficulty for being " just about right " where bosses " nearly beat you every time " unlike other RPG 's such as Ultima where enough " adventuring " makes it possible to " trash " enemies " with ease . " He praised the " great " music , preferring it over Zelda , stating what it " lacks in graphics , it more than makes up for in sound . " He praised the story in particular , noting that , in a departure from other RPGs where the party always " sticks together through thick and thin , " the characters have their own motives for joining and leaving the group , with one that " even betrays " them . He stated that it is like " following the storyline of a fantasy novel , " comparing it to The Lord of the Rings and Man in the Iron Mask , concluding that , because " the characters often spoke up for themselves , " he " got much more attached " to the party " than in any other computer game . " 
 Retrospectively , major reviewers have called Final Fantasy IV one of the greatest video games of all time , noting that it pioneered many now common console role @-@ playing game features , including " the whole concept of dramatic storytelling in an RPG . " Reviewers have praised the game for its graphics , gameplay and score , and have noted that Final Fantasy IV was one of the first role @-@ playing games to feature a complex , involving plot . However , retrospective reviews have heavily criticized the game 's original SNES release for the poor quality of its English @-@ language translation . 
 It has been included in various lists of the best games of all time . Nintendo Power included it in the " 100 Greatest Nintendo Games " lists , placing it ninth in 1997 's issue 100 , and twenty @-@ eighth in 2005 's issue 200 . IGN included it in its top 100 lists of the greatest games of all time , ranking it # 9 in 2003 , as the highest @-@ ranking RPG , and at # 26 in 2005 , as the highest rated Final Fantasy title on the list . In 2007 , it was ranked at # 55 , behind Final Fantasy VI and Final Fantasy Tactics . Famitsu released a reader poll in 2006 ranking it as the sixth best game ever made . It was also list among the best games of all time by Electronic Gaming Monthly in 2001 and 2006 , Game Informer in 2001 and 2009 , GameSpot in 2005 , and GameFAQs in 2005 , 2009 and 2014 . 
 Final Fantasy Collection sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in 1999 , making it the 31st best selling release of that year in Japan . Weekly Famitsu gave it a 54 out of 60 points , scored by a panel of six reviewers . The Game Boy Advance version , Final Fantasy IV Advance , was met with praise from reviewers , although a few noted the game 's graphics do not hold up well to current games , especially when compared to Final Fantasy VI . Reviewers noted that some fans may still nitpick certain errors in the new translation . The Nintendo DS version of the game was praised for its visuals , gameplay changes and new cutscenes . It was a nominee for Best RPG on the Nintendo DS in IGN 's 2008 video game awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In Japan , 1 @.@ 44 million copies of Final Fantasy IV 's Super Famicom version were sold . The PlayStation version sold an additional 261 @,@ 000 copies in Japan in 1997 . By March 31 , 2003 , the game , including the PlayStation and WonderSwan Color remakes , had shipped 2 @.@ 16 million copies worldwide , with 1 @.@ 82 million of those copies being shipped in Japan and 340 @,@ 000 abroad . As of 2007 just before the release of the Nintendo DS version , nearly 3 million copies of the game had been sold around the world . The Game Boy Advance version of the game sold over 219 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006 . By May 2009 , the DS version of the game had sold 1 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide . 
 Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , the sequel to Final Fantasy IV , is set seventeen years after the events of the original . The first two chapters of the game were released in Japan in February 2008 for NTT DoCoMo FOMA <unk> series phones , with a release for au WIN BREW series phones slated for Spring 2008 . The game revolves around <unk> , the son of Cecil and Rosa , with most of the original cast members returning , some of whom are featured in more prominent roles than before , among other new characters . After the mobile release , it was hinted that The After Years would be released outside Japan . On March 25 , 2009 , an announcement was made by Satoru Iwata during Nintendo 's GDC 2009 Keynote speech that the U.S. would see The After Years released later that year on the Wii 's WiiWare service . The first two chapters were released on June 1 , 2009 in North America and June 5 , 2009 in PAL territories , with the additional chapters being released in the following months . 
 A two @-@ volume novelization of Final Fantasy IV was released in Japan on December 25 , 2008 . 
 = Elaine Paige = 
 Elaine Paige OBE ( born Elaine Jill Bickerstaff , 5 March 1948 ) is an English singer and actress best known for her work in musical theatre . Raised in Barnet , Hertfordshire , Paige attended the Aida Foster Theatre School , making her first professional appearance on stage in 1964 , at the age of 16 . Her appearance in the 1968 production of Hair marked her West End debut . 
 Following a number of roles over the next decade , Paige was selected to play Eva Perón in the first production of Evita in 1978 , which brought her to the attention of the broader public . For this role , she won the Laurence Olivier Award for Performance of the Year in a musical . She went on to originate the role of Grizabella in Cats and had a Top 10 hit with " Memory " , a song from the show . In 1985 , Paige released " I Know Him So Well " with Barbara Dickson from the musical Chess , which remains the biggest @-@ selling record by a female duo . She then appeared in the original stage production of Chess , followed by a starring role in Anything Goes which she also co @-@ produced . Paige made her Broadway debut in Sunset Boulevard in 1996 , playing the lead role of Norma Desmond , to critical acclaim . She appeared in The King and I from 2000 to 2001 , and six years later she returned to the West End stage in The Drowsy Chaperone . She has also worked sporadically in television . 
 In addition to being nominated for five Laurence Olivier Awards , Paige has won many other awards for her theatre roles and has been called the First Lady of British Musical Theatre due to her skill and longevity . She has released 22 solo albums , of which eight were consecutively certified gold and another four multi @-@ platinum . Paige is also featured on seven cast albums and has sung in concerts across the world . Since 2004 she has hosted her own show on BBC Radio 2 called Elaine Paige on Sunday . 
 In 2014 , Paige celebrated her 50 years in show business . Paige announced on her official website a " Farewell " concert tour and a new career @-@ spanning album ' The Ultimate Collection ' to mark this milestone in her career . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Elaine Jill Bickerstaff was born and raised in Barnet , Hertfordshire , where her father worked as an estate agent and her mother was a milliner . Her mother had been a singer in her youth , and her father was an amateur drummer . Paige stands at just under 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) tall , which she says has caused her to lose out on leading roles . Her original ambition was to become a professional tennis player , at which point her headmistress pointed out to her " they 'd never see you over the net " , but Paige continued to play tennis and has referred to the sport as one of her passions . 
 At 14 , Paige listened to the film soundtrack of West Side Story , which evoked the desire for a career in musical theatre . Paige 's musical ability was encouraged by her school music teacher , Ann Hill , who was also the head of the music department . Paige was a member of Hill 's choir , and her first role on stage was playing Susanna in a school production of Mozart 's The Marriage of Figaro , which was followed by parts in The Boy Mozart and solos in Handel 's Messiah — " a difficult work for little children " . Paige also recalls singing the mezzo role of <unk> in Mozart 's Bastien and <unk> . After singing the aria , she chose to break down in character and to release a sob much to the audience 's shock who , having been convinced by her acting , thought she was in real pain . 
 Her father later suggested that she should go to drama school , so she attended the Aida Foster Theatre School . Lacking confidence , she initially disliked stage school ; her father encouraged her to persevere and she grew to enjoy her time there . After graduating , her first job was modelling children 's clothing at the Ideal Home Exhibition . Prior to stage school she attended <unk> Girls ' School – a secondary modern in Oakleigh Park in Hertfordshire where she had achieved just two CSE qualifications . 
 = = = Early career – 1968 – 1980 : West End debut and Evita = = = 
 Paige 's first professional appearance on stage was during the UK tour of the Anthony Newley / Leslie Bricusse musical The Roar of the <unk> – The Smell of the Crowd in 1964 , playing the role of a Chinese urchin . To audition for the role she sang " I 'm Just a Girl Who Cain 't Say No " but was rejected the first time . She was successful the second time around after being convinced to re @-@ audition under a new name . <unk> through a phone book for inspiration , she became aware of the " page " she was observing and decided upon that name with the addition of an " i " . At the age of 20 , she made her West End debut in Hair on 27 September 1968 , remaining in the cast until March 1970 . While also being an understudy for the character of Sheila , she played a member of the tribe in the chorus , for which role she was required to be naked on stage in one scene . She also appeared as an urchin in the West End 's Oliver ! . Over the next decade , she played roles in various musicals , including Jesus Christ Superstar ; Nuts ; Grease , in which she played the lead role of Sandy from 1973 to 1974 ; Billy , from 1974 to 1975 playing Rita ; and The Boyfriend , as Maisie ( 1975 – 1976 ) . Paige had a minor role in the 1978 sex comedy film Adventures of a Plumber 's Mate . 
 After months of acting and singing auditions , Hal Prince offered the still relatively unknown Paige the title role of Eva Perón in the first stage production of the Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber musical , Evita . Her performance won her critical acclaim and brought her into public prominence at the age of 30 . Julie Covington , who played the role on the original concept album , had turned down the opportunity of playing the role on stage leading to a long search for a new star . Paige eventually competed against Bonnie Schoen , an American initially favoured by Prince for the role . She later said , " Bonnie was already a big name on Broadway . In a way , she didn 't have anything to prove . She was smoothly , <unk> professional . But I saw this as my big chance and , like Eva when she clapped eyes on Peron , I grabbed with both hands . I wanted the role more than anything else in the whole world . " For her performance in Evita , she won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Musical , which at that time was called the Society of West End Theatre Award . She also won the Variety Club Award for <unk> Personality of the Year . She played the role for 20 months in total , from 1978 to 1980 . She also released her first studio album in 1978 , titled Sitting Pretty . Just prior to her success in Evita , Paige had strongly considered becoming a nursery nurse , but after she sang for Dustin Hoffman , he made her promise that she would continue in theatre work . She admitted that she was " fed up with the whole thing " and that she could not even afford new clothing or to eat out ; " Evita saved me " she stated . 
 = = = 1981 – 1993 : Cats and Chess era = = = 
 Paige went on to portray some of Lloyd Webber 's most notable female characters , creating the role of Grizabella in the original production of Cats from 11 May 1981 to 13 February 1982 . She took on the role late in the rehearsal process when the actress Judi Dench had to withdraw due to a torn Achilles tendon . Paige 's performance of the song " Memory " from Cats , with which she had a Top 10 hit , is her signature piece . The single reached number 5 in the UK charts and has since been recorded by a further 160 artists . She reprised the role of Grizabella for the video release of Cats in 1998 , one of only two performers in the film from the original London cast ; the other was Susan Jane Tanner as <unk> . Paige 's website claims that the video soon became the bestselling music video in the UK and America . 
 The 1983 production of <unk> , written by former ABBA members , Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson , saw Paige star in the role of <unk> . She then originated the role of Florence for the 1984 concept album of Chess , with lyrics by Tim Rice and music by Ulvaeus and Andersson . Her albums , Stages ( 1983 ) , and Cinema ( 1984 ) , rejoined the cast recording of Chess in the UK top 40 chart , giving her three consecutive successful albums . In 1985 , Paige released " I Know Him So Well " , a duet from Chess , singing with Barbara Dickson . The single held the number 1 position in the British singles charts for four weeks , and still remains the biggest @-@ selling record by a female duo , according to the Guinness Book of Records . From 1986 to 1987 , Paige appeared as Florence in the stage production of Chess , a role that earned her a second Olivier Award nomination , this time in the category , Best Actress in a Musical . She next sang at the White House in 1988 . 
 Paige then took on the part of Reno Sweeney in the musical production of Anything Goes , which she co @-@ produced and starred in from 1989 to 1990 . Patti LuPone was appearing in Anything Goes on Broadway around that time , so Paige sought to become the co @-@ producer of the West End production as a way to secure the role there before LuPone could take it . Playing Reno Sweeney was Paige 's first experience using an American accent on stage , and the role earned her a third Olivier Award nomination . Beyond her theatre roles , she appeared in the television programme Unexplained Laughter in 1989 alongside Diana Rigg . 
 In 1993 , Paige signed up for a year as French chanteuse Édith Piaf in Pam Gems ' musical play , Piaf , to critical acclaim . The Guardian wrote that Paige was " a magnificent , perfect Piaf " . The demanding production required her to sing 15 songs , some in French , and to be on stage for 2 hours 40 minutes in total , and forced her to leave early due to exhaustion . Her portrayal of Piaf earned her an Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical , her fourth nomination . She subsequently released an album , titled Piaf , containing Édith Piaf songs . 
 = = = 1994 – 2001 : Sunset Boulevard and Broadway debut = = = 
 In 1995 , Paige was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) by Queen Elizabeth for her contributions to musical theatre . 
 Paige stepped briefly into the role of Norma Desmond in Lloyd Webber 's West End production of Sunset Boulevard in 1994 , when Betty Buckley was taken ill and had to undergo an emergency appendectomy . The nature of the situation meant that Paige only had two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks in the rehearsal process before her first performance . She admitted feeling daunted by the prospect , having seen Glenn Close in the role on Broadway just prior to entering rehearsals . London critics were largely won over by Paige in a performance that " not only <unk> out every ounce of dramatic action but delivers some unexpected humor as well " and she took over the part full @-@ time the following year . She then won the Variety Club Award for Best Actress of the Year , and received her fifth Olivier Award nomination in 1996 . 
 During the run of Sunset Boulevard at the West End 's Adelphi Theatre in 1995 , Paige discovered a lump in her breast , prompting her to consult her doctor , who at first reassured her there was nothing to be concerned about . She returned twice , and her doctor subsequently sent her for tests that confirmed the lump was cancerous , nine months after she discovered it . Continuing her role in the production Paige did not miss a show , and stated , " When I did the show I became very emotional . Some of the lyrics suddenly took on an entirely different meaning . Words like , ' as if we never said goodbye ' became more real " . Paige went in for day surgery on a Sunday due to her theatre commitments , had five years of medical treatment and completed a radiation programme . She spoke for the first time of her encounter with breast cancer in a 2004 interview , and has since described the period as " the most awful thing that 's happened to me in my life " . 
 Paige transferred to the New York production of Sunset Boulevard to make her Broadway debut at the Minskoff Theatre on 12 September 1996 , staying with the show until it closed on 22 March 1997 . On the Sunset Boulevard set in Broadway , the staircase steps had to be raised six inches ( 15 cm ) in order to accommodate Paige 's short stature , or it would have been hard to see her behind the banister . Paige was welcomed to the Broadway stage with a long standing ovation from the audience , and received largely positive reviews for her New York performance as Norma Desmond : " The lush sound and the sheer power of her voice are , to put it simply , incredible " , wrote one critic , whilst another said " Her voice has great range , remarkable clarity and emotional force " . Paige was the first Norma Desmond in Sunset Boulevard to sing one of the show 's key songs , " With One Look " , which she did first at Lloyd Webber 's wedding to Madeleine Gurdon , although at the time the song was called " Just One <unk> " . Lloyd Webber noted , regarding Paige 's performance of one of the show 's other prominent songs , " As If We Never Said Goodbye " , that it was " as good , if not the best , of anything I 've ever heard of mine " . Regarding the key lyric in the song , " This world 's waited long enough . I 've come home at last " , Paige had sought to change the way the melody was sung , despite being fully aware of Lloyd @-@ Webber 's fastidious tendencies . To her , the moment was not exploited to its fullest potential , so she approached the show 's musical director , David Caddick , and expressed her wish to hold the word " home " , to which he agreed . Although she had been disappointed when she hoped to perform on Broadway in Evita , Cats and Chess , Paige stated of her debut there , " It was just the most perfect time to go with that particular show " . After Sunset Boulevard finished , she suffered from depression , commenting that the show 's closing " was the most terrible feeling . ... I 'd felt I 'd lost something so very important to me . I thought it had died and gone away . " 
 Arts commentator Melvyn Bragg hosted a special edition of The South Bank Show about Paige 's career in 1996 , titled The Faces of Elaine Paige . The episode saw her visiting parts of the world where plays she had starred in had been set : the Casa Rosada in Buenos Aires , Argentina where Eva Perón had given speeches ; the Parisian haunts of Edith Piaf including a meeting with her collaborator Charles Aznavour ; and Sunset Boulevard , Los Angeles . 
 In 1997 , Paige made her United States concert debut when she opened the Boston Pops season , which was aired on WGBH in America . The following year , she made a guest appearance at Andrew Lloyd Webber 's 50th birthday celebration at the Royal Albert Hall , performing " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " and " Memory " She then played <unk> in the non @-@ musical play The Misanthrope in 1998 , but she admitted that she missed the musical element and that the silence was slightly unsettling to her . A Lifetime Achievement Award from The National Operatic and Dramatic Association soon followed . She later performed alongside Bette Midler in a 1999 New York concert to raise money for the Breast Cancer Research Foundation . 
 From 2000 to 2001 , she starred as Anna Leonowens in a revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's The King and I at the London Palladium . Paige had turned down an offer for the role the first time she was approached , but later accepted , admitting that she had " forgotten what a fantastic score it was " , although she did question her own suitability for the role . Before the opening , the box office had already taken in excess of £ 7 million in ticket sales . The critic for The Independent commented , " It may well be impossible to be a success as Evita and a success as Anna " complaining that Paige was not refined enough for the role , whereas The Spectator asserted that the role further strengthened her title as the " First Lady of British Musical Theatre " . During her time in The King and I , her mother was diagnosed with cancer . Despite Paige wanting to pull out of the show , her mother insisted that she should continue until her contract had finished , and Paige 's sister , Marion Billings , admitted , " That was very hard for Elaine , having to go on stage night after night knowing she wanted to be with Mum " . 
 = = = 2002 – 2013 : Radio and return to West End and Broadway = = = 
 Paige sang at the opening of the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , and then made her Los Angeles concert debut at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium . In 2003 , she played Angèle in Where There 's a Will , directed by Peter Hall . She next sang the role of Mrs Lovett in the New York City Opera production of Stephen Sondheim 's Sweeney Todd in March 2004 , earning positive reviews from critics , and a nomination for a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actress in a Musical . Paige then embarked upon a UK tour which was titled " No Strings Attached " . 
 In September 2004 , Paige began a weekly Sunday afternoon radio show , Elaine Paige on Sunday , between 1 and 3 PM on BBC Radio 2 , featuring music from musical theatre and film . The 400th edition was broadcast on Sunday 29 July 2012 . In an unfavourable review , the show was described by Elisabeth Mahoney of The Guardian as " a chilly , alienating listening experience " and a " rare wrong move " on the part of Radio 2 . Lisa Martland of The Stage agreed that " it is by far the music that brings me back to the programme ... and not her lightweight presenting style " . However , the show regularly attracts 3 million listeners , and interviews are also featured each week . Paige also focused on television appearances , playing Dora <unk> in the 2005 ITV adaptation of Agatha Christie 's A Murder Is Announced in the Marple series , before performing a guest role as a post mistress in Where the Heart Is . The episode of Marple was watched by 7 @.@ 78 million viewers . 
 The release of Paige 's first full studio album of new recordings in 12 years was marked in 2006 , titled Essential Musicals . The album included popular songs from musicals identified by a poll on her radio show , in which 400 @,@ 000 listeners voted . At this point , Paige had recorded 20 solo albums in total , of which eight were consecutively certified gold and another four multi @-@ platinum , and she had been featured on seven cast albums . Paige also appeared in concert in Scandinavia , Hong Kong , Europe , the Middle East , New Zealand , Australia and Singapore . On 20 and 21 December 2006 , she performed in concert in Shanghai , extending her concert tour to two dates to satisfy demand . With a noticeable absence from musical theatre , having not taken a role for many years , she explained in 2006 that " there 's been nothing that I 've wanted to do , and if you 're going to commit to a year at the theatre , six days a week , and have no life , then it 's got to be something that you want to do with all your heart " . She also affirmed that she believes for older actors it becomes harder to obtain theatre roles . 
 In 2007 , Paige made a return to the West End stage for the first time in six years , as the Chaperone / Beatrice Stockwell in The Drowsy Chaperone at the Novello Theatre . The production ran for a disappointing 96 performances , although it had opened to a standing ovation from the audience and a generally optimistic reaction from critics . The Daily Telegraph wrote , " Elaine Paige is a good sport ... enduring jokes about her reputation for being ' difficult ' with a grin that doesn 't seem all that forced . ... Only the self @-@ importantly serious and the chronically depressed will fail to enjoy this preposterously entertaining evening " . Paul Taylor from The Independent was less impressed and wrote " a miscast Elaine Paige manages to be unfunny to an almost ingenious degree as the heroine 's <unk> minder " . For her performance , Paige was nominated for a What 's On Stage Award in the category of Best Supporting Actress in a Musical . She next collaborated with the duo Secret Garden in recording the song " The Things You Are to Me " for their 2007 album , Inside I 'm Singing . 
 To raise money for Sport Relief Paige danced the tango on Sport Relief does Strictly Come Dancing with Matt Dawson in March 2008 , where they were voted second overall . In 2008 , she opened the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod and performed concerts in China , America and Australia featuring songs from her 40 @-@ year career . To further celebrate 40 years since her first performance on a West End Stage , in October 2008 Paige released a picture @-@ based autobiography titled Memories . The book took around eight months to compile ; " Since Evita I suppose , I had kept a yearbook . My parents always kept cuttings and things like that for me . I did have quite a lot of reference material to work out , " Paige commented . 
 An album titled Elaine Paige and Friends was produced by Phil Ramone in 2010 . The album features duets with Paige and artists such as Johnny Mathis , Barry Manilow and Olivia Newton @-@ John as well as a duet with Sinéad O 'Connor of a new song " It 's Only Life " penned by Tim Rice and Gary Barlow . Having entered the top 20 of UK Album Charts , it went on to achieve gold status . 
 Paige played the role of Carlotta Campion in the Kennedy Center production of Follies in May and June 2011 at the Eisenhower Theatre in Washington , DC , receiving favourable reviews for her performance of the showstopper , " I 'm Still Here . " The principal cast also comprised Bernadette Peters , Jan Maxwell , Ron Raines and Danny Burstein . She reprised this role in the Broadway transfer of the musical at the Marquis Theatre from August 2011 until the following January , before performing at the Ahmanson Theatre , Los Angeles , California in May and June 2012 . 
 = = = 2014 – present : 50th Anniversary , farewell tour = = = 
 At the end of 2013 Paige announced a concert tour , Page by Page by Paige , which focused on her 50th anniversary in show business and was advertised as a farewell tour . The 40th anniversary tour in 2008 marked 40 years since her debut on the West End stage , and the 50th anniversary tour in 2014 marked 50 years since her first stage performance . The tour featured <unk> Thor Cortes performing a number of songs , both solo and duets with Paige , and was sold out at all venues . The tour ran from 9 to 20 October 2014 , concluding at the Royal Albert Hall , London . Other stops included Cardiff , Bristol , Manchester , Newcastle ( Gateshead ) , Glasgow , Birmingham and Bournemouth . Due to a throat infection , one concert in Brighton had to be cancelled . Dates in Ireland were postponed before being rescheduled , with Paige giving four sold @-@ out concerts in Dublin ( two evenings ) , Limerick and Cork between 10 and 16 February 2015 . 
 In 2014 , Paige presented and performed in a six episode television show for Sky Arts television called The Elaine Paige Show . The show featured songs performed by Paige , masterclasses with drama college students and interviews and performances by West End and Broadway performers and writers . The show was recorded in March and April at Riverside Studios , London . 
 In June 2014 , Paige made her debut at G @-@ A @-@ Y ’ s Heaven nightclub in London and in November , she joined the inaugural Australian cruise of the performing arts on the MS Radiance of the Seas . 
 In May 2015 Paige was part of VE Day 70 : A Party to Remember , a special concert which took place at the Horse Guards Parade , and was broadcast live on BBC1 and BBC Radio 2 . Later in 2015 she performed in concert at Scarborough Open Air Theatre , supported by <unk> and Rhydian , and then headlined the Glamis Prom 2015 at Glamis Castle , Scotland , with Susan Boyle as her guest . The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra accompanied at both concerts . 
 In April 2016 , it was announced that Paige would perform a number of concerts - on successive weekends rather than intensive schedule of a regular tour - entitled " Stripped Back " . The tour will initially run from October until December 2016 and feature music by Harry Nilsson , Randy Newman , Jimmy Webb , Burt Bacharach , Leonard Cohen , Sting , Elton John and Lennon @-@ McCartney . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Having had so many starring roles in famous musicals , many to critical acclaim , Paige is often referred to as the First Lady of British Musical Theatre . In 2008 , she celebrated the 40th anniversary of her professional debut on the West End stage debut . Paige has never married nor had children , although she had an 11 @-@ year affair with the lyricist Tim Rice throughout the 1980s . She has said that she wanted to have children , but " it 's a wonderful life I have , so I 'm very fulfilled in other ways " . Paige has been dating Justin Mallinson since spring 2010 . 
 Paige 's singing abilities have won her worldwide praise , as have her acting skills with Andrew Gans of Playbill magazine writing that " Paige 's gift is to dissect a role and determine what phrasing , gesture or emotion can bring a scene to its fullest dramatic potential " . Mark Shenton also highlighted her voice in 2008 as " one of the most distinctive and impressive voices in the business " . Lloyd @-@ Webber insists that her rendition of " As If We Never Said Goodbye " is one of the best interpretations of a song by him . 
 She is a Vice @-@ President of The Children 's Trust , a UK charity for children with brain injury . 
 Paige has gained herself a reputation as someone who can be " difficult " . The Times ' Brian Logan wrote , " Paige is not exactly known for her humility . In newspaper profiles , that dread word ' difficult ' is often applied " . On one occasion , she told a male interviewer that she was going to stop giving interviews to female reporters because , in her own words , " I don 't trust other women in these situations . They establish a sisterhood with you and then betray it every time " . What has been seen as a cold side to her personality was also noted by Logan , but Paige has said that a common misconception of her is that she is confident and very serious . Another editor found her " refreshingly down @-@ to @-@ earth " and " very friendly " . 
 = = Views on theatre = = 
 Though Paige has enjoyed a long career in musical theatre , she rarely goes to watch musicals , much preferring to watch films or plays . She considers herself primarily an actress , rather than a singer , stating , " I really prefer to be in character " . Comparing the work of Rodgers and Hammerstein to that of Lloyd Webber , Paige has said that she finds Rodgers and Hammerstein songs more difficult to sing , and described them as challenging . She concluded , " it 's a quieter kind of singing , more controlled , not belting it out " . 
 In the light of the physical demands of performing in theatre Paige has said " Musical theatre is the hardest thing any actor will ever do . You become obsessive about sleeping , eating the right food , not speaking and giving yourself vocal rest and keeping exercised " . Regarding the pressure of having to be in a fit condition to perform in theatre each night , she remarked " you wouldn 't want to read the letters people write when you 're off and they 're disappointed – it 's so awful , the guilt one feels for not being there " . As part of a rigorous routine before musical roles to look after her voice , Paige stops eating dairy products and drinking alcohol and works hard on her fitness . After about three months into the production when her voice is tiring from performing , she withdraws from her normal social life , sometimes only communicating by notepad and fax . She never reads her reviews , finding that it is not helpful to hear too many opinions of her work . 
 Paige has named reality television series such as Any Dream Will Do , which aim to find an unknown actor to play the lead role in a musical , as the greatest threat to theatre today , believing that " actors already striving in the theatre wouldn 't dream of putting themselves on these shows " . In a later interview , she questioned the seriousness of the actors auditioning for this type of show : " you wouldn 't put yourself up for one of those shows in case you got bumped off the first week and all your colleagues saw it " . She has also expressed a wish for more new musicals to be put into production , instead of frequent revivals . 
 = = Stage roles = = 
 = = TV roles = = 
 In the 1980 ITV drama series Lady Killers , Paige played convicted murderer Kate Webster . In 1981 in Tales of the Unexpected , " The Way to Do it " , Paige plays Suzie , a girl working in a small casino trying to keep guests happy and finally eloping with the main character . Paige has also played roles in Agatha Christie 's Marple and Where the Heart Is . In 1989 , Paige appeared alongside Diana Rigg and Jon Finch in Alice Thomas Ellis ' " Unexplained Laughter " , as part of the BBC 's The Play on One . Paige will appear in a new BBC adaptation of William <unk> 's A Midsummer 's Night Dream adapted by Russell T Davies as part of the Shakespeare 400 celebrations . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Solo albums = = = 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 = = = Cast recordings = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Other albums and guest appearances = = = 
 = = = Videos and DVDs = = = 
 = The French Lieutenant 's Woman = 
 The French Lieutenant 's Woman is a 1969 postmodern historical fiction novel by John Fowles . It was his third published novel , after The Collector ( 1963 ) and The Magus ( 1965 ) . The novel explores the fraught relationship of gentleman and amateur naturalist Charles Smithson and Sarah Woodruff , the former governess and independent woman with whom he falls in love . The novel builds on Fowles ' authority in Victorian literature , both following and critiquing many of the conventions of period novels . 
 Following publication , the library magazine American Libraries , described the novel as one of the " Notable Books of 1969 " . Subsequent to its initial popularity , publishers produced numerous editions and translated the novel into many languages ; soon after the initial publication , the novel was also treated extensively by scholars . The novel remains popular , figuring in both public and academic conversations . In 2005 , Time magazine chose the novel as one of the 100 best English @-@ language novels published between 1923 and 2005 . 
 Part of the novel 's reputation is based on its expression of postmodern literary concerns through thematic focus on metafiction , historiography , metahistory , Marxist criticism and feminism . Stylistically and thematically , Linda Hutcheon describes the novel as an exemplar of a particular postmodern genre : " historiographic metafiction . " Because of the contrast between the independent Sarah Woodruff and the more stereotypical male characters , the novel often receives attention for its treatment of gender issues . However , despite claims by Fowles that it is a feminist novel , critics have debated whether it offers a sufficiently transformative perspective on women . 
 Following popular success , the novel created a larger legacy : the novel has had numerous responses by academics and other writers , such as A.S. Byatt , and through adaptation as film and dramatic play . In 1981 , the novel was adapted as a film of the same name with script by the playwright Harold Pinter , directed by Karel Reisz and starring Meryl Streep and Jeremy Irons . The film received considerable critical acclaim and awards , including several BAFTAs and Golden Globes . The novel was also adapted and produced as a British play in 2006 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before Fowles published The French Lieutenant 's Woman in 1969 , he had already established his literary reputation with his novels The Collector ( 1963 ) and The Magus ( 1965 ) . While writing The French Lieutenant 's Woman , he was working on the screenplay for the film adaptation of The Magus . Moreover , The Collector had already been adapted in a 1965 film that gained Fowles further popular attention . 
 Fowles described his main inspiration for The French Lieutenant 's Woman to be a persistent image of a ' Victorian Woman , ' who later developed into the novel 's titular character Sarah Woodruff . In a 1969 essay titled " Notes on an Unfinished Novel , " Fowles reflects on his writing process . He said he had an image during the autumn of 1966 of " A woman [ who ] stands at the end of a deserted quay and stares out to sea . " He determined that she belonged to a " Victorian Age " and had " mysterious " and " vaguely romantic " qualities . He made a note at the time about the function of the novel , saying 
 You are not trying to write something one of the Victorian novelists forgot to write ; but perhaps something one of them failed to write . And : Remember the etymology of the word . A novel is something new . It must have relevance to the writer 's now - so don 't ever pretend you live in 1867 ; or make sure the reader knows it 's a pretence . " 
 In an appended comment , dated " October 27 , 1967 " , he writes that he finished the first draft of the novel at about 140 @,@ 000 words . 
 Throughout the essay , Fowles describes multiple influences and issues important to the novel 's development , including his debt to other authors such as Thomas Hardy . In the essay , he describes surprise that the female character Sarah had taken the primary role in the novel . Later Fowles described other influences shaping the characters development , noting that the characters and story of The French Lieutenant 's Woman were loosely derived from Claire de Duras 's 1823 novel Ourika , which features a tragic affair between an African woman and French military man . Fowles later published a 1977 translation of Ourika into English . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Set in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , the narrator identifies the novel 's protagonist as Sarah Woodruff , the Woman of the title , also known as " Tragedy " and as " The French Lieutenant 's Whore " . She lives in the coastal town of Lyme Regis as a disgraced woman , supposedly abandoned by a French ship 's officer named <unk> who had returned to France and married . She spends some of her limited free time on The Cobb , a stone jetty where she stares out the sea . 
 One day , Charles Smithson , an orphaned gentleman , and Ernestina Freeman , his fiancée and a daughter of a wealthy tradesman , see Sarah walking along the cliffside . Ernestina tells Charles something of Sarah 's story , and he becomes curious about her . Though continuing to court Ernestina , Charles has several more encounters with Sarah , meeting her clandestinely three times . During these meetings , Sarah tells Charles of her history , and asks for his emotional and social support . During the same period , he learns of the possible loss of place as heir to his elderly uncle , who has become engaged to a woman young enough to bear a child . Meanwhile , Charles 's servant Sam falls in love with Mary , the maid of Ernestina 's aunt . 
 In fact , Charles has fallen in love with Sarah and advises her to leave Lyme for Exeter . Returning from a journey to warn Ernestina 's father about his uncertain inheritance , Charles stops in Exeter as if to visit Sarah . From there , the narrator , who intervenes throughout the novel and later becomes a character in it , offers three different ways in which the novel could end : 
 First ending : Charles does not visit Sarah , but immediately returns to Lyme to reaffirm his love for Ernestina . They marry , though the marriage never becomes particularly happy , and Charles enters trade under Ernestina 's father , Mr. Freeman . The narrator pointedly notes the lack of knowledge about Sarah 's fate . Charles tells Ernestina about an encounter which he implies is with the " French Lieutenant 's Whore " , but <unk> the sordid details , and the matter is ended . The narrator dismisses this ending as a daydream by Charles , before the alternative events of the subsequent meeting with Ernestina are described . Critic Michelle Phillips Buchberger describes this first ending as " a semblance of verisimilitude in the traditional ' happy ending ' " found in actual Victorian novels . 
 Before the second and third endings , the narrator appears as a character sharing a railway compartment with Charles . He tosses a coin to determine the order in which he will portray the other two possible endings , emphasising their equal plausibility . They are as follows : 
 Second ending : Charles and Sarah have a rash sexual encounter in which Charles realises that Sarah was a virgin . Reflecting on his emotions during this , Charles ends his engagement to Ernestina , and proposes to Sarah through a letter . Charles 's servant Sam fails to deliver the letter and , after Charles breaks his engagement , Ernestina 's father disgraces him . His uncle marries and his wife bears an heir , ensuring the loss of the expected inheritance . To escape the social suicide and depression caused by his broken engagement , Charles goes abroad to Europe and America . Ignorant of Charles ' proposal , Sarah flees to London without telling her lover . During Charles ' trips abroad , his lawyer searches for Sarah , finding her two years later living in the Chelsea house of the painter and poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti , where she enjoys an artistic , creative life . Sarah shows Charles the child of their affair , leaving him in hope that the three may be reunited . 
 Third ending : The narrator re @-@ appears outside the house at 16 Cheyne Walk and turns back his pocket watch by fifteen minutes . Events are the same as in the second @-@ ending version until Charles meets Sarah , when their reunion is sour . The new ending does not make clear the parentage of the child and Sarah expresses no interest in reviving the relationship . Charles leaves the house , intending to return to the United States , wondering whether Sarah is a manipulative , lying woman who exploited him . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The Narrator – as in other works of metafiction , the narrator 's voice frequently intervenes in the story with a personality of its own . Though the voice appears to be that of Fowles , Magali Cornier Michael notes that chapter 13 , which discusses the role of author and narrator within fiction , distinguishes between the author 's role in the text and the narrator 's . Alice Ferrebe describes the narrator as both a lens for critiquing traditional gender roles and a perpetuation of the perspectives on gendered identity perpetuated by the male gaze . 
 Sarah Woodruff – the main protagonist according to the narrator . Formerly a governess , she becomes disgraced after an illicit , but unconsummated , liaison with an injured French naval merchant . The feminist critic Magali Cornier Michael argues that she is more a plot device , not interpretable as a main character because her thoughts and motivations are only interpreted from the perspective of outside male characters . Sarah offers a representation of myth or symbol within a male perspective on women . 
 Charles Smithson – the main male character . Though born into a family with close ties to nobility , Smithson does not possess a title but has a sizable income and considerable education . Early in the novel he is described both as a casual naturalist and a Darwinist . Though trying to become an enlightened and forward @-@ thinking individual , the narrator often emphasises , through commentary on Smithson 's actions and situation , that his identity is strongly rooted in the traditional social system . Moreover , conflicting identification with social forces , such as science and religion , lead Smithson to an existential crisis . 
 Ernestina Freeman – Smithson 's fiance and daughter to a London @-@ based owner of department stores . Unlike Sarah , Ernestina 's temperament is much less complex , and much more simple @-@ minded . 
 Sam Farrow – Charles 's Hackney servant with aspirations to become a haberdasher . Throughout the novel , Sam becomes the narrator 's model for the working class peoples of Victorian Britain , comparing Sam 's identity with Charles 's ignorance of that culture . According to critic David Landrum , the tension between Sam and Charles Smithson importantly demonstrates Marxist class struggle , though this aspect of the novel is often overlooked by criticism emphasizing Charles 's relationship to Sarah . 
 Dr Grogan – an Irish doctor in the town of Lyme Regis who both advises the various upper @-@ class families in the town , and becomes an adviser to Charles . His education and interest in Darwin and other education make him a good companion for Charles . 
 Mr Freeman – the father of Ernestina , he earned his wealth as an owner of a drapery and clothes sales chain of stores . He " represents the rising entrepreneurial class in England " which stands in stark contrast to the old money which Smithson comes from . 
 Aunt Tranter – a prominent member of Lyme Regis society who is friends with Grogan and , as her maternal aunt , hosts Ernestina during her stay . 
 Mrs <unk> – a wealthy widow and , at the beginning of the novel , the employer of Sarah Woodruff . <unk> , and hypersensitive , her character fulfills the archetype of high @-@ society villainess . 
 Mary – stereotypical lower class servant to Ernestina Freeman and future wife to Sam Farrow . 
 Montague - Charles Smithson 's family lawyer of a firm which has been around since the eighteenth century . 2 @-@ 3 years older than Charles , he helps his client in search of Sarah towards the end of the novel . 
 = = Style and structure = = 
 Like many other postmodern novels , Fowles uses multiple different stylistic and structural techniques to highlight his thematic interests in The French Lieutenant 's Woman . When discussing these stylistic concerns , many literary critics comment on the importance of the narrator and the narration , the intertextual references to other literary works , and the multiple endings . 
 = = = Narration = = = 
 Throughout the novel , the omniscient narrative voice , alongside a series of footnotes , reflect with an objective tone on a number of plot devices : the author 's difficulty controlling the characters ; the conventions that are expected of a " Victorian novel " ; and , analyses of differences in 19th @-@ century customs and class . The narrator often returns to topics of interest to literature and scholarship from the period , like the theories of Charles Darwin and Charles Lyell , the radical politics of Karl Marx , and the works of Matthew Arnold , Alfred , Lord Tennyson , and Thomas Hardy . 
 Through a metafictional and <unk> voice , the contemporary , postmodern narrator questions the role of the author and the historian in thinking about the past . In her article discussing the use of paratext , or the contextualizing text printed in the book such as the footnotes and epigraphs , Deborah Bowen argues that the novel 's paratext forces the reader , like in other postmodern works , to rethink the importance of such peripheral material that in other contexts will get overlooked in light of preference for the main text . Instead of nicely complementing the main plot and adding meaning , these <unk> elements can distract from the effectiveness of the novel and challenging the authority of the narrative voice . 
 = = = Intertextuality = = = 
 Beyond the narrator intervening and emphasizing particular interpretations of the text , the book 's metafictional approach often relies on intertextual references to provide further commentary . In the epigraphs for each chapter , the book gestures towards a number of important 19th @-@ century texts and ideas . Partially , references to other texts act in " ironic play " , parodied by how the novel emulates other Victorian conventions throughout the text . Linda <unk> describes the works of William Thackery , George Eliot , Charles Dickens , Froude and Thomas Hardy as direct inspirations for this parody . 
 In his discussion of science and religion in the novel , John Glendening notes that both character commentary on Darwin 's publications along with the epigraphs mentioning those works as direct contributor 's to the novels emphasis on science superseding religion . Similarly , by quoting Marx with the first epigraph , along with multiple subsequent epigraphs , the novel directs thematic attention towards the socio @-@ economics issues within the novel . Deborah Bowen describes literary critics struggling to find readings of the epigraphs that explore the themes of the novel , and argues that the poor relationship between the epigraphs and the text " disperses the authority of the narrative voice , thus destroying his power to speak as a moralist . " For Bowen , the epigraphs support the satire of Victorian fiction conventions in the novel . 
 = = = Multiple endings = = = 
 Often critics will comment on the novel 's multiple endings . Each offers a possible ending for Charles 's pursuit of Sarah : the first ends with Charles married to Ernestina , the second with a successful reestablishment of a relationship with Sarah , and the third with Charles cast back into the world without a partner . Michelle Phillips Buchberger discusses these endings as a demonstration of " Fowles 's rejection of a narrow mimesis " of reality ; rather Fowles presents this multiplicity of endings to highlight the role of the author in plot choices . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Though a bestseller , the novel has also received significant scrutiny by literary critics . Especially during the 1960s and 70s , a novel with great popularity and significant academic scrutiny is unusual ; in literary study , the canon and its academic defenders often focused on " high literary " works that didn 't have large popular followings . In her study of postmodernism , Linda Hutcheon described The French Lieutenant Woman 's binary of popular and academic interest as a paradox similar to the postmodern thematic binaries produced within the novel 's content . Because of its prominence since publication , the novel has received a variety of different academic re @-@ examinations in light of numerous critical and thematic approaches . Some of the most popular concerns for the novel are its discussion of gender , especially questioning " Is the novel a feminist novel ? " , its engagement with metafictional and <unk> concepts and its treatment of science and religion . 
 = = = Gender = = = 
 The novel creates a number of binaries between men and women . Michelle Phillips Buchberger argues that The French Lieutenant 's Woman , along with Fowles two earlier novels The Collector ( 1963 ) and The Magus ( 1965 ) , portrays a fundamental binary between the male and female characters : the female characters act as an elite set of " creators " or " educated , visionary , and predominantly female " characters who provide the facilitation for evolution " in existential terms " of the male " ' collectors ' , whose traits are present in all of Fowles 's flawed male protagonists . " Though acknowledging such binaries in the role of the characters , critic Alice Ferrebe does not treat these binaries as necessary thematic elements . Rather , the binaries demonstrate what she calls a gendered " <unk> politics " , or a politics created by a gaze ( not dissimilar from the " male gaze " noticed in cinema studies ) , that constructs an artificial gender binary within Fowle 's early novels ( as opposed to a multiplicity of socially constructed genders ) . For Ferrebe , this binary creates a tension , especially with Sarah , who becomes a violently fetishised and objectified " other " , differentiated from the male characters like Charles . 
 = = = = Feminist novel = = = = 
 A number of critics have treated the novel as a feminist novel . The novel 's narrator demonstrates and proclaims a feminist approach to women : Sarah is presented as a more liberated and independently willed woman as compared to the other model female characters , such as Ernestina and her aunt . In a 1985 interview by Jan Relf , Fowles declared himself a " feminist " . 
 Magali Cornier Michael criticises this reading of the text , saying that the novel 's overwhelming reliance on male perspectives on women and feminism prevents the novel from meeting feminist objectives . Similarly , Michelle Phillips Buchberger argues that The French Lieutenant 's Woman , along with Fowles ' two earlier novels The Collector ( 1963 ) and The Magus ( 1965 ) , proclaimed a " pseudo @-@ feminism " while advocating some feminist ideas ; but , she says , they are permeated by a " fetishism [ of women that ] perpetuates the idea of woman as ' other ' " . Alice Ferrebe also notes that , despite Fowles ' attempts to critique masculine values , his novels remain male fantasies demonstrative of the " compromises and contradictions " created by the gendered situation in which he was writing . Other literary critics , such as William Palmer , Peter Conradi , Bruce Woodcock and Pamela Cooper , have also critiqued Fowles ' claims to a feminist perspective and representation . 
 = = = Metafiction , historiography and metahistory = = = 
 In her important study of postmodernity and its poetics in literature , Linda <unk> describes this novel as definitive of a genre she calls " historiographic metafiction " . She defines this postmodern genre as " well @-@ known and popular novels which are both intensely self @-@ reflexive yet paradoxically also lay claim to historical events and personages . " Typically postmodern , this genre of fiction blends the creation of imagined narratives with critique on the various modes in which we create knowledge , such as history and literature . Important to her discussion of the genre 's post @-@ modern style , The French Lieutenant 's Woman 's self @-@ reflexive narration bridges different discourses that usually remain separated , such as academic history , literary criticism , philosophy and literature . 
 The text 's representations of the past introduce anachronistic perspectives on the time and the characters . For example , in her queer studies @-@ based article , " Historical Romance , Gender and <unk> " , Lisa Fletcher argues that The French Lieutenant 's Woman , by relying on a " good love story " as the central means of representing the past , projects a contemporary hetero @-@ normative sexuality on the history of Victorian England . For Fletcher , Fowles ' paradoxical treatment of Sarah as both a Victorian character and as a desirable " modern woman , " through feminist gestures and sexual tension between Charles and Sarah , confines the historical set characters and their experience to stereotypical heterosexual romance . Fletcher believes that overall the text creates a stereotypical and limited perspective on the past , essentially " <unk> the passage of ( and relationship to ) history " . 
 = = = Science and religion = = = 
 Emphasis on a conflicted relationship between science and religion frequently occurs in both historical studies of Victorian history and Neo @-@ Victorian novels . In his chapter on The French Lieutenant 's Woman in his book , Evolution and the <unk> Jesus , John Glendening argues that Fowles ' novel is one of the first neo @-@ Victorian novels to handle the dynamic created between science and religion in Victorian identity . Glendening notes that more generally " Christian ideas and conventions become appropriated in the service of a secularist and extensional version of truth . " 
 Glendening says that Fowles uses commentary on Darwinism " to comment on characters and their experience and to forward a view of natural and human reality opposed to Christian doctrine , and , within limits amenable to existentialist philosophy . " In general , Glendening sees ideas of science and religion as central to the personal and social identities that develop within the novel , but creating symbolically conflictual binaries . He suggests that Fowles manoeuvres these conflictual forces to favour an existential self @-@ revelation exhibited through the main character of Smithson , leading to a conclusion that " the freedom implicit in accepting alienation should be exercised in overcoming it . " 
 = = Contemporary reception = = 
 The novel received mixed critical attention at its initial publication . Critics focused both praise and critique on its style , plot and approach to metafiction and metahistory . The following samples those responses : 
 The November 1969 New York Times review by Christopher Lehmann @-@ Haupt warned readers to " be certain there 's only one log on the fire . If , unhappily , you lack the fireplace by which this book should be read , set an alarm clock . " Lehmann @-@ Haupt found the book to begin as " irresistibly novelistic that he has disguised it as a Victorian romance , " yet the metafictional construction by the end positively " explodes all the assumptions of our Victorian sensibilities . " Time magazine 's November 1969 review described the novel as " resourceful and penetrating talent at work on that archaic form . " In March 1970 , the magazine American Libraries named the novel as one of the " Notable Books of 1969 , " calling it " A successful blending of two worlds as the author writes in modern terminology of the Victorian era . " 
 Not all of the reviews were positive ; for example , Roger Sale in The Hudson Review largely criticized the novel , saying , " At times it seems that the commentary is not so bad and the novel awful , but at others Fowles makes the novel almost work and the comments are embarrassingly vulgar . " Ultimately , the reviewer concluded that the novel was " stumbling and gauche and much much too long , but curiously attractive too . " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The novel has been reprinted in numerous editions and translated into many languages : Taiwanese , Danish , Dutch , Finnish , Hungarian , Italian , Norwegian , Portuguese , Chinese , German , Russian , Polish , and Spanish . The novel was originally published in 1969 by Little Brown and Company in both Boston and Toronto . The novel has also been published in a number of English editions from different publishers , represented in the following list ( with publication date in parenthesis ) : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The general popularity of The French Lieutenant 's Woman has inspired several responses to the novel , most notably other authors ' work and adaptation into film and theatre . 
 = = = Literary response = = = 
 The most prominent response to the novel is A.S. Byatt 's 1990 Booker Prize @-@ winning novel , Possession . She describes her novel as deliberately responding to the model of postmodern metafiction that critics highlight in The French Lieutenant 's Woman . Byatt described her motivation for responding in her essays in On Histories and Stories , saying : 
 Fowles has said that the nineteenth @-@ century narrator was assuming the omniscience of a god . I think rather the opposite is the case — this kind of fictive narrator can creep closer to the feelings and inner life of characters — as well as providing a Greek chorus — than any first @-@ person mimicry . In ' Possession ' I used this kind of narrator deliberately three times in the historical narrative — always to tell what the historians and biographers of my fiction never discovered , always to heighten the reader 's imaginative entry into the world of the text . 
 = = = Adaptation = = = 
 The novel was adapted as a 1981 film , written by playwright Harold Pinter and directed by Karel Reisz . The production staff included composer Carl Davis and the cinematographer Freddie Francis . The film starred Meryl Streep and Jeremy Irons with Hilton McRae , Jean Faulds , Peter Vaughan , Colin <unk> , Liz Smith , Patience Collier , Richard Griffiths , David Warner , Alun Armstrong , Penelope Wilton and Leo McKern . The film was nominated for five Academy Awards : Streep was nominated for Academy Award for Best Actress and the film was nominated for Academy Award for Best Writing , but both lost to On Golden Pond . Streep won a BAFTA and a Golden Globe for best actress . The film 's music and sound both won BAFTAs , despite not winning the Oscar . Pinter was nominated for a Golden Globe for best script and the work as a whole in the category Best Motion Picture – Drama . 
 During 2006 , the novel was adapted for the stage by Mark Healy , in a version which toured the UK that year . 
 = Robert Ridgway = 
 Robert Ridgway ( July 2 , 1850 – March 25 , 1929 ) was an American ornithologist specializing in systematics . He was appointed in 1880 by Spencer Fullerton Baird , secretary of the Smithsonian Institution , to be the first full @-@ time curator of birds at the United States National Museum , a title he held until his death . In 1883 , he helped found the American Ornithologists ' Union , where he served as officer and journal editor . Ridgway was an outstanding descriptive taxonomist , capping his life work with The Birds of North and Middle America ( eight volumes , 1901 – 1919 ) . In his lifetime , he was unmatched in the number of North American bird species that he described for science . As technical illustrator , Ridgway used his own paintings and outline drawings to complement his writing . He also published two books that systematized color names for describing birds , A Nomenclature of Colors for Naturalists ( 1886 ) and Color Standards and Color Nomenclature ( 1912 ) . Ornithologists all over the world continue to cite Ridgway 's color studies and books . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Ridgway was born in Mount Carmel , Illinois to David and Henrietta ( née Reed ) Ridgway . He was the oldest of ten children . He was educated at common schools in his native town , where he showed a special fondness for natural history . This interest to explore nature , both shooting with a gun given to him by his father , as well as drawing from life , was encouraged by his parents , his uncle William , and his aunt Fannie Gunn . 
 In 1871 he met Julia Evelyn Perkins , the daughter of one of the engravers for The History of North American Birds . Ridgway 's courtship of the girl who became known as " Evvie " lasted until she reached the age of eighteen , and they were married on October 12 , 1875 . 
 = = = Ornithological training and the King expedition = = = 
 In 1864 , at the age of thirteen , the young Ridgway wrote to the Commissioner of Patents , seeking advice on the identification of a bird he had seen . He enclosed a full @-@ sized color drawing of what turned out to be a pair of purple finches . His letter eventually was referred to Spencer Fullerton Baird of the Smithsonian Institution . Baird replied , identifying the bird and praising the boy 's artistic abilities , yet cautioning him to learn and use the scientific names of birds in further correspondence . 
 The mentor and protégé continued their exchange of letters , which led to Ridgway 's appointment , in the spring of 1867 , as the naturalist on Clarence King 's Survey of the 40th Parallel . After a brief , intensive stint of training in Washington , where he learned to prepare study skins , Ridgway joined the expedition in May . Starting from Sacramento , California , the team explored parts of Nevada , Utah Territory , and Idaho Territory . A highlight of the trip was a stop at Nevada 's Pyramid Lake . In the fall of 1868 , the members of the team were reduced for funding reasons , but Ridgway returned in 1869 for more work in Utah . In an undertaking that lasted nearly two years , Ridgway collected 1 @,@ 522 bird @-@ related specimens ( 753 nests and eggs and 769 skins ) and served as a key member on one of the four great surveys of the American West . He observed 262 species , most of these on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada . He had written most of his portion of King 's report by 1872 , but the " Ornithology " section was not published until 1877 . 
 = = = The Washington years = = = 
 Upon his return to Washington , Ridgway illustrated and wrote for Baird and Thomas M. Brewer 's History of North American Birds project . He formally joined the Smithsonian in 1874 , under the supervision of curator George Brown Goode . In 1880 he received the job title of curator ( variously , of ornithology or of the department of birds ) ; he was titled Curator of Birds from 1886 until his death . Working with the institution 's collection of approximately fifty thousand bird skins , Ridgway devoted himself to unraveling the taxonomic relationships among North American bird species . As well , he continued his field work to collect new specimens , making several trips to his home state of Illinois , Florida , other states of the U.S. , and Costa Rica . The Smithsonian exchanged study skins with other museums , either by donation or loan , and provided material and publications to collectors such as José <unk> Zeledón of the Costa Rican National Museum in exchange for specimens . 
 Ridgway was articulate and literate , and served as the Smithsonian 's mouthpiece and representative for many years in the study of birds . He welcomed visits to the museum from colleagues and the general public alike , and would give tours . One of his responsibilities involved assembling public exhibits . In the interest of accessibility , he made books available for browsing and displayed examples of birds described in popular natural histories . As well , he showed birds from well @-@ known poetry , species like the nightingale that are not found in North America . Returning the favor that Baird had paid him , he responded to letters from the public to identify birds and provided artist 's materials to a painter in California . Nevertheless , friends and colleagues described him as almost painfully shy , and he generally shirked publicity and the limelight . 
 Among Ridgway 's colleagues at the Smithsonian were Pierre Louis <unk> , who provided an important collection of Asian birds in 1883 . Charles Wallace Richmond joined the institution in 1893 ( at first , as a night watchman ) and was soon tasked by Ridgway with writing reviews and other short pieces . During Samuel Pierpont Langley 's tenure as Secretary , Ridgway assisted Langley 's aviation research . He provided calculations of the wing loading and other aerodynamic characteristics of species like the wandering albatross , turkey vulture , and other soaring birds . 
 In 1883 , Robert Ridgway was a founding member of the American Ornithologists ' Union ( AOU ) and he became an associate editor of the organization 's journal The Auk . He was prevailed upon to serve as an officer of the organization , but on the condition that he not be required to preside at public meetings . He served as a vice president of the AOU ( September 1883 – November 1891 ) and as its president ( November 1898 – November 1900 ) . 
 As scientific knowledge expanded quickly in the second half of the nineteenth century , the need for reorganizing the system of names used to describe North American birds grew <unk> . For example , certain names assigned by William Bartram in his catalog of 1791 were now deemed unusable . Robert Ridgway addressed this need with two publications in 1880 and 1881 , while Elliott Coues published a competing checklist in 1882 . Ridgway and Coues , along with Joel Asaph Allen , William Brewster , and Henry W. Henshaw , came together as a committee on nomenclature and classification , serving the newly founded AOU , to reconcile the various systems and catalogs . In 1886 , the committee released The Code of Nomenclature and Check @-@ List of North American Birds , both a consistent checklist and a set of rules for the naming of birds to be described in the future . The Code settled the disagreement about capitalization of species names and established today 's order of presentation , with waterbirds first and passerines last . Several of the handbook 's innovations were adopted by other branches of zoology , and were incorporated into the 1905 version of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature . 
 The committee 's work served to standardize the way that birds are described , identifying them at the subspecies level and using a three @-@ part trinomial name . While American ornithologists embraced the descriptive detail , European researchers of the time were reluctant to adopt it . Ridgway was an enthusiastic supporter of trinomial nomenclature , although his thinking in later life became more moderate . 
 = = = Other affiliations = = = 
 Robert Ridgway was corresponding member of the Zoological Society of London ; was associated with the Davenport ( Iowa ) Academy of Natural Sciences , the New York Academy of Sciences , the Brookville , Indiana , Society of Natural History , and the Chicago Academy of Sciences ; and was a foreign member of the British Ornithologists ' Union . He was a member of the permanent ornithological committee of the first international congress at Vienna in 1884 . Ridgway was also honorary member of the Nuttall Ornithological Club of Cambridge , Massachusetts , for which he contributed illustrations and 48 articles to its Bulletin . 
 The short @-@ lived Ridgway Ornithological Club of Chicago , Illinois ( active from 1883 to about 1890 ) was named in Ridgway 's honor , and he was an honorary member . 
 Although he lacked formal post @-@ secondary education , Ridgway received an honorary master 's degree in science from Indiana University in 1884 , as a sign of gratitude for his supplying them with bird specimens after their museum burned down . He was listed with the title of Professor in Smithsonian annual reports and staff directories , despite his lack of a teaching appointment . He is sometimes referred to as " Dr. Ridgway , " particularly by writers from his home state of Illinois . Ella Dean 's profile is an example . 
 = = = The Harriman expedition = = = 
 In 1899 , Robert Ridgway joined E. H. Harriman on his famous Harriman Alaska Expedition . John Muir , Louis Agassiz Fuertes , John Burroughs , Edward S. Curtis , and a number of other scientists and artists made a four @-@ month expedition to study the flora and fauna of Alaska 's coastline . However , the trip did not yield significant publications by Ridgway . 
 = = = Other family members = = = 
 Robert and Julia Ridgway had one son , Audubon <unk> Ridgway ( May 15 , 1877 – February 22 , 1901 ) . " Audie " had begun a promising career in ornithology at the Field Museum of Natural History when his life was cut short by a fatal bout of pneumonia . 
 Robert Ridgway 's second @-@ born brother , John <unk> Ridgway ( February 28 , 1859 – December 27 , 1947 ) , was an nationally @-@ prominent bird illustrator who worked for many years at the United States Geological Survey , as well as the Smithsonian , the California Institute of Technology , and the Los Angeles County Museum of History , Science , and Art . The two brothers often collaborated on illustrations , sometimes with Robert doing the drawing and John the coloring . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 In early June , 1913 , Robert Ridgway and his wife Julia ( " Evvie " ) moved to Olney , Illinois , to reduce physical and mental stress so that he might complete The Birds of North and Middle America , of which five of eight parts had already appeared . They built a new house on 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 hectares ) that they had purchased in 1906 , and named the place <unk> for two large larch trees growing on the property . Ridgway also acquired a tract of 18 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 hectares ) located in the country , to be called Bird Haven , which he developed as a private nature reserve for birds and as a nursery for cultivation of non @-@ native plants . His skill in landscaping and tending to the grounds was such that his expertise in that area was in some demand . Bird Haven , in part , is now an Olney city park . 
 Evvie 's death on May 24 , 1927 was a severe blow to Robert . Robert continued to live at <unk> , tending to his beloved trees and shrubs , until his death on March 25 , 1929 , at the age of 78 . Robert was buried at Bird Haven where Julia 's ashes had been scattered . 
 = = Works = = 
 Robert Ridgway 's first publication , at the age of 18 , was an article about the belted kingfisher . In the course of the next 60 years , he would go on to publish more than 500 titles and 13 @,@ 000 printed pages , most of it concerning North American birds . 
 Ridgway collaborated with Brewer and Baird on the five @-@ volume History of North American Birds ( three volumes on the land birds published in 1874 , and two volumes published as The Water Birds of North America in 1884 ) . In its time , the work was considered the standard work on North American ornithology . While Ridgway primarily contributed illustrations to the land bird volumes , he wrote the bulk of the water bird volumes . 
 Ridgway provided full @-@ color illustrations for his own books and those of others . He was at the peak of his artistic proficiency in the late 1870s . Even though certain of his contemporaries ( for instance , Daniel Giraud Elliot ) may have produced more artistically pleasing renderings , Ridgway 's were the most accurate . In the words of his biographer Daniel Lewis , Ridgway " may have had the best grasp of bird coloration in the country . " 
 With the publication of A Manual of North American Birds in 1887 , Robert Ridgway condensed what was known about the continent 's birds into a relatively compact 642 pages and 464 outline drawings . A prototype of today 's field guides , it was quite successful , going into a second edition in 1896 , and was described by Montague Chamberlain as " far away the best thing we have for the working naturalist . " Nevertheless , its bulk was unwieldy for use in the field , and its identification keys depended on characteristics of the bird in the hand , not field marks . Harry Oberholser characterized the quality of the illustrations as " rarely equaled , never excelled " in beauty and accuracy . 
 With Stephen Alfred Forbes , he wrote a two @-@ volume work , The Ornithology of Illinois . Ridgway 's contributions were published in two parts , in 1889 and 1895 . Ridgway also published a number of papers dealing with the woody plants of his region . He contributed twenty short pieces to Forest and Stream , a magazine edited by George Bird Grinnell . 
 = = = The color books = = = 
 Robert Ridgway published two books whose goal was to standardize the names of colors used by ornithologists to describe birds . The first , A Nomenclature of Colors for Naturalists , appeared in 1886 , and was relatively small in scope , illustrating 186 colors . It proposed a simple classification system , doing away with many subjective and evocative names that were currently popular . 
 Ridgway sought to improve and expand upon this work . By 1898 , he was in discussions with Secretary Langley about a new , expanded dictionary of color , to be published by ( or at least supported by ) the Smithsonian . An advisory committee was formed , with scientific illustrator William Henry Holmes as chairman and Richard Rathbun ( newly appointed assistant secretary ) as one of its five members . Children 's game inventor Milton Bradley , who had devised a color wheel for instructional use , was consulted by the project . Langley thought it important that the work include spectral information about the colors to be cataloged , and he proposed physicist and color theorist Ogden Rood as a co @-@ editor of the work . In 1901 , however , the tension between the committee 's broad vision of commercial applications for the project and Ridgway 's narrow objective of a naturalist 's reference book ended the Ridgway @-@ Smithsonian collaboration in the endeavor . 
 Ridgway published Color Standards and Color Nomenclature himself in 1912 , financed in part by a loan from his friend and colleague Zeledón . The work became a standard reference used by ornithologists for decades after Ridgway 's death , as well as specialists in such wide @-@ ranging fields as mycology , philately , and food coloring . The book named 1 @,@ 115 colors , illustrated with painted samples reproduced on 53 plates . Special care was taken to ensure consistency of color reproduction across the edition , as well as the prevention of fading . The color samples were printed as large sheets by A. Hoen & Co . , cut into swatches one inch by one @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half inches , and pasted into each bound book . 
 In the book 's foreword , Ridgway acknowledged the assistance of many , among them his brother John , Zeledón , and ornithologist John Thayer . With more than a thousand colors to be named , Ridgway devised some of his own imaginative identifiers ( such as Dragons @-@ blood Red and <unk> Blue ) . He also paid tribute to colleagues , including Rood ( with colors like Rood 's Lavender ) , Bradley ( Bradley 's Blue ) , field guide pioneer Frank Chapman , <unk> Samuel Prout , and others . 
 = = = Descriptions of new forms = = = 
 A significant proportion of Ridgway 's output consisted of formal scientific descriptions of new forms of birds ( new genera , species , and subspecies ) , many of them native to Central and South America . Many of these papers were short reports dealing with a single taxon , but he also would describe tens of new forms in a single publication , as in a paper describing 22 species from the Galápagos Islands or his Manual of North American Birds ( four new genera , 39 new species and subspecies ) . As subsequent research has revised the taxonomy of birds , not all of the forms that Ridgway described remain recognized as distinct , but his contributions are still substantial . During his lifetime , no other ornithologist described more new taxa of American birds than Ridgway . 
 While most of the forms described and named by Ridgway came from outside the United States , in one instance he identified a new taxon first collected no earlier than 1881 , in the Catskill Mountains of New York , an area already well @-@ explored by ornithologists . From two specimens collected by Eugene Bicknell , Ridgway wrote the description of Bicknell 's thrush as a subspecies of gray @-@ cheeked thrush , naming it for Bicknell . The bird , a breeder of New England and southern Canada , has since been recognized as a distinct species . 
 From specimens collected in 1888 , Ridgway was the first to describe hood mockingbird , large cactus finch , and medium tree finch , all endemic to the Galápagos . The latter two are members of the so @-@ called Darwin 's finch group of tanagers , significant for their impact on Charles Darwin 's reasoning about evolution and the emergence of new species . 
 = = = The Birds of North and Middle America = = = 
 Robert Ridgway 's career @-@ crowning work , on bird systematics , was the monumental 6 @,@ 000 @-@ page The Birds of North and Middle America , published by the Smithsonian in eleven volumes between 1901 and 1950 . He began the work in 1894 at the direction of Goode . A major objective of the work was to resolve problems of naming and classification in the scientific literature of the time and to identify synonyms . Dry , rigorous , and technically detailed in its language , the book was not considered to be accessible by the general reading public . Continuing the pattern of the Manual ( and Baird 's earlier Review of American Birds ) , each volume featured an appendix of engraved outline drawings of generic characteristics . 
 Ridgway published the eighth installment of the work , commonly known as Bulletin 50 , in 1919 . Although he continued to work on the project , outlining a projected two more volumes , it was incomplete at the time of his death in 1929 . Following Ridgway 's plan but doing his own writing , Herbert Friedmann of the Smithsonian completed the final three volumes . 
 The Birds of North and Middle America and Color Standards and Color Nomenclature are complementary works , and indeed Ridgway divided his time between the two projects in the first decade of the century . He used his own color terms extensively throughout Bulletin 50 . 
 = = Legacy and recognition = = 
 Spencer Fullerton Baird and his followers emphasized precision of description , traceability through the literature , the accumulation of empirical evidence ( that is , numerous specimens ) , and deductions drawn from facts — in opposition to the so @-@ called " European school " of the time , which depended on personal authority . Harris calls Robert Ridgway and his Birds of North and Middle America the culmination of the " <unk> school " of bird study . However , as ornithology around the turn of the twentieth century began to focus on bird behavior , reproduction strategies , and other aspects of the living organism , Ridgway fell behind the advances made by his colleagues of the succeeding generations . Paradoxically , because the overwhelming Bulletin 50 was so authoritative , no new publication could replace it for many years . Accordingly , systematics declined in importance as a means to study birds . 
 Birds named for Ridgway include the buff @-@ collared nightjar , Caprimulgus ridgwayi ( once known as Ridgway 's whip @-@ poor @-@ will ) ; the turquoise cotinga , Cotinga ridgwayi ; the Caribbean subspecies of the osprey , Pandion haliaetus ridgwayi ; a Big Island subspecies of the <unk> , <unk> sandwichensis ridgwayi ; Ridgway 's hawk , Buteo ridgwayi ; and many other species and subspecies . The monotypic genus <unk> is named for him ; it consists of Aztec thrush , R. pinicola . 
 In 1919 , Ridgway was awarded the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the National Academy of Sciences for his Birds of North and Middle America . The Academy elected him to membership in 1926 . In 1921 , he was the first to receive the AOU 's William Brewster Memorial Award , which recognizes " an exceptional body of work on birds of the Western Hemisphere . " 
 In 2002 , the American Birding Association established the Robert Ridgway Award for Publications in Field Ornithology . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1869 ( March ) . " The Belted Kingfisher Again , " American Naturalist 3 ( 1 ) : 53 – 54 . Retrieved 28 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1870 . " A New Classification of the North American Falconidae , with Descriptions of Three New Species . " Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 22 : 138 – 150 . Retrieved 15 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1872 ( December ) . " On the Relation between Color and Geographical Distribution in Birds , as <unk> in Melanism and <unk> . " ( part 1 of 2 ) American Journal of Science , 3rd ser . , 4 ( 24 ) : 454 – 460 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1873 ( September ) . " On the Relation between Color and Geographical Distribution in Birds , as <unk> in Melanism and <unk> . " ( part 2 of 2 ) American Journal of Science , 3rd ser . , 5 ( 25 ) : 39 – 43 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 . 
 Baird , S.F. , T.M. Brewer , and R. Ridgway . 1874 . A History of North American Birds : Land Birds . Little , Brown , Boston . Volume I , 596 pp . ; Volume II , 590 pp . ; Volume III , 560 pp . Retrieved 14 January 2013 . A special edition , published in the same year , of 50 copies contained 36 plates hand @-@ colored by Ridgway . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1877 . " Ornithology . " Volume IV , part III , pp. 303 – 669 , of King , Clarence , Report of the Geological Exploration of the Fortieth Parallel . U.S. Government Printing Office , Washington , D.C. Retrieved 3 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1880 ( September ) . " A Catalogue of the Birds of North America , " Proceedings of the United States National Museum . 3 : 163 – 246 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1881 . " Nomenclature of North American Birds Chiefly Contained in the United States National Museum , " Bulletin of the U.S. National Museum 21 : 1 – 94 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1882 . " Description of Two New Thrushes from the United States . " Proceedings of the United States National Museum 4 : 374 – 379 . Retrieved 15 January 2013 . Description of Bicknell 's thrush , as Hylocichla <unk> bicknelli . 
 Baird , S.F. , T.M. Brewer , and R. Ridgway . 1884 . The Water Birds of North America . Little , Brown , Boston . Volume I , 537 pp . ; Volume II , 552 pp . Retrieved 14 January 2013 . 
 American Ornithologists ' Union . 1886 . The Code of Nomenclature and Check @-@ List of North American Birds . New York . Retrieved 28 January 2013 . Members of the Committee : Elliott Coues , J.A. Allen , Robert Ridgway , William Brewster , and H.W. Henshaw . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1886 . A Nomenclature of Colors for Naturalists , and Compendium of Useful Knowledge for Ornithologists . Little , Brown , Boston . 129 pp. 10 colored plates and 7 plates of outline illustrations . Retrieved 4 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1887 . A Manual of North American Birds , Illustrated by 464 Outline Drawings of the Generic Characters . J.B. Lippincott , Philadelphia . 631 pp . Retrieved 14 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1889 . " A Descriptive Catalog of the Birds of Illinois , " part I of Ridgway , Robert , and Forbes , S.A. , The Ornithology of Illinois . State Laboratory of Natural History , Springfield , Ill . Volume I of part I. Retrieved 22 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1890 ( February ) . " Scientific Results of Explorations by the U. S. Fish Commission Steamer Albatross , No . I : Birds Collected on the Galapagos Islands in 1888 . " Proceedings of the United States National Museum 12 ( 767 ) : 101 – 128 . Retrieved 11 March 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1891 . " Directions for Collecting Birds . " Bulletin of the United States National Museum 39A : 1 – 27 . Retrieved 19 March 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1892 . " The Humming Birds . " Report of the National Museum for 1890 : 253 – 383 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1894 ( November ) . " Descriptions of Twenty @-@ Two New Species from the Galapagos Islands . " Proceedings of the United States National Museum 17 ( 1007 ) : 357 – 370 . Retrieved 22 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1895 . " A Descriptive Catalog of the Birds of Illinois , " part I of Ridgway , Robert , and Forbes , S.A. , The Ornithology of Illinois . State Laboratory of Natural History , Springfield , Ill . Volume II of part I. Retrieved 22 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1897 ( March ) . " Birds of the Galapagos Archipelago . " Proceedings of the United States National Museum 19 ( 1119 ) : 459 – 670 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1901 ( October ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . A Descriptive Catalogue of the Higher Groups , Genera , Species , and Subspecies of Birds Known to <unk> in North America , from the Arctic Islands to the Isthmus of Panama , the West Indies and Other Islands of the Caribbean Sea , and the Galapagos Archipelago . No. 50 , Part I. U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 745 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1902 ( October ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part II . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 854 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1904 ( December ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part III . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 840 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1907 ( July ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part IV . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 1029 pp . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1911 ( November ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part V. U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 892 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1912 . Color Standards and Color Nomenclature . Washington , D.C. 44 pp. 53 colored plates . Retrieved 4 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1914 ( April ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part VI . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 902 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1916 ( May ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part VII . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 556 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1919 ( June ) . The Birds of North and Middle America . No. 50 , Part VIII . U.S. National Museum , Washington , D.C. 868 pp . Retrieved 12 January 2013 . 
 Ridgway , Robert . 1923 ( April ) . " A Plea for Caution in the Use of <unk> . " The Auk 40 ( 2 ) : 375 – 376 . Retrieved 28 January 2013 . 
 = Banton , Romblon = 
 Banton ( formerly known as Jones ) is a fifth @-@ class municipality in the province of Romblon , Philippines . Its territory encompasses the entire island of Banton located on the northern portion of the province and lies on the northern portion of the Sibuyan Sea near the southern tip of Marinduque . It is a town of about 5 @,@ 000 people majority of which speak the <unk> language , one of the five primary branches of the Visayan languages . 
 Banton is thought to be already inhabited by Filipinos since the pre @-@ colonial period , based on analysis of discovered human remains , coffins , an ancient burial cloth and other archaeological finds by the National Museum in the 1930s . The present settlement was founded in 1622 by the Spanish and is the oldest settlement in the province . During the American colonial period , the municipality changed its name to Jones in honor of American congressman William Jones , who authored the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 . Today , Banton is one of Romblon 's thriving municipalities , with an economy dependent on copra farming , fishing , raffia palm weaving , and tourism . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " Banton " was derived from the Asi word <unk> , meaning " rocky " , referring to the mountainous and rocky topography of the island due to its volcanic origin . Another possible origin is the word <unk> , which is the Asi word for the venomous <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Banton was already inhabited during pre @-@ colonial times as proven by ancient artefacts such as wooden coffins and skeletal remains found in the island 's caves in 1936 by a team of researchers from the National Museum . Among the artefacts was the Banton Cloth , a piece of a traditional burial cloth found in one of the wooden coffins . It is estimated to be 400 years old , making it the earliest known warp ikat ( tie @-@ resist dyeing ) textile in the Philippines and Southeast Asia . These artifacts are now preserved at the National Museum of the Philippines in Manila . 
 The municipality of Banton was established by Spanish colonial authorities in 1622 , the first town established in the entire province of Romblon . It was initially founded in a site in <unk> Hill ( now part of Barangay <unk> ) , south @-@ west of its present site . The administration of the other islands of Romblon were put under the jurisdiction of Banton until 1631 , when Pueblo de Romblon was founded . In 1640 , due to frequent raids by Moros , who looted and pillaged the settlement , the limestone fort called Fuerza de San Jose and the San Nicolas de Tolentino Parish Church was constructed under the leadership of Father Agustin de San Pedro , also known as El Padre Capitan , who was the parish priest of Banton at that time . The construction was completed in 1644 , and in 1648 , San Nicolas de Tolentino was installed as the town 's patron saint . The fort effectively protected the town against further Moro raids . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 When civilian government was introduced in Romblon by the Americans on 16 March 1901 , Banton was one of the 11 new municipalities reinstated or created . In 1918 , the municipality was renamed Jones in honor of American congressman William Jones , who authored the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 that provided for greater autonomy for the Philippines under American colonial rule . In 1959 , Republic Act No. <unk> restored the island to its former name . 
 In 2013 , Banton was one of the sites of a detailed resource assessment by the Department of Energy ( DOE ) , along with <unk> Island in Batangas and <unk> Island in <unk> . The study aimed to determine whether the island can be a site for low enthalpy geothermal power generation . However , no exploitable geothermal resource has been delineated on the island . On 19 March 2013 , the National Museum declared as Important Cultural Property the island 's Guyangan Cave System , where precolonial wooden coffins , remains , and the Banton Cloth were found . 
 On 15 December 2015 , Typhoon <unk> made its fourth landfall over the island as it crossed central Philippines , causing severe devastation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Banton lies on the northern portion of the Sibuyan Sea , and is equidistant between Marinduque Island to the north and Tablas Island to the south . It is composed of the main island of Banton and the uninhabited islands of <unk> , Carlota and Isabel , the last two of which are collectively known as the Dos <unk> Islands . There is also an islet near Tabonan Beach on the north @-@ west of the island . 
 Banton has a total land area of 3 @,@ 248 hectares ( 32 @.@ 48 km2 ) . Based on rock petrology , the island is a dormant volcano which lies at the southernmost portion of the Pleistocene @-@ Quaternary West Luzon volcanic arc and may have been active during the Pliocene period . Because of its volcanic origin , the island has a mountainous , rocky topography , with very few patches of flat land suitable for farming . The island 's highest elevation , Mount <unk> , rises at 596 metres ( 1 @,@ 955 ft ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Banton is politically subdivided into 17 barangays . In 1954 , the <unk> of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> were consolidated into the barangay known as <unk> . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 As part of Romblon , Banton is classified under Type III of the Corona climatic classification system . This type of climate is described as having no prominent wet or dry seasons . The wet season , which usually occurs from June to November can extend up to December during the onset of the southwest monsoon . The dry season from January to May may sometimes have periods of rainfall or even inclement weather . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2015 census , Banton has a population of 5 @,@ 536 people . The island municipality is sparsely populated with a population density of 170 / km2 ( 441 / sq mi ) . According to the Department of Interior and Local Government ( DILG ) and the Commission on Elections ( <unk> ) , in 2013 , there were 3 @,@ 694 registered voters in Banton , spread over 31 electoral precincts . Of this figure , 1 @,@ 794 are male registered voters , while 1 @,@ 900 are female . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The island 's inhabitants speak the Asi language | <unk> language , one of three major languages spoken in Romblon and one of five primary branches of the Visayan language family . The island 's inhabitants were the first speakers of the language throughout the province , having spoken it since precolonial times . From Banton , the language spread to other island like Maestro de Campo , <unk> , and in the towns of Calatrava , and Odiongan in Tablas Island . 
 David Paul <unk> , a linguist from the Australian National University whose expertise is on Philippine languages , notes that Asi speakers may have been the first Visayan speakers in the Romblon region . He also suggests that Asi may have a Cebuano substratum and that many of its words may have been influenced by the later influx of other languages such as Romblomanon . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Banton has a primarily agricultural economy , with copra farming and fishing as the main sources of livelihood . There is also an indigenous raffia palm handicraft industry . Other crops grown in the island are root crops ( such as cassava , sweet potatoes ) , fruits and vegetables . The locals also engage in livestock raising for local consumption , and small @-@ scale shipbuilding of wooden boats and launches . 
 Due to the island 's rocky topography and lack of a stable supply of freshwater , rice production is difficult in the island . Rice from Mindoro , Marinduque or Quezon is supplied to the island by local traders . In recent years , the island has also become a small tourist hub for Asi expatriates and foreign tourists from the United States and other countries . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Banton is an eco @-@ tourism and heritage destination due to its beaches , diving sites , caves , churches and Spanish @-@ era fortifications . 
 = = = Heritage sites = = = 
 Being the oldest settlement in Romblon , Banton has several Spanish @-@ era fortifications and churches , as well as American @-@ era houses . These include Fuerza de San Jose , Banton Church , the old campanile made of limestone at Everlast in Barangay Poblacion , and a limestone watchtower at <unk> in Barangay <unk> . There is an American @-@ era house at <unk> in Barangay Poblacion which used to be the <unk> <unk> Museum but now serves as a sari @-@ sari store . The Asi Studies Center for Culture and the Arts ( also in Everlast ) serves as an information center for the Asi language and Banton history , as well as depository of Banton 's archaeological and cultural artifacts . The Church of San Nicolas de Tolentino also has a small museum of pre @-@ colonial and Spanish @-@ era artifacts . 
 = = = Natural formations = = = 
 Caves are Banton 's well @-@ known natural formations . The Guyangan Cave System , situated at the boundary of Barangay <unk> and Togbongan , has seven caves , some of which were inhabited during pre @-@ colonial times , and is now an Important Cultural Treasure as declared by the National Museum . Guyangan Hill , where the caves are situated , also has a natural view deck called <unk> overlooking Barangay Poblacion and the Sibuyan Sea . On a clear day , the islands of Sibuyan , Romblon , and Tablas , as well as <unk> Island , can be easily seen from <unk> . The island has several rock formations as well . Punta <unk> in Barangay Poblacion is a pointed rock formation in the shape of a spear or arrow head . In Barangay <unk> , on the southern portion of the island , lies a rock arch said to be the anchorage of " Lolo Amang " , a mythological figure in Romblon 's nautical folklore similar to the Flying Dutchman . 
 = = = Beaches = = = 
 Several beaches dot Banton 's coast including Macat @-@ ang , Tabonan , <unk> , Recodo , Togbongan , <unk> , and Tambak beaches . Some like Macat @-@ ang , Tabonan , and Tambak are white sand beaches , while others , like Togbongan , are pebbled and rocky . The island 's waters are also well @-@ known dive sites , with corals that serve as breeding ground for groupers , snappers , sharks , and stingrays . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Banton has annual religious and cultural festivals . The Sanrokan festival showcases the local tradition of sharing food , especially <unk> , among neighbors and starts from Holy Saturday up to Easter Sunday . The festival has two phases : the Sanrokan sa Barangay ( sharing of food in the villages ) and the Sanrokan sa Poblacion ( sharing of food at the town proper ) . Parlor games such as chasing the pig and <unk> ( climbing a greased bamboo pole to claim a prize ) are held during the celebration . This is followed by the <unk> ( meaning " souvenir / legacy " ) street dancing and parade . Meanwhile , every year , on 10 September , the entire island pays tribute and homage to the town 's patron saint , San Nicolas de Tolentino through the Biniray festival . Holy mass is held during feast day , followed by the parading of the saint 's image around town . This leads to a fluvial parade around the island , with each village giving homage to the saint . <unk> also hold an annual Via Crucis during the Holy Week and Flores de Mayo in May . 
 = = Local Government = = 
 Pursuant to the Local Government Code of 1991 , the Banton municipal government is composed of a mayor ( <unk> ) , a vice @-@ mayor ( <unk> <unk> ) and eight members ( <unk> ) of the Sangguniang Bayan or town council , alongside a secretary to the said council , all of which are elected to a three @-@ year term and are eligible to run for three consecutive terms . Banton 's incumbent and long @-@ time mayor is Jory <unk> of the Nacionalista Party while the incumbent vice @-@ mayor is Rolo <unk> , who ran as an independent candidate . 
 The barangays or villages , meanwhile , are headed by elected officials , the topmost being the <unk> Barangay or the Barangay Chairperson ( addressed as Kapitan ; also known as the Barangay Captain ) . The Kapitan is aided by the Sangguniang Barangay ( Barangay Council ) whose members , called Barangay <unk> ( Councilors ) , are also elected . 
 In 2011 and 2013 , Banton was a recipient of the Seal of Good Housekeeping from the Department of Interior and Local Government ( DILG ) . As recipient of the award , the local government was rewarded with one million pesos from the Performance Challenge Fund of the DILG for use in local projects . The Seal of Good Housekeeping is a mechanism which tracks the performance of local government units , " specifically in the areas of local legislation , development planning , resource generation , and resource allocation " . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Electricity in the island is supplied by a 0 @.@ 326 MW diesel power plant of the Romblon Electric Cooperative ( ROMELCO ) . However , electricity service is only available in early morning , from 4 : 00 to 6 : 00 a.m. and at night , from 5 : 00 to 11 : 00 p.m. , due to limited fuel supplies . As for water supply , potable water for drinking and washing comes from water pumps , artesian wells , springs , and rainwater collection tanks in individual homes . The island has access to cellular phone and Internet service through Smart and Globe . Terrestrial and cable television service are also available . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 As seas surrounding Banton can be rough during the wet season , the best time to visit the island is from March to May during the dry ( summer ) season . This is also the typical time for Asi families living in Metro Manila or abroad to visit the island since it coincides with the Lenten season and barangay fiestas . Within the island , the main forms of transportation are passenger motorcycles ( known elsewhere as <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and motorized boats . A circumferential road connects the 17 barangays of Banton to each other . 
 By sea : Banton is accessible via wooden launches and motorized boats that regularly travel from Lucena City , Quezon . Tourists and visitors can also take RORO vessels that ply the Manila @-@ Odiongan , Batangas City @-@ Odiongan , or the Roxas @-@ Odiongan route . From Odiongan , Banton can be reached by jeepney and motorized boat via Calatrava , Romblon . Another RORO route is from Lucena City to Boac or <unk> in Marinduque . From these towns , travelers can take jeepneys to Buenavista , which is only three hours away from Banton . Another alternative route is through Pinamalayan , Oriental Mindoro by motorized boats . 
 By air : The closest airport with active airline service is <unk> Airport in Alcantara , Romblon . Philippine Airlines operates three weekly flights to Romblon from Manila . From Alcantara , Banton can be reached in five to six hours by jeepney and motorized outrigger boats from Calatrava . 
 = = Education = = 
 Banton has a high literacy rate owing to the establishment of several public elementary and secondary schools . All schools in the island are administered by the Department of Education ( <unk> ) . The main public elementary school , Banton Central School , and the main secondary school , Banton National High School , are both located in the main village of Poblacion . There are public elementary schools as well in the villages of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Tan @-@ ag , Tungonan , and <unk> ( shared with the village of <unk> ) . Another secondary school , Tungonan National High School , is located in Tungonan . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Park Lane = 
 Park Lane is a major road in the City of Westminster , in Central London . It is part of the London Inner Ring Road and runs from Hyde Park Corner in the south to Marble Arch in the north . It separates Hyde Park to the west from Mayfair to the east . The road has a number of historically important properties and hotels and has been one of the most sought after streets in London , despite being a major traffic thoroughfare . 
 The road , 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) in length , was originally a simple country lane on the boundary of Hyde Park , separated by a brick wall . Aristocratic properties appeared during the late 18th century , including <unk> House , Somerset House and Londonderry House . The road grew in popularity during the 19th century after improvements to Hyde Park Corner and more affordable views of the park , which attracted the nouveau riche to the street and led to it becoming one of the most fashionable roads to live on in London . Notable residents included the 1st Duke of Westminster 's residence at Grosvenor House , the Dukes of Somerset at Somerset House and the British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli at No. 93 . Other historic properties include Dorchester House , Brook House and Dudley House . In the 20th century , Park Lane became well known for its luxury hotels , particularly The Dorchester , completed in 1931 , which became closely associated with eminent writers and international film stars . Flats and shops began appearing on the road , including penthouse flats . Several buildings suffered damage during World War II , yet the road still attracted significant development , including the Park Lane Hotel and the London Hilton on Park Lane , and several sports car garages . A number of properties on the road today are owned by some of the wealthiest businessmen from the Middle East and Asia . Current residents include business mogul Mohamed Al @-@ Fayed and former council leader Dame Shirley Porter . 
 The road has suffered from traffic congestion since the mid 19th century . Various road improvement schemes have taken place since then , including a major reconstruction programme in the early 1960s that transformed the road into a three @-@ lane dual carriageway by removing a 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) section of Hyde Park . Improved crossings for cyclists appeared in the early 21st century . Despite the changes , property prices along the road are still among the highest in London . Its prestigious status has been commemorated by being the second @-@ most expensive property square on the London Monopoly board . 
 = = Location = = 
 Park Lane is about 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) long , and runs north from Hyde Park Corner to Marble Arch , along the length of the eastern flank of Hyde Park . To the east of the road is Mayfair . The road is a primary route , classified <unk> . 
 The street is one of the key bus corridors in Central London . It is used by London bus routes 2 , 10 , 16 , 36 , 73 , 74 , 82 , 137 , 148 , 414 and 436 . In addition , night bus routes N16 , N73 , N74 and N137 are in service . The nearest tube stations to Park Lane are Hyde Park Corner on the Piccadilly line , which is near the street 's southern end , and Marble Arch on the Central line , which is located near the northern end of the street . At Brook Gate , partway along the road , there is a traffic signal controlled pedestrian and cycle crossing connecting Hyde Park to London Cycle Route 39 , which is the recommended cycling route from the park to the West End . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 What is now Park Lane was originally a simple track that ran along farm boundaries . When Hyde Park was opened in the sixteenth century , the lane ran north @-@ south along what is now the east boundary of Hyde Park , from Piccadilly to Marble Arch . 
 In the 18th century , it was known as Tyburn Lane and was separated from the park by a high dividing wall , with few properties along it aside from a short terrace of houses approximately where now are Nos. 93 – 99 . Tyburn Lane took its name from Tyburn village which was once in the vicinity , which had declined in the fourteenth century . The Tyburn gallows , also known as Tyburn Tree , situated at the end of what is now Park Lane , was London 's primary public execution spot until 1783 . Author Charles Knight wrote in 1843 , by 1738 " nearly the whole space between Piccadilly and Oxford Street was covered with buildings as far as Tyburn Lane , except in the south @-@ western corner about Berkeley Square and Mayfair " . 
 In 1741 , the lane was bought by the Kensington Turnpike Trust to provide regular maintenance , as coach traffic caused frequent wear on the road surface . <unk> House was built on the street in 1776 . On the corner with Oxford Street , Somerset House ( No. 40 ) , built in 1769 – 70 , was successively the town house of Warren Hastings , a former Governor @-@ General of India , the third Earl of Rosebery , and the Dukes of Somerset . The politician and entrepreneur Richard Sharp , also known as " Conversation Sharp " , lived at No. 28 . 
 In the 1760s , Londonderry House , on the corner of Park Lane and Hertford Street , was bought by the Sixth Earl of <unk> . He purchased the adjacent property and converted the buildings into one mansion , which was known for a period as <unk> House . In 1819 , Londonderry House was bought by The Rt. Hon. The 1st Baron Stewart , a British aristocrat , and later , during World War I , the house was used as a military hospital . After the war , Charles Vane @-@ Tempest @-@ Stewart , Viscount Castlereagh , and his wife , Edith Helen Chaplin , continued to use the house and entertained there extensively . After World War II , the house remained in the possession of the Londonderry family , until it was sold to make way for the 29 @-@ storey London Hilton , which opened on Park Lane in 1963 . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The street was not particularly significant until 1820 , when Decimus Burton constructed Hyde Park Corner at the lane 's southern edge , coinciding with Benjamin Dean Wyatt 's reconstruction of Londonderry House and Apsley House . At the same time , the entrances to Hyde Park at Stanhope , Grosvenor and Cumberland Gates were refurbished , and the wall at the park 's boundary was replaced with iron railings . It subsequently became an in @-@ demand residential address , offering both views across Hyde Park and a position at the most fashionable western edge of London . No. 93 , at the junction of Park Lane and Upper Grosvenor Street , was built between 1823 and 1825 by Samuel Baxter . The British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli lived at the house from 1839 to 1872 . In 1845 , a house on Park Lane was advertised as " one of the most <unk> in London " . 
 Much of the land to the east of Park Lane was owned by the Grosvenor Estate , whose policy was to construct large family homes attracting the nouveau riche to the area . The road became lined with some of the largest privately owned mansions in London , including the Duke of Westminster 's Grosvenor House ( replaced by the Grosvenor House Hotel ) and the Holford family 's Dorchester House ( demolished in 1929 and replaced in 1931 with The Dorchester ) , aside from the Marquess of Londonderry 's Londonderry House . The philanthropist Moses Montefiore lived at No. 90 for over 60 years , and a blue plaque now marks this location . 
 Brook House , at No. 113 Park Lane , was built in 1870 by T. H. Wyatt . It subsequently became the residence of Lord Louis Mountbatten and his wife Edwina . Aldford House was constructed in 1897 for the South African diamond millionaire Sir Alfred Beit . Another diamond mining magnate , Sir Joseph Robinson owned and lived at Dudley House at No. 100 . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 The character of Park Lane moved away from prestigious houses in the early 20th century , as residents began to complain about motor traffic and the noises from buses . The first flats were built on Nos. 139 – 140 in 1915 despite local opposition , with shops following soon after . However , buildings were redeveloped to allow penthouse flats , which became popular . The politician and art collector Philip Sassoon lived at No. 25 in the 1920s and 30s and held an extensive collection of objects at his house . Dancing partners Fred and Adele Astaire moved into a penthouse flat at No. 41 in 1923 , and stayed there during their theatrical appearances at London 's West End . The couple were courted by the social scene in London and enjoyed dancing at Grosvenor House . The black market fraudster Sidney Stanley lived on Park Lane in the 1940s , and became known as " the Pole of Park Lane " . 
 The Marriott London Park Lane , at No. 140 Park Lane , opened in 1919 . The site was once occupied by Somerset House and Camelford House . The site also occupies No. 138 Park Lane which was featured as a Home Guard Headquarters in the film The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp . The Park Lane Hotel was built in 1927 , designed by the architects Adie , Button and Partners . Despite its name , its official address is on Piccadilly and overlooks Green Park rather than Hyde Park . 
 The Dorchester , designed by Sir Owen Williams , opened on Park Lane in 1931 . With the development of the hotel , concerns were raised at the time that Park Lane would soon become New York City 's Fifth Avenue . The Dorchester quickly gained reputation as a luxury hotel and one of the most prestigious buildings on the road . During the 1930s it became known as a haunt of numerous writers and artists such as poet Cecil Day @-@ Lewis , novelist Somerset Maugham , and the painter Sir Alfred Munnings , and it became known for its distinguished literary gatherings , including " Foyles Literary Luncheons " , an event the hotel still hosts . From World War II onwards , the hotel and Park Lane become renowned for accommodating numerous international film stars , and it was closely associated with Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 During World War II , several properties on Park Lane were hit by bombs . Dudley House , at No. 100 , suffered major structural damage , including the destruction of the ballroom and gallery , though the building was partially restored . However , the strength of construction of the Dorchester Hotel gave it the reputation of being one of London 's safest buildings , and it was a safe haven for numerous luminaries . General Dwight D. Eisenhower took a suite on the first floor in 1942 , and later made it his headquarters . 
 The British Iron and Steel Research Association was originally established at No. 11 Park Lane in June 1944 , an institution responsible for much of the automation of modern steelmaking . It has since moved to No. 24 Buckingham Gate . The contact lens pioneer , Keith Clifford Hall held a practice at No. 139 , later expanding to No 140 , from 1945 to 1964 . The site of his practice is now commemorated by a green heritage plaque . The film and stage actress Anna Neagle lived at Alford House on Park Lane between 1950 and 1964 with her husband Herbert Wilcox ; the location of which is now marked with a green heritage plaque . The hotel trade continued to prosper ; construction of the London Hilton on Park Lane at 22 Park Lane began in 1960 and opened in 1963 at a construction cost of £ 8m ( now £ 151 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . On 5 September 1975 , a Provisional IRA bomb exploded at the hotel , killing two people and injuring over 60 . The blast also damaged neighbouring properties . 
 At the south end of Park Lane , on the west side , gates in honour of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother ( widow of George VI ) were erected in 1993 . The gates were designed by Giuseppe Lund and David Wynne and bear motifs in an interpretation from her coat of arms . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 The Animals in War Memorial was opened at the northeast edge of Park Lane in 2004 by Anne , Princess Royal . It commemorates animals that served in wars , and alongside servicemen . In June 2007 , a car bomb was successfully defused in an underground car park on Park Lane . The road was closed for most of the day for police investigation . 
 The road still attracts notable residents . In 2002 , Robert B. Sherman , composer of the musicals Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and Mary Poppins moved to an apartment on Park Lane following the death of his wife . He enjoyed the views of Hyde Park and in 2003 painted an eponymous portrait , Park Lane . The business mogul Mohamed Al @-@ Fayed has offices in 55 and 60 Park Lane . Trevor Rees @-@ Jones , the only survivor of the car crash that killed al @-@ Fayed 's son Dodi Fayed and Diana , Princess of Wales in 1997 , briefly recuperated in a flat on Park Lane following the accident . 
 Property prices on Park Lane remain some of the highest in London . In 2006 , former Conservative leader of Westminster City Council , Dame Shirley Porter moved into a new £ 1.5m development on Curzon Square after 12 years of exile in Israel . In 2015 , a report showed the average monthly rent for a 2 @-@ bedroom apartment on the road was £ 5 @,@ 200 . 
 Testament to the forces of globalisation , and growing investment and influence in the UK by Asians , many of the hotels and establishments on Park Lane are today owned by some of the wealthiest Middle Eastern and Asian businessmen , sheikhs and sultans . The Dorchester was purchased by the Sultan of Brunei in 1985 , and since 1996 has been part of the Dorchester Collection , owned by the Brunei Investment Agency ( BIA ) , an arm of the Ministry of Finance of Brunei . The Dorchester Collection connects The Dorchester on Park Lane to other luxury hotels internationally , including the The Beverly Hills Hotel and Hotel Bel @-@ Air of Los Angeles , and the Hôtel Meurice of Paris . In 1978 , a new branch of the Allied Arab Bank opened at 131 – 2 Park Lane , facilitating the interests of both Arab world and western clients . <unk> restaurant at 102 Park Lane serves African cuisine and is African @-@ owned . Wolfgang Puck 's restaurant at No. 45 has been described by GQ Magazine as serving one of the best breakfasts in London , with a mixture of American , European and Asian food . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 Owing to property on the road becoming more desirable , traffic began to increase on Park Lane during the 19th century . A short section of the lane was widened in 1851 as part of the redevelopment work on Marble Arch . In July 1866 , following the destruction of the boundary railings after a demonstration supporting the Second Reform Bill , the road was widened as far as Stanhope Gate . In 1871 , Hamilton Place was widened to allow an alternative traffic flow to Piccadilly . 
 By the 1950s , motor traffic levels along Park Lane had reached saturation point . A 1956 survey by the Metropolitan Police reported " at peak hours it is overloaded " , with traffic surveys showing 91 @,@ 000 and 65 @,@ 000 vehicles travelling around Hyde Park Corner and Marble Arch respectively in a twelve @-@ hour period , making Park Lane the link between the busiest and third busiest road junctions in London . Between 1960 and 1963 , the road was widened to three lanes each way either side of a central reservation . This required the demolition of Nos. 145 – 148 Piccadilly , near Hyde Park Corner , which had previously formed a line east of Apsley House . The work also re @-@ appropriated East Carriage Drive inside Hyde Park as the northbound carriageway , moving the park 's boundary westwards . Additionally , a car park was installed under the road , which became the largest underground parking area in London . Care was taken to preserve as much of the park as possible during the widening works ; in all , 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of park was removed and around 95 trees were felled . At the time of opening , the project was the largest road improvement scheme in Central London since the construction of Kingsway in 1905 . The total estimated cost was £ 1 @,@ 152 @,@ 000 ( now £ 21 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 ) . Further traffic signals were installed at the junction of Park Lane and Hyde Park corner in 1983 . 
 The road forms part of the London Inner Ring Road and is part of the London congestion charge zone 's boundary . When the zone was extended westward in February 2007 , Park Lane was designated as one of the " free through routes " , on which vehicles could cross the zone during its hours of operation without paying the charge . The western extension was removed in January 2011 . 
 In November 2008 , the mayor of London , Boris Johnson announced plans to build a tunnel beneath the street , allowing land to be released for development and green spaces . The traffic improvements and remodelling have diminished the appeal of Park Lane as a residential address , since it became one of the busiest and noisiest roads in central London . In 2011 , Johnson introduced spot fines for coaches idling on Park Lane . The widening of the road distanced the houses on the east side of Park Lane from Hyde Park itself , access to which is now by underpass . Despite the traffic noise the road is still upmarket , featuring five @-@ star hotels ( such as The Dorchester , the Grosvenor House Hotel and the InterContinental London Park Lane Hotel ) and showrooms for several sports car models , including BMW , Aston Martin and Mercedes @-@ Benz . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Park Lane is the second most valuable property in the London edition of the board game Monopoly . The street had a prestigious social status when the British version of the Monopoly board was first produced , in 1936 . On the board , Park Lane forms a pair with Mayfair , the most expensive property in the game . The squares were designed to be equivalents of Park Place and Boardwalk , respectively , on the original board , which used streets in Atlantic City , New Jersey . In 1988 , the World Monopoly Championships were held at the Park Lane Hotel , sponsored by Waddingtons , manufacturers of the British version . Since the game 's original production , prices on the real Park Lane have held their value , though average rent costs have been overtaken by Bond Street . 
 In Arthur Conan Doyle 's short story The Adventure of the Empty House ( 1903 ) , the character Ronald Adair , a gentleman who is murdered in 1894 , lives at No. 421 Park Lane ( the old numbering ) . The writer Jasper Fforde refers to the street and its Monopoly square in his novel The Eyre Affair ( 2001 ) , via the character Landen Parke @-@ Laine . 
 The street has several mentions in John Galsworthy 's 1922 trilogy , The Forsyte Saga . The 1967 BBC television adaptation used <unk> Hall in Liverpool for footage of James and Emily 's house on Park Lane . The road is mentioned in the second stanza of Noël Coward 's patriotic song " London Pride " . 
 The Mini Countryman Park Lane is a high @-@ end four wheel drive sport utility vehicle named after the road , where the company has a showroom . In Walter Lord 's book A Night to Remember , which documents the fate of the RMS Titanic , a broad , lower @-@ deck working corridor on E Deck , which ran the length of the ship , was referred to by officers as " Park Lane " ( and by crew as " Scotland Road " ) . 
 = New York State Route 250 = 
 New York State Route 250 ( NY 250 ) is a north – south state highway in the eastern portion of Monroe County , New York , in the United States . It extends for just over 16 miles ( 26 km ) from an intersection with NY 96 in the town of Perinton to a junction with Lake Road ( former NY 18 ) near the Lake Ontario shoreline in the town of Webster . NY 250 passes through the villages of Fairport and Webster , where it meets NY 31F and NY 104 , respectively . The highway is the easternmost north – south state route in Monroe County . 
 Most of the highway was taken over by the state of New York in the 1910s and 1920s . In 1908 , the section of modern NY 250 in Fairport between Church and High Streets became part of Route 20 , an unsigned legislative route assigned by the New York State Legislature . The definition of the route was altered in 1921 , taking the route on a more southerly course that used the portion of what is now NY 250 between NY 31 and NY 31F instead through eastern Monroe County . NY 250 was assigned to its current alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 250 , the easternmost north – south state route in Monroe County , begins at an intersection with NY 96 a short distance northwest of Eastview Mall in the town of Perinton . The two @-@ lane route heads to the northeast as Moseley Road , a name it retains for the next 4 miles ( 6 km ) . It initially heads uphill through a forested area ; however , at Garnsey Road , it turns northward and begins to slowly descend into a part of town dominated by housing tracts . The residential surroundings end 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Garnsey Road , where NY 250 meets NY 31 in a large commercial district that plays home to Perinton Square Mall , a shopping mall located just northeast of the junction . Past the junction , the route reenters a residential area and temporarily curves to the east to bypass a hill overlooking Ayrault Road . NY 250 returns to its due north routing at Ayrault Road and continues into the village of Fairport , where it changes names from Moseley Road to South Main Street at <unk> Road . 
 In Fairport , NY 250 follows South Main Street down a large hill that levels off at the southern edge of the village 's business district . Here , NY 250 intersects Church Street ( NY 31F ) and passes by the First Baptist Church of Fairport , located on the northwestern corner of the junction . The route continues north into the center of the village , passing by several small businesses and Fairport Village Landing — the largest shopping plaza in the village — before crossing over the Erie Canal by way of a lift bridge and becoming North Main Street . Once on the north side of the canal , NY 250 crosses the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester and West Shore Subdivisions at a single grade crossing ahead of High Street . At this point , the businesses give way to homes as the highway ascends a hill at the north end of the village and meets Whitney Road at the northern village line . 
 North of Whitney Road , NY 250 becomes Fairport – Nine Mile Point Road as it descends and ascends a series of small hills populated by homes on its way into Penfield . About 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of the town line and 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of Fairport , the route enters Lloyd 's Corners , a commercial district surrounding NY 250 's junction with NY 441 . The residential surroundings return north of the intersection , however , as the route approaches a junction with Whalen Road . Past this point , the homes begin to get further spaced apart as NY 250 heads northeastward into a rural area of eastern Monroe County . It remains on a northeastward course for just over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before curving back to the north at a junction with NY 286 ( Atlantic Avenue ) , its last major intersection before entering the town of Webster as Webster Road . 
 About 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) later , the highway reenters a more populated area that delimits the southern edge of the village of Webster . Now South Avenue , NY 250 heads north through the densely populated southern half of the community , passing by Spry Middle School on its way into the village center . Once again , the homes are supplanted by businesses as NY 250 and NY 404 ( Main Street ) meet at the heart of the business district . North of the junction , the route changes names to North Avenue and connects to the Irondequoit – Wayne County Expressway ( NY 104 ) at an interchange just two blocks from NY 404 . It continues on , crossing the Ontario Midland Railroad before leaving the village and becoming Webster Road once more . The highway heads onward through mostly residential areas of northeastern Webster to Lake Road ( formerly part of NY 18 ) , where NY 250 ends 250 yards ( 230 m ) from the Lake Ontario shoreline at Nine Mile Point . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = State ownership = = = 
 Most of what is now NY 250 was originally taken over by the state of New York during the 1910s and 1920s . Work to improve the highway to state highway standards was performed in stages , beginning in the town of Webster and gradually heading south through Fairport to Perinton . The segment north of the Penfield – Webster town line was improved at a cost of just over $ 103 @,@ 807 ( equivalent to $ 2 @.@ 49 million in 2016 ) and added to the state highway system on October 24 , 1913 . Construction on the next section between <unk> Lane in Fairport and the Penfield – Webster town line cost roughly $ 94 @,@ 140 ( equivalent to $ 2 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . It was accepted into the system on January 4 , 1915 . 
 South of Fairport , the section from modern NY 31 north to the Fairport village line was added on January 19 , 1916 , following a nearly $ 17 @,@ 127 ( equivalent to $ 372 @,@ 447 in 2016 ) project to improve the road . Lastly , the portion south of modern NY 31 was added in the late 1920s . The four state @-@ maintained segments were legislatively designated , but not signed , as State Highways 574 , <unk> , 1290 , and 1836 , respectively , for inventory purposes . The section of current NY 250 in Fairport between the southern village line and <unk> Lane was never taken over by the state and is village @-@ maintained . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 20 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Elbridge to Rochester via Fairport . Initially , Route 20 entered the village on High Street and followed Main Street south across the Erie Canal to Church Street , where it turned west toward Rochester . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 20 was realigned to enter Monroe County on modern NY 31 . At the junction of Palmyra and Moseley Roads , Route 20 turned north , following SH 1290 into Fairport . It rejoined its original alignment at the junction of Church and Main Streets . None of SH 1290 received a signed designation when the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 . 
 SH 1290 was not assigned a signed designation until the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York when it became part of NY 250 , a new route that extended south over SH 1836 to NY 15 ( now NY 96 ) in Perinton and north over SH <unk> and SH 574 to Lake Road in Webster . When NY 33B — the predecessor to NY 31F — was assigned c . 1931 , it entered Fairport on Church Street and turned north at NY 250 , following the route across the Erie Canal to High Street , where NY 33B turned to the east . The overlap with NY 33B was replaced with a concurrency with NY 31F after the latter route largely replaced the former in the late 1940s . The overlap was eliminated on April 1 , 1984 , when NY 31F was rerouted out of the village along East Church Street and Turk Hill Road as the result of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and the village of Fairport . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = Joe Warbrick = 
 Joseph Astbury " Joe " Warbrick ( 1 January 1862 – 30 August 1903 ) was a Māori rugby union player who represented New Zealand on their 1884 tour to Australia , and later captained and selected the 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team that embarked on a 107 @-@ match tour of New Zealand , Australia and the British Isles . 
 He was born in Rotorua , and played club rugby for Ponsonby while boarding at St Stephen 's Native School . In 1877 he was selected to play fullback for Auckland as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , making him the youngest person to play first @-@ class rugby in New Zealand . He played for Auckland against the first ever overseas team to tour the country – New South Wales – in 1882 . In 1884 he was picked for the first ever New Zealand representative team , and appeared in seven of the side 's eight matches on their tour of New South Wales . 
 In 1888 Warbrick conceived of , selected , and captained the privately funded New Zealand Native team . The squad , which included four of Warbrick 's brothers , was originally envisaged to contain only Māori players , but eventually included several New Zealand @-@ born , and foreign @-@ born , Europeans . Although the team played 107 matches , including 74 in the British Isles , due to injury Warbrick played only 21 matches . The tour was the first from the Southern Hemisphere to visit Britain , and remains the longest in rugby 's history . In 2008 Warbrick and the Natives were inducted into the International Rugby Board Hall of Fame . 
 Warbrick virtually retired from rugby after returning from the tour , and went on to work as a farmer and tourist guide in the Bay of Plenty . He was killed by an eruption of the Waimangu Geyser in 1903 . 
 = = Background and early career = = 
 Joseph Warbrick was born in Rotorua , New Zealand on 1 January 1862 . His father , Abraham Warbrick , was originally from England , while his mother , Nga <unk> <unk> , was Māori and the daughter of a Ngāti <unk> chief . Joe Warbrick was their third child , and was one of at least five brothers – the others were Alfred , Arthur , Fredrick , and William . All five of the brothers went on to tour together as part of the 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team . 
 With his family still based in the Bay of Plenty , Joe Warbrick was sent to board at St Stephen 's Native School in Bombay , and it was there that he started playing rugby union . In 1877 , and even though it was well north of Bombay , he started playing club rugby with Ponsonby in Auckland . Warbrick played well enough for Ponsonby to earn selection for Auckland Provincial Clubs ( now Auckland ) that year despite the fact he was only 15 years old . He played at fullback for them against Otago , and in doing so became the youngest person to play first @-@ class rugby in New Zealand – a record he still holds . 
 By 1878 Warbrick had left both St Stephen 's and Ponsonby and was employed as a public servant . The work required him to relocate regularly , and he moved throughout throughout the North Island for the remainder of his rugby career . By 1879 he was living in Wellington , and represented the province three times that season . He again played three matches for Wellington in 1880 , including one against his old province of Auckland . The 1880 match was the first ever visit by Wellington to Auckland , and was won by the visitors 4 – 0 . Warbrick was renowned for his drop @-@ kicking , and his goal in the match was the only score ; it was claimed by many Aucklanders that his performance was the difference between the two sides . 
 The first overseas team to tour New Zealand arrived in 1882 . New South Wales ( NSW ) played seven matches throughout New Zealand , including two against Auckland . By this time Warbrick was back in Auckland , but this time playing for the North Shore club , again won selection to the provincial side . He appeared in both matches against the touring NSW team . Auckland won both , the first 7 – 0 , and the second 18 – 4 . Warwick remained in Auckland the following year , and toured with province again , playing away matches against Wellington , Canterbury and Otago . 
 = = 1884 New Zealand team = = 
 In 1884 a team of New Zealand players , organised by the Canterbury player and administrator William <unk> , and Dunedin businessman Samuel Sleigh , was selected to tour New South Wales . This is now regarded as the first official representative New Zealand side . Warbrick was included in a squad of players that were selected from throughout the country ; this was all performed without the oversight of a national body – several provincial Rugby Unions did exist , but the New Zealand Rugby Football Union was not formed until 1892 . The squad 's 19 players were expected to assemble in Wellington before disembarking for Sydney on 21 May , however Warbrick missed his ship from Auckland and so travelled to Sydney alone . <unk> was elected captain , and Sleigh managed the team . The side won all eight of their matches on tour , including the three games against New South Wales . Warbrick appeared in seven matches and scored three drop goals ; one of the goals was reportedly kicked from well inside his own half . He played at both fullback and three @-@ quarter , and was noted for his good ball handling and speed , as well as his ability to drop kick . 
 = = Later provincial career = = 
 After returning from tour , Warbrick moved to Napier , and in 1885 represented Hawke 's Bay provincially , including captaining them against Poverty Bay . By 1886 he was back playing for Auckland , and that year captained them in their win against Wellington , and also against New South Wales – who were again touring the country . He returned to Hawke 's Bay for the 1887 season , and played for them against Wellington , Poverty Bay , and Canterbury . Warbrick had returned to Wellington by the 1888 season when he again played for the province . 
 The very first British Isles side toured New Zealand in 1888 . The side was privately organised and toured the country playing provincial sides in April and May of that year . Warbrick was in the Wellington team that faced the tourists on 13 May . The match was very ill tempered , with each side accusing the other of rough play , and eventually finished a 3 – 3 draw . 
 = = 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 In early 1888 Warbrick announced plans to assemble a Māori side to face the visiting British during their tour . He later revealed a plan to take a team of Māori or part @-@ Māori to tour the British Isles . His ambition was for " Māori football " to be as famous as Australian cricket , whose national side had already developed a strong rivalry with the English . It is not known exactly when Warbrick had conceived of the idea for this tour , but it was well before the arrival of the British Isles team in April 1888 . The touring British did help demonstrate the feasibility of Warbrick 's proposal , which was daunting – no New Zealand side had ever toured the Northern Hemisphere . Hearing of Warbrick 's plans , civil servant Thomas Eyton contacted him to offer help managing the tour , which Warbrick accepted . By May 1888 , James Scott , a publican , had joined the partnership . The three men decided that Warbrick would be the team 's captain , coach and selector , Scott its manager , and Eyton its promoter . Although Warbrick had chiefly sporting reasons for conducting the tour , for Eyton and Scott profit was the major motivation . 
 A New Zealand Māori side had never been selected – the first official side did not play until 1910 – but Warbrick 's experience in provincial rugby ensured he was well qualified to select the team . He travelled the country trying to find players who were both talented and willing to spend a year on tour . The make @-@ up of the team changed significantly between March 1888 and when the team departed New Zealand in August . Warbrick encountered challenges assembling the side ; there was opposition from some players in including part @-@ Māori in the squad which prompted several early recruits to withdraw . Initially twenty players were selected for the side – which was named the New Zealand Māori team . Some of these players had strong family and playing links to Warbrick ( such as his four brothers ) . Warbrick was eventually compelled to add five Pākehā ( European non @-@ Māori ) players to the squad which resulted in the side being renamed the New Zealand Native football team . Warbrick may have wanted a team of exclusively Māori or part @-@ Māori players , but according to historian Greg Ryan , including the Pākehā players was " necessary to strengthen the Native team and create a more effective combination " . A further player , Pie Wynyard , was added to the side after they arrived in Britain in November 1888 . 
 = = = Domestic tour and British Isles = = = 
 The side 's first match was against Hawke 's Bay on 23 June 1888 , and included Joe Warbrick in the backs . The match was won 5 – 0 , and was followed by a second match a week later in which Joe Warbrick contributed ten points in an 11 – 0 victory . The next match was against a strong Auckland side , who defeated the Natives 9 – 0 . The heavy defeat was costly for the Native team , with Joe Warbrick breaking several bones in his foot . It was his last game until November that year , and prompted the addition of Patrick Keogh – one of the five Pākehā in the side – to the squad before its departure from New Zealand . 
 The team departed New Zealand on 1 August 1888 , and sailed to England via Melbourne . After their six @-@ week voyage from Australia , the Native team arrived in England on 27 September 1888 . Their first match was against Surrey , on 3 October , but Joe Warbrick was still injured and so did not play . The side continued to play regularly – they averaged one game every 2 @.@ 3 days while in Britain – but Joe Warbrick did not appear until 7 November when the team faced Tynemouth . The match was won 7 – 1 , but Warbrick – who played at fullback – exasperated his foot injury . He did manage to play six matches between mid @-@ December and early January before he was again injured . He appeared against Stockport , a match drawn 3 – 3 , on 12 January , but his form was still poor . 
 Warbrick only played twice more in the following month , and was not fit enough to be selected for the team that faced England on 16 February . The match resulted in a controversial 7 – 0 loss for the Natives , and included two controversial English tries awarded by referee George Rowland Hill – who was also Secretary of the English Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) . The loss and aftermath soured the relationship between Warbrick 's team and the RFU – who accused the Natives of poor sportsmanship after they protested at the awarding of the controversial tries . 
 By the time the team departed for Australia in late March they had played 74 matches in Britain , but due to injury Warbrick only appeared in 14 ; in contrast David Gage featured in 68 matches , and eight other members played more than 50 . Joe Warbrick was not the only player to experience injury , the taxing schedule of matches took a toll , and he had frequently struggled to find a full complement of 15 fit players . On top of playing relatively few matches in Britain , Warbrick scored only once there – a conversion against Devon . 
 The high injury toll and congested schedule contributed to complaints about Joe Warbrick 's behaviour . His comments to the English press – who directed much of their focus towards him – were viewed negatively by some members of the squad ; he was accused of neglecting to acknowledge the contributions of players such as Thomas Ellison , Gage , Keogh , and Edward McCausland , but extol the efforts of himself and his brothers . 
 Warbrick said of his time in the British Isles : " My impression of England and its people during the tour was a very favourable one , more especially does this apply to private individuals . I found them everywhere very kind and attentive and apparently anxious to make one 's visit as pleasant as possible " . The term " private individuals " may have been used to exclude from praise both the RFU and London press . Following the tour he also criticised the impartiality of the English referees , and believed that the English administrators displayed a double standard in their treatment of the Natives – the RFU had continued to select Andrew Stoddart for the England team , despite him touring with the unsanctioned 1888 British team . 
 = = = Australia and return to New Zealand = = = 
 Warbrick sailed to Australia for a leg of their tour described by historian Greg Ryan as " little more than a testimony to the motives of Scott and Eyton as speculators . " Their time in Australia started in Victoria , where the side mostly played Victorian Rules Football against Melbourne clubs . These matches were played for financial rather than sporting reasons , and the team had little success at Victorian Rules . While the side only played a single rugby match in Victoria , they played rugby almost exclusively in New South Wales and Queensland . Warbrick made very few appearances in Australia – two in total – but continued as team captain . The Natives had not lost a rugby match in Australia when they played their second match against Queensland . The first match was won 22 – 0 , and the second – held on 20 July – was expected to be another comfortable victory for the Natives . However at half @-@ time the scores were level , and with the exception of Billy Warbrick , the Natives had played poorly . There were rumours that four of the Natives had been paid by local bookmakers to throw the match . When Joe Warbrick spoke to the team at half @-@ time , he threatened to expose the accused players ; this was enough to prompt an improvement in the Natives ' play , and the side recovered to win 11 – 7 . 
 The team returned to New Zealand in August 1889 , but the Queensland controversy still hung over the side . The Northern Rugby Union ( later renamed the Queensland Rugby Union ) did not take any action over the accusations , but the Otago Rugby Union ( ORU ) decided to conduct an inquiry . The matter was not resolved until after the team arrived in Dunedin when the ORU announced there was no evidence " justifying the accusations " , and dismissed taking any further action . The team continued to travel north , and played fixtures throughout the country . Joe Warbrick had played an early match in Gore – against Mataura District XVI – where he again suffered injury . The team 's final match was against Auckland on 24 August . The fixture was lost 7 – 2 , but by this point several Native 's players had departed the team , including Keogh , Ellison and Gage . Despite the gruelling schedule and high number of injuries , the loss to Auckland ended a remarkable streak that had started with their victory over Widnes on 9 March ; the Natives had not lost a rugby game in 31 matches – the side had won 30 , and drawn one match over that time . The Natives played a total of 107 rugby matches , including 74 in the British Isles , and the tour remains the longest tour in rugby history . 
 = = Retirement from playing and later life = = 
 Warbrick retired from rugby at the conclusion of the Native 's tour . He moved to the Bay of Plenty to farm , and occasionally turned out for the Tauranga representative team . Aside from that he did make a one @-@ match first @-@ class comeback five years later , when he played for Auckland against Taranaki in 1894 . Following this match , an Auckland paper wrote : 
 Considering that Joe won his cap in 1877 , it must be very pleasing to him to be able to record 1894 on it . As I said before , Joe 's career as a footballer is , I believe , unparalleled in the colonies . It is certainly a feat Joe may well feel proud of , that after battling the storms for a period of 17 years , he has again been called to render assistance to his province ... 
 Warbrick later worked as a tourist guide in the Rotorua area , where his brother Alfred was the Chief Government Guide . It was on 30 August 1903 , while working with his brother in the geothermal region of the area that Joe Warbrick was killed . The Waimangu Geyser – then the largest geyser in the world – unexpectedly erupted with Joe and several tourists in the vicinity ; four of them , including Joe , were killed instantly before being swept towards Lake <unk> . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 As the captain and instigator of the 1888 – 89 Natives – the first New Zealand team to tour the British Isles – Warbrick had a lasting impact on the development of rugby in his homeland . When the Natives returned from tour they introduced a style of rugby as good as any ever seen in the country . According to Ryan , " their brand of sensational running style and combined forward play had never been seen in New Zealand . " The speculative nature of the tour also contributed to the majority of New Zealand 's provincial unions forming a national body ; the New Zealand Rugby Football Union was formed in 1892 . As well , many of the Native 's went on to play provincial rugby , and Ellison and Gage eventually captained New Zealand . 
 In 2008 Warbrick was inducted into the International Rugby Board Hall of Fame , and is a member of the Māori Sports Awards Hall of Fame . A short film , Warbrick , was released in 2009 and depicts Joe Warbrick preparing an injury @-@ depleted Native 's squad for a match . The film was played for New Zealand 's national team – the All Blacks – during their preparations for a match against Australia in 2009 . 
 = Hotel Mario = 
 Hotel Mario is a computer puzzle game developed by Fantasy Factory and published by Philips Interactive Media and Nintendo for the Philips CD @-@ i in 1994 . The primary character of the game is Mario , who must find Princess Toadstool by going through seven Koopa hotels in the Mushroom Kingdom . Every hotel is divided into multiple stages , and the objective is to close all doors on each stage . Defeating a <unk> on the hotel 's final stage takes the player to the following building . 
 After Nintendo decided not to have Sony create an add @-@ on for the Super Famicom / Super NES , they gave Philips permission to use their characters in games for Philips ' CD @-@ i . 
 The games resulting from the license were widely criticized , with Hotel Mario being regarded as one of the worst Mario @-@ centered games , due to the animation of the shutting doors , the unresponsive controls and especially known for the cutscenes that used full motion video . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Controlling Mario , or his brother Luigi in two @-@ player mode , the player has to complete all stages of the seven hotels in the game . The first six hotels contain 10 stages , and the last contains 15 stages . Progressing from one stage to the next requires the player to shut every door shown in stage , without exceeding a given time limit . The purpose of closing the doors to progress is not explained . Elevators , which operate differently depending on the hotel , enable the player to go between the five floors of the stage . The faster a stage is cleared , the more points will be given to the player . Every stage has its own title screen via which the game can be saved . The screens are also used to enter previously played hotel stages and the map of the Mushroom Kingdom , which allows the player to access any visited hotel . 
 While trying to close the doors , the player must avoid certain hazards . Mario will lose a life if he touches an enemy , runs out of time , runs off the edge of the floor he is on , or if all the doors are open . Enemies in the game are mostly regular Mario series creatures , such as Goombas , Koopas , Boos and their variations . The opponent on the last stage of each hotel is one of the Koopalings , who each use different methods to attack Mario . 
 In his normal state , Mario can tolerate one hit from an enemy and defeat most of the foes with a stomp . By opening doors the player can find power @-@ ups which grant different abilities . A Super Mushroom transforms Mario into Super Mario , with glowing overalls and the strength to withstand two enemy hits . If the player finds another mushroom while Mario is in the Super Mario form , the item turns into a Fire Flower . When grabbing it , Mario becomes Fire Mario and can throw fireballs to eliminate enemies . A 1 @-@ up mushroom known as " Extra Mario Mushroom " or " Toad " can only be found by Fire Mario . Another way to earn an extra life is collecting 30 coins . The player can also obtain a Star Man , which makes Mario temporarily able to knock any enemy off the screen by simply touching them . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 The game takes place in the Mushroom Kingdom , which Bowser has turned into a hotel resort for the use of himself and his children , renaming the land " Klub Koopa Resort " . Each hotel in the area is guarded by one of the Koopalings and their henchmen . The hotels represent different building types with various locations , including a tree , a mine and a cloud . 
 Having been invited for a picnic by Princess Toadstool , Mario and Luigi enter the Mushroom Kingdom . At the entrance , however , they find a message from Bowser . He reveals that he has taken control over the kingdom and established seven hotels there , at one of which Princess Toadstool is being held as a " permanent guest " . As they visit the first six hotels , Mario and Luigi find the Princess several times , but on every occasion she disappears out of their sight , ending up in another hotel . They eventually enter a palace where Bowser himself resides . With the hotel 's owner defeated , the brothers flee the building with Princess Toadstool before it collapses . The Princess , now able to rule her kingdom in peace , thanks the Mario brothers , giving them both a kiss . 
 = = Development = = 
 In May 1991 , following an unsuccessful attempt with Sony to develop a CD @-@ ROM @-@ based add @-@ on for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Nintendo signed a deal with Philips to develop the aforementioned add @-@ on . However , witnessing the poor reception of the Sega Mega @-@ CD , Nintendo no longer considered the add @-@ on profitable , and the project was scrapped entirely . As part of dissolving the deal , Nintendo gave Philips the license to use five of their characters , including Mario , Luigi and Princess Toadstool , to be featured in their games for the CD @-@ i . The games were given little time to be developed and little funding , and Nintendo only gave cursory input . Philips used the characters to create games for the CD @-@ i , with Nintendo taking no part in their development except to give input on the look of the characters . Apart from Hotel Mario , the Mario characters were intended to be used in Super Mario 's Wacky Worlds , but the game was cancelled with only some prototype versions being programmed . While Wacky Worlds was planned as a CD @-@ i adaptation of the side @-@ scrolling platformer Super Mario World , Hotel Mario was made into a puzzle game in which stage areas were restricted to a single screen . Unlike the Legend of Zelda @-@ related games , the game was not developed by a third @-@ party company , but by Philips ' development team Fantasy Factory . 
 Several full @-@ motion video cutscenes were animated for Hotel Mario . The CD @-@ i was considered a commercial failure and the games became valuable due to their rarity . The cinematics depict Mario and Luigi as they advance to the next hotel , discussing with each other and giving hints to the player such as : " If you need instructions on how to get through the hotels , check out the enclosed instruction book ! " . The voices of the Mario Brothers were provided by Marc <unk> , with Jocelyn Benford doing the voice @-@ over for Princess Toadstool . On top of the full motion video capabilities of the CD @-@ i , Hotel Mario made use of the system ’ s internal clock by displaying messages that vary by date . 
 The backgrounds of the hotel stages were designed by freelance artist <unk> Venola . Having seen Hotel Mario 's initial version — which Venola called " mechanical " and " visually no fun " — , she and art director Jeff <unk> decided to use elements from Disney and J. R. R. Tolkien to enhance the game 's visual style . Illustrations of the stages were composed of several blocks , each of which featured one detail . The first item Venola created for all hotels was the door . Every building took one week to complete and was designed in accordance with a specific theme . For instance , a gothic design was used for Bowser 's hotel . 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , Hotel Mario was given mixed reviews by video game magazines Electronic Gaming Monthly and GamePro . The former commented that Hotel Mario 's gameplay was simple yet addictive . GamePro , while calling the game fun , believed that it would soon bore players , and gave it a fun factor of 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 . 
 Years after the game was released , it has gained the reputation of one of the lesser well @-@ received Mario games . When Electronic Gaming Monthly named Mario the greatest video game character in 2005 , they considered Hotel Mario his most embarrassing moment . 
 IGN said that Hotel Mario was better than the respective The Legend of Zelda titles , but noted that closing doors was not " a strong enough hook for an entire game . " Chris Kohler of Wired magazine regarded Hotel Mario as " a puzzle game with no puzzles , " assuming it was one of the reasons why Nintendo was not impressed by the CD @-@ ROM medium . The game was referred to as " <unk> " by GamesRadar and " little more than a really rubbish version of Elevator Action " by Eurogamer . 
 In its 1994 review , GamePro rated Hotel Mario 's graphics at 3 @.@ 5 and sound at 4 out of 5 , citing that " the only intriguing aspects of this game are the well @-@ fashioned animated sequences . " Years after the game was released , the cut scenes have become a subject of criticism among video game websites , and were called " outright terrifying " by 1UP.com. IGN described them as " abysmal " and " a bad flip @-@ book of images printed out of Microsoft Paint . From 1987 . " The quality of the voice acting was also questioned . Both 1UP.com and IGN thought the voices were unfitting for the characters and did not achieve the same playfulness as those of Mario and Luigi 's current voice artist Charles Martinet . Hotel Mario was listed in the Top 20 Worst Mario Games of all time , and as the # 1 worst Mario game by ScrewAttack 's Top Ten Worst Mario Games . 
 = IX Corps ( United States ) = 
 IX Corps was a corps of the United States Army . For most of its operational history , IX Corps was headquartered in or around Japan and subordinate to US Army commands in the Far East . 
 Created following World War I , the corps was not activated for use until just before World War II almost 20 years later . The corps spent most of World War II in charge of defenses on the West Coast of the United States , before moving to Hawaii and Leyte to plan and organize operations for US forces advancing across the Pacific . Following the end of the war , IX Corps participated in the occupation of mainland Japan . 
 The corps ' only combat came in the Korean War . It is best known for its exploits as a senior command of the Eighth United States Army , commanding front line UN forces in numerous offensives and counteroffensives throughout the war . The corps served on the front lines for most of the conflict and took command of several combat divisions at a time . Following the end of the Korean War , IX Corps remained in Korea for several years until it was moved to Japan . The corps spent almost 40 years as an administrative command of the US Army forces there , overseeing administrative functions but no combat . It was finally inactivated and consolidated in 1994 . 
 = = History = = 
 The IX Corps headquarters was first constituted on 29 July 1921 in the organized reserves , a new corps formation intended to compliment the existing corps commands in the active duty component of the force by providing command to reserve units . It was assigned a shoulder sleeve insignia shortly thereafter . Though the corps was not activated , it remained on the organizational rolls of the Army , to be called on when needed . On 1 October 1933 , the corps was moved to the active duty roster , though it remained deactivated . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The corps headquarters was finally activated on 24 October 1940 at Fort Lewis , Washington as part of a large buildup of the US Army in response to conflicts around the world . It immediately began training of combat units in preparation for deployment . One year later , IX Corps took command of the Camp Murray staging area in Washington , responsible for training Army National Guard forces in addition to its responsibilities training active duty and reserve units . 
 Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in late 1941 , IX Corps was assigned to defensive duties on the West Coast of the United States , specifically the central and northern regions of the coast . The corps oversaw defenses on the West Coast for the majority of the war , but in 1944 it was moved to Fort McPherson , Georgia in preparation for deployment overseas . 
 = = = = Planning = = = = 
 The corps trained at Fort McPherson in preparation for deployment to the Pacific Theater of Operations . On 25 September 1944 , the corps closed headquarters at Fort McPherson and moved to Hawaii . When it arrived in Hawaii , IX Corps was put under the command of the Tenth United States Army . Under the Tenth Army , IX Corps was assigned two missions . In 1944 , it was primarily concerned with formulating plans for an invasion of the coastal regions of Japanese @-@ held China . Later in 1944 and early 1945 , it was placed in charge of preparing the rest of the Tenth Army for movement to Okinawa in preparation for an invasion of the island , which was launched in April 1945 . 
 When General of the Army Douglas MacArthur took overall command of Pacific Forces , IX Corps was moved to Leyte in the Philippine Islands and was assigned to the Sixth United States Army in July 1945 . In Leyte , the corps was tasked with the planning of Operation Downfall , the invasion of mainland Japan , specifically the island of Kyushu . It was also tasked with planning occupation once Japan surrendered . IX Corps was assigned as one of four Corps under the command of the Sixth Army , with a strength of 14 divisions . With the 77th Infantry Division , the 81st Infantry Division and 98th Infantry Division , a force of 79 @,@ 000 men , IX Corps would serve as the Sixth Army 's reserve force during the initial invasion . Before the assault could be launched , Japan surrendered in August 1945 , following the use of nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 = = = = Occupation = = = = 
 Following the surrender , IX Corps was assigned command of occupation forces on the northern island of Hokkaidō . IX Corps transferred its headquarters in October 1945 to Sapporo for occupation duties . The next few years were a period during which the terms of the surrender were supervised and enforced ; Japanese military installations and material were seized , troops were disarmed and discharged , and weapons of warfare disposed of . The duties of the occupation force included conversion of industry , repatriation of foreign nationals , and supervision of the complex features of all phases of Japanese government , economics , education , and industry . 
 As the occupation duties were accomplished , the occupation force continued to downsize as more troops returned home and their units were inactivated . By 1950 , the Sixth Army had left Japan , and the occupation force was reduced to the Eighth United States Army commanding two corps and four under @-@ strength divisions ; the I Corps , commanding the 24th Infantry Division and 25th Infantry Division , and the IX Corps , commanding the 1st Cavalry Division and the 7th Infantry Division . IX Corps had been moved to Sendai as the occupation forces shifted as a result of the downsizing . As part of further downsizing , IX Corps was inactivated on 28 March 1950 , and its command responsibilities were consolidated with other units . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 Only a few months later , the Korean War began , and units from Japan began streaming into South Korea . The Eighth Army , taking charge of the conflict , requested the activation of three corps headquarters for its growing command of UN forces . IX Corps was activated on 10 August 1950 at Fort Sheridan , Illinois . Most of its personnel were transferred from the headquarters of the Fifth United States Army . 
 = = = = Pusan Perimeter = = = = 
 IX Corps arrived at the Pusan Perimeter in Korea on 22 September 1950 , and became operational the next day when it took command of the 2nd Infantry Division and 25th Infantry Division . It took charge of the western flank of the perimeter , defending the Naktong River area against attacking North Korean units . 
 Amphibious landings at Inchon by X Corps hit North Korean forces from behind , allowing I Corps and IX Corps to break out of Pusan , I Corps to the north and IX Corps to the south . Four days later I Corps troops pushed northward against crumbling enemy opposition to establish contact with forces of the 7th Infantry Division driving southward from the beachhead . Major elements of the North Korean Army were destroyed and cut off in this aggressive penetration ; the link @-@ up was effected south of Suwon on 26 September . The offensive was continued northwards , past Seoul , and across the 38th Parallel on 1 October . The momentum of the attack was maintained , and the race to the North Korean capitol , Pyongyang , ended on 19 October when elements of the South Korean 1st Infantry Division and US 1st Cavalry Division both entered the city . The advance continued , but against unexpectedly stiffening enemy resistance . On 25 October the first Chinese prisoners on the Eighth Army front were taken by I Corps troops . By the end of October the city of Chongju , forty miles from the Yalu River border of North Korea , had been captured . IX Corps advanced in the center of the Army , with I Corps along the west coast and X Corps operating independently further east . Commanders hoped the offensive would end the war " by Christmas . " 
 = = = = Chinese intervention = = = = 
 On 27 November , China entered the war on the side of North Korea against the UN . Massed Chinese attacks were immediately launched against troops of the corps , with Chinese forces penetrating the corps ' rear from its exposed east flank . The 2nd Infantry Division , at the front of IX Corp 's advance in <unk> , was overwhelmed from all sides by Chinese forces of the 40th CPV Army Corps , and elements from the 38th CPV Army Corps on 29 November in the Battle of <unk> . By 1 December , the division was almost completely destroyed ; it lost virtually all of its heavy equipment and vehicles , as well as suffering 4 @,@ 940 men killed or missing . The 25th Infantry Division , on its western flank , was also hit by overwhelming Chinese forces of the 39th CPV Army Corps , facing strong attacks and suffering heavy casualties and losses in equipment in the Battle of Ch 'ongch 'on River . However , it was spared the same losses as the 2nd Infantry Division by escaping across the Ch 'ongch 'on River . The Eighth Army suffered heavy casualties , ordering a complete withdraw to the Imjin River , south of the 38th parallel , having been devastated by the overwhelming Chinese force . IX Corps retreated along the western coast to safety via Anju . 
 In the wake of the retreat , the disorganized Eighth Army regrouped and re @-@ formed . The 2nd and 25th Infantry Divisions had suffered so many losses that both divisions were designated combat ineffective , and were relegated to the Eighth Army 's reserve to rebuild . IX Corps was then assigned the 1st Cavalry Division , 24th Infantry Division , 1st Marine Division and South Korean 6th Infantry Division , as well as the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team . The corps ' American forces were also reinforced at this point with battalions from Greece and the Philippines , as well as the 27th Commonwealth Brigade . 
 On 1 January 1951 , 500 @,@ 000 Chinese troops attacked the Eighth Army 's line at the Imjin River , forcing them back 50 miles and allowing the Chinese to capture Seoul . The Chinese eventually advanced too far for their supply lines to adequately support them , and their attack stalled . The Eighth Army , battered by the Chinese assault , began to prepare spring offensives to retake lost ground and keep the retreating Chinese forces from being able to rest . 
 Following the establishment of defenses south of the capital city , General Matthew B. Ridgway ordered I , IX , and X Corps to conduct a general counteroffensive against the Chinese forces on 25 January , Operation Thunderbolt . The three corps advanced north with IX Corps at the center of the line , on both sides of the Han River . The corps were to advance steadily northward , protected by heavy artillery and close air support , until they captured Seoul . IX Corps was tasked with capturing Chipyong @-@ ni , southeast of Seoul while providing support to the other two corps . However , it encountered stiff resistance from Chinese forces dug into the hilly country around Chipyong @-@ ni and was still bogged down in combat by 2 February . Chinese forces had established machine gun nests in the hillside and mined roads to slow the corps ' advance . In response , X Corps launched Operation Roundup , hoping to take pressure off of IX Corps and to force the Chinese to abandon Seoul . 
 Between February and March , the corps participated in Operation Killer , pushing Chinese forces north of the Han River . This operation was quickly followed up with Operation Ripper , which retook Seoul in March . After this , Operations Rugged and Dauntless in April saw Eighth Army forces advance north of the 38th parallel and reestablish themselves along the Kansas Line and Utah Line , respectively . In March , the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team and the 1st Marine Division were reassigned , and the corps was given command of the 7th Infantry Division and the South Korean 2nd Infantry Division in their place . 
 In late April , the Chinese launched a major counterattack . 486 @,@ 000 Chinese troops assaulted I Corps and IX Corps ' sector of the lines . Most of the UN forces were able to hold their ground , but the Chinese broke through at Kapyong , where the South Korean 6th Division was destroyed by the 13th CPV Army Corps , which penetrated the line and threatened to encircle the American divisions to the west . The 1st Marine Division and 27th British Commonwealth Brigade were able to drive the 13th Army Corps back while the 24th and 25th Divisions withdrew on 25 April . The line was pushed back to Seoul but managed to hold . A second offensive the next month was similarly unsuccessful , as Chinese and North Korean forces suffered heavy casualties but were unable to push back the Eighth Army forces . The I and IX Corps had blunted the offensive at the No Name Line , just north of Seoul . 
 = = = = Stalemate = = = = 
 In September , the UN Forces launched another counteroffensive with the 24th Infantry Division at the center of the line , west of the Hwachon Reservoir . Three of I Corps divisions advanced behind the 24th Infantry Division in Operation Commando . Flanked by the South Korean 2nd and 6th Divisions , the 24th advanced past Kumwha , engaging the 20th and 27th CPV Armies . These attacks were fierce , though enemy resistance was not as strong as it had been in previous offensives . In November , the Chinese attempted to counter this attack , but were unsuccessful . It was at this point , after several successive counteroffensives that saw both sides fighting intensely over the same ground , that the two sides started serious peace negotiations . In January 1952 , IX Corps was again reorganized , now containing the 7th Infantry Division and the newly arrived 45th Infantry Division . Two months later , it was reorganized with the 2nd Infantry Division , the 40th Infantry Division , and the South Korean 2nd , 3rd , and Capital Divisions . 
 In October 1952 , Chinese forces conducted a large offensive against IX Corps ' sector , against the hilly countryside around the Iron Triangle region of Chorwon , Kumhwa , and Pyongyang . The 38th CPV Field Army sent heavy assaults against the South Korean forces guarding Hill 395 in the Battle of White Horse . At the same time , Chinese forces attacked Arrowhead Hill , which was held by the 2nd Infantry Division two miles away . Both hills changed hands several times , but after two weeks and almost 10 @,@ 000 casualties , the Chinese were unsuccessful in capturing either objective and withdrew . 
 On 14 October 1952 , IX Corps launched an offensive , Operation Showdown , intended to improve its defensive lines by capturing a complex of hills and force Chinese lines back . This complex included Pike 's Peak , Jane Russell Hill , Sandy Hill , and Triangle Hill , northeast of Kumhwa . The 7th Infantry Division advanced , encountering resistance from the 15th Chinese Field Army . In the ensuing Battle of Triangle Hill , the four hills were captured and recaptured by both sides several times in the heaviest fighting that year . Eventually , the UN forces withdrew having been unsuccessful in capturing their objectives . UN forces suffered 9 @,@ 000 killed and the Chinese suffered 19 @,@ 000 killed or wounded during the fighting . The result of the battle had only been a slight improvement in IX Corps ' positions , as Chinese positions had been too well fortified for the UN forces to take and hold the ground . For the remainder of the year , US and Chinese forces both conducted a series of smaller raids on each other 's lines , avoiding major conflicts , as armistice negotiations continued unsuccessfully . In November , the Chinese launched another offensive to retake ground lost during these operations , which was again repulsed by UN forces . 
 In January 1953 , IX Corps was reorganized for the last time and now consisted entirely of South Korean forces . It retained command of the South Korean 3rd Infantry Division and Capital Division , and gained command of the South Korean 9th Infantry Division . The corps maintained a position around Chorwon , flanked to the west by I Corps and to the east by the South Korean II Corps . Though the South Korean II Corps saw a major attack against its lines in July 1953 , IX Corps and its divisions only fought in limited engagements , usually with company @-@ sized formations attacking or defending fortified positions against the Chinese until the end of the war . No major attacks against the corps were conducted through 1953 , until the armistice was signed in July , ending the war . 
 = = = After Korea = = = 
 Following the armistice , IX Corps remained on the front lines in Korea in case hostilities erupted again . On 1 January 1954 , it was reassigned from the Eighth Army to the Far East United States Army Forces . Camp Sendai was Headquarters XVI and then IX Corps during the 1950s . In November 1956 , over three years after the signing of the armistice , IX Corps headquarters left the front lines , moving to Fort Buckner , Okinawa , and the divisions under its command were shifted to the command of other headquarters . There , as a part of consolidation of US forces in the region , IX Corps merged with the US Army 's Ryukyus command to form a joint command element on 1 January 1957 . The command oversaw administrative duties of US forces in the Ryukyu Islands area . On 2 February 1956 , IX Corps moved from mainland Japan to Fort Buckner , Okinawa , where it merged with Headquarters Ryukyus Command , to form HQ <unk> / IX Corps on 1 January 1957 . ( <unk> ) The Army had previously in the late 1940s formed Ryukyu Command from the previous Okinawa Base Command . 
 In 1961 , part of the IX Corps was split into the 9th Regional Support Command , subordinate to the US Army Pacific command . Though the 9th Regional Support Command was an independent unit , it continued to operate closely with IX Corps . It received a distinctive unit insignia in 1969 . In 1972 , following further consolidation of US forces in the area , the US Army command on the Ryukyus was disbanded , and IX Corps merged with United States Army Japan to form a consolidated command of all US forces in the western Pacific region . There , its responsibilities included administrative oversight of US forces as well as conducting training and exercises with US and other units in the region . 
 A major change in the Army 's command and organizational structure in the Pacific occurred on 15 May 1972 , in conjunction with the return of Okinawa to Japanese control after twenty @-@ seven years of administration by the United States . Under the complex reorganization that accompanied reversion , Headquarters , IX U.S. Army Corps , was transferred from Okinawa and collocated with Headquarters , U.S. Army Japan , to form Headquarters , U.S. Army , Japan / IX Corps , at Camp Zama , Japan . On Okinawa , Headquarters , U.S. Army , Ryukyu Islands , and Headquarters , 2d Logistical Command , were inactivated and a U.S. Army Base Command , Okinawa , was established to command and support all Army units there and perform the theater logistic functions for United States and allied forces in the Pacific . 
 For the next 20 years , IX Corps remained in the region conducting training and oversight to US Army forces in the area , and as such it was never deployed to support any other US Army contingencies . IX Corps remained a command component of United States Army Japan until 1994 , when it was inactivated . At this point , the lineage of the corps was assumed by the 9th Theater Army Area Command , which was activated in its place . 
 Lieutenant General James E. Moore was : 
 Commanding General , IX Corps / Ryukyu Command / Deputy Governor , Ryukyu Islands , 1956 – 1957 . 
 Commanding General , IX Corps / U.S. Army Ryukyu Islands / Deputy Governor , Ryukyu Islands , 1957 . 
 Commanding General , IX Corps / U.S. Army Ryukyu Islands / U.S. High Commissioner , Ryukyu Islands , 1957 – 1958 . 
 Lieutenant General Donald P. Booth was : 
 Commanding General , IX Corps / U.S. Army Ryukyu Islands / U.S. High Commissioner , Ryukyu Islands , 1958 – 1961 . 
 Lt. Gen. Albert Watson , II was : 
 Commanding General , U.S. Army , Ryukyu Islands , Aug 1964 – Oct 1966 
 Lt. Gen. Ferdinand T. Unger was : 
 Commanding General , U.S. Army , Ryukyu Islands , O c t . 1966 – still in post Apr 1967 during GAO study on computers 
 U.S. Army Ryukyu Islands ( <unk> ) was active at lest until from 22 April 1969 – 21 October 1970 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The IX Corps was awarded one campaign streamer for service in World War II , and nine campaign streamers and two unit decorations during its service in the Korean War for a total of ten streamers and two unit decorations in its operational history . 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Percy Fender = 
 Percy George Herbert Fender ( 22 August 1892 – 15 June 1985 ) was an English cricketer who played 13 Tests and was captain of Surrey between 1921 and 1931 . An all @-@ rounder , he was a middle @-@ order batsman who bowled mainly leg spin , and completed the cricketer 's double seven times . Noted as a belligerent batsman , in 1920 he hit the fastest recorded first @-@ class century , reaching three figures in 35 minutes which remains a record in 2013 . On the basis of his Surrey captaincy , contemporaries judged him the best captain in England . 
 As early as 1914 Fender was named one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . After war service in the Royal Flying Corps he re @-@ established himself in the Surrey team and became captain in 1921 . His captaincy inspired the team to challenge strongly for the County Championship over the course of several seasons , despite a shortage of effective bowlers . Alongside his forceful though sometimes controversial leadership , Fender was an effective performer with bat and ball , although he lacked support as a bowler . From 1921 , he played occasionally in Tests for England but was never particularly successful . Despite press promptings , he was never appointed Test captain , and following a clash with the highly influential Lord Harris in 1924 , his England career was effectively ended . Further disagreements between Fender and the Surrey committee over his approach and tactics led the county to replace him as captain in 1932 and to end his career in 1935 . 
 A very recognisable figure , Fender was popular with his team and with supporters . Cartoonists enjoyed caricaturing his distinctive appearance , but he was also well known outside cricket for his presence in society . In addition to his cricket career , Fender worked in the wine trade , had a successful career in journalism , and wrote several well @-@ received books on cricket tours . He worked well into the 1970s , even after going blind . He died in 1985 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fender was the elder son of Percy Robert Fender , the director of a firm of stationers , and Lily , née Herbert . Born in Balham , Surrey , in 1892 , he was encouraged to play cricket by his mother 's family who were involved in Brighton club cricket , and from the age of eight he attended cricket matches to watch Sussex when visiting them . First educated at St George 's College , Weybridge , then at St Paul 's School , London , Fender did not excel academically , but was proficient in many sports . 
 At St Paul 's , Fender began to attract attention as a cricketer . Awarded his school colours in 1908 , he remained in the school team for three years . In 1909 , he topped the school 's batting averages , scoring a century in one match against Bedford School . In the same game , he was criticised by his schoolmaster for bowling <unk> . Fender 's success led to his selection for a representing Public Schools XI against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . His success for St Paul 's continued in 1910 , but his school career came to an abrupt end following an argument between his father and the High Master of the school . The dispute concerned a cricket match which Fender had played without parental permission , and his father was unhappy that cricket was taking precedence over academic studies . Fender was removed from the school immediately ; he still came top of the batting averages for 1910 but although selected , he was not allowed to play at Lord 's that summer as he was no longer a schoolboy . Despite his successes , St Paul 's cricket masters did not consider him a reliable cricketer ; he was criticised for taking too many risks when batting and for experimenting with too many different styles while bowling . Fender 's biographer , Richard Streeton , observes that " Fender 's experiments were frowned upon from his earliest days but ... already there was never any shortage of ideas in his cricket thinking . " 
 = = County cricketer before the First World War = = 
 = = = Sussex career = = = 
 While at school , Fender spent his summers with his grandparents in Brighton , which qualified him to play County Cricket for Sussex . When he left school in 1910 , he attracted the interest of the club and , after success in both local cricket and second @-@ team matches , he made his first @-@ class debut on 21 July as an amateur in Sussex 's County Championship match against Nottinghamshire . He played one other game that season , against Worcestershire , where he was shaken by the pace of two opposing bowlers . In the two games , Fender scored 19 runs and took one wicket . 
 After the 1910 cricket season , Fender worked in a paper mill in Horwich , Lancashire , to experience paper manufacturing — his father 's line of business — at first hand . While feeding paper into a machine , his left hand was trapped in the mechanism and injured . Three of his fingers were crushed at the tips ; upon healing , they remained stiff and numb for the rest of his life . Fender remained in Horwich at the start of the 1911 cricket season and played several times for Manchester Cricket Club . He was on the verge of selection for Lancashire when he had to return to Brighton . That season he played twice for Sussex ; the following year , in his second match for the county , he scored his maiden first @-@ class century , against Oxford University . He followed this by taking five for 42 ( five wickets taken and 42 runs conceded ) against Surrey . After these successes , Fender played regularly for the remainder of the 1912 season . In total , he scored 606 runs at an average of 24 @.@ 24 , and , bowling medium pace , took 16 wickets at an average of 25 @.@ 50 . 
 In 1913 , Fender was a regular member of the Sussex county side . In the first two months of the season , he made a considerable impact ; in 21 innings with the bat , he scored six fifties and one century . His reputation as an exciting , big @-@ hitting batsman grew quickly , and he was chosen in the representative Gentlemen v Players matches at Lord 's and The Oval . His performances for the Gentlemen , a team of amateurs , were unsuccessful , and the failure affected his form for the rest of the season . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack commented that he was not worth his place in the team in these latter months . Even so , he reached 1 @,@ 000 first @-@ class runs in a season for the first time : 1 @,@ 163 runs at an average of 23 @.@ 73 . He also took 34 wickets at 35 @.@ 08 . 
 = = = Move to Surrey = = = 
 Fender initially wanted to be a barrister , but his family could not afford the costs . By 1914 , he was working for the firm of paper manufacturers and stationers of which his father was managing director . Although he permitted Fender to play cricket , his father believed that sport and a business career were incompatible . Fender disagreed , suggesting that the contacts made in county cricket offset the lost working time . To aid his business career , Fender moved to London during the winter of 1913 – 14 . Fender was qualified by his birthplace to play for Surrey , and the county was happy to register him for the County Championship . Fender attended to business matters before and after each day 's play , and often combined Surrey 's trips to away matches with business meetings . Socially , Fender became a familiar figure in clubs and the theatre . He became friends with the actor Jack Hulbert and developed an interest in musical theatre , for which he provided financial support ; he also wrote lyrics for some songs . By the end of the 1914 season , Fender had convinced his father that he could successfully combine cricket and business . His improvement as a cricketer was recognised when was chosen as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year for 1914 . 
 As a player , Fender quickly made an impact for Surrey . He took a hat @-@ trick in his second game , and scored a century in his fifth , to establish his popularity with the Surrey crowds . During the season Fender scored 820 runs , often very quickly , and took 83 wickets including some through experimenting with leg spin bowling . According to Wisden his worth was measured by more than figures : " As a match winning factor he is a far greater force on a side than his records would suggest . " In a powerful Surrey side he batted aggressively , bowled more frequently than at Sussex — mainly as a support bowler to the main attack — and established a reputation as a slip fielder . A team @-@ mate judged that Fender was the " making " of the team , and Wisden commented that " he always seemed the right man in the right place " . A late replacement in the Gentlemen v Players game at Lord 's , Fender was not particularly successful but made a good impression on critics . The season ended prematurely because of the outbreak of war in August 1914 . Surrey had established a commanding lead in the County Championship table ; as their nearest challengers had no objection , the MCC declared them as county champions . 
 = = = Career in wartime = = = 
 Immediately following the cancellation of county cricket in 1914 , Fender enlisted in the army , joining the Inns of Court Regiment . Commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers , Fender disliked the routine of army life . With the help of the cricketer Pelham Warner , who worked in the War Office , he was transferred to the Royal Flying Corps in 1915 . Fender was initially stationed in London , where he was involved in work repelling Zeppelin attacks , before being sent to India in 1916 . Soon after his arrival , he became ill with dysentery , possibly cholera and several other diseases . He returned to England to recover but was left weak for much of the following two years . Army doctors were unsure what exactly was wrong with Fender and he remained in their care until 1918 . He played some charity cricket in 1917 and 1918 , but did not return to light duties with the Royal Flying Corps until the latter year . Just as he seemed to have recovered fully , he fractured his left leg in five places playing football at the end of 1918 . He remained on crutches throughout the remainder of 1918 and 1919 , missing the resumption of county cricket in 1919 . While incapacitated , Fender attempted to gain a place at Caius College , Cambridge , but was turned down owing to the restriction his injury placed upon his cricket , and his desire to concentrate on academic interests to further his business career — the interviewing panel only wanted him as a cricketer . Although he recovered in time to play in the 1920 season , his leg troubled him for the remainder of his career ; he was left with a minor limp , and long spells of fielding left him in pain . 
 = = Captain and leading cricketer = = 
 = = = Appointment as Surrey captain = = = 
 Surrey 's official captain for 1920 , Cyril Wilkinson , missed much of the 1920 season and was unavailable for the opening matches . As the only amateur in the team who was expected to play regularly , Fender was appointed as captain in Wilkinson 's absence . He led the team to victory in his first two matches in charge , and ten of his first twelve games . Wilkinson resumed the leadership at several points during the season , but his return in the final weeks coincided with a poor run of results . He consequently withdrew for two crucial games , and allowed Fender to captain the side . That year Surrey had few effective bowlers ; Fender was the leading wicket @-@ taker with 109 wickets in County Championship games . In all first @-@ class matches he took 124 wickets at an average of 21 @.@ 40 to reach 100 wickets in a season for the first time . Inconsistent with the bat , particularly in the latter half of the season , he scored 841 runs at 20 @.@ 51 . In almost every match Fender contributed , either with bat , ball or in the field . His captaincy was very effective ; his flair and willingness to use unconventional tactics were unusual at the time . This was quickly noticed by the public , who appreciated Surrey 's entertaining brand of cricket . Several games were won by Surrey after Fender used unorthodox methods to force the pace . In addition , Fender 's batting and bowling swayed several games in Surrey 's favour . Surrey finished third in the County Championship , but lost their final match , against Middlesex , when victory would have made them champions . Surrey needed 244 to win but Fender 's instruction to his batsmen to attempt to score faster had an adverse effect , and he later blamed himself for the defeat . Nevertheless , he was appointed permanent captain for the following season . 
 Against Northamptonshire in one of the last games of the 1920 season , Surrey had passed Northamptonshire 's score and were in a dominant position when Fender batted . He was dropped early on but batting in a carefree , aggressive style , reached 100 runs in 35 minutes , as of 2013 still the fastest individual century on record in first @-@ class cricket . In total , he scored 113 not out and shared a partnership of 171 runs in 42 minutes with Alan Peach . Although acknowledged to be a fast innings , Fender 's century was not recognised as a record at the time ; cricket records were not widely kept or studied , and other innings were believed to have been quicker . Surrey went on to win the match . 
 Chosen for the Gentlemen v Players , Fender had his first success in the fixture , hitting 50 in 40 minutes , the highest score for the Gentlemen in the match ; it may have influenced his selection for the MCC team to tour Australia . Some sections of the press suggested Fender should captain that team , but Reginald Spooner was initially appointed by the MCC ; when he was unavailable , J. W. H. T. Douglas became captain . Fender was included in the team , and the press regarded his selection as a formality . 
 = = = Test match cricketer = = = 
 During the MCC tour of Australia , England lost every game of the five @-@ match Test series . Fender played infrequently and with little success during the early part of the tour . Douglas rarely used him as a bowler , and for the first Test , he was omitted from the team at the last minute and was twelfth man . He was eventually selected for the third Test ; Jack Hearne was unavailable owing to illness , and Fender had recently been successful in a tour game . The tour manager Frederick Toone had suggested that Fender should replace Douglas as captain , an idea which had the support of two of the team 's leading professionals , but Douglas refused . Fender made his Test debut on 14 January 1921 but achieved little with bat or ball , partly owing to his lack of match practice in the preceding weeks . He dropped a catch from Charles Kelleway , who went on to score 147 runs . Nevertheless , Fender retained his place in the team for the remainder of the series . In the fourth Test , he took five for 122 , and achieved five for 90 in the fifth and final game . He led the English Test bowling averages with 12 wickets at an average of 34 @.@ 16 , and was the only England spin bowler to make the ball turn on the hard Australian pitches , though he was not particularly accurate . With the bat , he scored 59 in the fourth Test and passed 40 in two other innings . In the last game of the tour , against South Australia , Fender took 12 wickets , including seven for 75 in the first innings . In general , he withstood the hot weather better than his team @-@ mates , but his weak leg made fielding painful on the hard ground . In all first @-@ class games on the tour , he scored 325 runs at 27 @.@ 08 and took 32 wickets at 32 @.@ 71 . 
 As an amateur , Fender was not paid for the tour , but some of his expenses were paid by the MCC . However , tours at the time often left many amateurs out of pocket . To offset their costs , Fender and his team @-@ mate Rockley Wilson wrote for several newspapers and magazines during the tour . Their comments were criticised in Australia , particularly in the final Test when Wilson criticised the behaviour of the Australian spectators . Fender was barracked several times by the crowds when reports reached Australia of his newspaper columns ; occasionally , the crowds chanted " Please Go Home Fender " , making a play on his initials ; Fender made light of this , joining in by conducting the <unk> . In subsequent tours , the MCC forbade cricketers from writing about matches in which they were playing . On his way home , Fender wrote an account of the tour which was published as Defending the Ashes . However , he did not elaborate on his own opinions , and left out any controversy . 
 The Australian team joined the MCC cricketers on the journey to England , to play a further five Tests in 1921 . Once again , some newspapers suggested Fender should captain the England team , but Douglas was initially retained ; as the series progressed , several writers lamented the fact that Fender was overlooked . Fender began the season poorly and was not picked for the first three Tests , all of which were won by Australia . The England selectors tried 30 players in the course of the summer , many of whom critics did not consider to be of suitable quality . Fender began to take wickets consistently in the middle of the season , and scored a century in the Gentlemen v Players match , so he was chosen for the fourth Test . The game was drawn , affected by rain . Fender scored 44 not out and took two for 30 in the game . The final match was also a rain @-@ ruined draw ; Fender retained his place but had little success . He later said that he learned a great deal from Warwick Armstrong 's captaincy of the Australians . 
 Fender had greater success for Surrey in 1921 . For the second year in succession Surrey played Middlesex in the final game of the season , to decide the County Championship , and again they lost . They finished second in the table , but were hampered by a lack of quality bowling . Wisden praised Fender 's handling of his modest bowling resources , and stated that much of Surrey 's success came from his captaincy . Several of Surrey 's wins were very close , and came after Fender declared . Fender included a lob bowler , Trevor Molony , in three games ; lob bowling had practically died out from first @-@ class cricket , and Molony was the last specialist underarm bowler selected in county cricket . But Molony met with limited success and faded out of cricket . Owing to the lack of alternatives , Fender had to use his own bowling frequently , and often conceded many runs . Wisden said he was generally effective with the ball and described his fielding as " dazzling " , but suggested that his best batting came for teams other than Surrey . In all first @-@ class matches Fender completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets for the first time ; he scored 1 @,@ 152 runs at 21 @.@ 33 and took 134 wickets at 26 @.@ 58 . He also took 53 catches to become the first cricketer to pass 50 catches while completing the double ; as of 2013 , only Peter Walker has also done so . 
 = = = Peak in county cricket = = = 
 Fender completed the double in 1922 with 1 @,@ 169 runs and 157 wickets , Surrey finished third in the Championship , and once again the lack of effective bowling hindered the team . Wisden described the team 's success as " nothing less than a triumph for Mr Fender " . Despite damp weather which did not suit his style , he bowled more than his share of overs , often because there were few alternative bowlers . Wisden said : " Essentially a change bowler [ one who bowls while the main bowlers are rested ] — the best in England , as he has been aptly described — he became by force of circumstances the chief attacking force " . He bowled mainly leg spin , but often bowled successfully at medium pace . Wisden praised his inspirational captaincy , and concluded : " Over and above all this he was , by general consent , by far the best of the county captains , never losing his grip of the game and managing his side with a judgement that was seldom at fault . " During the season , Fender began to wear glasses in an attempt to cure headaches ; the remedy worked , although he later discovered there was nothing wrong with his eyesight , and the lenses he wore were little more than plain glass . The first time he wore glasses , Fender scored 185 in 130 minutes against Hampshire . Other rapid scoring feats included 91 in 50 minutes against Leicestershire and 137 in 90 minutes against Kent . There were no Tests in 1922 , but Sydney Pardon wrote that Fender was the only amateur who could be guaranteed a place on ability alone in an England team . Late in the season , Fender was involved in a public dispute with Lord Harris over the qualification of Alfred Jeacocke to play for Surrey . Harris , the influential treasurer of the MCC and chairman of Kent , had noticed that Jeacocke 's qualification had lapsed when he moved across the border from Surrey to Kent , albeit living on the same road . Fender , privately furious with Harris , publicly defended Jeacocke , and the press supported him ; the rules were altered the following season to allow Jeacocke to continue to play for Surrey . 
 Fender was chosen in the MCC team to tour South Africa in 1922 – 23 , but despite support from journalists , he was not chosen as captain . Frank Mann led the team ; his appointment was criticised in the press , which judged him to lack playing ability and suggested that the selectors favoured those associated with Lord 's — Mann was Middlesex captain . Mann appointed Fender his vice @-@ captain on the journey to South Africa , but played every match on the tour to leave Fender with no opportunity to lead the side . England won the Test series 2 – 1 , but Fender had some difficulties playing on the matting pitches used in South Africa , on which the ball bounced and turned in a different fashion from the turf on which cricket was played in England . He began in good batting form , scoring 96 in the first match , and he passed fifty on two other occasions , including an uncharacteristically defensive innings of 60 in the third Test , but his batting faded as the tour progressed . He was generally successful as a bowler , but proved expensive in the Tests . However , his best bowling performance according to his team @-@ mates came in the second Test , when he took four for 29 on the first day ; all the South Africans found it difficult to bat against him , and he later described it as one of the best bowling spells of his career . He played in all five Tests , scoring 128 runs at an average of 14 @.@ 22 and taking 10 wickets at 41 @.@ 80 , while in all first @-@ class games , he scored 459 runs at 22 @.@ 95 and took 58 wickets at 19 @.@ 58 . 
 In 1923 Fender enjoyed his best all @-@ round season , scoring 1 @,@ 427 runs and taking 178 wickets . The former was the second best aggregate of his career , the latter his highest total of wickets . Again , there were no Test matches , but Fender played in two Test trials . He was successful in the first match , taking six for 44 and scoring 49 runs , but his performance was overshadowed by continued controversy over the captaincy ; Fender was not asked to captain a side in either match . The press questioned why the selectors ignored Fender 's captaincy claims even though , in the view of journalists , he was the most deserving candidate . One writer suggested that Lord 's " resented " Fender 's success , and that politics prevented his appointment . At that time it was usual for amateurs and professionals to enter the field of play from different gates ; Fender 's habit was to use the same gate as his professionals . This brought a rebuke for Fender from Lord Harris , who said : " We do not want that sort of thing at Lord 's , Fender " . Surrey finished fourth in the Championship , hampered once again by their lack of bowlers ; their batsmen frequently made large scores but the team could not bowl out the opposition and many games were drawn . Fender 's batting continued to be effective , but he demonstrated a more restrained approach and improved his defence . Again , he had a heavy bowling workload given the lack of support , and Wisden said that he bowled with " pronounced spin and variety of device " . 
 = = = Controversy and loss of England place = = = 
 Fender 's form dipped in 1924 after a good start with bat and ball ; thereafter , despite occasional successes , he lacked consistency . Surrey finished third in the Championship , and Fender contributed 1 @,@ 004 runs and 84 wickets in all first @-@ class matches . Once again , Fender was a candidate for the England captaincy — South Africa played a Test series that season , and the MCC were to tour Australia in 1924 – 25 . The eventual appointment of Arthur Gilligan was criticised in the press , which again speculated why Fender was not chosen . Fender 's prospects of leading England receded further when he clashed once more with Lord Harris . The MCC had rebuked two county committees for covering their pitches prior to matches against the South Africans during a spell of wet weather . Fender pointed out in a letter published by the press that Lord Harris and the MCC were aware that this was common practice at the Scarborough Festival , despite their claims to the contrary . When Fender next played at Lord 's , the furious Lord Harris summoned Fender to admonish him . Fender always regretted his indiscretion and believed it finished any chance he had of the England captaincy . Fender played in the first two Tests , without much success , and was dropped ; he played only one more Test in his career . Gilligan was injured during the series , but the selectors recalled Douglas as captain rather than select Fender . When the team to tour Australia that winter was chosen , Fender was not selected , a decision which upset him deeply . Fender was married at the end of the 1924 cricket season , and in the off @-@ season wrote about the MCC tour of Australia for the Daily Express . 
 In 1925 , Fender returned to his best form , completing the double with 1 @,@ 042 runs and 137 wickets . Surrey finished second in the table and by the end of the season had not lost a Championship match at the Oval for five years . However , they never challenged the champions , Yorkshire , and this proved to be the last time under Fender 's leadership that the team finished near the top of the Championship table . In the view of the press , Fender remained a potential England captain for the Ashes series in 1926 , but Arthur Carr was chosen . In his survey of England cricket captains , Alan Gibson suggests that Fender and Carr were the only two realistic candidates by that time — other county captains either lacked the skill to play Tests or had already been tried and discarded . When Carr was dropped before the final Test , the journalist Home Gordon reported that a " certain amateur " — Gibson suggests this must have been Fender — was waiting by the phone for news that he was to captain England . In the event , Percy Chapman took over for the final match and England regained the Ashes . However , Streeton believes that by this stage , Fender was never likely to be chosen ; he played in a Test trial match and for the Gentlemen against the Players , but Greville Stevens was preferred in the England team . In all first @-@ class matches , Fender completed the double again with 1 @,@ 043 runs and 112 wickets . After the season , he joined a short tour of Jamaica led by Lord Tennyson , playing three first @-@ class matches . 
 = = Final years = = 
 = = = Late 1920s = = = 
 In the following seasons , Surrey dropped steadily down the Championship table . Fender failed to reach 1 @,@ 000 runs in 1927 , although his average of 31 @.@ 96 was his best for five seasons ; he also took 89 wickets at 25 @.@ 75 . That season , he achieved one of the best bowling performances of his career when he took six wickets in 11 balls against Middlesex , to become the first player in first @-@ class cricket to take six wickets in so few deliveries . This remained a record until 1972 when Pat Pocock took seven wickets in 11 balls . Fender went on to take seven wickets in 19 balls ; his final analysis was seven for 10 . The following two seasons were his best with the bat ; in 1928 , he scored 1 @,@ 376 runs at 37 @.@ 18 , his highest average in a season , and in 1929 he scored 1 @,@ 625 runs , his highest run aggregate . He was less successful with the ball : in 1928 he took 110 wickets but his bowling average rose to 28 , and took 88 wickets at an average of over 30 in 1929 . His good form at the start of 1929 led to his recall to the England team , and he played one Test against South Africa . This was his final Test ; overall , in 13 Tests , he scored 380 runs at an average of 19 @.@ 00 and took 29 wickets at 40 @.@ 86 . By that season , Surrey had fallen to tenth in the table . 
 = = = Involvement with Bradman and Bodyline = = = 
 During the MCC tour to Australia in 1928 – 29 , the Australian batsman Donald Bradman made his Test debut . Covering the tour as a journalist , Fender judged that Bradman " was one of the most curious mixtures of good and bad batting I have ever seen " , but was not convinced by his ability at the time . Bradman came to England with the Australian touring team in 1930 , and was extremely successful ; during the course of the season , Fender completely changed his mind — not least when Bradman , particularly determined to succeed against Fender following his criticism , scored 252 against Surrey . Fender played fewer matches than in previous seasons , as he was writing on the Tests for a newspaper ; in the 1930 season , he scored 700 runs and took 65 wickets . Meanwhile , the Australian victory in the Test series owed much to Bradman , who scored 974 runs in seven innings , breaking several records in the process . His success , and the manner of it , concerned the English authorities , and Fender among others believed that success against Bradman was to be found in adopting new tactics . In his newspaper reports that summer , Fender was critical of Bradman 's batting during one spell in the final Test when he batted unconvincingly against fast bowler Harold Larwood on a pitch affected by rain . Fender passed this information on to his Surrey colleague Douglas Jardine , who was later named England captain for the MCC tour of 1932 – 33 . Over the following months , Australian journalists kept Fender informed of developments in batting in that country , information which he passed on to Jardine . Jardine later conceived the strategy of Bodyline , where fast bowlers bowled at the batsmen 's leg stump , frequently pitching the ball short and hitting him . The tactic was contentious , and created much ill @-@ feeling between the players . Fender did not cover the tour as a journalist , as his newspaper sent Jack Hobbs instead . However , during the tour Jardine wrote to inform Fender that much of his information had been correct and that he was adapting his tactics accordingly . Fender later insisted that his role was minor in creating the strategy , but he was close to both Jardine and Arthur Carr , who discussed the plans before the tour began ; some writers suggested that the original idea was Fender 's . 
 = = = Resignation and retirement = = = 
 Early in 1931 Fender offered to resign as Surrey 's captain , to give Jardine more experience of leadership before he assumed the England captaincy , but Surrey declined . Fender scored 916 runs and took 84 wickets that season . However , the Surrey committee were becoming disillusioned with Fender as captain after he had missed matches in 1930 to work as a journalist . Another point of contention was that Fender , against the wishes of the committee , preferred to keep in @-@ form professional players in the team instead of playing amateurs when they were available . There were disagreements over expenses , and the committee disapproved when Fender declared Surrey 's innings closed after one ball , to make up time in a rain @-@ affected match . A series of other controversial incidents further antagonised the committee . As a result , Fender was dismissed in January 1932 , a move rumoured in the press for some time and which was quickly leaked . The club released a statement which said Fender would only stand down if a suitable replacement could be found , before Jardine was officially appointed in March . It is likely that the uncertainty arose because Jardine took his time in accepting the position . Fender supported Jardine 's appointment , and pledged to continue playing under his captaincy . 
 Fender played less frequently in the following seasons , as his appearances were restricted by journalistic and business requirements . He scored over 400 runs in each season between 1932 and 1935 and scored two centuries in that time , both in 1933 . With the ball , he took over 60 wickets in each season , although with higher bowling averages than earlier in his career . Having played regularly for the Gentlemen against the Players throughout his career , he made his last appearance in the match in 1934 . He continued to be an effective member of the county team , which he occasionally led when the regular captain — initially Jardine , later , Errol Holmes — was absent . Prior to the 1936 season Holmes suggested to Fender that he should play fewer games for Surrey that year . Rather than do so , Fender preferred not to play at all , and he informed the committee that he would no longer represent the county . The committee publicly thanked Fender , but the reasons for the sudden termination of his county career are unclear ; rumours suggested that some factions at Surrey wanted Fender out of the club . In the event , Fender played two first @-@ class matches in 1936 , captaining MCC teams against Oxford and Cambridge universities ; these were his final appearances in first @-@ class cricket . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 19 @,@ 034 runs at an average of 26 @.@ 65 , and took 1 @,@ 894 wickets at 25 @.@ 05 . He continued to play minor cricket for some time , and maintained his association with the sport for many years . His most notable appearance came after the war , when he captained an " Old England XI " , featuring many former England players , against Surrey in 1946 in a match to celebrate Surrey 's centenary . 
 During the Second World War , Fender joined the Royal Air Force . He worked in southern England with a responsibility for moving men and equipment , and was mentioned in dispatches for his role in preparations for the Allied invasion of Europe . Later , he was posted to various parts of the world in his role in movements . 
 In the 1920s , Fender was approached four times to stand for Parliament as a Conservative Party candidate and declined each time . Between 1952 and 1958 , he served as a Conservative member on the London County Council and later was appointed Deputy Lieutenant of London . In the late 1970s , Fender became blind , and moved in with his daughter , although continuing to run his business . He travelled to Australia in 1977 to attend celebrations that marked 100 years of Test cricket and was the oldest man there . In his final years , he moved into a nursing home and died there on 15 June 1985 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 = = = Batting , bowling and fielding = = = 
 As a batsman , Fender 's approach was aggressive ; whatever the circumstances he hit the ball very hard , and his ability to play a variety of strokes made it difficult for captains to place fielders effectively . He batted with his weight mainly on his front foot and used powerful wrist @-@ work to send the ball in different directions while playing the same stroke . Among his favoured shots were the drive , pull and cut . Other than his 35 @-@ minute century , he played many innings in which he scored quickly , and the cricket historian Gerald Brodribb has calculated that Fender was among first @-@ class cricket 's fastest scorers , with an average rate of 62 runs an hour . He also recorded several notably powerful hits , including one which sent the ball 132 yards . Fender 's aggressive approach made him an inconsistent scorer , but Surrey had a strong batting side and his hitting power was more valuable to the team than if he had played in more orthodox fashion . The side 's batting strength meant that Fender rarely had to play defensively , although he could do so if the situation demanded . 
 Originally a fast @-@ medium bowler — a style to which he sometimes reverted when Surrey were short of bowlers — Fender 's main bowling style was wrist spin , and he could spin the ball effectively . He gripped the ball differently from most wrist spinners , using his thumb and first two fingers , and would attempt any kind of unorthodox delivery if he thought it might be effective . To deceive the batsman he varied the position from which he bowled and the height of his arm , and occasionally bowled deliberate full tosses or long hops to surprise them . Fender hoped that , in his eagerness to score from an apparently innocuous ball , the batsman would mis @-@ hit , a tactic he would often try when the batsman was playing defensively . Fender 's love of experimentation and his surprise variations made him difficult for batsmen to face , but produced inconsistent results and he sometimes conceded many runs . His Wisden obituary suggests that Fender would have been better employed as a " fourth or fifth bowler in a strong bowling side " , but Surrey 's weakness in bowling meant that he had to do far more work than was ideal for his style and approach . Despite his experimentation , critics regarded him as a reliable bowler using his primary method , and The Times described him as " subtle in flight and with artful variations " . 
 Fender fielded mainly at slip . He possessed quick reactions and could move quickly to catch balls hit some distance from him . His technique was unorthodox ; he crouched low when waiting for the ball with one leg stretched behind him , like a sprinter ready to begin a race . Good catching was vital in a Surrey side which possessed weak bowling , making his contributions even more important , and critics regarded him as one of the best slip fielders in England . 
 The journalist and cricket writer John Arlott wrote of Fender : " <unk> on the field , lanky , bespectacled , curly @-@ haired , slouching along , hands deep in pockets and wearing a grotesquely long sweater , he was immortalised by cartoonist Tom Webster " . This appearance made him a favourite of cartoonists generally , and Fender enjoyed this fame , particularly the cartoons of Webster who drew Fender in a long sweater before he ever wore one ; Fender then adopted them to match his image . Similarly , he continued to wear glasses on the field after discovering that he did not need them . 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
 Contemporary critics believed that Fender 's handling of a limited bowling side while Surrey captain in the 1920s , and his achievements in taking the county to high positions in the County Championship , made him the best captain in England . Team @-@ mates and opponents praised his captaincy skills , and described him as the best they had known . His Times obituary stated : " [ Fender ] was a sharp captain , quick to observe the slightest opportunity of advantage and ready to gamble on his ability to exploit it . His keen eye for weakness in an opponent and ability to extract and employ the best powers of his own players caused him often , and with reason , to be described as the best county captain who never captained England . No more flexible thinker on cricket ever lived . " Always willing to take risks in order to win , Fender 's main objective was to surprise the opposition ; legends grew of his successful ploys . Prior to Fender , few county captains displayed tactical imagination ; Fender inspired his teams to play forceful , entertaining cricket which made him and his Surrey team very popular . His leadership was often specifically commented on by the press , an unusual occurrence in county cricket reports . In particular , his declarations often were the subject of attention and controversy — he often declared , contrary to orthodox tactics at the time , before his side had built up a big lead or even before they reached the opposition 's first innings total . One of his favoured approaches was for the batsmen in the lower middle @-@ order to hit out at the bowling , no matter the state of the match ; if successful , the team either quickly consolidated a position of strength or regained the initiative if earlier batsmen had failed . Fender also used non @-@ regular bowlers in an attempt to unsettle batsmen . His innovative approach included the introduction of caps with larger peaks to shade his players ' eyes from the sun , and he recruited a baseball coach to improve their throwing . 
 Although often a candidate in the press to captain England , Fender was never chosen to do so . Rumours circulated at the time about the reasons . One suggestion was that he was overlooked because he was Jewish , but Fender said he was not Jewish and in any case did not believe this would have been a problem . Other purported reasons included that he had not been to Oxford or Cambridge , and that he was in the wine trade , which was considered an unsuitable career for a gentleman , but in later life Fender dismissed these as potential factors . In fact , not everyone approved of Fender 's captaincy . He was sometimes accused of gamesmanship , for example by persuading umpires that conditions were unfit for play until they favoured his team . He occasionally used negative tactics when he was unhappy with the approach of the opposition — in one game where the opposition had not declared , he slowed down play to the extent that one over took 12 minutes to bowl . Opponents recalled other uses of time @-@ wasting tactics , deliberate damaging of the pitch by Surrey players to assist their bowlers , and intimidation of both the opposition and umpires . The cricket writer Martin Williamson suggests that " in an era where gentlemen played by the rules , Fender was adroit at stretching the Laws to snapping point . " Fender 's attitude towards amateurs also brought him into opposition with others . His disinclination to play amateurs in the Surrey team unless they were talented enough was opposed by the Surrey committee — the Surrey president , H. D. G. Leveson Gower , wished Fender to include friends and contacts whom Fender did not consider worth a place in the team . According to E. W. Swanton : " While always highly popular with the teams he led , his relations with the Surrey authorities were also apt to be difficult . " Fender attempted to unite the amateurs and professionals in the team through using one gate to enter the field , and stopped the practice of separate lunches and teas . He planned to end the tradition of using separate changing rooms , until stopped by the professional Hobbs . Fender 's proposals shocked senior cricket figures , and caused another clash with the influential Lord Harris ; allied to other disagreements between the pair , it may have ended his England career . The deeply conservative cricket establishment may also have resented Fender 's unorthodoxy on the cricket pitch . Fender made himself more unacceptable by mocking establishment figures such as Leveson Gower ; a team @-@ mate later remarked that Fender " was often his own worst enemy " . Fender also believed that the controversy over his journalism in 1921 counted against him with the MCC committee . According to Wisden , Fender 's limited success at Test level " may have saved the selectors , who were thought never to favour him as a captain of England , an embarrassing problem " . His Wisden obituary concluded : " He was one of the most colourful figures in the cricket world for many years ... and was widely regarded as the shrewdest county captain of his generation " . 
 = = Cricket journalism = = 
 While still a cricketer , Fender wrote for several London newspapers and magazines , and also broadcast on the radio . Although remaining in England , he commented on the 1924 – 25 Ashes series for the Sunday Express and became involved in an argument which arose during the tour over the merits of professional captaincy ; Fender believed professionals would make good captains . He also wrote about the 1926 series , and drew criticism from Australians when he called their sportsmanship into question . He later wrote regularly for the Evening News and The Star ; to the irritation of other journalists , he became the first man to use a typewriter in the press box . 
 Fender wrote four books on cricket tours : his 1920 – 21 account Defending the Ashes , an account of the 1928 – 29 tour which he covered as a journalist , and books about the 1930 and 1934 Australian tours of England . A fifth book , more autobiographical in nature , followed later . The Times described Fender as " an astute critic of the game " whose accounts were " well @-@ observed and analytical " . Wisden found his writing outspoken at times , but rated his four tour books as among the best available . In 2012 , the cricket journalist Steven Lynch wrote that Fender " can probably be credited with revolutionising the [ cricket ] tour book . Previously they were often travelogues , but Fender included serious in @-@ depth analysis of the play , backed up with copious statistics " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Fender worked for his father , including periods spent in France and Belgium , up until the outbreak of war in 1914 , but when he returned from active service found the business frustrating . With his father 's approval , he left the firm to start his own wine business with his brother Robert . The business thrived , in part owing to Fender 's wide range of connections , and he remained chairman and managing director until 1976 . For a time , Fender produced his own whiskey brand , which he tried to sell when touring South Africa with the MCC in 1922 – 23 , but competition from the larger distilling companies meant that it was a short @-@ lived success . After the Second World War , he had to rebuild his wine firm , which had suffered from wartime restrictions and hardships , this time assisted by his son . He and Robert also established a paper merchants called Fender Brothers , although he later relinquished his shares in the company . Meanwhile , he maintained his connections with Crescens Robinson and followed his father as chairman of the company from 1943 to 1968 . 
 The press closely followed Fender 's activities in his personal life , reporting his activities at dances , races and shooting . As such , he had a high profile , and was easily recognisable to the general public . In September 1924 , he married Ruth Clapham , a well @-@ known figure in society and the daughter of a Manchester jeweller , whom he met in Monte Carlo in 1923 . The couple had two children ; Ruth died suddenly in 1937 from Bright 's disease . Fender remarried in 1962 , but his second wife , Susan Gordon , died in 1968 . 
 = Bull Run River ( Oregon ) = 
 The Bull Run River is a 21 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 35 @.@ 2 km ) tributary of the Sandy River in the U.S. state of Oregon . Beginning at the lower end of Bull Run Lake in the Cascade Range , it flows generally west through the Bull Run Watershed Management Unit ( BRWMU ) , a restricted area meant to protect the river and its tributaries from contamination . The river , impounded by two artificial storage reservoirs as well as the lake , is the primary source of drinking water for the city of Portland , Oregon . 
 It is likely that Native Americans living along the Columbia River as early as 10 @,@ 000 years ago visited the Bull Run watershed in search of food . Within the past few thousand years they created trails over the Cascade Range and around Mount Hood , near the upper part of the Bull Run watershed . By the mid @-@ 19th century , pioneers used these trails to cross the mountains from east to west to reach the fertile Willamette Valley . In the 1890s , the City of Portland , searching for sources of clean drinking water , chose the Bull Run River . Dam @-@ building , road construction , and legal action to protect the watershed began shortly thereafter , and Bull Run water began to flow through a large pipe to the city in 1895 . 
 Erosion @-@ resistant basalt underlies much of the watershed , and streams passing over it are relatively free of sediments . However , turbidity increases when unstable soils sandwiched between layers of basalt and other volcanic rocks are disturbed and wash into the river during rainstorms . Despite legal protections , about 22 percent of the protected zone was logged during the second half of the 20th century , and erosion increased . For a time in 1996 , Portland had to shut down the Bull Run supply because of turbidity and switch to water from wells . A law passed later that year prohibited most logging in or near the watershed , and since then the Portland Water Bureau and the United States Forest Service have closed many of the logging roads and removed culverts and other infrastructure contributing to erosion . 
 Mature trees , most of them more than 500 years old and more than 21 inches ( 53 cm ) in diameter , cover about half of the watershed , and the rest of the watershed is also heavily forested . Annual precipitation ranges from 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) near the water supply intake to as much as 170 inches ( 4 @,@ 300 mm ) near the headwaters . More than 250 wildlife species , including the protected northern spotted owl , inhabit this forest . Downstream of the BRWMU , the watershed is far less restricted . In the late 19th century , an unincorporated community , Bull Run , became established near the river in conjunction with a hydroelectric project and a related railroad line . About 6 miles ( 10 km ) of the lower river is open to fishing and boating , and the land at the confluence of the Bull Run and Sandy rivers has been a public park since the early 20th century . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Bull Run River begins at Bull Run Lake , a natural body of water modified slightly by the Portland Water Bureau , near Hiyo Mountain in the Mount Hood Wilderness . Originating in Clackamas County north of Forest Road 18 ( Lolo Pass Road ) , its unnamed headwater tributaries enter the lake . Flowing northwest from the lake , the river immediately enters Multnomah County and continues generally northwest for about 5 miles ( 8 km ) . Along this stretch , the river flows by a United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) stream gauge at river mile ( RM ) 20 @.@ 9 or river kilometer ( RK ) 30 @.@ 6 , passes under Forest Road 1025 and Forest Road 10 and receives Blazed Alder Creek from the left and Log Creek and Falls Creek , both from the right . Then the river turns southwest and passes another stream gauge just before entering Bull Run River Reservoir 1 at RM 15 ( RK 24 ) . Also entering the reservoir are Fir Creek from the left , North Fork Bull Run River from the right , then Deer , Cougar , and Bear creeks , all from the right . The Bull Run River exits the reservoir via a spillway 11 miles ( 18 km ) from the river mouth . Forest Road 10 runs roughly parallel to the right bank of the river from near the headwaters to Southwest Bull Run Road , near the mouth . 
 Entering Bull Run River Reservoir 2 , the river receives Camp Creek from the left , re @-@ enters Clackamas County , and receives South Fork Bull Run River from the left . The river exits the reservoir via a spillway at about RM 6 ( RK 10 ) . Below Reservoir 2 , Forest Road 10 ( Waterworks Road ) is on the river 's right bank , and Forest Road 14 is on the left . The river flows by a stream gauge at RM 4 @.@ 7 ( RK 7 @.@ 6 ) and passes under Forest Road 14 before receiving the Little Sandy River from the left at about RM 2 ( RK 3 ) . The river then turns northwest , passes under an unnamed road and then under Southeast Bull Run Road near the unincorporated community of Bull Run , which is on the river 's right , and the defunct powerhouse of the Bull Run Hydroelectric Project , which is on the left . Southeast Camp <unk> Road runs roughly parallel to the river along its right bank from here to the mouth . Along this stretch , the river receives Laughing Water Creek from the right and enters the Sandy River at Dodge Park , about 18 @.@ 5 miles ( 29 @.@ 8 km ) miles from the larger river 's confluence with the Columbia River . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The USGS and the water bureau operate a stream gauge at RM 4 @.@ 7 ( RK 7 @.@ 6 ) , which is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) downstream from Bull Run Reservoir 2 and the water system intake . Measurements are for the river only and do not include water diverted upstream of the gauge to the city water supply or to a former power plant . The maximum flow at this station was 24 @,@ 800 cubic feet per second ( 700 m3 / s ) on December 22 , 1964 , and the minimum flow was 1 @.@ 1 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 031 m3 / s ) on October 4 , 1974 . The drainage area above this gauge is 107 square miles ( 280 km2 ) , about 77 percent of the whole watershed . The maximum flow occurred during the floods of December 1964 and January 1965 , rated by the National Weather Service as one of Oregon 's top 10 weather events of the 20th century . 
 Since 1966 , the USGS has monitored the flow of the Bull Run River at a stream gauge 14 @.@ 8 miles ( 23 @.@ 8 km ) from the mouth . The average flow between then and 2008 was 404 cubic feet per second ( 11 @.@ 4 m3 / s ) . This is from a drainage area of 47 @.@ 90 square miles ( 124 @.@ 06 km2 ) , about 34 percent of the entire watershed . The maximum flow recorded during this period was 15 @,@ 800 cubic feet per second ( 450 m3 / s ) on November 5 , 1999 . The minimum was 30 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 85 m3 / s ) on October 28 – 31 , 1987 . 
 The uppermost stream gauge on the main stem is at RM 20 @.@ 9 ( RK 30 @.@ 6 ) , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) downstream from the outlet structure at Bull Run Lake . In operation since 1992 , the gauge recorded an average flow of 26 @.@ 1 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 74 m3 / s ) between then and 2009 . This was from a drainage area of 5 @.@ 08 square miles ( 13 @.@ 2 km2 ) , about 4 percent of the total watershed . The maximum flow recorded during this period was 148 cubic feet per second ( 4 @.@ 2 m3 / s ) on February 7 , 1996 . The minimum was 8 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 23 m3 / s ) on October 28 , 1992 . 
 In addition to the three main @-@ stem gauges , the USGS operates five other stream gauges in the Bull Run watershed . Each of the following tributaries has one gauge : Fir Creek , Blazed Alder Creek , the North Fork , the South Fork , and the Little Sandy . 
 Near the outlet structure of Bull Run Lake , a USGS water @-@ stage recorder at RM 21 @.@ 9 ( RK 46 @.@ 8 ) has collected data on lake levels since 1992 . The maximum lake content between then and 2009 was 48 @,@ 340 acre feet ( 59 @,@ 630 @,@ 000 m3 ) on February 9 , 1996 , and the minimum was 31 @,@ 080 acre feet ( 38 @,@ 340 @,@ 000 m3 ) on October 29 , 1992 . The two Bull Run reservoirs are also equipped with water @-@ stage recorders . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Columbia River basalts , 10 to 20 million years old , that underlie much of the Bull Run watershed are exposed near the bottoms of steep canyons along the river and its tributaries . In the western half of the watershed , the Rhododendron formation , rich in sediments , overlies the basalt , and later volcanic flows of basalt and andesite overlie both older formations . Areas of thick talus occur in the eastern part of the watershed at elevations higher than 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) above sea level , and north @-@ facing slopes above 2 @,@ 600 feet ( 790 m ) show evidence of glaciation . Over many centuries , streams in the watershed have carved canyons through the Rhododendron formation to the level of the basalt . Since basalt resists erosion , water traveling over it remains relatively free of sediments . Less than 2 percent of the watershed is at high risk for landslides . 
 The Bull Run River 's three reservoirs — Bull Run Lake , Bull Run Reservoir 1 , and Bull Run Reservoir 2 — are oligotrophic and do not sustain many life forms . Bull Run Lake is in a steep @-@ sided cirque blocked at its lower end by a series of lava flows topped by debris from a glacial moraine . Small streams flow into the lake from ridges above it , and water exits the lake mainly by seeping through porous rock to enter the Bull Run River about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) downstream . Evidence suggests that over the past several thousand years , although forest fires in the area and volcanic activity on Mount Hood or Mount St. Helens have caused temporary changes in the lake 's <unk> condition , it " has always returned to conditions similar to those seen at present . " Turbidity is sometimes a problem in Reservoirs 1 and 2 when unstable soils sandwiched between layers of lava erode into tributaries , especially the North and South forks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First peoples = = = 
 Archeological evidence suggests that Native Americans lived along the lower Columbia River as early as 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The area near what later became The Dalles , on the Columbia east of the mouth of the Sandy River , eventually became an important trading center . The Indians established villages on floodplains and traveled seasonally to gather huckleberries and other food on upland meadows , to fish for salmon , and to hunt elk and deer . Although no direct evidence exists that these lower @-@ Columbia Indians traveled up the Sandy , it is likely that they did . Traces of these people include petroglyphs carved into the rocks of the Columbia River Gorge . Within the past few thousand years , Indians created trails across the Cascade Range around Mount Hood . In the 19th century , this trail network linked the Wascopam Mission near The Dalles to settlements in the Willamette Valley . One popular trail crossed over Lolo Pass , near the headwaters of the Bull Run River , and another , which later became the Barlow Road , met the Lolo Pass trail roughly where the Zigzag and Salmon rivers enter the Sandy . Indians from villages along the Columbia , Clackamas , and other rivers also traveled by water to the lower Sandy River area to fish for salmon and to gather berries , nuts and roots . The Klickitat tribe referred to Bull Run Lake as <unk> , meaning " Loon Lake " . 
 = = = Explorers , settlers , and waterworks = = = 
 Before the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1805 , few Europeans or European @-@ Americans had visited the Sandy River basin . One of the first documented visits to the upper Sandy occurred in 1838 , when Daniel Lee drove cattle from the Willamette Valley to Wascopam via the Indian trail over Lolo Pass . By 1840 , pioneers were using the trail to cross the Cascades , and the Barlow Road , following another old trail , opened in 1846 . One of its branches ran along the Devil 's Backbone , a ridge separating the Sandy and Little Sandy basins . A few of these newcomers settled along the Sandy River . 
 In 1886 , the Portland Water Committee , predecessor of the Portland Water Bureau , began a search for a superior drinking water source . The committee , led by Henry Failing , commissioned Isaac W. Smith , an engineer and surveyor , to inspect any viable water supply in the region . Smith chose the Bull Run River , and a five @-@ month survey trip led him to conclude that a gravity @-@ flow system could deliver clean water from Bull Run to Portland . In 1892 , U.S. President Benjamin Harrison signed a proclamation creating a protected area , the Bull Run Reserve , in the watershed . By 1895 Portland had built a diversion dam on the Bull Run River , and completed its first conduit ( Conduit 1 ) to carry Bull Run water to the city . At about the same time as the Smith survey , a small farming community , at first named <unk> but renamed Bull Run in 1895 , grew up near the confluence of the Bull Run and Sandy rivers . Meanwhile , improvements to the Barlow Road encouraged population growth along the lower Sandy and the establishment of cities like Gresham and Sandy . Even so , by 1900 much of the upper Sandy basin was still remote , wild , and accessible mainly by trails . 
 Expanding the system 's storage and delivery capacities in stages , the city built Conduit 2 from Bull Run to Portland in 1911 , and in 1917 constructed a small dam at the high water outlet of Bull Run Lake . In 1921 , the city replaced the headworks diversion dam with a new one , about 40 feet ( 12 m ) high , and added Conduit 3 . In 1929 , Portland built Dam 1 ( the Ben Morrow Dam ) , which is about 200 feet ( 61 m ) high . To keep pace with population growth and increasing water demands , the city created Reservoir 2 behind Dam 2 . The new dam , completed in 1962 at the site of the headworks dam , is a rockfill structure , 110 feet ( 34 m ) high . By that time , the city had already replaced the aging Conduit 1 with Conduit 4 . 
 = = = Hydroelectric projects = = = 
 The lower Bull Run River changed dramatically in 1906 , when the Mount Hood Railway and Power Company ( MHR & P ) began work on the Bull Run Hydroelectric Project . The project included a powerhouse on the Bull Run River at RM 1 @.@ 5 ( RK 2 @.@ 4 ) , and a diversion dam on one of its largest tributaries , the Little Sandy River , 1 @.@ 7 miles ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) from its confluence with the Bull Run River . Water from the Little Sandy Dam diverted much of the Little Sandy 's flow through a wooden flume about 3 @.@ 2 miles ( 5 @.@ 1 km ) long to a 140 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 57 km2 ) reservoir called Roslyn Lake and from there to the powerhouse . 
 To begin the project , the MHR & P needed access to the powerhouse site . At the time , it took three hours by stagecoach to reach Bull Run from an electric railway depot in Boring . Roads in the area had to be planked to be usable during heavy rains . Access improved in mid @-@ 1911 , when the company finished construction on a 22 @-@ mile ( 35 km ) railway line between the <unk> neighborhood in east Portland and Bull Run . In 1912 , the year the powerhouse began generating electricity , the MHR & P merged with the Portland Railway , Light and Power Company , ( PRL & P ) , which later modified the line for use by electric trolleys . 
 In 1913 , the PRL & P , the predecessor of the electric utility company known as Portland General Electric ( PGE ) , expanded the hydroelectric project by building Marmot Dam at RM 30 ( RK 48 ) on the Sandy River , from which it diverted water through canals and tunnels , the longest of which was 4 @,@ 690 feet ( 1 @,@ 430 m ) , to the Little Sandy River upstream of the Little Sandy Dam . This increased the maximum flow along the flume to Roslyn Lake from about 200 cubic feet per second ( 5 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) to about 800 cubic feet per second ( 23 m3 / s ) . Since the combined flow entered the lower Bull Run River after leaving the powerhouse , the system altered the flows of three rivers . In 1999 , close to a century after the start of the project , PGE announced that it would remove the Marmot and Little Sandy dams and related equipment and close the 22 @-@ megawatt powerhouse because of costs associated with maintenance and fish protection . Marmot Dam was demolished in 2007 and the Little Sandy Dam in 2008 , restoring natural flows to the Sandy and Little Sandy . 
 In 1982 , work on the Portland Hydroelectric Project , unrelated to the Bull Run Hydroelectric Project , began generating electricity at powerhouses below the dams at Reservoirs 1 and 2 on the Bull Run River . Portland sells the electricity from a 24 @-@ megawatt plant at Dam 1 and a 12 @-@ megawatt plant at Dam 2 to PGE , which operates and maintains the equipment . PGE , a corporation with home offices in Portland , has many other sources of electricity , which it sells to customers in a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 10 @,@ 000 km2 ) service area in the northern Willamette Valley . 
 = = = Logging = = = 
 Extensive timber cutting in the Sandy River basin began in the mid @-@ 19th century in response to a demand for wood from the Portland metropolitan area . Logging intensified in the lower basin through the 20th century as sawmills became established in Sandy , Boring , Brightwood and other settlements in the region , and railroad spurs extended into the forests . In 1904 , President Theodore Roosevelt signed into law the Bull Run Trespass Act to forbid activities such as camping and livestock grazing in the Bull Run Reserve . Except for activity related to the waterworks , the protected area changed little until the 1950s , when the United States Forest Service began to advocate logging in the Reserve . After the U.S. Congress passed the Multiple Use – Sustained Yield Act of 1960 stressing timber production in the national forests , the Forest Service in the 1960s and 1970s built about 170 miles ( 270 km ) of forest roads in the watershed . Before the road @-@ building and heavy logging , " The watershed [ had ] remained almost inviolable for nearly 60 years , its runoff protected by a largely unbroken expanse of centuries @-@ old trees , " according to a member of the Bull Run Advisory Committee , a scientific panel commissioned by the City of Portland in 1977 to review issues related to Bull Run . 
 In 1973 , Joseph Miller , Jr . , a retired Portland physician , sued the Forest Service , claiming that its logging violated the Bull Run Trespass Act . In 1976 , U.S. District Judge James M. Burns agreed , and logging was halted . Shortly thereafter , Congress rescinded the Bull Run Trespass Act and replaced it with the Bull Run Watershed Management Act of 1977 , which created the Bull Run Watershed Management Unit ( BRWMU ) ( replacing the Bull Run Reserve ) and legalized further Bull Run logging unless it could be shown to reduce water quality . Logging and the debate about logging continued . In 1994 about 75 percent of the BRWMU was made into a reserve for protecting the northern spotted owl and other species dependent on old @-@ growth forests . In February 1996 , runoff from unusually heavy rains in the watershed washed so much eroded soil into the Bull Run storage reservoirs that the City had to shut down the Bull Run supply and switch during the crisis to its emergency supply from a well field along the Columbia River . Later in 1996 , Congress passed the Oregon Resources Conservation Act , which prohibited logging on all Forest Service lands within the Bull Run water supply drainage and another 3 @,@ 500 acres ( 14 km2 ) of land that drained to the lower Bull Run River . In 2001 , the Little Sandy Act extended the prohibitions to the entire BRWMU and public lands along the Little Sandy River . 
 Between 1958 and 1993 , when the last timber @-@ cutting took place in the BRWMU , about 14 @,@ 500 acres ( 59 km2 ) , roughly 22 percent of the water supply drainage , were logged . Since then , to reduce erosion from the outmoded logging infrastructure , the Forest Service and the water bureau have been decommissioning parts of the Bull Run forest road network , which had grown to 346 miles ( 557 km ) . By autumn 2008 , they had closed 78 miles ( 126 km ) of roads , were dismantling another 63 miles ( 101 km ) , and were removing 245 culverts . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Bull Run watershed drains 139 square miles ( 360 km2 ) , most of which is in the Mount Hood National Forest in Multnomah and Clackamas counties in northwest Oregon . The confluence of the Bull Run and Sandy rivers at Dodge Park , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of downtown Portland , marks the watershed 's western ( downstream ) end , while on the east it borders Hood River County , and at Hiyo Mountain it is about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) northwest of Mount Hood in the Cascade Range . It is a sub @-@ watershed of the Lower Columbia – Sandy Watershed . Elevations within the watershed range from 4 @,@ 750 feet ( 1 @,@ 450 m ) at Buck Peak on the watershed 's northeastern boundary to 243 feet ( 74 m ) at the mouth of the Bull Run River . 
 As the main source of Portland 's drinking water , the watershed is largely restricted to uses related to water collection , storage , and treatment , and to forest management . The city 's drinking water protection area consists of the 102 square miles ( 260 km2 ) of the basin upstream of the water supply intake at RM 6 @.@ 2 ( RK 10 ) . The protection area is part of a larger restricted zone , the BRWMU , which covers 143 square miles ( 370 km2 ) . It lies mostly within Multnomah and Clackamas counties but extends in places along its eastern edge into Hood River County . As of 2010 , the Forest Service manages 95 percent of the BRWMU on land owned by the federal government ; the Portland Water Bureau manages the 4 percent that is owned by the City of Portland , and the Bureau of Land Management manages the remaining 1 percent , which is on federal land . Small portions of the watershed that are along the lower main stem or along tributaries are partly outside the BRWMU and fall under other jurisdictions . 
 Watersheds bordering the Bull Run River drainage basin are those of the West Fork Hood River to the east and northeast , the Sandy River to the south and west , and the Columbia River to the north . Small Columbia River tributaries , each with a subwatershed bordering the Bull Run watershed , flow north from a ridge between the Bull Run and Columbia rivers . These include Eagle , Tanner , Moffett , McCord , Horsetail , Oneonta , Multnomah , and Bridle Veil creeks , which plunge over one or more waterfalls as they enter the Columbia Gorge . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate along the Bull Run River is typical of the western Oregon Cascades foothills . Annual precipitation ranges from 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) near the intake for the Portland water supply to as much as 170 inches ( 4 @,@ 300 mm ) near the headwaters . Summers are dry , and winters , especially November through January , are wet . At low elevations , most of the precipitation arrives in the form of rain , but at higher elevations 25 to 30 percent of the moisture arrives as snow . Fog drip may add significantly to total precipitation in the vicinity of Bull Run Lake . A study published in 1982 suggested that standard rain gauges placed in open areas might be underestimating the contribution of fog drip to heavily forested parts of the watershed by up to 30 percent . Accumulated snow is rare at elevations up to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) above sea level but sometimes reaches 6 to 10 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) above 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) . Melting snow adds to streamflow in April and May , and dry soil inhibits streamflow in August . Generally , temperatures are mild . Lows in January range from just below freezing to about 25 ° F ( − 4 ° C ) , while July highs are usually about 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . 
 The Natural Resources Conservation Service ( <unk> ) of the United States Department of Agriculture operates snow telemetry ( <unk> ) stations at three places in the Bull Run watershed to help predict how much water will be available from melting snow . Snow depths and density vary with time and location . At the Blazed Alder Creek station , the highest of the three at 3 @,@ 650 feet ( 1 @,@ 110 m ) above sea level , the mean snow @-@ water equivalent ( SWE ) ( the amount of water in the accumulated snow ) ranged in 2009 from 0 in July – October to about 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) in April . A station on the North Fork at an elevation of 3 @,@ 060 feet ( 930 m ) reported a minimum mean SWE of 0 in July – October 2009 and a maximum of about 37 inches ( 940 mm ) in April . In the same year at the South Fork station , elevation 2 @,@ 690 feet ( 820 m ) , the mean SWE varied from 0 in June – September to about 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in March . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 Although most of the watershed is generally closed to the public , the protected area includes forest roads , buildings , three dams and reservoirs , two hydroelectric power stations , and other infrastructure used by government employees who manage the forest and the water supply system . The system includes a concrete dam and spillway , added to the natural outlet of Bull Run Lake . The dam , completed in about 1960 , was preceded in 1915 by a timber @-@ and @-@ rockfill structure and later by other measures to increase the lake 's storage capacity and to prevent seepage . These measures raised the lake 's usable storage from about 2 @.@ 8 billion US gallons ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) to about 4 @.@ 3 billion US gallons ( 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) , an increase of about 55 percent . Dam 1 , which impounds Reservoir 1 , is a concrete arch @-@ gravity dam about 200 feet ( 61 m ) high , and Dam 2 , a rockfill structure about 110 feet ( 34 m ) high , impounds Reservoir 2 . Although the two reservoirs combined can hold up to about 17 billion US gallons ( 64 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) , their total usable storage is only about 10 billion US gallons ( 38 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) . 
 The raw water intake ( headworks ) at Bull Run is just below Dam 2 . This is where water is diverted from the river for chlorination and then routed into three distribution conduits for delivery to Portland . About 23 percent of the watershed 's annual runoff is diverted to the city 's water supply . 
 The main roads within the BRWMU include Forest Road 10 , which runs for much of its length along the north side of the river . It links the community of Bull Run near the mouth of the river and Forest Road 18 ( Lolo Pass Road ) east of Bull Run Lake . <unk> off Forest Road 10 downstream of Reservoir 2 , Forest Roads 12 and 14 form a loop south of the river . The loop extends as far east as Goodfellow Lakes , near the source of the Little Sandy River . Below the BRWMU , Bull Run Road , open to the public , crosses the river between the community of Bull Run and Dodge Park . 
 The Bull Run River Bridge , a 240 @-@ foot ( 73 m ) Pennsylvania @-@ petit truss span that carries Bull Run Road , was originally the west truss of the Burnside Bridge over the Willamette River in downtown Portland . It includes parts made of wrought iron as well as steel , and its truss portals incorporate nautical design elements meant for Portland , an inland seaport . Built in 1894 , the bridge was moved to Bull Run in 1926 , when a new Burnside Bridge replaced the old one . The Sandy River Bridge over the Sandy River at Dodge Park , just upriver from the mouth of the Bull Run River , was the 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) east truss of the Burnside Bridge . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
