 Thick forests cover about 95 percent of the watershed . Douglas @-@ fir is the dominant tree species in the basin below 3 @,@ 400 feet ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) above sea level , where western redcedar thrives in moist areas and western hemlock also grows . Douglas @-@ fir and noble fir are the dominant species at higher elevations , and Pacific silver fir is the climax species . Mature trees , which cover about 54 percent of the watershed , are mostly more than 500 years old and have diameters exceeding 21 inches ( 53 cm ) . Trees between 9 inches ( 23 cm ) and 21 inches ( 53 cm ) in diameter cover about 34 percent of the basin , while younger , smaller trees dominate the remaining 12 percent . The forest floors support many smaller plants such as salal and sword fern . About 5 percent of the watershed consists of unvegetated water bodies or bare rock and a tiny fraction of meadow . 
 More than 250 wildlife species , including peregrine falcon , bald eagle and northern spotted owl are thought to frequent the watershed . Migratory birds such as loons use the basin for feeding and nesting as they travel along the Pacific Flyway . Native fish species include chinook and coho salmon , steelhead , coastal cutthroat trout , Pacific lamprey , and rainbow trout , but since 1922 the headworks dam or its successor , Dam 2 , have blocked anadromous fish passage to the upper river and its tributaries . Many amphibian and reptile species thrive near streams and ponds . Roosevelt elk , American black bear , coyote , cougar , black @-@ tailed deer , North American river otter , American mink , and North American beaver are among the mammals found in the watershed . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Adjacent to the confluence of the Bull Run and Sandy rivers , 14 @-@ acre ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) Dodge Park offers tree @-@ shaded picnic areas , a swimming hole , a sandy beach , and a boat ramp for launching rafts , kayaks , and drift boats on the Sandy River . The Portland Water Bureau owns and maintains the park , established in the early 20th century . Originally called Bull Run Park , it was renamed for Frank Dodge , superintendent of the water bureau from 1897 to 1914 . Until supplanted by automobile highways , the electric trolley to Bull Run carried passengers to and from the park until 1930 . The water bureau estimates that at least 30 @,@ 000 people visited the park in 1926 . As of 2015 , the bureau has plans to restore and improve the park as time and money allow . 
 Although most of the Bull Run River watershed is closed to the public , whitewater enthusiasts sometimes run the lower 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) stretch from the Bull Run Road bridge to the Sandy River . The put @-@ in place for the run is just below the powerhouse , and the take @-@ out is at Dodge Park . The run features a permanent slalom course near the put @-@ in , six class 3 rapids in the first 2 miles ( 3 km ) , and a short stretch of class 2 water at the end of the run . 
 Fishing is limited to the lower reaches of the river . Hatchery Chinook salmon and summer and winter steelhead are sometimes caught near the confluence with the Sandy River , and catch and release fishing for wild trout is allowed from the mouth of the river to the edge of the Bull Run watershed reserve . 
 Access to the Bull Run Watershed Management Unit is generally limited to government employees and guests on official business , and security guards keep watch on its three gated entrances . However , the water bureau offers public tours in the summer and fall , and hikers may use the Pacific Crest Trail , which runs along the eastern edge of the watershed near Mount Hood . The bureau has been averaging about 85 group tours a year . 
 = .hack ( video game series ) = 
 .hack / <unk> <unk> / is a series of single @-@ player hack and slash developed for the PlayStation 2 console by CyberConnect2 and published by Bandai . The series of four games , titled .hack / / Infection , .hack / / Mutation , .hack / / Outbreak , and .hack / / Quarantine , features a " game within a game " ; a fictional massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game ( MMORPG ) called The World which does not require the player to connect to the Internet . Players may transfer their characters and data between games in the series . Each game comes with an extra DVD containing an episode of .hack / / Liminality , the accompanying original video animation series which details fictional events that occur concurrently with the games . 
 The games are part of a multimedia franchise called Project .hack which explores the mysterious origins of The World . Set after the events of the anime series .hack / / Sign , the games focus on a player named Kite and his quest to discover why some users have become comatose as a result of playing The World . The search evolves into a deeper investigation of The World and its effects on the stability of the Internet . 
 Critics gave the series mixed reviews . It was praised for its unique setting and its commitment to preserve suspension of disbelief , as well as the character designs . However , it was criticized for uneven pacing and a lack of improvement between games . The commercial success of the franchise led to the production of .hack / / frägment — a remake of the series with online capabilities — and .hack / / <unk> , another video game trilogy . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 .hack simulates an MMORPG ; players assume the role of a participant in a fictional game called The World . The player controls the on @-@ screen player character Kite from a third @-@ person perspective but first @-@ person mode is available . The player manually controls the viewing perspective using the game controller . Within the fictional game , players explore monster @-@ infested fields and dungeons , and " Root Towns " that are free of combat . They can also log off from The World and return to a computer desktop interface which includes in @-@ game e @-@ mail , news , message boards , and desktop and background music customization options . The player may save the game to a memory card both from the desktop and within The World at a Save Shop . A Data Flag appears on the save file after the player completes the game , allowing the transfer of all aspects of the player character and party members to the next game in the series . 
 The series is typical of action role @-@ playing games , in which players attack enemies in real time . The game 's action pauses whenever the menu is opened to select magic to cast , items to use , or skills to perform . The player directly controls Kite and the other characters are controlled by artificial intelligence . The player may either provide the computer @-@ controlled characters with guidelines ( " attack " , " first aid " , " magic " , etc . ) or issue direct commands . Most hostile creatures are contained within magic portals and combat will not begin until the player character approaches the portal and releases the monsters inside . Kite possesses a unique ability called " Data Drain " which allows him to transform these enemies into rare items . Many boss monsters are known as " Data Bugs " — enemies with corrupted data which gives them infinite health . Data Drain is used to repair the damaged monsters ' data and render them vulnerable but its use increases Kite 's level of infection , randomly causing harmful side effects . The infection can be cured by defeating enemies without Data Drain . 
 Root Towns are non @-@ combat areas of The World where the player may restock items , buy equipment , or chat and trade with other players of The World . In many towns , the player may also raise a sentient , pig @-@ like creature called a Grunty , which can be ridden in fields and in later games raced for prizes . A blue portal called the Chaos Gate is used to travel between towns ( called " servers " ) and to access the fields and dungeons where battles occur . A three @-@ word password system controls the characteristics of each area ; attributes such as the prevalence of monsters or items change depending on the properties of each word in the password phrase . Certain plot @-@ related areas have restricted access , but the player character has an ability called " Gate Hacking " which allows him to access these areas using " Virus Cores " obtained through Data Drain . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The .hack games are set in an alternate timeline of Earth , in the year 2010 . After a computer virus called " Pluto 's Kiss " crashes nearly every computer in the world , access to the Internet is closed to the general public to address security concerns . After two years without the Internet and online games , a MMORPG called The World is released . It becomes the most popular online game of all time with over 20 million unique players . Shortly before the events portrayed in the .hack games , a number of users become comatose as a result of playing The World . However , the developers blame their condition on cyberterrorism . 
 The World was developed by a German programmer named Harald Hoerwick ; its backstory is based on the Epitaph of Twilight , an epic poem by Emma <unk> . Her death inspired Hoerwick to create the game . Elements of the poem are coded into the game 's programming . The hidden purpose of Hoerwick 's game is to develop the ultimate artificial intelligence ( AI ) , which is capable of making decisions for itself . To this end , Hoerwick inserted functions into the system which monitor and extract behavioral data from millions of the game 's players to aid in the AI 's learning process . After Hoerwick 's death , these pieces of code became black boxes to the current developers , who cannot fathom their purpose , yet are critical to the proper functioning of the game . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The main protagonist of .hack is Kite , a new player of The World whose friend Orca becomes comatose under mysterious circumstances . Kite is joined by nearly twenty other players in his quest to solve the mystery of the coma victims . The players who have the greatest impact on the success of Kite 's mission are BlackRose , a fellow newbie to The World whose brother is also in a coma ; Balmung , a legendary player who seeks to eliminate sources of corruption in the game he loves ; and Wiseman , an information broker who becomes a key strategist for Kite 's team . Helba , a professional hacker , and Lios , a reluctant system administrator , also aid in Kite 's efforts to rescue the coma victims . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In .hack / / Infection , Kite 's friend Orca invites him to play The World . In the first dungeon they visit , they encounter a girl in white , Aura , being chased by a humanoid monster . Aura tries to entrust Orca with an item called " the Book of Twilight " , but the monster attacks him , crashing The World 's servers . Kite 's player discovers that Yasuhiko , Orca 's player , has fallen comatose after the attack , and resolves to discover the cause . Kite meets BlackRose , who takes him to a cathedral where they are attacked by a headless swordsman . The legendary player Balmung appears and defeats it , but the monster revives itself as a Data Bug . The Book of Twilight then activates , altering Kite 's character data and giving him the Twilight Bracelet . He uses its Data Drain to correct the swordsman 's code , allowing Balmung to kill it . Balmung accuses Kite of causing the viral infection spreading through the game , and leaves . Kite and BlackRose decide to cooperate to help the coma victims . After investigating a number of leads , Kite and BlackRose track down Skeith , the creature that put Orca into a coma . They defeat Skeith , but it transforms into a larger enemy called Cubia , from which they escape . 
 In .hack / / Mutation , Kite and BlackRose encounter system administrator Lios , who declares Kite 's bracelet to be an illegal hack . He tries to delete Kite 's character data , but fails due to Kite 's data being encrypted by the Book of Twilight . Helba intervenes , and convinces Lios to observe Kite for the time being . Lios directs them to an area where they find Innis , a monster with powers similar to Skeith 's . Upon defeating Innis , Kite receives an e @-@ mail from Aura , who reveals that she is an AI . They travel to an area to meet her ; but Cubia attacks them , and they repel the monster with difficulty . Short on leads , they contact Wiseman , who is intrigued by Kite 's bracelet . He suggests that Skeith and Innis are based on the " Cursed Wave " , an antagonistic force featured in the poem Epitaph of Twilight , upon which The World is based . Wiseman helps grant them access to Net Slum , a place known as a paradise for hackers and wandering AIs . Upon arrival , another Cursed Wave monster called Magus attacks them . They defeat it and return to the Root Town , where they discover that the computer virus has spread to The World 's main servers and into the real world . 
 In .hack / / Outbreak , Balmung realizes that he cannot end the situation on his own , and joins Kite 's quest . BlackRose tells Kite that her brother became comatose under similar circumstances as Orca , which renews both characters ' determination . Wiseman formulates a plan to combat the Cursed Wave , enlisting Helba 's assistance . Their teamwork destroys the Wave monster <unk> , but the aftermath causes networks in the real world to malfunction . Aura contacts Kite again , but their meeting is cut short by Cubia 's reappearance . Lios , observing Cubia 's power , agrees to join Kite , Helba , and the others to combat the Cursed Wave . In the resulting operation , the team pools their resources to defeat another Wave monster called <unk> , with no repercussions in the real world . 
 .hack / / Quarantine sees the current server becoming increasingly unstable . To fix the problem , Helba replaces it with a copy of the Net Slum . At the bottom of a dungeon , Kite encounters Mia , a member of his party . He discovers that Mia is actually another Cursed Wave monster named Macha , whom he reluctantly defeats . Meanwhile , Cubia grows stronger , and Kite 's team barely fends off its latest attack . In contrast , Operation Orca is a success as they destroy <unk> , the next Wave monster . Kite seeks the advice of Harald Hoerwick , the creator of the game who survives beyond death through his AI incarnations . Aura appears and hints that Cubia is the " shadow " of Kite 's Twilight Bracelet . Cubia ambushes them and destroys the AI Harald . In their final battle , Kite recalls Aura 's hint and has BlackRose destroy the bracelet , causing Cubia to fade away . Without the bracelet , the final Wave member , <unk> , ambushes the party in Net Slum Root Town . With the aid of the spirits of the coma victims , Kite penetrates <unk> 's barrier . Aura sacrifices herself to end the battle , restoring the network to normal and reviving all the coma victims . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development for .hack began in early 2000 with the aim of shocking and surprising the player and creating a distinctive product . CyberConnect2 's president Hiroshi Matsuyama played a key role in developing the concept for the series . A number of core ideas , including " slaying dragons or being a thief in London " were explored , but these were rejected in favor of an " offline / online game " . Matsuyama said that this would give young gamers an opportunity to experience online play without paying monthly fees or needing powerful Internet connections . The developers looked at a number of MMORPGs such as Phantasy Star Online , Ultima Online , and Final Fantasy XI for inspiration , and drew influences from the prior works of character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto ( Neon Genesis Evangelion ) and scenario writer Kazunori Itō ( Ghost in the Shell ) . Itō noted that casting the player into the role of a subscriber of The World creates a unique story @-@ telling situation which draws the player deeper into the plot . 
 From the start of its development , .hack was envisioned as a four @-@ part series intended to mirror the four @-@ volume story arcs found in manga . Matsuyama theorized that the act of transferring saved data across the four volumes would help to create a sense of the human drama embodied by the games ' story and invest the player into the narrative . The games were developed simultaneously alongside other elements of Project .hack such as .hack / / Sign to emphasize the multimedia aspect of the franchise . The three @-@ month gap between each game 's release allowed the developers to make minor changes in response to criticisms . The games were packaged with bonus DVDs featuring episodes of .hack / / Liminality , an original video animation ( OVA ) series that depicts events that occur concurrently with the games . The developers intended the OVA series to depict fictional events happening in the real world outside the game . Players in Japan who purchased all four games were rewarded with .hack / / Gift , an OVA parodying the .hack series . After the completion of the series , the development team produced .hack / / frägment , a game using the same engine as the .hack series with an online multiplayer component . The aims of .hack / / frägment were to allow the developers to watch player interactions in an online environment and to gauge interest in an . 
 = = Reception = = 
 By March 2004 , sales of the .hack games exceeded 1 @.@ 73 million , with 780 @,@ 000 copies sold in Japan . Critics gave the series mixed reviews . .hack / / Infection received the most positive reviews of the series ; critics were intrigued by the games ' unique premise . Jeremy Dunham of IGN was impressed by the game 's commitment to preserve the illusion of online and praised the character designs and the inclusion of the Japanese voice track , but criticized the camera manipulation and the game 's shortness and lack of difficulty . A Game Informer reviewer praised the way it captures the sense of community that a real MMORPG offers . 
 Many reviewers cited the game 's unusual setting as the counterbalance to the mediocre gameplay , repetitive environments and poor camera control . Overall , the first game was moderately well received , with reviewers overlooking gameplay flaws because of a compelling story . Christian Nutt of Gamespy awarded if four stars out of five and commended Bandai for breaking new ground and Cyber Connect 2 for providing an engrossing RPG experience . Gary Steinman of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine wrote , " [ a ] t its core , .hack is not a good game " , calling the battle systems " wildly unbalanced " and the graphics " spectacularly underwhelming " , but said the " mind @-@ bending " story allowed him to look past its obvious flaws and anticipate future games in the series . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot was less forgiving , deriding .hack / / Infection as a sub @-@ par version of Kingdom Hearts . 
 .hack / / Mutation also received mixed reviews , and many critics complained that little was done to address the problems of its predecessor . Fennec Fox of Gamepro said that game , " is simply an extension of Infection " , with " muddy graphics , questionable control , and a story concept that ’ s just interesting enough to keep you going . " Greg Kasavin of GameSpot gave it a rating of 6 @.@ 7 out of 10 and wrote , " not only does it bring you exactly the same sort of repetitive hack @-@ and @-@ slash gameplay , but it 's also similarly short and simple and once again offers little in the way of plot or character development . " Nutt found the second game to be more addictive than the first , despite its numerous shortcomings such as obvious padding towards the end of the story . He praised the " mixture of cool story and viscerally engaging RPG gameplay " , the accelerating story , gameplay progression and memorable boss battles . Other reviewers were encouraged by the MMORPG @-@ oriented details that contribute to the game 's presentation and built excitement for the future of the series . IGN also named .hack / / Mutation as PlayStation 2 Game of the Month for May 2003 . 
 .hack / / Outbreak represented a shift in the critical reception of the series as reviewers grew tired of the incremental or nonexistent improvements between titles . Kasavin rated it 6 @.@ 4 out of 10 , and wrote that it " just doesn 't make for a satisfying experience " . Dunham gave it an overall rating of 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 , praised the battle system and wrote that there had been a great improvement in the artificial intelligence of ally characters and enemies , although he was disappointed by the lack of any other changes . Nutt awarded .hack / / Outbreak three stars out of five , writing that the game 's " extremely challenging enemies and lots of solo missions give the game an edge that keeps it from becoming boring " . However , he criticized the four @-@ part game structure , observing , " we are paying Bandai $ 200 for one game " and that " the extreme lack of improvements from volume to volume is ... downright exploitative of the fans " . 
 Some critics called the final game , .hack / / Quarantine , a satisfying conclusion to a mediocre series , while others said it is a confusing mess of poor pacing and plot holes . Dunham awarded the game 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 and called the plot twists " shocking and clever " . Kasavin rated it 6 @.@ 1 out of 10 and wrote that , " [ o ] n its own merits , Quarantine isn 't a bad game , and [ loyal players ] should find it to have a satisfying conclusion that , sure enough , leaves the possibility for further adventures in The World " . He also called Bandai 's decision to add 60 to 80 hours of padding to the game , split it into four full @-@ priced products , and release these as a series disappointing . Nutt was similarly disappointed with the final game , awarding it two stars out of five . He wrote that the story was well @-@ presented and excellent , but that it was only present in the game 's first and last quarters . He was satisfied by the game 's ending and loved its story , style , and characters , but grew tired of the game 's " endless chains of chambers , these easily @-@ defeated enemies , this total lack of strategy " . The Game Informer reviewer hoped to see a more effective implementation of .hack 's concept in the future . Japanese magazine Famitsu Weekly gave the .hack games scores in the 29 to 30 out of 40 range , indicating average reviews . However , the Japanese Computer Entertainment Supplier 's Association ( CESA ) honored the series for its combination of different fictional media including games , anime , radio , and manga into a compelling whole at the 2002 @-@ 2003 CESA Awards . 
 = = Related media and legacy = = 
 The .hack video games are part of a multimedia franchise that includes novels , manga , and anime series . Set before the events of the video games , .hack / / Sign is an anime television series that establishes The World as a setting . .hack / / Another Birth is a series of novels that retells the story of the games from BlackRose 's perspective . .hack / / XXXX is a manga adaptation of the games ' story with changes to some elements , such as Cubia acting as a player character . The first official sequel to the games is the manga and anime series .hack / / Legend of the Twilight , which began serializing on July 30 , 2002 . It tells the story of Shugo and Rena — regular players who win avatars of Kite and BlackRose in a contest — and their exploration of The World and its secrets . .hack / / <unk> is a series of video games also released in multiple parts that forms the centerpiece of .hack Conglomerate , a new project set seven years after the events of Project .hack with a new version of The World . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The games ' soundtrack , titled .hack / / Game Music Perfect Collection , was released as a double album in Japan on April 23 , 2003 . It features 68 compositions by <unk> Fukuda , <unk> Nakata , and <unk> Fukuda . A special edition of this soundtrack includes a third disc featuring sound effects and clips used in the games . The album was released with fewer tracks in North America as .hack / / Game Music Best Collection . Patrick Gann of RPGFan wrote that the second disc , which contains music for cutscenes and special events , was stronger than the first disc 's generic town and battle themes . He called the soundtrack " techno meets opera " , singled out the volume intro tracks for particular praise . Gann noted that the North American release functions as a " Best of " album , but felt that " a lot of solid music [ is ] missing " in this release . Other reviewers were less enthusiastic ; Paul Koehler of RPGamer called the music " particularly bland " and IGN 's Dunham lamented that the second installment did not introduce many new pieces . However , he concluded that " the melodious piano and oboe themes were still brawny enough to convince us that we needed to buy the soundtrack sometime in the near future " . 
 .hack / / Game Music Perfect Collection 
 .hack / / Game Music Best Collection 
 = = = .hack / / frägment = = = 
 .hack / / frägment is a multiplayer online game based on the fictional MMORPG , The World . It was released only in Japan on November 23 , 2005 and online service ended on January 18 , 2007 , after being extended two months because of its popularity . Famitsu Weekly gave .hack / / frägment a cumulative score of 29 out of 40 over four reviews , much like its reviews of the main series . Designer Hiroshi Matsuyama described the game as a way to see how players would react to online play . The game uses the same game engine as the .hack video game series and thus , its gameplay is identical , with the exception of online mode . Players explore areas and fight monsters in real time . A major difference is that during online play , the action does not pause when the menu is opened . Players may still use the skill " Data Drain " to weaken monsters and collect rare items . The user interface and control scheme are otherwise unchanged . 
 Players may create their characters based on a number of preset body shapes and color schemes and may choose a class ( such as <unk> or Twin Blade ) and character name . In online mode , players may enter a lobby and search for a maximum of two other players to join them on an adventure . The game includes an expanded communication interface that allows players to chat , send e @-@ mail , post to an in @-@ game Bulletin Board System , and receive server news updates . It is possible to establish ad @-@ hoc chat rooms separate from the public @-@ access ones . Guilds are permanent , exclusive chat rooms for members . In offline mode , players may level up , obtain items , and learn new skills as one of their online mode characters without the need for an Internet connection . Players may invite characters from the .hack games , .hack / / Sign , and .hack / / Legend of the Twilight into their party . The " story mode " of .hack / / frägment is identical to that of the .hack games , with the player 's created character replacing Kite . While offline , players may use a PC utility called " <unk> " to create areas and dungeons and release them online . The creators of the most popular areas are given the ability to add strong monsters for players to defeat . 
 = Who 's That Girl ( 1987 film ) = 
 Who 's That Girl is a 1987 American screwball comedy film written by Andrew Smith and Ken <unk> , and directed by James Foley . It stars Madonna and Griffin Dunne , and depicts the story of a street @-@ smart girl who is falsely accused of murdering her boyfriend and is sent to jail . After getting released , she meets a man , who is supposed to make sure she gets on her bus back to Philadelphia , and convinces him to help her catch those responsible for her confinement . While searching for the embezzler , they fall in love with each other . 
 After the failure of her 1986 film Shanghai Surprise , Madonna decided to sign another comedy film titled Slammer , which was later renamed to Who 's That Girl . However , she had to convince both Warner Bros. and the producers of the film that she was ready for the project . Madonna enlisted her friend James Foley to direct the film . Shooting began in New York in October 1986 , and continued until March 1987 . Production was halted during December due to snowfall in New York . Madonna utilized the time to work on her next tour and the soundtrack of the film . 
 The film was released on August 7 , 1987 , and was a box office bomb , grossing only $ 2 @.@ 5 million in its first week , with its final domestic total being about $ 7 @.@ 3 million . Critics were highly disappointed with the film , and Foley 's direction . Some went on to call it one of the worst films to be released , while others found Madonna 's comic timing to be one of the highlights . 
 However , the Who 's That Girl World Tour went on to be a critical and commercial success , grossing a total of US $ 25 million , and playing in front of audiences totaling 1 @.@ 5 million people . And the soundtrack of the film , though not acclaimed by the critics , enjoyed commercial success . Three of Madonna 's songs , the title track , " Causing a Commotion " and " The Look of Love " , were released as singles with the title track becoming Madonna 's sixth number one single on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The soundtrack album went on to sell six million copies worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Nikki Finn is a carefree young woman , who is always dressed in a leather jacket and skirt , with fire @-@ red lips , platinum bob hair and speaking in a high @-@ pitched voice . One day , her boyfriend Johnny uncovers two men stealing money out of a trust fund and takes pictures of the theft . Johnny puts the pictures in a safety deposit box and gives Nikki the key for safekeeping . The thieves catch Johnny and murder him , then frame Nikki by putting his body into the trunk of her car . Nikki is sentenced to seven years in prison . This is seen during the animated opening credits of the movie . 
 After four years , the story presents tax attorney Loudon Trott ( Griffin Dunne ) on a busy day . He is getting married to the daughter of one of the richest men in New York , Simon Worthington . Loudon 's bride Wendy Worthington ( Haviland Morris ) is a selfish woman who is more consumed in her wedding plans than in the well @-@ being of her fiancé . Loudon , on the other hand , has a number of duties entrusted to him by his boss ( and future father @-@ in @-@ law ) , Mr. Worthington ( John McMartin ) . First he has to pick up a cougar for an exotic animal activist named Montgomery Bell ( John Mills ) , then to pick up Nikki , and lastly he has to make sure that Nikki catches the next bus to her hometown of Philadelphia . 
 Nikki , meanwhile , is determined to catch the actual thieves and bring forth the truth . After meeting Loudon , Nikki cons him into taking her shopping . After taking a Rolls Royce into Harlem to buy a gun – and nearly being arrested during a police raid – she explains her story to Loudon who believes that she is innocent , and decides to help her . She 's also on the run from a pimp named Raoul ( Coati Mundi ) and his lackey Benny ( Dennis <unk> ) , the people who killed Johnny . Only after dangling off a car smashed through the top floor of a parking garage , does he tell her the bank and the box number of Nikki 's slain boyfriend . 
 Afterward Nikki vanishes with the cougar ( whom she names " Murray " ) . Loudon visits Mr. Bell to apologize for losing the animal , to find Nikki had delivered Murray and was waiting for him at Mr. Bell 's home . He has created a Brazilian rainforest filled with animals on top of his roof . There Nikki and Loudon — who had become close with each other on their journey — express their love for each other , and Murray finds a partner . Loudon delivers Nikki to the bus station the next morning , but Nikki becomes broken @-@ hearted , realizing that she has to go back to Philadelphia , leaving Loudon , who is about to get married . While on the bus , she opens an envelope in the security box and finds the photographs that prove that Mr. Worthington is an embezzler and he was the mastermind behind the theft . Nikki gate @-@ crashes the wedding , gets Mr. Worthington arrested and proclaims her love for Loudon . The film ends with Nikki and Loudon riding off into the sunset on a bus to Philadelphia , with Murray and his partner chasing after them . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Madonna 's 1986 studio album True Blue was a critical and commercial success , spawning five top @-@ five singles , and selling over eight million copies worldwide , by the year @-@ end . However , her film career was not as successful as she had hoped it would be . Following the commercially successful Desperately Seeking Susan , her 1986 film Shanghai Surprise — where she starred with her then husband Sean Penn — was a critical and box @-@ office failure , prompting Madonna to comment that she " struggled to come to terms with her character in Shanghai Surprise , because the innocence and repressed personality I was required to portray was so at variance with my own character . " Continuing to struggle with her film career , Madonna was unsure about of her ability to choose a good script , and film producers were less sure about backing her up . 
 Madonna felt that comedy was more of her repertoire , and proceeded to sign a comedy film titled Slammer , written by Andrew Smith and Ken <unk> . She wanted to play the part of a street smart girl called Nikki Finn , who was jailed for a crime she did not commit . However , in light of the bad publicity surrounding her and Penn , and also of the very public failure of Shanghai Surprise , Madonna had to persuade producers <unk> Heller and Bernard Williams , as well as Warner Brothers , that she was up for the part . In addition , she wanted an old friend , James Foley to direct the film . Foley had previously been Penn 's best man at his marriage to Madonna , and had also directed the music videos of Madonna 's singles " Live to Tell " ( 1986 ) and " Papa Don 't Preach " ( 1986 ) . He was ecstatic at having the opportunity to make a major feature film , as previously he had only directed the small @-@ budgeted film At Close Range , starring Penn . As author Andrew Morton pointed out in his biography on Madonna , " the combination of a dubiously talented movie star and a first @-@ time movie director hardly guaranteed a box @-@ office hit , but the film received the go @-@ ahead from Warner , who wanted to <unk> more on Madonna 's success . " Madonna plowed gamely on , saying : " All Warner 's executives were real positive about the project . It was a process — with the writers — of honing the script , making it better . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting for the film began as soon as Madonna had signed up for it . Griffin Dunne was signed to play the part of Loudon Trott , a lawyer whose job was to help Nikki get on a bus , after she was released . Initially Madonna had thought of asking Penn to play the part of Detective <unk> , but Penn was serving a 60 @-@ day jail term , having violated the probation he received in 1986 , for assaulting a friend of Madonna and attacking an extra on the set of At Close Range . The part went to Robert Swan , followed by the signing of John McMartin , Haviland Morris and Bibi Besch as Trott 's father @-@ in @-@ law , fiancée , and mother @-@ in @-@ law respectively . Madonna herself commented that she had a lot in common with the character Nikki . " She 's courageous and sweet and funny and misunderstood . But she clears her name in the last , and that 's always good to do . I 'm continuously doing that with the public . I liked Nikki 's tough side and her sweet side . The toughness is only a mask for the vulnerability she feels inside . " Madonna was also offered the lead role in the Blake Edwards comedy film Blind Date opposite to Bruce Willis , but she refused it in favor of Slammer . She said , " The thing I had planned to do after Shanghai Surprise was Blind Date at Tri @-@ Star . I was supposed to have the approval of the director and the leading man , but they didn 't tell me they 'd already hired Bruce Willis . That ... just didn 't work out . But I was really excited about doing a real physical , screwball comedy , so when Jamie brought this up , it was like my reward . " Coati Mundi , member of Kid Creole and the Coconuts , and Madonna 's long @-@ time friend joined the cast to play the role of Raoul , Nikki 's enemy . Costume designer Deborah Scott was signed to create the wardrobe for the film . Madonna , who visualized the character of Nikki as a dizzy screwball blond , started watching the screwball comedies of the sixties , especially the work of actors like Cary Grant , Clark Gable , Carole Lombard and Judy Holiday . She asked Scott to create comical rah @-@ rah and ballet tutu skirts for the character , with fishnet tights and loud make @-@ up . Scott also designed a glamorous Monroe @-@ esque dress for the love scene between her and Dunne . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in New York in October 1986 . There was a huge crowd around the shooting location trying to get closer to her , whenever she stepped on the set . But Madonna was approachable , signing autographs for the children of the crew , joining in with the wisecracking and when not busy , she used to dance around a boom box with Mundi . When shooting commenced , Madonna would ask for five minutes to study the script and the scene they were shooting ; her idea of preparing for the part was not studied . For example , before a scene in which she needed to appear out of breath , she did a series of push @-@ ups before going on set . Always punctual and professional on the set , Madonna felt that her first takes were perfect and refused to appear for second or third takes . Dunne observed that " [ Madonna ] likes her first take best . I think my best is around fourth . She always says , ' You got it , you got it , ' and she was driving me crazy just like her character would . We had to make a compromise as to which take is the best . " Once Foley got down on one knee and kissed Madonna 's feet in order to encourage her to do a re @-@ take . Afterwards he noted , " She 's very instinctual , what comes out is unencumbered by analysis . " 
 Madonna was ready to take direction for her part , relying on Foley to give her all the cues . He , on the other hand , felt that in person , Madonna seemed to morph into a whole different body and self . He believed the process to be oddly elusive and commented that her persona morphing seemed to work most dramatically in Madonna 's music videos . " You 'd think that that would be the perfect attribute to have for screen acting . But although she ' acts ' very well sometimes , she doesn 't push the right buttons at the right times over the course of the film . The failure of Shanghai Surprise had left its mark " , said Foley . Regarding her acting abilities , Foley stressed on the fact that Madonna was very uptight and into every detail , determined to have the correct portrayal . " That 's probably why it wasn 't so good . In Desperately Seeking Susan , when she didn 't know what she was doing , she was being natural and at her best . " 
 As December arrived , production was halted for a few days due to snowfall in New York City . Madonna decided to utilize the time by working on the soundtrack of the film and also started to note ideas for her next concert tour . While recording the title track , Madonna decided to change the film 's name from Slammer to Who 's That Girl as she felt it to be a better title . Filming commenced in January 1987 , with a scene involving a cougar . But during the second take , the cougar accidentally escaped from the cage , resulting in shooting being paused for a few hours . Madonna remained calm , later noting the incident as " extremely frightening , but I did my best to have my composure . That freaked the others more . " Mundi felt that " she 's got a bit of that perfectionist thing in her . She doesn 't rest . She 's got the movie , and the soundtrack album , and also planning her Who 's That Girl Tour , doing all these stuff at the same time ! " By February 1987 , Madonna 's scenes were already shot although she proceeded to linger on the set to watch Foley and his team work . Foley commented , that having Madonna around the set and not acting was a " pain @-@ in @-@ the @-@ ass " as she " wont skimp especially on cost and she should know that Warner had a tight schedule and constraints on the budget . They still did not trust Madonna when it came to acting . Hell they even gave a greater percentage of the budget to the soundtrack . " Filming ended in March 1987 , with post @-@ production continuing till July 1987 . During the development of the starting credits , Madonna asked Foley if they could have a cartoon figure of her character introducing the film credits . Foley liked the idea , and Warner enlisted cartoonist April March to create the cartoon . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The film was released on August 7 , 1987 , in United States to 944 theatres . Warner Bros. did not arrange for an advance screening , as they believed that Madonna 's appeal would draw moviegoers to come to the film . A pre @-@ release celebration was held on August 6 , 1987 , at Times Square in New York , where Madonna arrived to promote the film . A crowd of almost 10 @,@ 000 people assembled to watch Madonna . As an introduction to the day , the radio jockeys from New York 's <unk> radio station played Madonna 's popular songs in the Square , atop a platform created for the event . The police closed off 43rd and 44th streets , but allowing the traffic to pass through Broadway and Seventh Avenue of Manhattan . Around 6 PM , limousines started to arrive at the Square , with celebrities and the actors of the film entering the fanfare . Madonna arrived in a low @-@ cut , low @-@ backed sequined evening gown and the short hair she had adopted for the film . Although she was late by about an hour , the crowd number continued increasing . Asking her fans good @-@ naturedly to " Shut up , so I can talk " , Madonna thanked everybody for coming to the opening of Who 's That Girl . She talked about her experience of arriving in Times Square eight years before , and said , " I was completely awestruck . Ten years later , I see all of you who have come to see me , and I 'm completely awestruck . Thank you , and I hope you like the movie . " Saying this Madonna departed from the platform , and walked to the National Theatre . Joseph A. <unk> from The New York Times noted that most of the crowd were in their late teenage years and early 20 's . Some held up signs and photographs but he noticed the Madonna wannabes were absent , the adolescent girls who had imitated Madonna 's early lace @-@ and @-@ leather look . This was a result of Madonna 's more mature image from True Blue . 
 To further promote the film , Madonna embarked on the 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour . It was Madonna 's first world tour , reaching Asia , North America and Europe . Musically and technically superior to her previous Virgin Tour , the Who 's That Girl tour incorporated multimedia components to make the show more appealing . Madonna trained herself physically with aerobics , jogging and weight @-@ lifting , to cope with the choreography and the dance routines . The stage was bigger than her previous tour , flanked with four video screens , multimedia projectors and a flight of stairs in the middle . Leonard became the music director and encouraged Madonna to go with the idea of rearranging her older songs and presenting them in a new format . Madonna named the tour as Who 's That Girl , when during rehearsals one @-@ day she looked at a gigantic image of herself , projected on a screen on the stage and mused about how much she has changed and " who was that girl on the screen ? " . The show consisted of seven costume changes , with song @-@ and @-@ dance routines , theatrics , addressing social causes — during " Papa Don 't Preach " — as well as an encore , consisting of the title song " Who 's That Girl " and " Holiday " . The tour was critically appreciated , who commented on the extravagant nature of the concert and complimented Madonna for her dancing , costume changes and dynamic pacing . Who 's That Girl was a commercial success , grossing in total of US $ 25 million by playing in front of 1 @.@ 5 million audience members . According to Pollstar , it was the second top selling female concert tour of 1987 , behind Tina Turner 's Break Every Rule Tour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received negative reviews from critics , and has a rating of 23 % on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . Vincent Canby from The New York Times noted that Madonna , left to her own devices and her own canny pace , is a very engaging comedian . " When Madonna 's no @-@ nonsense pragmatism isn 't being twisted into poses of lovable eccentricity , the actress is sexy and funny and never for a minute sentimental . At times she looks amazingly like Marilyn Monroe , but the personality is her own , more resilient and more knowing . As the WASP @-@ y sleeping prince , Mr. Dunne gives the most stylishly comic performance of a career that 's been largely underrated by the public . Though he seems to be Madonna 's foil , he provides the movie with its backbone , even in its most ludicrous moments . He may well be one of the most truly sophisticated straight men in the business today . " However , he ended the review by saying that the film was short on outright guffaws . Hal Hinson of The Washington Post gave to the film a mixed review , commenting that " you may not feel as if you 've seen a movie . You may not quite know what you 've seen " and that although he laughed too much , the film " is outrageously inept , but not in a routine manner " . Hinson also criticized the work of Foley , noting that he " doesn 't have the skill to sustain a cartoon style . " Philip <unk> from The Dallas Morning News commented that the film is a deft and daffy comedy performance ; Madonna is great with the one @-@ liners . [ ... ] As a movie star , Madonna may be an acquired taste . But one thing is certain : acquiring this particular taste is going to be an enjoyable experience . " Jay Boyar from Orlando Sentinel gave a negative review saying , " Luckily for her , Madonna can sing , and use it to save herself from this disgrace of a movie . " 
 Jamie <unk> from The Advocate was more critical , saying " Madonna delivers the worst performance in recent memory as the heroine of an attempt at screwball comedy . Watching her try to look like Marilyn Monroe and sound like Betty Boop , though , is a sure sign that this film was a disaster in the making . At the same time , it seems inconceivable that anyone would sit down and plan something so dreadful . " Carole Kass from Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch felt that since " Madonna is the idol of teen @-@ agers . If they imitate her hair and her makeup , these ' wanna @-@ <unk> ' who want to be like Madonna and dress like Madonna may be cute . But , as a popular personality , Madonna has a responsibility to her fans . And shoplifting is something not to promote . Nor is smoking . " Dan Dinicola from The Schenectady Gazette felt that " Who 's That Girl is not simply an awful film , it is positively unbearable . It 's a movie without a head or a brain , a picture of such crass stupidity that it can 't even make you angry . Instead it <unk> you to death with its moronic platitudes , its pretensions to comedy . [ ... ] It 's a vanity project which is so <unk> produced and conceived that it makes you want to cringe in shame . [ ... ] Madonna is no more than a novelty item . " Johanna Steinmetz from Chicago Tribune complimented Dunne 's acting and said : " Fortunately the film has Griffin Dunne . Dunne , working in a domain once ruled by Cary Grant , manages to be stuffy , naive and vulnerable but never undignified as Loudon Trott , the New York lawyer . " Jean Rosenbluth from Rolling Stone was harsh about the film , saying " The question posed by the film 's title was Who 's that girl ? The answer provided by the box @-@ office receipts was , alas , ' The same one who appeared in Shanghai Surprise and bored us to death ' . " 
 The picture was the recipient of five Razzie Award nominations , including Worst Director ( James Foley ) , Worst Original Song ( " El Coco Loco " ) , Worst Screenplay and Worst Picture , with Madonna winning Worst Actress . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was released to a total of 944 theatres , with an extra 66 being added later . In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( $ 5 @,@ 207 @,@ 235 in 2016 dollars ) , becoming the tenth highest grossing film of that week . The next week it had a 60 % decline in sales . The film grossed a total of $ 7 @.@ 3 million ( $ 15 @,@ 205 @,@ 126 in 2016 dollars ) worldwide , and was a box office bomb . It was placed at 97 on the top 100 movies of 1987 list . Morton noted that although " Madonna 's comic talent was acknowledged , cinemagoers in the United States stayed away in droves . " The film was better accepted in the foreign released territories , prompting Madonna to defend herself , rather weakly , that her ideas were better accepted in Europe and Japan , rather than her home country . She added , " I think the movie did badly in America because I upstaged it with my tour . People were confused about the connection between the record , the tour and the movie because they all had the same title . I also think there are people who don 't want me to do well in both fields . I had to really fight to get any respect from the music business and now I guess there are some people who feel that I ought to be grateful for that respect and stick to music . " Nevertheless , Warner Bros. decided to release the film in home media in VHS on November 11 , 1987 , a decision not approved by Madonna . 
 Foley accepted the failure of the film saying , " I knew it was doomed before even filming started . The day before the first shoot , I sat in my hotel and looked to the script thinking , ' Damn , wish I could re @-@ write this whole thing . ' After the film released , my dad called me up saying ' you know The New York Times are calling it the worst film of the year . " He recalled that both he and Madonna chose to overlook the failure of the film , and remembered one incident when he met Madonna at a hotel lobby . " She just looked to me once and said , ' So it 's a flop right ? ' That 's the only time she ever mentioned the film . Even Sean also never mentioned it in front of her . " In another article in The New York Times , Vincent Canby noted that Madonna 's real personality is of a " knowing , shrewd , pragmatic young woman , a performer of invigorating energy who still looks a lot like Marilyn Monroe , even with short hair , but who has much more in common with the enthusiastic , unembarrassed , comic tartness of Jean Harlow , somehow let loose on the streets of New York in the 80 's . " However , he felt that Who 's That Girl failed to portray that image , leading to its failure . The first half of the film showed a different personality of Madonna , trying to be comical , which was not accepted by the public . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack from the film was released on July 21 , 1987 , by Sire Records , and contains four songs by Madonna , and others by her label mates Scritti Politti , Duncan Faure , Club Nouveau , Coati Mundi and Michael Davidson . It is considered a Madonna album by Warner Bros. Records since the majority of the songs are sung by her . Madonna began working on the soundtrack in December 1986 , and contacted Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray , both producers of her third studio album True Blue ( 1986 ) . She needed uptempo and downtempo songs for the soundtrack . The uptempo song , composed by Leonard , ended up being the title track for the film ; together , Madonna and Leonard also developed the downtempo ballad " The Look of Love " . Two more songs were composed for the film with Bray , the first being the dance @-@ y tune " Causing a Commotion " , and the other being " Can 't Stop " , a track inspired by Sixties Motown and the group Martha and the Vandellas . 
 After its release , Who 's That Girl soundtrack received mostly negative reviews from critics , who called it plain and incomplete , although citing the title track and " The Look of Love " as its highlights . The soundtrack was a commercial success , reaching the top ten of the album charts of the United States , Austria , Canada , France , Italy , New Zealand , Sweden and the United Kingdom , while topping the charts of Germany , and Billboard 's European Album chart . Worldwide , the album went on to sell six million copies . Three of the Madonna tracks were released as singles . The title track became her sixth number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , making her the first artist to accumulate six number @-@ one singles in the 1980s , and the first female performer to get that many number @-@ ones as a solo act . " Causing a Commotion " was the second single , and it reached number two on the Hot 100 , and the top ten of the charts of other nations . " The Look of Love " was a European market @-@ only release , reaching the top ten in United Kingdom . Another track , " Turn It Up " was a promotional release in United States , reaching the number 15 on the dance charts . 
 = Man of Science , Man of Faith = 
 " Man of Science , Man of Faith " is the first episode of the second season of Lost and the 26th episode overall . The episode was directed by Jack Bender and written by Damon Lindelof . It first aired on September 21 , 2005 , on ABC . The flashbacks focus on Jack Shephard 's struggle to heal Sarah , who would later become his wife . In real time , John Locke and Kate Austen decide to enter the now @-@ open hatch shaft . 
 While writing the season premiere , the producers decided to pick up the hatch storyline which was left hanging after season one 's finale " Exodus " , leaving the raft events to be explained in the following episode , " Adrift " . " Man of Science , Man of Faith " received positive reviews , and stands as the most @-@ watched episode of the series in North America , with 23 @.@ 47 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 A man ( Henry Ian Cusick ) wakes up from his bunk bed and immediately presses a few keys on what appears to be a late 1970s @-@ era computer . He then gets dressed , and begins his day as the camera moves about the surrounding rooms , which contain an assortment of objects from the 1960s to the present . He puts on some music , begins an exercise routine , has a shower , makes himself some breakfast , and injects himself with a vaccine . He is interrupted by an explosion , spurring the man to arm himself before using a telescope @-@ and @-@ mirror system . His gaze reveals the faces of Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) standing around the now @-@ open Hatch shaft . 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Jack encounters his future wife , Sarah ( Julie Bowen ) , who has arrived in his emergency room after a car crash . Jack saves Sarah 's life , but goes on to tell her that due to spinal cord injury , it is unlikely that Sarah will regain the ability to walk . 
 After being chastised by his father ( John Terry ) about his pessimistic bedside manner , Jack operates on Sarah , and goes running a Tour de stade . While running he falls , and meets another runner named Desmond , who tells him that he is training for a race around the world . Jack shares with Desmond how he failed Sarah , and Desmond advises him about his need to feel and provide more hope . When Jack returns to Sarah 's room , he discovers that she has experienced a miraculous recovery . 
 = = = On the island = = = 
 At the Hatch entry , Locke says that they should not wait for the sun to come up to enter the Hatch . Jack , on the other hand , feels that their entry should be delayed . At the same time , at the caves , Shannon Rutherford ( Maggie Grace ) and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) search the jungle for Walt 's ( Malcolm David Kelley ) dog , Vincent . During the search , Shannon has a vision of Walt , dripping wet and speaking incoherently . She talks about this with the rest of the survivors , but no one believes her . 
 Upon reaching the caves , Jack explains the situation to the survivors , promising them they will be all right along with Kate , as long as they stay together . Locke then appears , carrying cable and saying he is going into the hatch . Soon after , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) follows behind him . While Locke is easing her down the shaft , Kate realizes and mysteriously disappears during a sudden burst of light from within the Hatch . 
 Back at the caves , after informing the survivors why they went into the jungle and that Dr. Arzt ( Daniel Roebuck ) is dead , Jack decides that he is going after Kate and Locke . Upon reaching the Hatch , he finds no one there and rappels down the shaft on his own . While exploring , he comes across a painted mural , and a wall where the key hanging around his neck is pulled by a strong magnetic force . Finally , after being surprised by a bright light and loud music , he enters what appears to be an underground geodesic dome with computer equipment , including an Apple II Plus computer with its prompt glowing and its shift key relabeled execute . As Jack is about to use it , Locke appears and tells Jack not to touch it . After Jack raises the gun and asks where Kate is , Locke is revealed to be at gunpoint . The gunman threatens that he will shoot Locke if Jack does not surrender . Jack refuses , instead taunting Locke about his destiny . Finally , the gunman steps out and Jack seems to recognize him . The gunman is Desmond . 
 = = Production = = 
 While " Man of Science , Man of Faith " alludes to a quote in the previous episode where Locke describes himself as a man of faith and Jack as a man of science , writer Damon Lindelof stated that the episode has the title to imply that Jack is both , with the flashback making the empiricist " man of science " facing a miracle while treating a patient . The episode was written to focus on the opening of the hatch , so the other cliffhanger left in " Exodus " , the destruction of Michael 's boat and the kidnapping of his son Walt by the Others , would be explained in the second episode , " Adrift " . The cliffhanger also influenced the tone : the protagonists are expecting an attack by the Others , but the audience knows the Others are not coming since they were going for the boat instead . To make the episode accessible to new viewers , many instances of dialogue recap events of the first season . 
 The producers decided to start the episode inside The Swan because they considered the audience would expect to pick up from Locke and Jack looking into the hatch shaft , so the opening instead is filmed in a place that does not reveal its location or period - Jack Bender stated it made him remember a San Francisco apartment - until the explosion of the hatch . For the flashbacks , director Jack Bender decided to avoid making the hospital scenes similar to ER , filming mostly with handheld cameras to give a " spontaneous feel " to the scene . Sarah 's operation was filmed in an actual surgery room in Oahu , while Aloha Stadium in Honolulu is used for Jack and Desmond 's tour de stade . 
 Starting in this episode , the castaways start abandoning the caves , which the producers considered a location hard to film and " not aesthetically good " . The Swan would become a centerpiece location because of its mysteries and the commodities given to the protagonists , such as electricity and food . The station was designed to invoke modernism of the 1970s , similar to how Disneyland 's Tomorrowland evokes what was modern in the 1960s , but with an appearance that decayed after decades without maintenance . Foreshadowing the fact that the station is used for dangerous means , the design added the concrete wall with a magnetic force . The hatch shaft was completely computer generated with shots filmed using a greenscreen . 
 This is the first episode to feature the song " Make Your Own Kind of Music " by Mama Cass , which is heard in many later episodes . Lindelof picked the song as it reminded him of his childhood , as his mother " used to listen to on Sunday mornings , when she ’ d put on music , vacuum and cry . " Lindelof also declared that the song " lyrically felt right " , and had a haunting feeling due to Mama Cass ' personal history . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The season premiere hit a ratings high for the series , with 23 @.@ 47 million American viewers . The episode was third in the weekly audience ranking , behind CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and Desperate Housewives , and stands as the most watched episode of Lost . 
 Critical reviews were positive . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly was frustrated at the episode not revealing what happened to the raft characters and unveiling of so many new mysteries , but liked the writing and symbolism considering that " the whole enigmatic enterprise seemed grounded in rich layers of meaning " . TV Squad 's Keith McDuffee said he was " held in suspense " throughout the episode . Chris Carabott of IGN rated " Man of Science , Man of Faith " 9 @.@ 3 out of 10 , praising the flashbacks for being " edited incredibly well with the on island content " and Julie Bowen 's performance as Sarah . The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan described the episode as " a wonderfully paced , terrific return to form " . Ryan Mcgee of Zap2it considered the introduction in the hatch and Desmond 's scene with Jack at the stadium to be the highlights of the season premiere . 
 Director of photography Michael <unk> was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single @-@ Camera Series for this episode . IGN ranked " Man of Science , Man of Faith " the 18th best episode of Lost , while a similar list by Los Angeles Times ranked the episode 11th , saying it had the best Jack flashback and demonstrated " a show confident in itself and at the height of its powers " . 
 = Mumbai = 
 Mumbai ( / <unk> / ; also known as Bombay , the official name until 1995 ) is the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra . It is the most populous city in India and the ninth most populous agglomeration in the world , with an estimated city population of 18 @.@ 4 million . Along with the neighbouring regions of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region , it is one of the most populous urban regions in the world and the <unk> most populous metropolitan area in India , with a population of 20 @.@ 7 million as of 2011 . Mumbai lies on the west coast of India and has a deep natural harbour . In 2009 , Mumbai was named an alpha world city . It is also the wealthiest city in India , and has the highest GDP of any city in South , West , or Central Asia . Mumbai has the highest number of billionaires and millionaires among all cities in India . 
 The seven islands that came to constitute Mumbai were home to communities of fishing colonies . For centuries , the islands were under the control of successive indigenous empires before being ceded to the Portuguese and subsequently to the British East India Company when in 1661 King Charles II married the Portuguese Catherine of Braganza , and as part of her dowry Charles received the ports of Tangier and seven islands of Bombay . During the mid @-@ 18th century , Bombay was reshaped by the Hornby Vellard project , which undertook reclamation of the area between the seven islands from the sea . Along with construction of major roads and railways , the reclamation project , completed in 1845 , transformed Bombay into a major seaport on the Arabian Sea . Bombay in the 19th century was characterised by economic and educational development . During the early 20th century it became a strong base for the Indian independence movement . Upon India 's independence in 1947 the city was incorporated into Bombay State . In 1960 , following the Samyukta Maharashtra movement , a new state of Maharashtra was created with Bombay as the capital . 
 Mumbai is the financial , commercial and entertainment capital of India . It is also one of the world 's top ten centres of commerce in terms of global financial flow , generating 6 @.@ 16 % of India 's GDP and accounting for 25 % of industrial output , 70 % of maritime trade in India ( Mumbai Port Trust and <unk> ) , and 70 % of capital transactions to India 's economy . The city houses important financial institutions such as the Reserve Bank of India , the Bombay Stock Exchange , the National Stock Exchange of India , the SEBI and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations . It is also home to some of India 's premier scientific and nuclear institutes like BARC , <unk> , <unk> , TIFR , <unk> , <unk> , and the Department of Atomic Energy . The city also houses India 's Hindi ( Bollywood ) and Marathi film and television industry . Mumbai 's business opportunities , as well as its potential to offer a higher standard of living , attract migrants from all over India , making the city a melting pot of many communities and cultures . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Mumbai is derived from <unk> or Mahā @-@ <unk> — the name of the patron goddess ( Kuladevi ) Mumbadevi of the native Agri , Koli and <unk> Kshatriya communities — and ā 'ī meaning " mother " in the Marathi language , which is the mother tongue of the <unk> and the official language of Maharashtra . 
 The oldest known names for the city are <unk> and <unk> ; these are sometimes still used . Ali Muhammad Khan , in the <unk> @-@ i @-@ <unk> ( 1507 ) referred to the city as <unk> . In 1508 , Portuguese writer Gaspar Correia used the name Bombaim , in his <unk> da Índia ( " Legends of India " ) . This name possibly originated as the Old Portuguese phrase <unk> <unk> , meaning " good little bay " , and Bombaim is still commonly used in Portuguese . In 1516 , Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa used the name Tana @-@ <unk> : Tana appears to refer to the adjoining town of Thane and <unk> to Mumbadevi . 
 Other variations recorded in the 16th and the 17th centuries include : <unk> ( 1525 ) , Bombay ( 1538 ) , <unk> ( 1552 ) , <unk> ( 1552 ) , <unk> ( 1554 ) , <unk> ( 1563 ) , <unk> ( 1644 ) , <unk> ( 1666 ) , <unk> ( 1666 ) , <unk> ( 1676 ) , Boon Bay ( 1690 ) , and Bon Bahia . After the English gained possession of the city in the 17th century , the Portuguese name was anglicised as Bombay . 
 By the late 20th century , the city was referred to as Mumbai or <unk> in the Indian <unk> official languages of Marathi , Konkani , Gujarati , Kannada and Sindhi , and as <unk> in Hindi . The Government of India officially changed the English name to Mumbai in November 1995 . This came at the insistence of the Marathi nationalist Shiv Sena party , which had just won the Maharashtra state elections , and mirrored similar name changes across the country and particularly in Maharashtra . According to Slate magazine , " they argued that ' Bombay ' was a corrupted English version of ' Mumbai ' and an unwanted legacy of British colonial rule . " Slate also said " The push to rename Bombay was part of a larger movement to strengthen Marathi identity in the Maharashtra region . " While the city is still referred to as Bombay by some of its residents and by Indians from other regions , mention of the city by a name other than Mumbai has been controversial , resulting in emotional outbursts sometimes of a violently political nature . 
 A resident of Mumbai is called <unk> in the Marathi language , in which the suffix kar means resident of . The term has been in use for quite some time but it gained popularity after the official name change to Mumbai . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Mumbai is built on what was once an archipelago of seven islands : Bombay Island , Parel , Mazagaon , Mahim , Colaba , Worli , and Old Woman 's Island ( also known as Little Colaba ) . It is not exactly known when these islands were first inhabited . Pleistocene sediments found along the coastal areas around Kandivali in northern Mumbai suggest that the islands were inhabited since the Stone Age . Perhaps at the beginning of the Common era ( 2 @,@ 000 years ago ) , or possibly earlier , they came to be occupied by the Koli fishing community . 
 In the third century BCE , the islands formed part of the Maurya Empire , during its expansion in the south , ruled by the Buddhist emperor , Ashoka of Magadha . The Kanheri Caves in Borivali were excavated in the mid @-@ third century BCE , and served as an important centre of Buddhism in Western India during ancient Times . The city then was known as <unk> ( Ancient Greek : A Cluster of Seven Islands ) to the Greek geographer Ptolemy in 150 CE . The Mahakali Caves in Andheri were built between the 1st century BCE and the 6th century CE . 
 Between the second century BCE and ninth century CE , the islands came under the control of successive indigenous dynasties : Satavahanas , Western <unk> , Abhiras , Vakatakas , Kalachuris , Konkan Mauryas , Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas , before being ruled by the Silhara dynasty from 810 to 1260 . Some of the oldest edifices in the city built during this period are , Jogeshwari Caves ( between 520 and 525 ) , Elephanta Caves ( between the sixth to seventh century ) , Walkeshwar Temple ( 10th century ) , and Banganga Tank ( 12th century ) . 
 King Bhimdev founded his kingdom in the region in the late 13th century and established his capital in Mahikawati ( present day Mahim ) . The Pathare Prabhus , among the earliest known settlers of the city , were brought to Mahikawati from Saurashtra in Gujarat around 1298 by Bhimdev . The Delhi Sultanate annexed the islands in 1347 – 48 and controlled it until 1407 . During this time , the islands were administered by the Muslim Governors of Gujarat , who were appointed by the Delhi Sultanate . 
 The islands were later governed by the independent Gujarat Sultanate , which was established in 1407 . The Sultanate 's patronage led to the construction of many mosques , prominent being the Haji Ali Dargah in Worli , built in honour of the Muslim saint Haji Ali in 1431 . From 1429 to 1431 , the islands were a source of contention between the Gujarat Sultanate and the Bahamani Sultanate of Deccan . In 1493 , Bahadur Khan Gilani of the Bahamani Sultanate attempted to conquer the islands but was defeated . 
 = = = Portuguese and British rule = = = 
 The Mughal Empire , founded in 1526 , was the dominant power in the Indian subcontinent during the mid @-@ 16th century . Growing apprehensive of the power of the Mughal emperor Humayun , Sultan Bahadur Shah of the Gujarat Sultanate was obliged to sign the Treaty of Bassein with the Portuguese Empire on 23 December 1534 . According to the treaty , the seven islands of Bombay , the nearby strategic town of Bassein and its dependencies were offered to the Portuguese . The territories were later surrendered on 25 October 1535 . 
 The Portuguese were actively involved in the foundation and growth of their Roman Catholic religious orders in Bombay . They called the islands by various names , which finally took the written form Bombaim . The islands were leased to several Portuguese officers during their regime . The Portuguese Franciscans and Jesuits built several churches in the city , prominent being the St. Michael 's Church at Mahim ( 1534 ) , St. John the Baptist Church at Andheri ( 1579 ) , St. Andrew 's Church at Bandra ( 1580 ) , and Gloria Church at <unk> ( 1632 ) . The Portuguese also built several fortifications around the city like the Bombay Castle , Castella de Aguada ( Castelo da Aguada or Bandra Fort ) , and Madh Fort . The English were in constant struggle with the Portuguese vying for hegemony over Bombay , as they recognised its strategic natural harbour and its natural isolation from land @-@ attacks . By the middle of the 17th century the growing power of the Dutch Empire forced the English to acquire a station in western India . On 11 May 1661 , the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza , daughter of King John IV of Portugal , placed the islands in possession of the English Empire , as part of Catherine 's dowry to Charles . However , Salsette , Bassein , Mazagaon , Parel , Worli , Sion , Dharavi , and Wadala still remained under Portuguese possession . From 1665 to 1666 , the English managed to acquire Mahim , Sion , Dharavi , and Wadala . 
 In accordance with the Royal Charter of 27 March 1668 , England leased these islands to the English East India Company in 1668 for a sum of £ 10 per annum . The population quickly rose from 10 @,@ 000 in 1661 , to 60 @,@ 000 in 1675 . The islands were subsequently attacked by Yakut Khan , the Siddi admiral of the Mughal Empire , in October 1672 , <unk> van Goen , the Governor @-@ General of Dutch India on 20 February 1673 , and Siddi admiral Sambal on 10 October 1673 . 
 In 1687 , the English East India Company transferred its headquarters from Surat to Bombay . The city eventually became the headquarters of the Bombay Presidency . Following the transfer , Bombay was placed at the head of all the Company 's establishments in India . Towards the end of the 17th century , the islands again suffered incursions from Yakut Khan in 1689 – 90 . The Portuguese presence ended in Bombay when the Marathas under Peshwa Baji Rao I captured Salsette in 1737 , and Bassein in 1739 . By the middle of the 18th century , Bombay began to grow into a major trading town , and received a huge influx of migrants from across India . Later , the British occupied Salsette on 28 December 1774 . With the Treaty of Surat ( 1775 ) , the British formally gained control of Salsette and Bassein , resulting in the First Anglo @-@ Maratha War . The British were able to secure Salsette from the Marathas without violence through the Treaty of Purandar ( 1776 ) , and later through the Treaty of <unk> ( 1782 ) , signed to settle the outcome of the First Anglo @-@ Maratha War . 
 From 1782 onwards , the city was reshaped with large @-@ scale civil engineering projects aimed at merging all the seven islands into a single amalgamated mass . This project , known as Hornby Vellard , was completed by 1784 . In 1817 , the British East India Company under Mountstuart Elphinstone defeated Baji Rao II , the last of the Maratha Peshwa in the Battle of Khadki . Following his defeat , almost the whole of the Deccan came under British suzerainty , and was incorporated into the Bombay Presidency . The success of the British campaign in the Deccan marked the liberation of Bombay from all attacks by native powers . 
 By 1845 , the seven islands coalesced into a single landmass by the Hornby Vellard project via large scale land reclamation . On 16 April 1853 , India 's first passenger railway line was established , connecting Bombay to the neighbouring town of Thana ( now Thane ) . During the American Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) , the city became the world 's chief cotton @-@ trading market , resulting in a boom in the economy that subsequently enhanced the city 's stature . 
 The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 transformed Bombay into one of the largest seaports on the Arabian Sea . In September 1896 , Bombay was hit by a bubonic plague epidemic where the death toll was estimated at 1 @,@ 900 people per week . About 850 @,@ 000 people fled Bombay and the textile industry was adversely affected . As the capital of the Bombay Presidency , the city witnessed the Indian independence movement , with the Quit India Movement in 1942 and The Royal Indian Navy Mutiny in 1946 being its most notable events . 
 = = = Independent India = = = 
 After India 's independence in 1947 , the territory of the Bombay Presidency retained by India was restructured into Bombay State . The area of Bombay State increased , after several erstwhile princely states that joined the Indian union were integrated into the state . Subsequently , the city became the capital of Bombay State . On April 1950 , Municipal limits of Bombay were expanded by merging the Bombay Suburban District and Bombay City to form the Greater Bombay Municipal Corporation . 
 The Samyukta Maharashtra movement to create a separate Maharashtra state including Bombay was at its height in the 1950s . In the Lok Sabha discussions in 1955 , the Congress party demanded that the city be constituted as an autonomous city @-@ state . The States Reorganisation Committee recommended a bilingual state for Maharashtra – Gujarat with Bombay as its capital in its 1955 report . Bombay Citizens ' Committee , an advocacy group of leading Gujarati industrialists lobbied for Bombay 's independent status . 
 Following protests during the movement in which 105 people lost their lives in clashes with the police , Bombay State was reorganised on linguistic lines on 1 May 1960 . Gujarati @-@ speaking areas of Bombay State were partitioned into the state of Gujarat . Maharashtra State with Bombay as its capital was formed with the merger of Marathi @-@ speaking areas of Bombay State , eight districts from Central Provinces and Berar , five districts from Hyderabad State , and numerous princely states enclosed between them . As a memorial to the martyrs of the Samyukta Maharashtra movement , Flora Fountain was renamed as <unk> Chowk ( Martyr 's Square ) , and a memorial was erected . 
 The following decades saw massive expansion of the city and its suburbs . In the late 1960s , Nariman Point and Cuffe Parade were reclaimed and developed . The Bombay Metropolitan Region Development Authority ( <unk> ) was established on 26 January 1975 by the Government of Maharashtra as an apex body for planning and co @-@ ordination of development activities in the Bombay metropolitan region . In August 1979 , a sister township of New Bombay was founded by the City and Industrial Development Corporation ( <unk> ) across the Thane and Raigad districts to help the dispersal and control of Bombay 's population . The textile industry in Bombay largely disappeared after the widespread 1982 Great Bombay Textile Strike , in which nearly 250 @,@ 000 workers in more than 50 textile mills went on strike . Mumbai 's defunct cotton mills have since become the focus of intense redevelopment . 
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Port , which currently handles 55 – 60 % of India 's containerised cargo , was commissioned on 26 May 1989 across the creek at <unk> Sheva with a view to de @-@ congest Bombay Harbour and to serve as a hub port for the city . The geographical limits of Greater Bombay were coextensive with municipal limits of Greater Bombay . On 1 October 1990 , the Greater Bombay district was bifurcated to form two revenue districts namely , Bombay City and Bombay Suburban , though they continued to be administered by same Municipal Administration . 
 From 1990 to 2010 , there has been an increase in violence in the hitherto largely peaceful city . Following the demolition of the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya , the city was rocked by the Hindu @-@ Muslim riots of 1992 – 93 in which more than 1 @,@ 000 people were killed . On 12 March 1993 , a series of 13 co @-@ ordinated bombings at several city landmarks by Islamic extremists and the Bombay underworld resulted in 257 deaths and over 700 injuries . In 2006 , 209 people were killed and over 700 injured when seven bombs exploded on the city 's commuter trains . In 2008 , a series of ten coordinated attacks by armed terrorists for three days resulted in 173 deaths , 308 injuries , and severe damage to several heritage landmarks and prestigious hotels . The blasts that occurred at the Opera House , Zaveri Bazaar , and Dadar on 13 July 2011 were the latest in the series of terrorist attacks in Mumbai . 
 Mumbai is the commercial capital of India and has evolved into a global financial hub . For several decades it has been the home of India 's main financial services , and a focus for both infrastructure development and private investment . From being an ancient fishing community and a colonial centre of trade , Mumbai has become South Asia 's largest city and home of the world 's most prolific film industry . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Mumbai consists of two distinct regions : Mumbai City district and Mumbai Suburban district , which form two separate revenue districts of Maharashtra . The city district region is also commonly referred to as the Island City or South Mumbai . The total area of Mumbai is 603 @.@ 4 km2 ( 233 sq mi ) . Of this , the island city spans 67 @.@ 79 km2 ( 26 sq mi ) , while the suburban district spans 370 km2 ( 143 sq mi ) , together accounting for 437 @.@ 71 km2 ( 169 sq mi ) under the administration of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai ( MCGM ) . The remaining areas belong to various Defence establishments , the Mumbai Port Trust , the Atomic Energy Commission and the Borivali National Park , which are out of the jurisdiction of the MCGM . 
 Mumbai lies at the mouth of the <unk> River on the western coast of India , in the coastal region known as the Konkan . It sits on Salsette Island ( <unk> Island ) , which it partially shares with the Thane district . Mumbai is bounded by the Arabian Sea to the west . Many parts of the city lie just above sea level , with elevations ranging from 10 m ( 33 ft ) to 15 m ( 49 ft ) ; the city has an average elevation of 14 m ( 46 ft ) . Northern Mumbai ( Salsette ) is hilly , and the highest point in the city is 450 m ( 1 @,@ 476 ft ) at Salsette in the Powai – Kanheri ranges . The Sanjay Gandhi National Park ( Borivali National Park ) is located partly in the Mumbai suburban district , and partly in the Thane district , and it extends over an area of 103 @.@ 09 km2 ( 39 @.@ 80 sq mi ) . 
 Apart from the <unk> Dam , there are six major lakes that supply water to the city : Vihar , Lower Vaitarna , Upper Vaitarna , Tulsi , <unk> and Powai . Tulsi Lake and Vihar Lake are located in <unk> National Park , within the city 's limits . The supply from Powai lake , also within the city limits , is used only for agricultural and industrial purposes . Three small rivers , the Dahisar River , <unk> ( or <unk> ) and <unk> ( or <unk> ) originate within the park , while the polluted <unk> River originates from Tulsi Lake and gathers water overflowing from Vihar and Powai Lakes . The coastline of the city is indented with numerous creeks and bays , stretching from the Thane creek on the eastern to Madh Marve on the western front . The eastern coast of Salsette Island is covered with large mangrove swamps , rich in biodiversity , while the western coast is mostly sandy and rocky . 
 Soil cover in the city region is predominantly sandy due to its proximity to the sea . In the suburbs , the soil cover is largely alluvial and loamy . The underlying rock of the region is composed of black Deccan basalt flows , and their acidic and basic variants dating back to the late Cretaceous and early Eocene eras . Mumbai sits on a seismically active zone owing to the presence of 23 fault lines in the vicinity . The area is classified as a Seismic Zone III region , which means an earthquake of up to magnitude 6 @.@ 5 on the Richter scale may be expected . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Mumbai has a tropical climate , specifically a tropical wet and dry climate ( Aw ) under the Köppen climate classification , with seven months of dryness and peak of rains in July . The cooler season from December to February is followed by the summer season from March to June . The period from June to about the end of September constitutes the south @-@ west monsoon season , and October and November form the post @-@ monsoon season . 
 Between June and September , the south west monsoon rains lash the city . Pre @-@ monsoon showers are received in May . Occasionally , north @-@ east monsoon showers occur in October and November . The maximum annual rainfall ever recorded was 3 @,@ 452 mm ( 136 in ) for 1954 . The highest rainfall recorded in a single day was 944 mm ( 37 in ) on 26 July 2005 . The average total annual rainfall is 2 @,@ 146 @.@ 6 mm ( 85 in ) for the Island City , and 2 @,@ 457 mm ( 97 in ) for the suburbs . 
 The average annual temperature is 27 @.@ 2 ° C ( 81 ° F ) , and the average annual precipitation is 2 @,@ 167 mm ( 85 in ) . In the Island City , the average maximum temperature is 31 @.@ 2 ° C ( 88 ° F ) , while the average minimum temperature is 23 @.@ 7 ° C ( 75 ° F ) . In the suburbs , the daily mean maximum temperature range from 29 @.@ 1 ° C ( 84 ° F ) to 33 @.@ 3 ° C ( 92 ° F ) , while the daily mean minimum temperature ranges from 16 @.@ 3 ° C ( 61 ° F ) to 26 @.@ 2 ° C ( 79 ° F ) . The record high is 42 @.@ 2 ° C ( 108 ° F ) set on 14 April 1952 , and the record low is 7 @.@ 4 ° C ( 45 ° F ) set on 27 January 1962 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Mumbai is India 's largest city ( by population ) and is the financial and commercial capital of the country as it generates 6 @.@ 16 % of the total GDP . It serves as an economic hub of India , contributing 10 % of factory employment , 25 % of industrial output , 33 % of income tax collections , 60 % of customs duty collections , 20 % of central excise tax collections , 40 % of India 's foreign trade and ₹ 4 @,@ 000 crore ( US $ 590 million ) in corporate taxes . Along with the rest of India , Mumbai has witnessed an economic boom since the liberalisation of 1991 , the finance boom in the mid @-@ nineties and the IT , export , services and outsourcing boom in 2000s . Although Mumbai had prominently figured as the hub of economic activity of India in the 1990s , the Mumbai Metropolitan Region is presently witnessing a reduction in its contribution to India 's GDP . 
 As of October 2015 , Mumbai 's GDP is $ 278 billion ( from 2014 ) . and its per @-@ capita ( PPP ) income in 2009 was ₹ 486 @,@ 000 ( US $ 7 @,@ 200 ) , which is almost three times the national average . Its nominal per capita income is ₹ 125 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 900 ) , ( US $ 2 @,@ 094 ) . Many of India 's numerous conglomerates ( including Larsen and Toubro , State Bank of India ( SBI ) , Life Insurance Corporation of India ( LIC ) , Tata Group , <unk> and Reliance ) , and five of the Fortune Global 500 companies are based in Mumbai . This is facilitated by the presence of the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) , the Bombay Stock Exchange ( BSE ) , the National Stock Exchange of India ( <unk> ) , and financial sector regulators such as the Securities and Exchange Board of India ( SEBI ) . 
 Until the 1970s , Mumbai owed its prosperity largely to textile mills and the seaport , but the local economy has since then diversified to include finance , engineering , diamond @-@ polishing , healthcare and information technology . The key sectors contributing to the city 's economy are : finance , gems & jewellery , leather processing , IT and ITES , textiles , and entertainment . Nariman Point and Bandra Kurla Complex ( BKC ) are Mumbai 's major financial centres . Despite competition from Bangalore , Hyderabad and Pune , Mumbai has carved a niche for itself in the information technology industry . The Santacruz Electronic Export Processing Zone ( <unk> ) and the International <unk> Park ( Navi Mumbai ) offer excellent facilities to IT companies . 
 State and central government employees make up a large percentage of the city 's workforce . Mumbai also has a large unskilled and semi @-@ skilled self @-@ employed population , who primarily earn their livelihood as hawkers , taxi drivers , mechanics and other such blue collar professions . The port and shipping industry is well established , with Mumbai Port being one of the oldest and most significant ports in India . Dharavi , in central Mumbai , has an increasingly large recycling industry , processing recyclable waste from other parts of the city ; the district has an estimated 15 @,@ 000 single @-@ room factories . 
 Mumbai has been ranked sixth among top ten global cities on the billionaire count , 48th on the Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index 2008 , seventh in the list of " Top Ten Cities for Billionaires " by Forbes magazine ( April 2008 ) , and first in terms of those billionaires ' average wealth . As of 2008 , the Globalization and World Cities Study Group ( GaWC ) has ranked Mumbai as an " Alpha world city " , third in its categories of Global cities . Mumbai is the third most expensive office market in the world , and was ranked among the fastest cities in the country for business startup in 2009 . 
 = = Civic administration = = 
 Greater Mumbai , an area of 603 square kilometres ( 233 sq mi ) , consisting of the Mumbai City and Mumbai Suburban districts , extends from Colaba in the south , to Mulund and Dahisar in the north , and <unk> in the east . Its population as per the 2011 census was 12 @,@ 442 @,@ 373 . 
 It is administered by the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai ( MCGM ) ( sometimes referred to as the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation ) , formerly known as the Bombay Municipal Corporation ( BMC ) . The MCGM is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis . The Mayor is chosen through indirect election by the councillors from among themselves for a term of two and half years . 
 The Municipal Commissioner is the chief Executive Officer and head of the executive arm of the Municipal Corporation . All executive powers are vested in the Municipal Commissioner who is an Indian Administrative Service ( IAS ) officer appointed by the state government . Although the Municipal Corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city , it is the Commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies . The Commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute . The powers of the Commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the Corporation or the Standing Committee . 
 The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai was ranked 9th out of 21 Cities for best governance & administrative practices in India in 2014 . It scored 3 @.@ 5 on 10 compared to the national average of 3 @.@ 3 . 
 The two revenue districts of Mumbai come under the jurisdiction of a District Collector . The Collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the Central Government , and oversee the national elections held in the city . 
 The Mumbai Police is headed by a Police Commissioner , who is an Indian Police Service ( IPS ) officer . The Mumbai Police is a division of the Maharashtra Police , under the state Home Ministry . The city is divided into seven police zones and seventeen traffic police zones , each headed by a Deputy Commissioner of Police . The Traffic Police is a semi @-@ autonomous body under the Mumbai Police . The Mumbai Fire Brigade , under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporation , is headed by the Chief Fire Officer , who is assisted by four Deputy Chief Fire Officers and six Divisional Officers . 
 Mumbai is the seat of the Bombay High Court , which exercises jurisdiction over the states of Maharashtra and Goa , and the Union Territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli . Mumbai also has two lower courts , the Small Causes Court for civil matters , and the Sessions Court for criminal cases . Mumbai also has a special Terrorist and Disruptive Activities ( <unk> ) court for people accused of conspiring and abetting acts of terrorism in the city . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Mumbai had been a traditional stronghold and birthplace of the Indian National Congress , also known as the Congress Party . The first session of the Indian National Congress was held in Bombay from 28 – 31 December 1885 . The city played host to the Indian National Congress six times during its first 50 years , and became a strong base for the Indian independence movement during the 20th century . 
 The 1960s saw the rise of regionalist politics in Bombay , with the formation of the Shiv Sena on 19 June 1966 , out of a feeling of resentment about the relative marginalisation of the native Marathi people in Bombay . Shiv Sena switched from ' Marathi Cause ' to larger ' Hindutva Cause ' in 1985 and joined hands with <unk> Janata Party ( BJP ) in same year . The Congress had dominated the politics of Bombay from independence until the early 1980s , when the Shiv Sena won the 1985 Bombay Municipal Corporation elections . 
 In 1989 , the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , a major national political party , forged an electoral alliance with the Shiv Sena to dislodge the Congress in the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections . In 1999 , several members left the Congress to form the Nationalist Congress Party ( NCP ) but later allied with the Congress as part of an alliance known as the Democratic Front . Currently , other parties such as Maharashtra Navnirman Sena ( MNS ) , Samajwadi Party ( SP ) , Bahujan Samaj Party ( BSP ) , and several independent candidates also contest elections in the city . 
 In the Indian national elections held every five years , Mumbai is represented by six parliamentary constituencies : North , North West , North East , North Central , South Central , and South . A Member of parliament ( MP ) to the Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian Parliament , is elected from each of the parliamentary constituencies . In the 2014 national elections , all six parliamentary constituencies were won by the BJP and Shiv Sena in alliance , with both parties winning three seats each . 
 In the Maharashtra state assembly elections held every five years , Mumbai is represented by 36 assembly constituencies . A Member of the Legislative Assembly ( MLA ) to the Maharashtra Vidhan Sabha ( Legislative Assembly ) is elected from each of the assembly constituencies . In the 2014 state assembly elections , out of the 36 assembly constituencies , 15 were won by the BJP , 14 by the Shiv Sena and 5 by the Congress . 
 Elections are also held every five years to elect corporators to power in the MCGM . The Corporation comprises 227 directly elected Councillors representing the 24 municipal wards , five nominated Councillors having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration , and a Mayor whose role is mostly ceremonial . In the 2012 municipal corporation elections , out of the 227 seats , the Shiv Sena @-@ BJP alliance secured 107 seats , holding power with the support of independent candidates in the MCGM , while the Congress @-@ NCP alliance bagged 64 seats . The tenure of the Mayor , Deputy Mayor , and Municipal Commissioner is two and a half years . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Public transport = = = 
 Public transport systems in Mumbai include the Mumbai Suburban Railway , Monorail , Metro , Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport ( BEST ) buses , black @-@ and @-@ yellow meter taxis , auto rickshaws and ferries . Suburban railway and BEST bus services together accounted for about 88 % of the passenger traffic in 2008 . Auto rickshaws are allowed to operate only in the suburban areas of Mumbai , while taxis are allowed to operate throughout Mumbai , but generally operate in South Mumbai . Taxis and rickshaws in Mumbai are required by law to run on compressed natural gas ( CNG ) , and are a convenient , economical , and easily available means of transport . 
 = = = = Rail = = = = 
 The Mumbai Suburban Railway , popularly referred to as Locals forms the backbone of the city 's transport system . It is operated by the Central Railway and Western Railway zones of the Indian Railways . Mumbai 's suburban rail systems carried a total of 6 @.@ 3 million passengers every day in 2007 , which is more than half of the Indian Railways daily carrying capacity . Trains are overcrowded during peak hours , with nine @-@ car trains of rated capacity 1 @,@ 700 passengers , actually carrying around 4 @,@ 500 passengers at peak hours . The Mumbai rail network is spread at an expanse of 319 route kilometres . 191 rakes ( train @-@ sets ) of 9 car and 12 car composition are utilised to run a total of 2 @,@ 226 train services in the city . 
 The Mumbai Monorail and Mumbai Metro have been built and are being extended in phases to relieve overcrowding on the existing network . The Monorail opened in early February 2014 . The first line of the Mumbai Metro opened in early June 2014 . 
 Mumbai is the headquarters of two zones of the Indian Railways : the Central Railway ( CR ) headquartered at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus ( formerly Victoria Terminus ) , and the Western Railway ( WR ) headquartered at Churchgate . Mumbai is also well connected to most parts of India by the Indian Railways . Long @-@ distance trains originate from Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus , Dadar , Lokmanya Tilak Terminus , Mumbai Central , Bandra Terminus , Andheri and Borivali . 
 = = = = Bus = = = = 
 Mumbai 's bus services carried over 5 @.@ 5 million passengers per day in 2008 , which dropped to 2 @.@ 8 million in 2015 . Public buses run by BEST cover almost all parts of the metropolis , as well as parts of Navi Mumbai , Mira @-@ <unk> and Thane . The BEST operates a total of 4 @,@ 608 buses with CCTV cameras installed , ferrying 4 @.@ 5 million passengers daily over 390 routes . Its fleet consists of single @-@ decker , double @-@ decker , vestibule , low @-@ floor , disabled @-@ friendly , air @-@ conditioned and Euro III compliant diesel and compressed natural gas powered buses . BEST introduced air @-@ conditioned buses in 1998 . BEST buses are red in colour , based originally on the Routemaster buses of London . Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation ( MSRTC , also known as ST ) buses provide intercity transport connecting Mumbai with other towns and cities of Maharashtra and nearby states . The Navi Mumbai Municipal Transport ( <unk> ) and Thane Municipal Transport ( TMT ) also operate their buses in Mumbai , connecting various nodes of Navi Mumbai and Thane to parts of Mumbai . 
 Buses are generally favoured for commuting short to medium distances , while train fares are more economical for longer distance commutes . 
 The Mumbai Darshan is a tourist bus service which explores numerous tourist attractions in Mumbai . Bus Rapid Transit System ( <unk> ) lanes have been planned throughout Mumbai . Though 88 % of the city 's commuters travel by public transport , Mumbai still continues to struggle with traffic congestion . Mumbai 's transport system has been categorised as one of the most congested in the world . 
 = = = = Water = = = = 
 Water transport in Mumbai consists of ferries , hovercrafts and catamarans . Services are provided by both government agencies as well as private partners . Hovercraft services plied briefly in the late 1990s between the Gateway of India and CBD <unk> in Navi Mumbai . They were subsequently scrapped due to lack of adequate infrastructure . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 Mumbai is served by National Highway 3 , National Highway 4 , National Highway 8 , National Highway 17 and National Highway 222 of India 's National Highways system . The Mumbai @-@ Pune Expressway was the first expressway built in India . The Eastern Freeway was opened in 2013 . The Mumbai Nashik Expressway , Mumbai @-@ Vadodara Expressway , are under construction . The Bandra @-@ Worli Sea Link bridge , along with Mahim Causeway , links the island city to the western suburbs . The three major road arteries of the city are the Eastern Express Highway from Sion to Thane , the Sion Panvel Expressway from Sion to Panvel and the Western Express Highway from Bandra to Dahisar . Mumbai has approximately 1 @,@ 900 km ( 1 @,@ 181 mi ) of roads . There are five tolled entry points to the city by road . 
 Mumbai had about 721 @,@ 000 private vehicles as of March 2014 , 56 @,@ 459 black and yellow taxis as of 2005 , and 106 @,@ 000 auto rickshaws , as of May 2013 . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport ( formerly Sahar International Airport ) is the main aviation hub in the city and the second busiest airport in India in terms of passenger traffic . It handled 36 @.@ 6 million passengers and 694 @,@ 300 tonnes of cargo during FY 2014 – 2015 . An upgrade plan was initiated in 2006 , targeted at increasing the capacity of the airport to handle up to 40 million passengers annually and the new terminal T2 was opened in February 2014 . 
 The proposed Navi Mumbai International Airport to be built in the <unk> @-@ Panvel area has been sanctioned by the Indian Government and will help relieve the increasing traffic burden on the existing airport . 
 The Juhu Aerodrome was India 's first airport , and now hosts the Bombay Flying Club and a heliport operated by state @-@ owned Pawan Hans . 
 = = = Sea = = = 
 Mumbai is served by two major ports , Mumbai Port Trust and Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust , which lies just across the creek in Navi Mumbai . Mumbai Port has one of the best natural harbours in the world , and has extensive wet and dry dock accommodation facilities . Jawaharlal Nehru Port , commissioned on 26 May 1989 , is the busiest and most modern major port in India . It handles 55 – 60 % of the country 's total containerised cargo . Ferries from Ferry Wharf in Mazagaon allow access to islands near the city . 
 The city is also the headquarters of the Western Naval Command , and also an important base for the Indian Navy . 
 = = Utility services = = 
 Under colonial rule , tanks were the only source of water in Mumbai , with many localities having been named after them . The MCGM supplies potable water to the city from six lakes , most of which comes from the Tulsi and Vihar lakes . The <unk> lake supplies water to the western suburbs and parts of the island city along the Western Railway . The water is filtered at Bhandup , which is Asia 's largest water filtration plant . India 's first underground water tunnel was completed in Mumbai to supply water to the Bhandup filtration plant . 
 About 700 million litres of water , out of a daily supply of 3500 million litres , is lost by way of water thefts , illegal connections and leakages , per day in Mumbai . Almost all of Mumbai 's daily refuse of 7 @,@ 800 metric tonnes , of which 40 metric tonnes is plastic waste , is transported to dumping grounds in Gorai in the northwest , Mulund in the northeast , and to the <unk> dumping ground in the east . Sewage treatment is carried out at Worli and Bandra , and disposed of by two independent marine outfalls of 3 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) and 3 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) at Bandra and Worli respectively . 
 Electricity is distributed by the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport ( BEST ) undertaking in the island city , and by Reliance Energy , Tata Power , and the Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co . Ltd ( <unk> ) in the suburbs . Consumption of electricity is growing faster than production capacity . Power supply cables are underground , which reduces <unk> , thefts and other losses . 
 Cooking gas is supplied in the form of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders sold by state @-@ owned oil companies , as well as through piped natural gas supplied by Mahanagar Gas Limited . 
 The largest telephone service provider is the state @-@ owned MTNL , which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular services up until 2000 , and provides fixed line as well as mobile WLL services . Mobile phone coverage is extensive , and the main service providers are Vodafone Essar , Airtel , MTNL , Loop Mobile , Reliance Communications , Idea Cellular and Tata Indicom . Both GSM and CDMA services are available in the city . Mumbai , along with the area served by telephone exchanges in Navi Mumbai and Kalyan is classified as a Metro telecom circle . Many of the above service providers also provide broadband internet and wireless internet access in Mumbai . As of 2014 , Mumbai had the highest number of internet users in India with 16 @.@ 4 million users . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The architecture of the city is a blend of Gothic Revival , Indo @-@ Saracenic , Art Deco , and other contemporary styles . Most of the buildings during the British period , such as the Victoria Terminus and Bombay University , were built in Gothic Revival style . Their architectural features include a variety of European influences such as German gables , Dutch roofs , Swiss timbering , Romance arches , Tudor casements , and traditional Indian features . There are also a few Indo @-@ Saracenic styled buildings such as the Gateway of India . Art Deco styled landmarks can be found along the Marine Drive and west of the Oval Maidan . Mumbai has the second largest number of Art Deco buildings in the world after Miami . In the newer suburbs , modern buildings dominate the landscape . Mumbai has by far the largest number of skyscrapers in India , with 956 existing buildings and 272 under construction as of 2009 . 
 The Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee ( <unk> ) , established in 1995 , formulates special regulations and by @-@ laws to assist in the conservation of the city 's heritage structures . Mumbai has two UNESCO World Heritage Sites , the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus and the Elephanta Caves . In the south of Mumbai , there are colonial @-@ era buildings and Soviet @-@ style offices . In the east are factories and some slums . On the West coast are former @-@ textile mills being demolished and skyscrapers built on top . There are 31 buildings taller than 100m , compared with 200 in Shanghai , 500 in Hong Kong and 500 in New York . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 census , the population of Mumbai was 12 @,@ 479 @,@ 608 . The population density is estimated to be about 20 @,@ 482 persons per square kilometre . The living space is <unk> metre per person . As Per 2011 census , Greater Mumbai , the area under the administration of the MCGM , has a literacy rate of 94 @.@ 7 % , higher than the national average of 86 @.@ 7 % . The number of slum @-@ dwellers is estimated to be 9 million , up from 6 million in 2001 , that is , 62 % of all Mumbaikars live in informal slums . 
 The sex ratio in 2011 was 838 females per 1 @,@ 000 males in the island city , 857 in the suburbs , and 848 as a whole in Greater Mumbai , all numbers lower than the national average of 914 females per 1 @,@ 000 males . The low sex ratio is partly because of the large number of male migrants who come to the city to work . 
 Residents of Mumbai call themselves Mumbaikar , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> . Mumbai has a large polyglot population like any other metropolitan city of India . Sixteen major languages of India are also spoken in Mumbai , most common being Marathi , Hindi , Gujarati and English . English is extensively spoken and is the principal language of the city 's white collar workforce . A colloquial form of Hindi , known as <unk> – a blend of Marathi , Hindi , Gujarati , Konkani , Urdu , Indian English and some invented words – is spoken on the streets . 
 Mumbai suffers from the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast growing cities in developing countries : widespread poverty and unemployment , poor public health and poor civic and educational standards for a large section of the population . With available land at a premium , Mumbai residents often reside in cramped , relatively expensive housing , usually far from workplaces , and therefore requiring long commutes on crowded mass transit , or clogged roadways . Many of them live in close proximity to bus or train stations although suburban residents spend significant time travelling southward to the main commercial district . Dharavi , Asia 's second largest slum ( if Karachi 's Orangi Town is counted as a single slum ) is located in central Mumbai and houses between 800 @,@ 000 and one million people in 2 @.@ 39 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 92 sq mi ) , making it one of the most densely populated areas on Earth with a population density of at least 334 @,@ 728 persons per square kilometre . With a literacy rate of 69 % , the slums in Mumbai are the most literate in India . 
 The number of migrants to Mumbai from outside Maharashtra during the 1991 – 2001 decade was 1 @.@ 12 million , which amounted to 54 @.@ 8 % of the net addition to the population of Mumbai . 
 The number of households in Mumbai is forecast to rise from 4 @.@ 2 million in 2008 to 6 @.@ 6 million in 2020 . The number of households with annual incomes of 2 million rupees will increase from 4 % to 10 % by 2020 , amounting to 660 @,@ 000 families . The number of households with incomes from 1 – 2 million rupees is also estimated to increase from 4 % to 15 % by 2020 . According to Report of Central Pollution Control Board ( <unk> ) 2016 Mumbai is the noisiest city in India before Lucknow , Hyderabad and Delhi . 
 = = = Ethnic groups and religion = = = 
 The religious groups represented in Mumbai as of 2011 include Hindus ( 65 @.@ 99 % ) , Muslims ( 20 @.@ 65 % ) , Buddhists ( 4 @.@ 85 % ) , Jains ( 4 @.@ 10 % ) , Christians ( 3 @.@ 27 % ) , Sikhs ( 0 @.@ 58 % ) , with Parsis and Jews making up the rest of the population . The linguistic / ethnic demographics are : Maharashtrians ( 42 % ) , Gujaratis ( 19 % ) , with the rest hailing from other parts of India . 
 Native Christians include East Indian Catholics , who were converted by the Portuguese during the 16th century , while Goan and Mangalorean Catholics also constitute a significant portion of the Christian community of the city . Jews settled in Bombay during the 18th century . The Bene Israeli Jewish community of Bombay , who migrated from the Konkan villages , south of Bombay , are believed to be the descendants of the Jews of Israel who were shipwrecked off the Konkan coast , probably in the year 175 BCE , during the reign of the Greek ruler , Antiochus IV Epiphanes . Mumbai is also home to the largest population of Parsi Zoroastrians in the world , numbering about 80 @,@ 000 . Parsis migrated to India from Pars ( Persia / Iran ) following the Muslim conquest of Persia in the seventh century . The oldest Muslim communities in Mumbai include the Dawoodi Bohras , Ismaili <unk> , and Konkani Muslims . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Mumbai 's culture is a blend of traditional festivals , food , music , and theatres . The city offers a cosmopolitan and diverse lifestyle with a variety of food , entertainment , and night life , available in a form and abundance comparable to that in other world capitals . Mumbai 's history as a major trading centre has led to a diverse range of cultures , religions , and cuisines coexisting in the city . This unique blend of cultures is due to the migration of people from all over India since the British period . 
 Mumbai is the birthplace of Indian cinema — Dadasaheb Phalke laid the foundations with silent movies followed by Marathi talkies — and the oldest film broadcast took place in the early 20th century . Mumbai also has a large number of cinema halls that feature Bollywood , Marathi and Hollywood movies . The Mumbai International Film Festival and the award ceremony of the Filmfare Awards , the oldest and prominent film awards given for Hindi film industry in India , are held in Mumbai . Despite most of the professional theatre groups that formed during the British Raj having disbanded by the 1950s , Mumbai has developed a thriving " theatre movement " tradition in Marathi , Hindi , English , and other regional languages . 
 Contemporary art is featured in both government @-@ funded art spaces and private commercial galleries . The government @-@ funded institutions include the Jehangir Art Gallery and the National Gallery of Modern Art . Built in 1833 , the Asiatic Society of Bombay is one of the oldest public libraries in the city . The Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu <unk> ( formerly The Prince of Wales Museum ) is a renowned museum in South Mumbai which houses rare ancient exhibits of Indian history . 
 Mumbai has a zoo named <unk> <unk> ( formerly Victoria Gardens ) , which also harbours a garden . The rich literary traditions of the city have been highlighted internationally by Booker Prize winners Salman Rushdie , Aravind <unk> . Marathi literature has been modernised in the works of Mumbai @-@ based authors such as Mohan Apte , Anant <unk> , and Gangadhar Gadgil , and is promoted through an annual Sahitya Akademi Award , a literary honour bestowed by India 's National Academy of Letters . 
 Mumbai residents celebrate both Western and Indian festivals . Diwali , Holi , Eid , Christmas , Navratri , Good Friday , Dussera , Moharram , Ganesh Chaturthi , Durga Puja and Maha Shivratri are some of the popular festivals in the city . The Kala <unk> Arts Festival is an exhibition of a world of arts that encapsulates works of artists in the fields of music , dance , theatre , and films . A week @-@ long annual fair known as Bandra Fair , starting on the following Sunday after 8 September , is celebrated by people of all faiths , to commemorate the Nativity of Mary , mother of Jesus , on 8 September . 
 The Banganga Festival is a two @-@ day music festival , held annually in the month of January , which is organised by the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation ( <unk> ) at the historic Banganga Tank in Mumbai . The Elephanta Festival — celebrated every February on the Elephanta Islands — is dedicated to classical Indian dance and music and attracts performers from across the country . Public holidays specific to the city and the state include Maharashtra Day on 1 May , to celebrate the formation of Maharashtra state on 1 May 1960 , and Gudi Padwa which is the New Year 's Day for Marathi people . 
 Beaches are a major tourist attraction in the city . The major beaches in Mumbai are <unk> Chowpatty , Juhu Beach , Dadar Chowpatty , Gorai Beach , Marve Beach , <unk> Beach , Madh Beach , Aksa Beach , and <unk> Beach . Most of the beaches are unfit for swimming , except <unk> Chowpatty and Juhu Beach . <unk> World is a theme park and amusement centre situated close to Gorai Beach , and includes Asia 's largest theme water park , Water Kingdom . Adlabs Imagica opened in April 2013 is located near the city of <unk> off the Mumbai @-@ Pune Expressway . 
 = = Media = = 
 Mumbai has numerous newspaper publications , television and radio stations . Marathi dailies enjoy the maximum readership share in the city and the top Marathi language newspapers are Maharashtra Times , <unk> , Lokmat , Loksatta , Mumbai <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Popular Marathi language magazines are <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> & Chitralekha . Popular English language newspapers published and sold in Mumbai include The Times of India , Mid @-@ day , Hindustan Times , DNA India , and The Indian Express . Newspapers are also printed in other Indian languages . Mumbai is home to Asia 's oldest newspaper , Bombay Samachar , which has been published in Gujarati since 1822 . Bombay <unk> , the first Marathi newspaper , was started by <unk> <unk> in Mumbai in 1832 . 
 Numerous Indian and international television channels can be watched in Mumbai through one of the Pay TV companies or the local cable television provider . The metropolis is also the hub of many international media corporations , with many news channels and print publications having a major presence . The national television broadcaster , Doordarshan , provides two free terrestrial channels , while three main cable networks serve most households . 
 The wide range of cable channels available includes Zee Marathi , Zee Talkies , <unk> Marathi , Star <unk> , Mi Marathi , DD Sahyadri ( All Marathi channels ) , news channels such as ABP Majha , IBN @-@ Lokmat , Zee 24 <unk> , sports channels like ESPN , Star Sports , National entertainment channels like Colors , Sony , Zee TV and Star Plus , business news channels like CNBC Awaaz , Zee Business , ET Now and Bloomberg UTV . News channels entirely dedicated to Mumbai include Sahara <unk> Mumbai . Zing a popular Bollywood gossip channel is also based out of Mumbai . Satellite television ( DTH ) has yet to gain mass acceptance , due to high installation costs . Prominent DTH entertainment services in Mumbai include Dish TV and Tata Sky . 
 There are twelve radio stations in Mumbai , with nine broadcasting on the FM band , and three All India Radio stations broadcasting on the AM band . Mumbai also has access to Commercial radio providers such as Sirius . The Conditional Access System ( CAS ) started by the Union Government in 2006 met a poor response in Mumbai due to competition from its sister technology Direct @-@ to @-@ Home ( DTH ) transmission service . 
 Bollywood , the Hindi film industry based in Mumbai , produces around 150 – 200 films every year . The name Bollywood is a blend of Bombay and Hollywood . The 2000s saw a growth in Bollywood 's popularity overseas . This led filmmaking to new heights in terms of quality , cinematography and innovative story lines as well as technical advances such as special effects and animation . Studios in Goregaon , including Film City , are the location for most movie sets . The city also hosts the Marathi film industry which has seen increased popularity in recent years , and TV production companies . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Schools = = = 
 Schools in Mumbai are either " municipal schools " ( run by the MCGM ) or private schools ( run by trusts or individuals ) , which in some cases receive financial aid from the government . The schools are affiliated with either of the following boards 
 Maharashtra State Board ( <unk> ) 
 The All @-@ India Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations ( CISCE ) 
 The National Institute of Open Schooling ( NIOS ) 
 The Central Board for Secondary Education ( CBSE ) 
 The International Baccalaureate ( IB ) 
 The International General Certificate of Secondary Education ( IGCSE ) . Marathi or English is the usual language of instruction . The government @-@ run public schools lack many facilities , but are the only option for poor residents who cannot afford the more expensive private schools . 
 The primary education system of the MCGM is the largest urban primary education system in Asia . The MCGM operates 1 @,@ 188 primary schools imparting primary education to 485 @,@ 531 students in eight languages ( Marathi , Hindi , Gujarati , Urdu , English , Tamil , Telugu , and Kannada ) . The MCGM also imparts secondary education to 55 @,@ 576 students through its 49 secondary schools . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 Under the 10 + 2 + 3 / 4 plan , students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll for two years in junior college , where they select one of three streams : arts , commerce , or science . This is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study , or a professional degree course , such as law , engineering and medicine . Most colleges in the city are affiliated with the University of Mumbai , one of the largest universities in the world in terms of the number of graduates . 
 The University Of Mumbai is one of the premier universities in India . It was ranked 41 among the Top 50 Engineering Schools of the world by America 's news broadcasting firm Business Insider in 2012 and was the only university in the list from the five emerging BRICS nations viz Brazil , Russia , India , China and South Africa . Moreover , the University of Mumbai was ranked 5th in the list of best Universities in India by India Today in 2013 and ranked at 62 in the QS BRICS University rankings for 2013 , a ranking of leading universities in the five BRICS countries ( Brazil , Russia , India , China and South Africa ) . Its strongest scores in the QS University Rankings : BRICS are for papers per faculty ( 8th ) , employer reputation ( 20th ) and citations per paper ( 28th ) . It was ranked 10th among the top Universities of India by QS in 2013 . With 7 of the top ten Indian Universities being purely science and technology universities , it was India 's 3rd best Multi Disciplinary University in the QS University ranking . 
 The Indian Institute of Technology ( Bombay ) , <unk> <unk> Technological Institute ( <unk> ) , University Institute of Chemical Technology ( <unk> ) which are India 's premier engineering and technology schools , and <unk> Women 's University are the other autonomous universities in Mumbai . <unk> <unk> Engineering College is the first and the oldest private engineering college affiliated to the federal University of Mumbai and is also pioneered to be the first institute in the city 's university to offer undergraduate level courses in Computer Engineering , Information Technology , Biomedical Engineering and Biotechnology . Grant Medical College established in 1845 and Seth G.S. Medical College are the leading medical institutes affiliated with Sir <unk> <unk> Group of Hospitals and KEM Hospital respectively . Mumbai is also home to National Institute of Industrial Engineering ( <unk> ) , Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies ( <unk> ) , Narsee <unk> Institute of Management Studies ( <unk> ) , S P Jain Institute of Management and Research , Tata Institute of Social Sciences ( <unk> ) and several other management schools . Government Law College and Sydenham College , respectively the oldest law and commerce colleges in India , are based in Mumbai . The Sir J. J. School of Art is Mumbai 's oldest art institution . 
 Mumbai is home to two prominent research institutions : the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research ( TIFR ) , and the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre ( BARC ) . The BARC operates <unk> , a 40 MW nuclear research reactor at their facility in Trombay . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Cricket is more popular than any other sport in the city . Due to a shortage of grounds , various modified versions ( generally referred to as gully cricket ) are played everywhere . Mumbai is also home to the Board of Control for Cricket in India ( BCCI ) and Indian Premier League ( IPL ) . The Mumbai cricket team represents the city in the Ranji Trophy and has won 40 titles , the most by any team . The city is also represented by the Mumbai Indians in the Indian Premier League . The city has two international cricket grounds , the Wankhede Stadium and the Brabourne Stadium . The first cricket test match in India was played in Mumbai at the Bombay Gymkhana . The biggest cricketing event to be staged in the city so far is the final of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup which was played at the Wankhede Stadium . Mumbai and London are the only two cities to have hosted both a World Cup final and the final of an ICC Champions Trophy which was played at the Brabourne Stadium in 2006 . 
 Football is another popular sport in the city , with the FIFA World Cup and the English Premier League being followed widely . In the Indian Super League , Mumbai City FC represents the city ; while in the I @-@ League ( matches in the city are played at the Cooperage Ground ) , the city is represented by two teams : Mumbai FC and Air @-@ India . When the Elite Football League of India was introduced in August 2011 , Mumbai was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season . Named the Mumbai Gladiators , the team 's first season was played in Pune in late 2012 , and it will be Mumbai 's first professional American football franchise . In Hockey , Mumbai is home to the Mumbai Marines and Mumbai Magicians in the World Series Hockey and Hockey India League respectively . Matches in the city are played at the Mahindra Hockey Stadium . 
 Rugby is another growing sport in Mumbai with league matches being held at the Bombay Gymkhana from June to November . 
 Every February , Mumbai holds derby races at the Mahalaxmi Racecourse . <unk> 's Derby is also held in February at the Turf Club in Mumbai . In March 2004 , the Mumbai Grand Prix was part of the F1 powerboat world championship , and the Force India F1 team car was unveiled in the city , in 2008 . The city is planning to build its own F1 track and various sites in the city were being chalked out , of which the authorities have planned to zero down on Marve @-@ Malad or Panvel @-@ Kalyan land . If approved , the track will be clubbed with a theme park and will spread over an area of some 160 to 200 ha ( 400 to 500 acres ) . In 2004 , the annual Mumbai Marathon was established as a part of " The Greatest Race on Earth " . Mumbai has also played host to the Kingfisher Airlines Tennis Open , an International Series tournament of the ATP World Tour , in 2006 and 2007 . 
 = Dennis Rodman = 
 Dennis Keith Rodman ( born May 13 , 1961 ) is an American retired professional basketball player , who played for the Detroit Pistons , San Antonio Spurs , Chicago Bulls , Los Angeles Lakers , and Dallas Mavericks in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was nicknamed " The Worm " and was known for his fierce defensive and rebounding abilities . 
 Rodman played at the small forward position in his early years before becoming a power forward . He earned NBA All @-@ Defensive First Team honors seven times and won the NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award twice . He also led the NBA in rebounds per game for a record seven consecutive years and won five NBA championships . His biography at NBA.com states that he is " arguably the best rebounding forward in NBA history " . On April 1 , 2011 , the Pistons retired Rodman 's No. 10 jersey , and he was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame later that year . 
 Rodman experienced an unhappy childhood and was shy and introverted in his early years . After aborting a suicide attempt in 1993 , he reinvented himself as a " bad boy " and became notorious for numerous controversial antics . He repeatedly dyed his hair in artificial colors , had many piercings and tattoos , and regularly disrupted games by clashing with opposing players and officials . He famously wore a wedding dress to promote his 1996 autobiography Bad As I Wanna Be . Rodman pursued a high @-@ profile affair with singer Madonna and was briefly married to actress Carmen Electra . Rodman also attracted international attention for his visits to North Korea and his subsequent befriending of North Korean leader Kim Jong @-@ un in 2013 . 
 Apart from basketball , Rodman is a retired part @-@ time professional wrestler and actor . He was a member of the nWo and fought alongside Hulk Hogan at two Bash at the Beach events . He had his own TV show The Rodman World Tour , and had lead roles in the action films Double Team ( 1997 ) and Simon Sez ( 1999 ) . Both films were critically panned , with the former earning Rodman a triple Razzie Award . He appeared in several reality TV series and was the winner of the $ 222 @,@ 000 main prize of the 2004 edition of Celebrity Mole . Rodman won the first ever Celebrity Championship Wrestling tournament . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Rodman was born in Trenton , New Jersey , the son of Shirley and Philander Rodman , Jr . , an Air Force enlisted member , who later fought in the Vietnam War . When he was young , his father left his family , eventually settling in the Philippines . Rodman has many brothers and sisters : according to his father , he has either 26 or 28 siblings on his father 's side . However , Rodman himself has stated that he is the oldest of a total of 47 children . 
 After his father left , Shirley took many odd jobs to support the family , up to four at the same time . In his 1997 biography Bad As I Wanna Be , he expresses his feelings for his father : " I haven 't seen my father in more than 30 years , so what 's there to miss ... I just look at it like this : Some man brought me into this world . That doesn 't mean I have a father " . ( He would not meet his father again until 2012 . ) 
 Rodman and his two sisters , Debra and Kim , grew up in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas , Texas , at the time one of the most impoverished areas of the city . Rodman was so attached to his mother that he refused to move when she sent him to a nursery when he was four years old . According to Rodman , his mom was more interested in his two sisters , who were both considered more talented than he was in basketball , and made him a laughing stock whenever he tagged along with them . He felt generally " overwhelmed " by the all @-@ female household . Debra and Kim would go on to become All @-@ Americans at Louisiana Tech and Stephen F. Austin , respectively . Debra won two national titles with the Lady <unk> . 
 While attending South Oak Cliff High School , Rodman was a gym class student of future Texas A & M basketball coach Gary Blair . Blair coached Rodman 's sisters Debra and Kim , winning three state championships . However , Rodman was not considered an athletic standout . According to Rodman , he was " unable to hit a layup " and was listed in the high school basketball teams , but was either benched or cut from the squads . Measuring only 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) as a freshman in high school , he also failed to make the football teams and was " totally devastated " . After finishing school , Rodman worked as an overnight janitor at Dallas Fort Worth International Airport . He then experienced a sudden growth spurt and decided to try basketball again despite becoming even more withdrawn because he felt odd in his own body . 
 A family friend tipped off the head coach of Cooke County College ( now North Central Texas College ) in Gainesville , Texas . In his single semester there , he averaged 17 @.@ 6 points and 13 @.@ 3 rebounds , before flunking out due to poor academic performance . After his short stint in Gainesville , he transferred to Southeastern Oklahoma State University , an NAIA school . There , Rodman was a three @-@ time NAIA All @-@ American and led the NAIA in rebounding in both the 1984 – 1985 and 1985 – 1986 seasons . In three seasons there , 1983 – 1984 through 1985 – 1986 , he averaged 25 @.@ 7 points and 15 @.@ 7 rebounds , led the NAIA in rebounding twice and registered a <unk> field goal percentage . At the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament , a pre @-@ draft camp for NBA hopefuls , he won Most Valuable Player honors and caught the attention of the Detroit Pistons . 
 During college Rodman worked at a summer youth basketball camp , where he befriended camper Bryne Rich , who was shy and withdrawn due to a hunting accident in which he mistakenly shot and killed his best friend . The two became almost inseparable and formed a close bond . Rich invited Rodman to his rural Oklahoma home ; at first , Rodman was not well @-@ received by the Riches because he was black . But the Riches were so grateful to him for bringing their son out of his shell that they were able to set aside their prejudices . Although Rodman had severe family and personal issues himself , he " adopted " the Riches as his own in 1982 and went from the city life to " driving a tractor and messing with cows " . Though Rodman credited the Riches as his " surrogate family " that helped him through college , as of 2013 he had stopped communicating with the Rich family for reasons unknown to them . 
 = = Basketball career = = 
 = = = Detroit Pistons = = = 
 = = = = 1986 – 1989 = = = = 
 Rodman made himself eligible for the 1986 NBA draft . He was drafted by the Detroit Pistons as the 3rd pick in the second round ( 27th overall ) , joining the rugged team of coach Chuck Daly that was called " Bad Boys " for their hard @-@ nosed approach to basketball . The squad featured Isiah Thomas and Joe Dumars at the guard positions , Adrian Dantley and Sidney Green at forward , and center Bill Laimbeer . Bench players who played more than 15 minutes per game were sixth man Vinnie Johnson and the backup forwards Rick Mahorn and John Salley . Rodman fit well into this ensemble , providing 6 @.@ 5 points , 4 @.@ 7 rebounds and some tough defense in 15 @.@ 0 minutes of playing time per game . 
 Winning 52 games , the Pistons comfortably entered the 1987 NBA Playoffs . They swept the Washington Bullets and soundly beat the Atlanta Hawks in five games , but bowed out in seven matches against the archrival Boston Celtics in what was called one of the physically and mentally toughest series ever . Rodman feuded with Celtics guard Dennis Johnson and taunted Johnson in the closing seconds when he waved his right hand over his own head . When the Celtics took Game Seven , Johnson went back at Rodman in the last moments of the game and mimicked his taunting gesture . 
 After the loss , Rodman made headlines by directly accusing Celtics star Larry Bird of being overrated because he was white : " Larry Bird is overrated in a lot of areas . ... Why does he get so much publicity ? Because he 's white . You never hear about a black player being the greatest " . Although teammate Thomas supported him , he endured harsh criticism , but avoided being called a racist because , according to him , his own girlfriend <unk> " Annie " Bakes was white . 
 In the following 1987 – 1988 season , Rodman steadily improved his stats , averaging 11 @.@ 6 points and 8 @.@ 7 rebounds and starting in 32 of 82 regular season games . The Pistons fought their way into the 1988 NBA Finals , and took a 3 – 2 lead , but lost in seven games against the Los Angeles Lakers . In Game Six , the Pistons were down by one point with eight seconds to go ; Dumars missed a shot , and Rodman just fell short of an offensive rebound and a putback which could have won the title . In Game Seven , L.A. led by 15 points in the fourth quarter , but Rodman ’ s defense helped cut down the lead to six with 3 : 52 minutes to go and to two with one minute to go . But then , he fouled Magic Johnson , who hit a free throw , missed an ill @-@ advised shot with 39 seconds to go , and the Pistons never recovered . In that year , he and his girlfriend Annie had a daughter they named Alexis . 
 Rodman remained a bench player during the 1988 – 1989 season , averaging 9 @.@ 0 points and 9 @.@ 4 rebounds in 27 minutes , yet providing such effective defense that he was voted into the All @-@ Defensive Team , the first of eight times in his career . He also began seeing more playing time after Adrian Dantley was traded at midseason to Dallas for Mark Aguirre . In that season , the Pistons finally vanquished their playoffs bane by sweeping the Boston Celtics , then winning in six games versus the Chicago Bulls — including scoring champion Michael Jordan — and easily defeating the Lakers 4 – 0 in the 1989 NBA Finals . Although he was hampered by back spasms , Rodman dominated the boards , grabbing 19 rebounds in Game 3 and providing tough interior defense . 
 = = = = 1989 @-@ 1993 = = = = 
 In the 1989 – 1990 season , Detroit lost perennial defensive forward Rick Mahorn when he was taken by the Minnesota Timberwolves in that year 's expansion draft and ended up on the Philadelphia 76ers when the Pistons could not reacquire him . It was feared that the loss of Mahorn – average in talent , but high on hustle and widely considered a vital cog of the " Bad Boys " teams – would diminish the Pistons ’ spirit , but Rodman seamlessly took over his role . He went on to win his first big individual accolade . Averaging 8 @.@ 8 points and 9 @.@ 7 rebounds while starting in the last 43 regular season games , he established himself as the best defensive player in the game ; during this period , the Pistons won 59 games , and Rodman was lauded by the NBA " for his defense and rebounding skills , which were unparalleled in the league " . For his feats , he won the NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award ; he also connected on a .595 field goal percentage , which made him the most precise shooter of the league . In the 1990 NBA Playoffs , the Pistons beat the Bulls again , and in the 1990 NBA Finals , Detroit met the Portland Trail Blazers . Rodman suffered from an injured ankle and was often replaced by Mark Aguirre , but even without his defensive hustle , Detroit beat Portland in five games and claimed their second title . 
 During the 1990 – 1991 season , Rodman finally established himself as the starting small forward of the Pistons . He played such strong defense that the NBA stated he " could shut down any opposing player , from point guard to center " . After coming off the bench for most of his earlier years , he finally started in 77 of the 82 regular season games , averaged 8 @.@ 2 points and 12 @.@ 5 rebounds and won his second Defensive Player of the Year Award . In the 1991 NBA Playoffs , however , the Pistons were swept by the championship @-@ winning Chicago Bulls in the Eastern Conference Finals . It was the 1991 – 1992 season where Rodman made a remarkable leap in his rebounding , collecting an astounding 18 @.@ 7 rebounds per game ( 1 @,@ 530 in total ) , winning his first of seven consecutive rebounding crowns , along with scoring 9 @.@ 8 points per game , and making his first All @-@ NBA Team . His 1 @,@ 530 rebounds ( the most since Wilt Chamberlain 's 1 @,@ 572 in the 1971 – 1972 season ) have never been surpassed since then ; the best mark not set by Rodman is by Kevin Willis , who grabbed 1 @,@ 258 boards that same season . Willis lamented that Rodman had an advantage in winning the rebounding title with his lack of offensive responsibilities . In a March 1992 game , Rodman totaled a career high 34 rebounds . However , the aging Pistons were eliminated by the upcoming New York Knicks in the First round of the 1992 NBA Playoffs . 
 Rodman experienced a tough loss when coach Chuck Daly , whom he had admired as a surrogate father , resigned in May ; Rodman skipped the preseason camp and was fined $ 68 @,@ 000 . The following 1992 – 1993 season was even more tumultuous . Rodman and Annie Bakes , the mother of his daughter Alexis , were divorcing after a short marriage , an experience which left him traumatized . The Pistons won only 40 games and missed the 1993 NBA Playoffs entirely . One night in February 1993 , Rodman was found asleep in his car with a loaded rifle . Four years later in his biography As Bad As I Wanna Be , he confessed having thought about suicide and described that night as an epiphany : " I decided that instead [ of killing myself ] I was gonna kill the impostor that was leading Dennis Rodman to a place he didn 't want to go ... So I just said , ' I 'm going to live my life the way I want to live it and be happy doing it . ' At that moment I tamed [ sic ] my whole life around . I killed the person I didn 't want to be . " The book was later adapted for a TV movie Bad As I Wanna Be : The Dennis Rodman Story . Although he had three years and $ 11 @.@ 8 million remaining on his contract , Rodman demanded a trade . On October 1 , 1993 , the Pistons dealt him to the San Antonio Spurs . 
 = = = San Antonio Spurs = = = 
 In the 1993 – 1994 NBA season , Rodman joined a Spurs team which was built around perennial All @-@ Star center David Robinson , with a supporting cast of forwards Dale Ellis , Willie Anderson and guard Vinny Del Negro . On the hardwood , Rodman now was played as a power forward and won his third straight rebounding title , averaging 17 @.@ 3 boards per game , along with another All @-@ Defensive Team call @-@ up . Living up to his promise of killing the " shy imposter " and " being himself " instead , Rodman began to show first signs of unconventional behavior : before the first game , he shaved his hair and dyed it blonde , which was followed up by stints with red , purple , blue hair and a look inspired from the film Demolition Man . During the season , he headbutted Stacey King and John Stockton , refused to leave the hardwood once after being ejected , and had a highly publicized two @-@ month affair with Madonna . The only player to whom Rodman related was reserve center Jack Haley , who earned his trust by not being shocked after a visit to a gay bar . However , despite a 55 @-@ win season , Rodman and the Spurs did not survive the first round of the 1994 NBA Playoffs and bowed out against the Utah Jazz in four games . 
 In the following 1994 – 1995 NBA season , Rodman clashed with the Spurs front office . He was suspended for the first three games , took a leave of absence on November 11 , and was suspended again on December 7 . He finally returned on December 10 after missing 19 games . After joining the team , he suffered a shoulder separation in a motorcycle accident , limiting his season to 49 games . Normally , he would not have qualified for any season records for missing so many games , but by grabbing 823 rebounds , he just surpassed the 800 @-@ rebound limit for listing players and won his fourth straight rebounding title by averaging 16 @.@ 8 boards per game and made the All @-@ NBA Team . In the 1995 NBA Playoffs , the 62 @-@ win Spurs with reigning NBA Most Valuable Player Award winner Robinson entered the Western Conference Finals and were considered favorites against the reigning champions Houston Rockets who had only won 47 games . It was thought that Rockets center Hakeem Olajuwon would have a hard time asserting himself versus Robinson and Rodman , who had both been voted into the NBA All @-@ Defensive Teams . However , neither Robinson nor Rodman , who had disrupted a playoff game against the Lakers by sitting down on the court , could stop Olajuwon , who averaged 35 @.@ 3 points against the elite defensive Spurs frontcourt , and helped eliminate the Spurs in six games . 
 Rodman admitted his frequent transgressions , but asserted that he lived his own life and thus a more honest life than most other people : 
 " I just took the chance to be my own man ... I just said : ' If you don 't like it , kiss my ass . ' ... Most people around the country , or around the world , are basically working people who want to be free , who want to be themselves . They look at me and see someone trying to do that ... I 'm the guy who 's showing people , hey , it 's all right to be different . And I think they feel : ' Let 's go and see this guy entertain us . ' " 
 = = = Chicago Bulls = = = 
 Prior to the 1995 – 1996 NBA season , Rodman was traded to the Chicago Bulls of perennial scoring champion Michael Jordan for center Will Perdue and cash considerations to fill a large void at power forward left by Horace Grant , who left the Bulls prior to the 1994 – 1995 season . Given Rodman could not use the 10 jersey as the Bulls had retired it for Bob Love , and the NBA denied him the reversion 01 , Rodman instead picked the number 91 , whose digits add up to 10 . Although the trade for the already 34 @-@ year @-@ old and volatile Rodman was considered a gamble at that time , the power forward quickly adapted to his new environment , helped by the fact that his best friend Jack Haley was also traded to the Bulls . Under coach Phil Jackson , he averaged 5 @.@ 5 points and 14 @.@ 9 rebounds per game , winning yet another rebounding title , and was part of the great Bulls team that won 72 of 82 regular season games , an NBA record at the time . About playing next to iconic Jordan and hard @-@ working Scottie Pippen , Rodman said : 
 " On the court , me and Michael are pretty calm and we can handle conversation . But as far as our lives go , I think he is moving in one direction and I 'm going in the other . I mean , he 's goin ' north , I 'm goin ' south . And then you 've got Scottie Pippen right in the middle . He 's sort of the equator . " 
 Although struggling with calf problems early in the season , Rodman grabbed 20 or more rebounds 11 times and had his first triple @-@ double against the Philadelphia 76ers on January 16 , 1996 scoring 10 points and adding 21 rebounds and 10 assists ; by playing his trademark tough defense , he joined Jordan and Pippen in the All @-@ NBA Defense First Team . Ever controversial , Rodman made negative headlines after a head butt of referee Ted Bernhardt during a game in New Jersey on March 16 , 1996 ; he was suspended for six games and fined $ 20 @,@ 000 , a punishment that was criticized as too lenient by the local press . 
 In the 1996 NBA Playoffs , Rodman scored 7 @.@ 5 points and grabbed 13 @.@ 7 rebounds per game and had a large part in the six @-@ game victory against the Seattle SuperSonics in the 1996 NBA Finals : in Game Two at home in the Bulls ' United Center , he grabbed 20 rebounds , among them a record @-@ tying 11 offensive boards , and in Game Six , again at the United Center , the power forward secured 19 rebounds and again 11 offensive boards , scored five points in a decisive 12 – 2 Bulls run , unnerved opposing power forward Shawn Kemp and caused Seattle coach George Karl to say : " As you evaluate the series , Dennis Rodman won two basketball games . We controlled Dennis Rodman for four games . But Game 2 and tonight , he was the reason they were successful . " His two games with 11 offensive rebounds each tied the NBA Finals record of Elvin Hayes . 
 In the 1996 – 1997 NBA season , Rodman won his sixth rebounding title in a row with 16 @.@ 7 boards per game , along with 5 @.@ 7 points per game , but failed to rank another All @-@ Defensive Team call @-@ up . However , he made more headlines for his notorious behavior . On January 15 , 1997 , he was involved in an incident during a game against the Minnesota Timberwolves . After tripping over cameraman Eugene Amos , Rodman kicked Amos in the groin . Though he was not assessed a technical foul at the time , he ultimately paid Amos a $ 200 @,@ 000 settlement , and the league suspended Rodman for 11 games without pay . Thus , he effectively lost $ 1 million . Missing another three games to suspensions , often getting technical fouls early in games and missing an additional 13 matches due to knee problems , Rodman was not as effective in the 1997 NBA Playoffs , in which the Bulls reached the 1997 NBA Finals against the Utah Jazz . He struggled to slow down Jazz power forward Karl Malone , but did his share to complete the six @-@ game Bulls victory . 
 The regular season of the 1997 – 1998 NBA season ended with Rodman winning his seventh consecutive rebounding title with 15 @.@ 0 boards per game , along with 4 @.@ 7 points per game . He grabbed 20 or more rebounds 11 times , among them a 29 @-@ board outburst against the Atlanta Hawks and 15 offensive boards ( along with ten defensive ) versus the Los Angeles Clippers . Led by the aging Jordan and Rodman ( respectively 35 and 37 years old ) , the Bulls reached the 1998 NBA Finals , again versus the Jazz . After playing strong defense on Malone in the first three games , he caused major consternation when he left his team prior to Game Four to go wrestling with Hulk Hogan . He was fined $ 20 @,@ 000 , but it was not even ten percent of what he earned with this stint . However , Rodman ’ s on @-@ court performance remained top @-@ notch , again shutting down Malone in Game Four until the latter scored 39 points in a Jazz Game Five win , bringing the series to 3 – 2 from the Bulls perspective . In Game Six , Jordan hit the decisive basket after a memorable drive on Jazz forward Bryon Russell , the Bulls won their third title in a row and Rodman his fifth ring . 
 Rodman garnered as much publicity for his public antics . He dated Madonna and claimed she tried to conceive a child with him . Shortly after , Rodman famously wore a wedding dress to promote his autobiography Bad As I Wanna Be , claiming that he was bisexual and that he was marrying himself . 
 = = = Twilight years = = = 
 After the 1997 – 1998 NBA season , the Bulls started a massive rebuilding phase , largely at the behest of then @-@ general manager Jerry Krause . Head coach Phil Jackson and several members of the team left via free agency or retirement , including Michael Jordan , Scottie Pippen , Steve Kerr and Jud Buechler . Rodman was released by the Bulls on January 21 , 1999 , before the start of the lockout @-@ shortened 1998 @-@ 99 NBA season . With his sister acting as his agent at the time , Rodman joined the Los Angeles Lakers , for a pro @-@ rated salary for the remainder of the 1998 – 1999 season . With the Lakers he only played in 23 games and was released . 
 In the 1999 – 2000 NBA season , the then @-@ 38 @-@ year @-@ old power forward was signed by the Dallas Mavericks , meaning that Rodman returned to the place where he grew up . For the Mavericks , he played 12 games , was ejected twice and alienated the franchise with his erratic behavior until he was waived again ; Dallas guard Steve Nash commented that Rodman " never wanted to be [ a Maverick ] " and therefore was unmotivated . Despite the negative feedback , Rodman averaged 14 @.@ 3 rebounds per game . This would have been enough to lead the league had he played enough games to qualify . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Post @-@ NBA years = = 
 After his NBA career , Rodman took a long break from basketball and concentrated on his film career and on wrestling . 
 After a longer hiatus , Rodman returned to play basketball for the Long Beach Jam of the newly formed American Basketball Association during the 2003 – 2004 season , with hopes of being called up to the NBA midseason . In the following 2004 – 2005 season , he signed with the ABA 's Orange County Crush and the following season with the league 's Tijuana Dragons . After retiring from wrestling , Rodman became Commissioner of the Lingerie Football League in 2005 . 
 The return to the NBA never materialized , but on January 26 , 2006 , it was announced that Rodman had signed a one @-@ game " experiment " deal for the UK basketball team Brighton Bears of the British Basketball League to play Guildford Heat on January 28 , and went on to play three games for the Bears . In spring 2006 , he played two exhibition games in the Philippines along with NBA ex @-@ stars Darryl Dawkins , Kevin Willis , Calvin Murphy , Otis Birdsong and Alex English . On April 27 , they defeated a team of former Philippine Basketball Association stars in <unk> City , Cebu and Rodman scored five points and grabbed 18 rebounds . On May 1 , 2006 , Rodman 's team played their second game and lost to the Philippine national basketball team 110 – 102 at the Araneta Coliseum , where he scored three points and recorded 16 rebounds . 
 In 2005 , Rodman made two visits to Finland . At first , he was present at <unk> in July in a wife @-@ carrying contest . However , he resigned from the contest due to health problems . In November , he played one match for <unk> <unk> of the Finland 's basketball league , <unk> . 
 That same year , Rodman published his second autobiography , I Should Be Dead By Now ; he promoted the book by sitting in a coffin . 
 On April 4 , 2011 , it was announced that Rodman would be inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame . 
 In March 2013 , Rodman arrived at the Vatican City during voting in the papal conclave for the selection of a new pope . The trip was organized by an Irish gambling company . " I 'm just promoting this website . It 's a gambling website , and it 's about people who are going to bet on the new pope , and if he 's black , you get your money back " , said Rodman . 
 In July 2013 , Rodman joined Premier Brands to launch and promote Bad Boy Vodka . 
 On July 24 , 2015 , Rodman publicly endorsed Donald Trump 's 2016 presidential campaign . Rodman and Trump had previously appeared together on Celebrity Apprentice . 
 = = = North Korea visits = = = 
 On February 26 , 2013 , Rodman made a trip to North Korea with Vice Media correspondent Ryan Duffy to host basketball exhibitions . He met North Korean leader Kim Jong @-@ un . Rodman and his travel party were the first known Americans to have met Kim . He later said Kim was " a friend for life " and suggested that President Barack Obama " pick up the phone and call " Kim since the two leaders were basketball fans . On May 7 , after reading an article from The Seattle Times , Rodman sent out a tweet asking Kim to release American prisoner Kenneth Bae , who had been sentenced to 15 years of hard labor in North Korea . 
 On September 3 , 2013 , Rodman flew to Pyongyang for another meeting with Kim Jong @-@ un . Rodman said that Kim has a daughter named Kim Ju @-@ ae , and that he is a " great dad " . Rodman also noted that he planned to train the North Korean national basketball team . Rodman stated that he is " trying to open Obama 's and everyone 's minds " and encouraged Obama to reach out to Kim Jong @-@ un . 
 In December 2013 , Rodman announced he would visit North Korea again . He also said he has plans to bring a number of former NBA players with him for an exhibition basketball tour . According to Rory Scott , a spokesman for the exhibitions ' sponsoring organization , Rodman planned to visit December 18 – 21 and train the North Korean team in preparation for January games . The matchups were scheduled for January 8 ( Kim Jong @-@ un ’ s birthday ) and January 10 , 2014 . Included on the U.S. exhibition team were Kenny Anderson , Cliff Robinson , Vin Baker , Craig Hodges , Doug Christie , Sleepy Floyd , Charles D. Smith , and four <unk> . Rodman departed from Beijing on January 6 . Organised by Paddy Power , among his entourage was the Irish media personality Matt Cooper , who had interviewed Rodman a number of times on radio . 
 On January 7 , 2014 , in North Korea prior to the exhibition games , Rodman made comments during a CNN interview implying that Kenneth Bae was at fault for his imprisonment . The remarks were widely reported in other media outlets and provoked a storm of criticism . Two days later , Rodman apologized for his comments , saying that he had been drinking and under pressure . He added that he " should know better than to make political statements " . Some members of the U.S. Congress , the NBA and human rights groups suggested that Rodman had become a public relations stunt for the North Korean government . On May 2 , 2016 , Kenneth Bae credited Rodman with his early release . He said that Rodman 's rant raised awareness of his case and that he wanted to personally thank him for his expedited release . 
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury is reportedly investigating whether Rodman broke the law by bringing Kim Jong @-@ un thousands of dollars in luxury gifts on his most recent trip to North Korea . 
 Rodman 's " hoops diplomacy " inspired a 20th Century Fox comedy , Diplomats . Tim Story and Peter Chernin are set to produce the film while Jonathan Abrams is reportedly writing the script . 
 = = Awards , records and achievements = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 From the beginning of his career Rodman was known for his defensive hustle , which was later accompanied by his rebounding prowess . In Detroit , he was mainly played as a small forward , and his usual assignment was to neutralize the opponent 's best player ; Rodman was so versatile that he could guard centers , forwards or guards equally well and won two NBA Defensive Player of the Year Awards . From 1991 on , he established himself as one of the best rebounders of all time , averaging at least 15 rebounds per game in six of the next seven years . Playing power forward as member of the Spurs and the Bulls , he had a historical outburst in the 1996 NBA Finals : he twice snared 11 offensive rebounds , equalling an all @-@ time NBA record . In addition , he had a career @-@ high 34 @-@ rebound game on March 4 , 1992 . Rodman 's rebounding prowess with Detroit and San Antonio was also aided by his decreased attention to defensive positioning and helping teammates on defense . Daly said Rodman was selfish about rebounding , but deemed him a hard worker and <unk> . Rodman 's defensive intensity returned while with Chicago . 
 On offense , Rodman 's output was mediocre . He averaged 11 @.@ 6 points per game in his second season , but his average steadily dropped : in the three championship seasons with the Bulls , he averaged five points per game and connected on less than half of his field goal attempts . His free throw shooting ( lifetime average : <unk> ) was considered a big liability : on December 29 , 1997 , Bubba Wells of the Dallas Mavericks committed six intentional fouls against him in only three minutes , setting the record for the fastest foul out in NBA history . The intention was to force him to attempt free throws , which in theory would mean frequent misses and easy ball possession without giving up too many points . However , this plan backfired , as Rodman hit 9 of the 12 attempts . This was Dallas coach Don Nelson 's early version of what would later develop into the famous " Hack @-@ a @-@ Shaq " method that would be implemented against Shaquille O 'Neal , Dwight Howard and other poor free throw shooters . 
 In 14 NBA seasons , Rodman played in 911 games , scored 6 @,@ 683 points and grabbed 11 @,@ 954 rebounds , translating to 7 @.@ 3 points and 13 @.@ 1 rebounds per game in only 31 @.@ 7 minutes played per game . NBA.com lauds Rodman as " arguably the best rebounding forward in NBA history and one of the most recognized athletes in the world " but adds " enigmatic and individualistic , Rodman has caught the public eye for his ever @-@ changing hair color , tattoos and unorthodox lifestyle " . On the hardwood , he was recognized as one of the most successful defensive players ever , winning the NBA championship five times in six NBA Finals appearances ( 1989 , 1990 , 1996 – 1998 ; only loss 1988 ) , being crowned NBA Defensive Player of the Year twice ( 1990 – 1991 ) and making seven NBA All @-@ Defensive First Teams ( 1989 – 1993 , 1995 – 1996 ) and NBA All @-@ Defensive Second Teams ( 1994 ) . He additionally made two All @-@ NBA Third Teams ( 1992 , 1995 ) , two NBA All @-@ Star Teams ( 1990 , 1992 ) and won seven straight rebounding crowns ( 1992 – 1998 ) and finally led the league once in field goal percentage ( 1989 ) . 
 Rodman was recognized as the prototype bizarre player , stunning basketball fans with his artificial hair colors , numerous tattoos and body piercings , multiple verbal and physical assaults on officials , frequent ejections , and his tumultuous private life . He was ranked No. 48 on the 2009 revision of SLAM Magazine 's Top 50 Players of All @-@ Time . Metta World Peace played one year with the 91 jersey number in homage to Rodman , who he described as a player who he liked " on the court as a hustler , not when he kicked the cameraman . " 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = 
 After getting suspended for the rest of the 1996 – 1997 NBA season , Rodman seriously took up his hobby of professional wrestling and appeared on the edition of March 10 of Monday Nitro with his friend Hollywood Hulk Hogan in World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . At the March 1997 Uncensored event , he appeared as a member of the nWo . His first match was at the July 1997 Bash at the Beach event , where he teamed with Hogan in a loss to Lex Luger and The Giant . At the August 1997 Road Wild event , Rodman appeared as the Impostor Sting hitting Luger with a baseball bat to help Hogan win the WCW World Heavyweight Championship . 
 After the 1997 – 98 NBA season , where Rodman and the Chicago Bulls defeated Karl Malone and the Utah Jazz in the 1998 NBA Finals , Rodman and Malone squared off again , this time in a tag team match at the July 1998 Bash at the Beach event . He fought alongside Hulk Hogan , and Malone tagged along with Diamond Dallas Page . In a poorly received match , the two power forwards exchanged " rudimentary <unk> , slams and clotheslines " for 23 minutes . Rodman bested Malone again as he and Hogan picked up the win . 
 = = = i @-@ Generation Superstars of Wrestling and retirement ( 2000 ) = = = 
 On July 30 , 2000 , for the i @-@ Generation Superstars of Wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event , he fought against i @-@ Generation Champion Curt Hennig in an Australian Outback match . The event was subtitled Rodman Down Under . Hennig won the match by disqualification . Rodman refrained from wrestling at the top level and retired . 
 = = = Hulk Hogan 's Celebrity Championship Wrestling ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Rodman came out of retirement to appear as a contestant on Hulk Hogan 's Celebrity Championship Wrestling , broadcast on CMT . Rodman was the winner of the series , defeating other challengers such as <unk> and Dustin Diamond . 
 = = = In wrestling = = = 
 = = Media appearances = = 
 In 1996 , Rodman had his own MTV reality talk show called The Rodman World Tour , which featured him in a series of odd @-@ ball situations . This show was produced by Patrick Byrnes and written by Tom Cohen and Matt Price . 
 A year later , he made his feature film debut in the action film Double Team alongside Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme and Mickey Rourke . The film was critically panned and his performance earned him three Golden Raspberry Awards : Worst New Star , Worst Supporting Actor and Worst Screen Couple ( shared with Van Damme ) . Rodman starred in Simon Sez , a 1999 action / comedy and co @-@ starred with Tom Berenger in a 2000 action film about skydiving titled <unk> . In 1998 , he joined the cast of the syndicated TV show Special Ops Force , playing ' Deke ' Reynolds , a flamboyant but skilled ex @-@ Army <unk> pilot and demolitions expert . 
 In 2005 , Rodman became the first man to pose naked for PETA 's advertisement campaign " Rather Go Naked Than Wear Fur " . 
 Since then he has appeared in few acting roles outside of playing himself . Rodman has made an appearance in an episode of 3rd Rock from the Sun playing the character of himself , except being a fellow alien with the Solomon family . He voiced an animated version of himself in the Simpsons episode " Treehouse of Horror XVI " . 
 Rodman has also appeared in several reality soaps : in January 2006 , Rodman appeared on the fourth version of Celebrity Big Brother in the UK , and on July 26 , 2006 , in the UK series Love Island as a houseguest contracted to stay for a week . Finally , he appeared on the show Celebrity Mole on ABC . He wound up winning the $ 222 @,@ 000 grand prize . 
 Rodman was the winner of Hulk Hogan 's Celebrity Championship Wrestling title defeating other challengers such as <unk> and Dustin Diamond . 
 In 2008 , Rodman joined as a spokesman for a sports website <unk> , the brainchild of Mike Levy founder and former CEO of CBS <unk> Rodman also writes a blog and occasionally answers members ' questions for OPEN Sports . 
 In 2009 , he appeared as a contestant on Celebrity Apprentice . Throughout the season , each celebrity raised money for a charity of their choice ; Rodman selected the Court Appointed Special Advocates of New Orleans . He was the fifth contestant eliminated , on March 29 , 2009 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriages = = = 
 Rodman 's first wife was Annie Bakes , with whom he had a daughter named Alexis ( born 1988 ) . They divorced in the early 1990s . Rodman married model Carmen Electra in November 1998 at the Little Chapel of the Flowers in Las Vegas , Nevada . Electra filed for divorce in April 1999 . 
 In 1999 Rodman met Michelle Moyer , with whom he had a son , D.J. ( born 2000 ) and a daughter , Trinity ( born 2001 ) . Moyer and Rodman married in 2003 on his 42nd birthday . Michelle Rodman filed for divorce in 2004 , although the couple spent several years attempting to reconcile . The marriage was officially dissolved in 2012 when Michelle Rodman again petitioned the court to grant a divorce . It was reported that Rodman owed $ 860 @,@ 376 in child and spousal support . 
 = = = Alcohol issues = = = 
 Rodman entered an outpatient rehab center in Florida in May 2008 . In May 2009 , his behavior on Celebrity Apprentice led to an intervention which included Phil Jackson as well as Rodman 's family and other friends . Rodman initially refused to enter rehabilitation because he wanted to attend the Celebrity Apprentice reunion show . In 2009 , Rodman agreed to appear on the third season of Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew . Rodman remained a patient at the Pasadena Recovery Center for the 21 @-@ day treatment cycle . A week after completion he entered a sober @-@ living facility in the Hollywood Hills , which was filmed for the second season of Sober House . During episode seven of Sober House , Rodman was shown being reunited with his mother Shirley , from whom he had been estranged for seven years . During this same visit Shirley also met Rodman 's two children for the first time . On January 10 , 2010 , on the same day that Celebrity Rehab premiered , Rodman was removed from an Orange County , California restaurant for disruptive behavior . In March 2012 , Rodman 's financial advisor said , " In all honesty , Dennis , although a very sweet person , is an alcoholic . His sickness impacts his ability to get work . " 
 On January 15 , 2014 , Rodman again entered a rehabilitation facility to seek treatment for alcohol abuse . This came on the heels of a well @-@ publicized trip to North Korea where his agent , Darren Prince , reported he had been drinking heavily and to an extent " that none of us had seen before . " 
 = = = Legal troubles = = = 
 On November 5 , 1999 , Rodman and his then @-@ wife , Carmen Electra , were charged with misdemeanors after police were notified of a domestic disturbance . Each posted $ 2 @,@ 500 in bail and were released with a temporary restraining order placed on them . 
 In December 1999 Rodman was arrested for drunken driving and driving without a valid license . In July 2000 , Rodman pleaded guilty to both charges and was ordered to pay $ 2 @,@ 000 in fines and was required to attend a three @-@ month treatment program . 
 He was arrested in 2002 for interfering with police investigating a code violation at a restaurant he owned ; the charges were eventually dropped . After settling down in Newport Beach , California , the police appeared over 70 times at his home because of loud parties . In early 2003 , Rodman was arrested and charged with domestic violence at his home in Newport Beach for allegedly assaulting his then @-@ fiancee . 
 In April 2004 , Rodman pleaded nolo contendere to drunk driving in Las Vegas and was fined $ 1 @,@ 000 and served 30 days of home detention . On April 30 , 2008 , Rodman was arrested following a domestic violence incident at a Los Angeles hotel . On June 24 , 2008 , he pleaded no contest to the misdemeanor spousal battery charges and was sentenced to one year of domestic violence counseling and three years probation . He received 45 hours of community service , which were to involve some physical labor activities . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Rodman , Dennis ( 1994 ) . Rebound : The Dennis Rodman Story . ISBN 0 @-@ 517 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Rodman , Dennis ( 1996 ) . Bad as I Wanna Be . ISBN 0 @-@ 440 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Rodman , Dennis ( 1997 ) . Walk on the Wild Side . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Rodman , Dennis ( 2005 ) . I Should Be Dead by Now . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 016 @-@ 5 . 
 Rodman , Dennis ( 2013 ) . Dennis the Wild Bull . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 249 @-@ 7 . 
 = History of FC Barcelona = 
 The history of Futbol Club Barcelona goes from the football club 's founding in 1899 and up to current time . FC Barcelona , also known simply as Barcelona and familiarly as Barça , is based in Barcelona , Catalonia , Spain . The team was founded in 1899 by a group of Swiss , English and Spanish footballers led by Joan Gamper . The club played amateur football until 1910 in various regional competitions . In 1910 , the club participated in their first of many European competitions , and has since amassed ten UEFA trophies and a sextuple . In 1928 , Barcelona co @-@ founded La Liga , the top @-@ tier in Spanish football , along with a string of other clubs . As of 2016 , Barcelona has never been relegated from La Liga , a record they share with Athletic Bilbao and arch @-@ rival Real Madrid . 
 The history of Barcelona has often been politically . Though it is a club created and run by foreigners , Barcelona gradually became a club associated with Catalan values . In Spain 's transition to autocracy in 1925 , Catalonia became increasingly hostile towards the central government in Madrid . The hostility enhanced Barcelona 's image as a focal point for <unk> , and when Francisco Franco banned the use of the Catalan language , the stadium of Barcelona became one of the few places the people could express their dissatisfaction . The Spanish transition to democracy in 1978 has not dampened the club 's image of Catalan pride . In the 2000s – a period of sporting success in the club and an increased focus on Catalan players – club officials have openly called for Catalonia to become an independent state . 
 = = Beginnings of Football Club Barcelona ( 1899 – 1922 ) = = 
 On 22 October 1899 , Joan Gamper placed an advertisement in Los Deportes declaring his wish to form a football club ; a positive response resulted in a meeting at the Gimnasio <unk> on 29 November . Eleven players attended : Walter Wild ( the first director of the club ) , Lluís d <unk> , Bartomeu <unk> , Otto Kunzle , Otto Maier , Enric Ducal , Pere Cabot , Josep <unk> , John Parsons and William Parsons . As a result , Football Club Barcelona was born . The blue and red colours of the shirt were first worn in a match against Hispania in 1900 ; the prevailing Catalonia conception is that the colours were chosen by Joan Gamper and are those of his home team , Crystal Palace . 
 FC Barcelona quickly emerged as one of the leading clubs in Spain , competing in the Campeonato de Cataluña and the Copa del Rey . In 1902 , the club won its first trophy , the Copa <unk> , and also played in the first Copa del Rey final , losing 2 – 1 to <unk> . 
 In 1908 , Joan Gamper became club president for the first time to save the club from bankruptcy . The club had not won since the Campeonato de Cataluña in 1905 ; this caused their financial trouble . One of his main achievements was to help Barcelona acquire its own stadium and thus achieve a stable income . 
 On 14 March 1909 , the team moved into the Camp de la Indústria , a stadium with a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 . To celebrate their new surroundings , a logo contest was held the following year . Carles Comamala won the contest , and his suggestion became the crest that the club still wears as of 2012 , with some minor changes . 
 With the new stadium , Barcelona participated in the inaugural version of the Pyrenees Cup , which , at the time , consisted of the best teams of Languedoc , MIDI and Aquitaine ( Southern France ) , the Basque Country and Catalonia ; all were former members of the Marca <unk> region . The contest was generally considered the most prestigious in that era . From the inaugural year in 1910 to 1913 , Barcelona won the competition four consecutive times . Carles Comamala played an integral part of the four @-@ time champion , managing the side along with <unk> and Jack Greenwell . The latter became the club 's first full @-@ time coach in 1917 . The last edition was held in 1914 in the city of Barcelona , which local rivals Espanyol won . 
 During the same period , the club changed its official language from Castilian to Catalan and gradually evolved into an important symbol of Catalan identity . For many fans , participating in the club had less to do with the game itself and more with being a part of the club 's collective identity . On 4 February 1917 , the club held its first testimonial match to honour Ramón Torralba who played from 1913 to 1928 . The match was against local side Terrassa , which Barcelona won 6 – 2 . 
 Gamper simultaneously launched a campaign to recruit more club @-@ members , and , by 1922 , the club had more than 20 @,@ 000 , who helped finance a new stadium . The club then moved to the new Les Cortes , which they inaugurated the same year . Les Cortes had an initial capacity of 22 @,@ 000 , and was later expanded to 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Gamper recruited Jack Greenwell as the first full @-@ time manager in Barcelona 's history . After he was hired , the club 's fortunes began to improve on the field . During the Gamper @-@ led era , Barcelona won eleven Campeonato de Cataluña , six Copa del Rey and four Pyrenees Cups and enjoyed its first " golden age " . 
 = = Rivera , Republic and Civil War ( 1923 – 1957 ) = = 
 On 14 June 1925 , in a spontaneous reaction against Primo de Rivera 's dictatorship , the crowd in the stadium jeered the Royal March . As a reprisal , the ground was closed for six months and Gamper was forced to relinquish the presidency of the club . This coincided with the transition to professional football , and , in 1926 , the directors of Barcelona publicly claimed , for the first time , to operate a professional football club . On 3 July 1927 , the club held a second testimonial match for Paulino Alcántara , against the Spanish national team . To kick off the match , local journalist and pilot Josep <unk> dropped the ball onto the pitch from his airplane . In 1928 , victory in the Spanish Cup was celebrated with a poem titled " Oda a Platko " , which was written by a member of the Generation of ' 27 , Rafael Alberti , inspired by the heroic performance of the Barcelona goalkeeper , Franz Platko . Two years after the victory , on 30 July 1930 , Gamper committed suicide after a period of depression brought on by personal and financial problems . 
 Although they continued to have players of the standing of Josep <unk> , the club now entered a period of decline , in which political conflict overshadowed sports throughout society . Attendance at matches dropped as the citizens of Barcelona were occupied with discussing political matters . Although the team won the Campionat de Catalunya in 1930 , 1931 , 1932 , 1934 , 1936 and 1938 , success at a national level ( with the exception of the 1937 disputed title ) evaded them . 
 A month after the Spanish Civil War began in 1936 , several players from Barcelona enlisted in the ranks of those who fought against the military uprising , along with players from Athletic Bilbao . On 6 August , Falangist soldiers near Guadarrama murdered club president Josep Sunyol , a representative of the pro @-@ independence political party . He was dubbed the martyr of <unk> , and his murder was a defining moment in the history of FC Barcelona and Catalan identity . In the summer of 1937 , the squad was on tour in Mexico and the United States , where it was received as an ambassador of the Second Spanish Republic . The tour led to the financial security of the club , but also resulted in half of the team seeking asylum in Mexico and France , making it harder for the remaining team to contest for trophies . 
 On 16 March 1938 , Barcelona came under aerial bombardment from the Italian Air Force , causing more than 3 @,@ 000 deaths , with one of the bombs hitting the club 's offices . A few months later , Catalonia came under occupation and as a symbol of the " undisciplined " Catalanism , the club , now down to just 3 @,@ 486 members , faced a number of restrictions . All signs of regional nationalism , including language , flag and other signs of separatism were banned throughout Spain . The Catalan flag was banned and the club were prohibited from using non @-@ Spanish names . These measures forced the club to change its name to Club de Fútbol Barcelona and to remove the Catalan flag from its crest . 
 In 1943 , Barcelona faced rivals Real Madrid in the semi @-@ finals of Copa del Generalísimo . The first match at Les Corts was won by Barcelona 3 – 0 . Before the second leg , Franco 's director of state security visited Barcelona 's players in the changing room . He reminded them that they were only playing due to the " generosity of the regime " . Real Madrid comfortably won the match , beating Barcelona 11 – 1 . 
 Despite the difficult political situation , CF Barcelona enjoyed considerable success during the 1940s and 1950s . In 1945 , with Josep Samitier as coach and players like César , Ramallets and Velasco , they won La Liga for the first time since 1929 . They added two more titles in 1948 and 1949 . In 1949 , they also won the first Copa Latina . In June 1950 , Barcelona signed <unk> Kubala , who was to be an important figure at the club . 
 On a rainy Sunday of 1951 , the crowd left Les Corts stadium after a 2 – 1 win against Santander by foot , refusing to catch any trams , and surprising the Francoist authorities . The reason was simple : at the same time , a tram strike was taking place in Barcelona , receiving the support of blaugrana fans . Events like this made CF Barcelona represent much more than just Catalonia and many progressive Spaniards saw the club as a staunch defender of rights and freedoms . 
 Coach Fernando <unk> and player László Kubala , regarded by many as the club 's best , inspired the team to several different trophies in 1952 , including La Liga , the Copa del Generalísimo , the Copa Latina , the Copa Eva Duarte and the Copa Martini Rossi . In 1953 , they helped the club win La Liga and the Copa del Generalísimo again . 
 = = Club de Fútbol Barcelona ( 1957 – 1978 ) = = 
 With Helenio Herrera as coach , a young Luis Suárez , the European Footballer of the Year in 1960 , and two influential Hungarians recommended by László Kubala , Sándor Kocsis and Zoltán <unk> , the team won another national double in 1959 and a La Liga and Fairs Cup double in 1960 . In 1961 , they became the first club to beat Real Madrid in a European Cup play @-@ off . However , they lost 2 – 3 to Benfica in the final . 
 The 1960s were less successful for the club , with Real Madrid monopolising La Liga . The completion of the Camp Nou , finished in 1957 , meant the club had little money to spend on new players . The 1960s saw the emergence of Josep Maria <unk> and Carles Rexach , and the club won the Copa del Generalísimo in 1963 and the Fairs Cup in 1966 . Barcelona restored some pride by beating Real Madrid 1 – 0 in the 1968 Copa del Generalísimo final at the Santiago Bernabéu – in front of Francisco Franco – with their coach Salvador Artigas , a former republican pilot in the civil war . With the end of Franco 's dictatorship in 1974 , the club changed its official name back to Futbol Club Barcelona and reverted the crest to its original design , including the original letters once again . 
 The 1973 – 74 season saw the arrival of a new player in Johan Cruyff , who was bought for a world record £ 920 @,@ 000 from Ajax . Already an established player with Ajax , Cruyff quickly won over the Barcelona fans when he told the European press that he chose Barcelona over Real Madrid because he could not play for a club associated with Franco . He further endeared himself when he named his son Jordi , after the local Catalan Saint George . Next to champions like Juan Manuel <unk> , Carles Rexach and Hugo Sotil , he helped the club win the 1973 – 74 season for the first time since 1960 , defeating Real Madrid 5 – 0 at the Santiago Bernabéu along the way . He was crowned European Footballer of the Year in 1973 during his first season with Barcelona ( his second Ballon d 'Or win ; he won his first while playing for Ajax in 1971 ) . Cruyff received this prestigious award a third time ( the first player to do so ) in 1974 , while he was still with Barcelona . 
 = = Núñez and the stabilization years ( 1978 – 2000 ) = = 
 In 1978 , Josep Lluís Núñez became the first elected president of FC Barcelona , and , since then , the members of Barcelona have elected the club president . The process of electing a president of Barcelona was closely tied to Spain 's transition to democracy in 1974 and the end of Franco 's dictatorship . The new president 's main objective was to develop Barcelona into a world @-@ class club by giving it stability both on and off the pitch . His presidency was to last for 22 years , and it deeply affected the image of Barcelona , as Núñez held to a strict policy regarding wages and discipline , letting go of such world @-@ class players as Diego Maradona , Romário and Ronaldo rather than meeting their demands . 
 On 16 May 1979 , the club won its first UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup by beating Fortuna Düsseldorf 4 – 3 in Basel in a final watched by more than 30 @,@ 000 travelling blaugrana fans . The same year , Núñez began to invest in the club 's youth program by converting La Masia to a dormitory for young academy players from abroad . The name of the dormitory would later become synonymous with the youth program of Barcelona . 
 In June 1982 , Diego Maradona was signed for a world record fee of £ 5 million from Boca Juniors . In the following season , under coach César Luis Menotti , Barcelona won the Copa del Rey , beating Real Madrid . Maradona 's time with Barcelona , however , was short @-@ lived and he soon left for Napoli . At the start of the 1984 – 85 season , Terry Venables was hired as manager and he won La Liga with noteworthy displays by German midfielder Bernd Schuster . The next season , he took the team to their second European Cup final , only to lose on penalties to Steaua București during a dramatic evening in Seville . 
 Around this time , tensions began to arise between what was perceived as president Núñez 's dictatorial rule and the nationalistic support group , Boixos Nois . The group , identified with a left @-@ wing separatism , repeatedly demanded the resignation of Núñez and openly defied him through chants and banners at matches . At the same time , Barcelona experienced an eruption in skinheads , who often identified with a right @-@ wing separatism . The skinheads slowly transferred the Boixos Nois ' ideology from liberalism to fascism , which caused division within the group and a sudden support for Núñez 's presidency . Inspired by British hooligans , the remaining Boixos Nois became violent , causing havoc leading to large @-@ scale arrests . 
 After the 1986 FIFA World Cup , Barcelona signed the English top @-@ scorer Gary Lineker , along with goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta , but the team could not achieve success , as Schuster was excluded from the team . Terry Venables was subsequently fired at the beginning of the 1987 – 88 season and replaced with Luis Aragonés . The season finished with the players rebelling against president Núñez , in an event known as the Hesperia mutiny , and a 1 – 0 victory at the Copa del Rey final against Real Sociedad . 
 In 1988 , Johan Cruyff returned to the club as manager and he assembled the so @-@ called " Dream Team " . He used a mix of Spanish players like Pep Guardiola , José Mari <unk> and Txiki <unk> while signing international players such as Ronald Koeman , Michael Laudrup , Romário and Hristo Stoichkov . 
 It was ten years after the inception of the youth program , La Masia , when the young players began to graduate and play for their first team . One of the first graduates who would later earn international acclaim was Pep Guardiola . Under Cruyff 's guidance , Barcelona won four consecutive La Liga titles from 1991 to 1994 . They beat Sampdoria in both the 1989 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup final and the 1992 European Cup final at Wembley Stadium , with a free @-@ kick goal from Dutch international Ronald Koeman . They also won a Copa del Rey in 1990 , the European Super Cup in 1992 and three Supercopa de España . With 11 trophies , Cruyff became the club 's most successful manager to date . He also became the club 's longest consecutive serving manager , serving eight years . Cruyff 's fortune was to change , however , and in his final two seasons , after he failed to win any trophies , he fell @-@ out with president Núñez , resulting in his departure . 
 Reacting to Cruyff 's departure , an independent protest group was organised by Armand <unk> , Joan Laporta and Alfons <unk> . The objective of the group , called L <unk> Blau was to oppose the presidency of Núñez , which they regarded as a corruption of the club 's traditional values . Laporta would later take over the presidency of Barcelona in 2003 . 
 Cruyff was briefly replaced by Bobby Robson , who took charge of the club for a single season in 1996 – 97 . He recruited Ronaldo from his previous club , PSV and delivered a cup treble , winning the Copa del Rey , UEFA Cup Winners Cup and the Supercopa de España . Despite his success , Robson was only ever seen as a short @-@ term solution while the club waited for Louis van Gaal to become available . 
 Like Maradona , Ronaldo only stayed a short time before he left for Internazionale . New stars emerged , however , such as Luís Figo , Patrick Kluivert , Luis Enrique and Rivaldo , and the team won a Copa del Rey and La Liga double in 1998 . In 1999 , the club celebrated its <unk> , winning the Lile title and where Rivaldo became the fourth Barcelona player to be awarded European Footballer of the Year . Despite this domestic success , the failure to emulate Real Madrid in the Champions League led to van Gaal and Núñez resigning in 2000 . 
 = = The Laporta years ( 2000 – 2010 ) = = 
 The departures of Núñez and Louis van Gaal were hardly noticed by the fans when compared to that of Luís Figo , then club vice @-@ captain . Figo had become a cult hero and was considered by Catalans to be one of their own . Barcelona fans , however , were distraught by Figo 's decision to join arch @-@ rivals Real Madrid , and , during subsequent visits to the Camp Nou with Madrid , Figo was given an extremely hostile reception . Upon his first return , a piglet 's head and a full bottle of whiskey were thrown at him from the crowd . The next three years saw the club in decline , and managers came and went . Van Gaal was replaced by Llorenç Serra Ferrer who , despite an extensive investment in players in the summer of 2000 , presided over a mediocre league campaign and a humiliating first @-@ round Champions League exit , and was eventually dismissed late in the season . 
 Long @-@ serving coach Carles Rexach was appointed as his replacement , initially on a temporary basis , and managed to at least steer the club to the last Champions League spot on the final day of the season . Despite better form in La Liga and a good run to the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League , Rexach was never viewed as a long @-@ term solution and that summer Van Gaal returned to the club for a second spell as manager . What followed , despite another decent Champions League performance , was one of the worst La Liga campaigns in the club 's history , with the team as low as 15th in February 2003 . This led to Van Gaal 's resignation and replacement for the rest of the campaign by Radomir Antić , though a sixth @-@ place finish was the best that he could manage . At the end of the season , Antić 's short @-@ term contract was not renewed , and club president Joan Gaspart resigned , his position having been made completely untenable by such a disastrous season on top of the club 's overall decline in fortunes since he became president three years prior . 
 After the disappointment of the Gaspart era , the combination of a new young president , Joan Laporta , and a young new manager , former Dutch and Milan star Frank Rijkaard , saw the club bounce back . On the field , an influx of international players , including Ronaldinho , Deco , Henrik Larsson , Ludovic Giuly , Samuel Eto 'o and Rafael Márquez , combined with homegrown Spanish players Carles Puyol , Andrés Iniesta , Xavi and Víctor Valdés , led to the club 's return to success . Barcelona won La Liga and the Supercopa de España in 2004 – 05 , and Ronaldinho and Eto 'o were voted first and third , respectively , in the FIFA World Player of the Year awards . 
 In the 2005 – 06 season , Barcelona repeated their Liga and <unk> successes . The pinnacle of the league season arrived at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in a 3 – 0 win over Real Madrid . It was Rijkaard 's second victory at the Bernabéu , making him the first Barcelona manager to win there twice . Ronaldinho 's performance was so impressive that after his second goal , which was Barcelona 's third , some Real Madrid fans gave him a standing ovation . In the Champions League , Barcelona beat Arsenal 2 – 1 in the final . Trailing 1 – 0 to a ten @-@ man Arsenal and with less than 15 minutes remaining , they came back to win 2 – 1 , with substitute Henrik Larsson , in his final appearance for the club , setting up goals for Samuel Eto 'o and fellow substitute Juliano Belletti , for the club 's first European Cup victory in 14 years . 
 Despite being the favourites and starting strongly , Barcelona finished the 2006 – 07 season without any trophies won . A pre @-@ season United States tour was later blamed for a string of injuries to key players , including leading scorer Samuel Eto 'o and rising star Lionel Messi . There was open feuding as Eto 'o publicly criticized coach Rijkaard and Ronaldinho . Ronaldinho also admitted that a lack of fitness affected his form . In La Liga , Barcelona were in first place for much of the season , but inconsistency in the New Year saw Real Madrid overtake them to become champions . Barcelona advanced to the semi @-@ finals of the Copa del Rey , winning the first leg against Getafe 5 – 2 , with a goal from Messi bringing comparison to Diego Maradona 's goal of the century , but then lost the second leg 4 – 0 . They took part in the 2006 FIFA Club World Cup , but were beaten by a late goal in the final against Brazilian side Internacional . In the Champions League , Barcelona were knocked out of the competition in the last 16 by eventual runners @-@ up Liverpool on the away goals rule . 
 Barcelona finished the 2007 – 08 season third in La Liga and reached the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League and Copa del Rey , both times losing to the eventual champions , Manchester United and Valencia , respectively . The day after a 4 – 1 defeat to Real Madrid , Joan Laporta announced that Barcelona B coach Pep Guardiola would take over Rijkaard 's duties on 30 June 2008 . 
 In the pre @-@ season of 2008 – 09 , a motion of no confidence was raised against club president Joan Laporta . This motion received 60 percent support , just short of the 66 percent required to oust him , prompting eight of the directors to resign . Continuing as president , Laporta made large changes to the playing staff , spending nearly € 90 million rebuilding the squad . 
 For the second time that season , Barcelona played Real Madrid in El Clásico , this time at the Santiago Bernabéu . Barcelona won the historic match 2 – 6 , which was the largest margin of victory by which Barcelona had won in Madrid since the 1970s , when Johan Cruyff led Barcelona to win 0 – 5 . On 6 May 2009 , Barcelona played against Chelsea in the second leg of the Champions League semi @-@ finals . Following a goalless first leg , Chelsea led the second leg at Stamford Bridge 1 – 0 , from the eighth minute until injury time , when Andrés Iniesta scored an equaliser in the 93rd minute from the edge of the penalty area , sending Barcelona through to the final on the away goals rule . On 13 May , Barcelona beat Athletic Bilbao 4 – 1 to win the Copa del Rey for a record 25th time . Three days later , Real Madrid lost a league match and Barcelona was crowned La Liga champions for the 2008 – 09 season . 
 With a largely homegrown squad , in which seven players of the starting 11 were products of their youth academy , La Masia , Barcelona defeated the defending champions Manchester United 2 – 0 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome on 27 May 2009 , to earn their third Champions League title . This completed the first ever treble won by a Spanish side , having already won the La Liga and Copa del Rey in that season . 
 Barcelona went on to win the 2009 Supercopa de España against Athletic Bilbao , and the 2009 UEFA Super Cup against Shakhtar Donetsk , becoming the first European club to win both domestic and European Super Cups following a treble . In December 2009 , Barcelona won the 2009 Club World Cup , thus becoming the first team ever to accomplish the sextuple . In May 2010 , Barcelona won La Liga for the second consecutive time with a record Spanish league tally of 99 points out of 114 possible . In August , Barcelona won their ninth Supercup , beating the previous record of eight , which they shared with Real Madrid . 
 = = 2011 – present = = 
 Barcelona begin start off the season with the traditional curtain raiser , the Supercopa de España , against Sevilla , losing the first leg 3 – 1 at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán Stadium . In the return leg at the Camp Nou , however , the team would win 4 – 0 , thus claiming the Supercopa 5 – 3 on aggregate . In the 2010 – 11 season , Barcelona would endure a slow start to the campaign , despite a victory over Racing de Santander ( 3 – 0 ) on the opening day of the season ; they would go on to be defeated 2 – 0 at the Camp Nou by newly promoted minnows Hércules . Nevertheless , Barça would recover and go on to magnificent 5 – 0 win over Real Madrid at home . In the Champions League semi @-@ finals against Madrid at the Santiago Bernabéu , Lionel Messi scored two goals to ensure a 0 – 2 win for Barcelona , with the second leg at home ending in a 1 – 1 draw , sending Barça through to the Final to take on Manchester United . In the Copa del Rey Final at the Mestalla Stadium against Real Madrid , Cristiano Ronaldo would convert a header on the 100th minute to win the Copa for Madrid , 1 – 0 . Barça , however , would end up beating Manchester United 3 – 1 with goals from Pedro , Messi and David Villa to win them the Champions League for the fourth time in club history . Barcelona would also claim La Liga with 96 points to Real Madrid 's 92 for the third time in a row to round off a very successful season . 
 The 2011 – 12 season would kick off with the Supercopa de España , this time against reigning Copa del Rey champions Real Madrid . In Madrid , Barcelona would play to a 2 – 2 draw , but would seal the Supercup with a 3 – 2 win at the Camp Nou . The first kick of a ball in La Liga for Barça would be at the Camp Nou against Villarreal , with the Catalans easily winning 5 – 0 . In the first Liga Clásico of the season , Barcelona would win 1 – 3 in Madrid to level on points with Madrid heading into the Christmas break . Nevertheless , Barcelona would drop two points away to Espanyol , which ended 1 – 1 , to go two points behind their <unk> Madrid . In the Copa del Rey semi @-@ finals , in the first leg against Real Madrid , the Blaugrana would win 1 – 2 in Madrid , later sealing their place in the semi @-@ finals after a 2 – 2 draw at the Camp Nou . In the Round of 16 of the UEFA Champions League , the then @-@ defending champions would defeat Bayer Leverkusen 1 – 3 in Germany and rout them 7 – 1 at the Camp Nou . The quarter @-@ finals against Milan would begin slowly for the Catalan club , playing to a 0 – 0 draw in Milan , only to sweep the Italian club aside 3 – 1 at the Camp Nou with two strikes from Lionel Messi . In the semi @-@ finals against Chelsea , Barcelona would be defeated 1 – 0 in London after a Didier Drogba strike in the 45th minute . The second leg , meanwhile , at the Nou Camp finished 2 – 2 , thus eliminating Barcelona from European contention . In the penultimate game of the season at home to Real Madrid , perhaps the most important game of the Catalan club 's season , Barça would collapse 1 – 2 to Real Madrid with a strike each from Sami Khedira and Cristiano Ronaldo , winning Los Blancos the match . On 27 April , coach Pep Guardiola announced in a tearful press conference in Barcelona that he would be stepping down as coach of the Catalan club at the end of the season , citing that he needed a break from football ; he was to be replaced by Tito Vilanova . In Barcelona 's final game of the season , the Copa del Rey finals against Athletic Bilbao , Barça would win 3 – 0 with a brace from Pedro and a strike from Messi , winning the club the trophy . That season , Barça would also win the 2011 UEFA Super Cup , 2 – 0 against Porto and the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup , 4 – 0 against Santos . 
 Barça 's 2012 – 13 season yet again began with a Supercopa contention , this time another incarnation of El Clásico . Barcelona would win the first leg at home 3 – 2 with goals from Messi , Pedro and Xavi , but in the second leg , despite a wonderfully @-@ struck free kick from Messi from 35 yards out , Barcelona would succumb 2 – 1 to their fiercest foes with goals from Ronaldo and Gonzalo Higuaín . In La Liga , Barcelona would shoot straight up to the top of the league table with a 5 – 1 win over Real Sociedad . In the most @-@ hyped game of the season so far , Barcelona and Real Madrid would play out what many regard as the best Clásico in recent memory , ending in a 2 – 2 draw at the Camp Nou with both Messi and Ronaldo netting twice for their respective clubs . Barça would also kick of their Copa del Rey defence with a 3 – 0 win over Alavés . In the Champions League on 7 November 2012 , Barcelona would fall 2 – 1 to Celtic , with Messi grabbing his third Champions League goal of the 2012 – 13 season in the 90th minute in Glasgow . Barcelona were eliminated from Europe 0 – 7 on aggregate in the semi @-@ finals against eventual champions Bayern Munich , the worst @-@ ever aggregate loss in any European competition for the club . 
 On 22 July 2013 , Gerardo Martino was confirmed as manager of Barcelona for the 2013 – 14 season . Barcelona 's first official games under Martino were the home and away legs of the 2013 Supercopa de España , which Barça won 1 – 1 on away goals . On 23 January 2014 , Sandro Rosell resigned as president by the admissibility of the complaint for alleged misappropriation following the transfer of Neymar . Josep Maria Bartomeu replaced him to finish the term in 2016 . 
 In April 2014 , FIFA banned the club from buying players for the next two transfer windows following the violation of the FIFA 's rules about the transfer of footballers aged under 18 . A statement on FIFA 's website read , " With regard to the case in question , FC Barcelona has been found to be in breach of art . 19 of the Regulations in the case of ten minor players and to have committed several other concurrent infringements in the context of other players , including under Annexe 2 of the Regulations . The Disciplinary Committee regarded the infringements as serious and decided to sanction the club with a transfer ban at both national and international level for two complete and consecutive transfer periods , together with a fine of CHF 450 @,@ 000 . Additionally , the club was granted a period of 90 days in which to regularise the situation of all minor players concerned . " FIFA rejected an appeal in August but the pending appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) allowed Barcelona to sign players during the summer of 2014 . 
 On 17 May , in a game where they needed to defeat Atlético Madrid ( who had eliminated them from the Champions League in the quarter @-@ finals earlier in the year ) to be crowned champions of La Liga for the 23rd time , they drew after Atlético defender Diego <unk> headed in the equalizer in the 49th minute , giving Atlético the championship . 
 On 19 May 2014 , it was announced that Luis Enrique would return to Barcelona as head coach after he agreed to a two @-@ year deal . He was recommended by sporting director Andoni Zubizarreta , his former Spain national teammate . Following Luis Enrique 's arrival , Barcelona broke their transfer record when they paid Liverpool between € 81 to € 94 million for striker Luis Suárez , who at the time was serving a four @-@ month ban from all football @-@ related activity imposed by the FIFA Disciplinary Committee after biting Italian defender Giorgio <unk> during his appearance for Uruguay in a World Cup group stage match . 
 In late December 2014 , Barcelona 's appeal to the CAS was unsuccessful and the original transfer ban was reinstated , leaving the club unable to utilise the 2015 winter and summer transfer windows . On 5 January 2015 , <unk> was sacked by the board after 4 years as director of football . On 12 February 2015 , Barcelona announced the formation of a new Football Area Technical Commission , made up of vice @-@ president Jordi Mestre , board member Javier <unk> , Carles Rexach and <unk> <unk> . 
 Barcelona won the treble in the 2014 – 15 season , winning La Liga , Copa del Rey and Champions League titles , and became the first European team to have won the treble twice . On 17 May , the club clinched their 23rd La Liga title after defeating Atlético Madrid . This was Barcelona 's seventh La Liga title in the last ten years . On 30 May , the club defeated Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final at Camp Nou . On 6 June , Barcelona won the Champions League final with a 3 – 1 win against Juventus , which completed the treble , the club 's second in six years . 
 = Sacagawea dollar = 
 The Sacagawea dollar ( also known as the " golden dollar " ) is a United States dollar coin that has been minted every year since 2000 , although not released for general circulation from 2002 through 2008 and again from 2012 onward due to its general unpopularity with the public and low business demand for the coin . These coins have a copper core clad by manganese brass , giving them a distinctive golden color . The coin features an obverse by Glenna Goodacre . From 2000 to 2008 , the reverse featured an eagle design by Thomas D. Rogers . Since 2009 , the reverse of the Sacagawea dollar has been changed yearly , with each design in the series depicting a different aspect of Native American cultures . 
 The coin was first suggested as a replacement for the Susan B. Anthony dollar , which proved useful for vending machine operators and mass transit systems despite being unpopular with the public . The Statue of Liberty was originally proposed as the design subject , but Sacagawea , the Shoshone guide of the Lewis and Clark expedition , was eventually chosen . 
 The new dollar coin was heavily marketed by the Mint in a series of print , radio , and television advertisements , as well as Mint partnerships with Walmart and Cheerios . However , the Sacagawea dollar did not prove popular with the public , and mintage dropped sharply in the second year of production . Production of Sacagawea dollars continued , since 2007 in parallel with the U.S. Presidential dollars . In 2012 , mintage numbers were reduced by over 90 % , in line with a similar reduction for the Presidential Dollars , due to large stockpiles of unused dollar coins . 
 The Mint planned to issue the Sacagawea design in 22 @-@ karat gold as well , but this idea was quickly abandoned after the Mint 's authority to strike the coins was questioned , and the Mint has retained ownership of the few such coins produced . Soon after initial production of the dollar , it was noticed that a few of the dollar coins were erroneously struck with the obverse of a state quarter and the normal reverse . 
 = = Background = = 
 Due to the limited circulation of the Eisenhower dollar , it was decided in the 1970s that a smaller dollar coin might prove more useful to the public . On September 26 , 1978 , Congress approved legislation to provide for a smaller dollar coin to be minted , which would depict Susan B. Anthony , a prominent American suffragette . These new dollars also proved unpopular , due in large part to their similarity in size and metallic composition to the quarter @-@ dollar . Since there was little interest in the coin as a circulating medium , most were placed in United States Mint and Federal Reserve vaults throughout the country , and mintage ceased after 1981 . 
 Despite their initial lack of popularity , by the late 1990s the Treasury 's supply of small dollar coins began to dwindle due to their widespread use in vending machines ( including more than 9 @,@ 000 stamp machines situated in post offices across the United States ) and mass transit turnstiles . Beginning in 1997 , several bills were introduced to Congress with the intent of resuming mintage of small @-@ sized dollar coins to keep up with demand . On March 20 of that year , Arizona Republican Representative Jim Kolbe introduced legislation calling for more dollar coins to be minted . Four months later , on July 24 , Republican Representative Michael Castle of Delaware , a member of the House Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy , also introduced legislation , calling for the Statue of Liberty to be the subject of the design . On October 21 , Minnesota Republican Rod Grams introduced a bill in the Senate , also calling for the mintage of a newly designed dollar coin . The final legislation authorizing the design and production of a new dollar coin was based on Grams ' bill . Also on October 21 , in a hearing before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy , Trade , and Technology , Treasury Department officials gave their support for a new dollar coin , recommending that it be gold @-@ colored with a distinctive edge , to make it easily distinguishable from the quarter @-@ dollar . During this hearing , Philip N. Diehl , then Director of the Mint , estimated that it would take thirty months to begin production of the new coin . 
 The United States Senate approved the necessary legislation on November 9 , 1997 , and the House of Representatives did the same on November 13 . On December 1 President Bill Clinton signed the 50 States Commemorative Coin Program Act , which became Public Law 105 @-@ 124 . Section four of the act , which is entitled " United States $ 1 Coin Act of 1997 " , provided for a new dollar coin to be struck , stating in part : " The dollar coin shall be golden in color , have a distinctive edge , have tactile and visual features that make the denomination of the coin readily discernible " . The act also gave authority to the Secretary of the Treasury to resume production of the Susan B. Anthony dollar until production could begin on the new dollar coin . In total , more than 41 million Susan B. Anthony dollars were struck bearing the date 1999 . 
 = = Design history = = 
 = = = Subject selection = = = 
 Though the United States $ 1 Coin Act of 1997 required a change in composition and edge , it did not dictate what was to appear on the coin . To determine this , Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin appointed a nine @-@ member Dollar Coin Design Advisory Committee . Rubin , who had the authority to select the coin 's design as Secretary of the Treasury , specified that the coin should depict a representation of one or more women and could not depict a living person . The committee was chaired by Philip N. Diehl , a role that did not include a vote on the designs . They met in Philadelphia in June 1998 , listening to seventeen concepts submitted by members of the public , and reviewing many more suggestions received by telephone , mail and email . On June 9 , 1998 , the committee recommended Sacagawea , the Shoshone guide of the Lewis and Clark Expedition , for the design of the new coin . Despite the committee 's choice of Sacagawea , Castle advocated that the Statue of Liberty be depicted , as per his earlier legislation . In a letter to the House of Representatives , Castle explained his objection , stating that the " goal in creating a new dollar coin is to make it more distinctive with a popular design that would encourage its wider use by the public . " Between November 18 and 22 , 1998 , the General Accounting Office conducted a poll on behalf of Castle . The object of the poll was to determine which design the public would find more desirable . In total , 65 percent preferred the Statue of Liberty , 27 percent preferred Sacagawea , two percent believed that either was acceptable , three percent said neither was acceptable , and an additional three percent had no opinion . Despite Castle 's objection , Sacagawea was ultimately chosen as the subject of the coin . 
 = = = Initial design selection = = = 
 Invitations were sent to 23 artists with guidelines as to what their designs should depict . The obverse was to depict a representation of Sacagawea , and the reverse an eagle symbolizing peace and freedom . Another guideline requested artists " be sensitive to cultural authenticity , and try to avoid creating a representation of a classical European face in Native American headdress . " In November and December 1998 , members of the Native American community , teachers , numismatists , historians , members of Congress , various government officials and others were invited by the United States Mint to review the submitted proposed designs . Six obverse and seven reverse designs were originally selected for further consideration . 
 After the Mint conducted a series of polls and focus groups , three obverse and four reverse designs were selected as finalists . The Mint received approximately 90 @,@ 000 e @-@ mails in reference to the design selection process . In response to the large amount of feedback generated , Diehl stated that the internet has " allowed us to conduct a public outreach program of unprecedented scope to measure opinions of the designs . " All seven of the selected designs were forwarded to the United States Commission of Fine Arts ; the Commission chose an obverse design depicting Sacagawea with her infant son , Jean Baptiste Charbonneau , as designed by sculptor Glenna Goodacre . Goodacre chose Randy <unk> He @-@ <unk> Teton to model for Sacagawea , of whom there are no known contemporary portraits , to help the artist capture the features of a young Native American woman . The chosen reverse , designed by Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Thomas D. Rogers , depicted a soaring eagle . 
 = = = Native American redesign = = = 
 On September 20 , 2007 , Pub.L. 110 – 82 , known as the Native American $ 1 Coin Act , was signed by president George W. Bush . The act specified in part that the one dollar coin shall depict " images celebrating the important contributions made by Indian tribes and individual Native Americans to the development of the United States and the history of the United States . " The act also called for the removal of the date from the obverse and " E PLURIBUS UNUM " from the reverse of the coin , opting instead to add them to the edge . At this time the mintmark was also moved to the edge . 
 The program requires that the reverse of the dollar depict a new design every year . In order to determine which design to depict on the coins , officials from the United States Senate Committee on Indian Affairs , the Native American Caucus and the National Congress of American Indians , the consulting organizations for the program , appoint a liaison to the United States Mint . Between twelve and fifteen themes are selected after consultation with the National Museum of the American Indian and the Smithsonian Institution . At this point , the consulting organizations supply the Mint with written comments regarding the themes . The suggestions are then sent to the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee , where a theme is recommended . After reviewing the recommendations and input from the contributing organizations , the selected theme is finalized , at which point designs are produced that represent the theme . Once designs are created , the consulting organizations and the National Museum of the Native American are consulted , and the designs are sent to the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee for approval . Based on all comments and recommendations received , the Mint selects a final design that is recommended to the Secretary of the Treasury for approval . 
 The first coin in the Native American series , issued in 2009 , was designed by Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Norman E. Nemeth , the subject being the spread of Three Sisters Agriculture . It depicts a Native American woman planting seeds in a field populated with corn , beans and squash . Above the woman is the inscription " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " , and below is " $ 1 " . 
 The design selected for the 2010 reverse was designed by Artistic Infusion Program artist Thomas Cleveland and depicts the Hiawatha belt surrounding five stone @-@ tipped arrows , along with the inscriptions " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " , " $ 1 " , " <unk> " and " GREAT LAW OF <unk> " . The subject of the design is the " Great Tree of Peace " . 
 The reverse of the 2011 dollar depicts the hands of the Supreme Sachem <unk> and Plymouth Colony Governor John Carver holding a ceremonial pipe , along with the inscriptions " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " , " $ 1 " , and " <unk> <unk> 1621 " . The coin was designed by Artistic Infusion Program artist Richard Masters and engraved by Mint sculptor – engraver Joseph Menna . The design subject is treaties with tribal nations . 
 The theme for the reverse of the 2012 dollar is " Trade Routes of the 17th Century " and the design depicts the profile of a Native American man and a horse in the foreground and a group of galloping horses in the background . This reverse design was created by Thomas Cleveland as part of the Artistic Infusion Program and engraved by Mint sculptor – engraver Phebe Hemphill . 
 The 2013 dollar commemorates the Treaty with the Lenape in 1778 , the first formal treaty between the United States and a Native American tribe . The coin depicts a turkey , a howling wolf , and a turtle — symbols of the Lenape . Its design was created by Susan Gamble as part of the Artistic Infusion Program , and engraved by Phebe Hemphill . 
 The 2014 dollar depicts a Native American man clasping a ceremonial pipe while his wife holds a plate of provisions , including fish , corn , roots and gourds . In the background is the stylized image of the face of William Clark 's compass , displaying " NW " for " northwest . " It bears the inscriptions " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " and " $ 1 , " as required by law . 
 The reverse design of the 2015 dollar depicts Mohawk ironworkers . According to the U.S. Mint , the coin commemorates Kahnawake and Akwesasne Mohawk ironworkers who contributed to the building of New York City skyscrapers . The inscriptions on the reverse read " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA , " " $ 1 " and " <unk> <unk> . " It was designed by artist Ronald D. Sanders . 
 According to an August 29 , 2014 , U.S. Mint press release , the design selected for use on the 2016 coins commemorates Code talkers from World Wars I and II . Designed by Thomas D. Rogers , it includes the inscriptions " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA , " $ 1 " , " WWI " and " WWII " and depicts two helmets used by American fighting forces in the 20th century — the Brodie helmet of World War I , and the M1 helmet of World War II — along with two feathers which combine to form a V , " symbolizing victory , unity , and the important role that these code talkers played . " 
 On October 7 , 2015 , the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee recommended new designs for 2017 and 2018 . These were , respectively , Sequoyah and Jim Thorpe , the latter over an outline of his ancestor Chief Black Hawk . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 After her obverse design was approved , Goodacre visited the Philadelphia Mint engraving department six times in order to finalize the designs . Rogers ' reverse design was also modified before production began . In his original proposal , mountainous scenery was depicted beneath the flying eagle ; this was removed and the positions of other reverse design features were altered before Rubin gave final approval . The composition selected for the new coin included a cladding of manganese brass ( containing about 77 % copper , 12 % zinc , 7 % manganese , and 4 % nickel ) over a pure copper core . This composition was chosen because it would give the coin a distinctive golden color while being electromagnetically identical to its predecessor , the copper @-@ nickel Susan B. Anthony dollar . The first official striking of the Sacagawea dollar took place on November 18 , 1999 , during a ceremony in which dignitaries and other invited guests each struck individual examples of the coins . Because the coins were struck before 2000 , it was not legal to release them during the first strike ceremonies . Instead , the coins were saved and later sent to the dignitaries who struck them . Full @-@ scale production began shortly after the ceremonial strikings . 
 For her work creating the obverse of the Sacagawea dollar , Goodacre received a $ 5 @,@ 000 commission ; she requested that it be paid in dollar coins . The coins paid to Goodacre were struck on specially burnished blanks to give them a finish unique to that striking . Diehl and other Mint dignitaries personally delivered the coins to Goodacre on April 5 , 2000 . A similar specially burnished finish was used on the 75 @,@ 000 2000 @-@ D dollars included in the Millennium Coin & Currency sets . Soon after release of the new coins , it was discovered that they tarnished quickly once in circulation . In April 2001 the Mint began testing an experimental rinse that would inhibit the tarnishing ; however , the rinse was used only in that year . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The act authorizing the dollar coin also provided for the Secretary of the Treasury to " adopt a program to promote the use of such coins by commercial enterprises , mass transit authorities , and Federal , State , and local government agencies . " The Mint 's initial advertising campaign , consisting of an estimated 1 @,@ 600 television , radio and print advertisements and partnerships with the national retail chain Wal @-@ Mart and the General Mills company , cost approximately $ 41 million . The television ads consisted of the head of George Washington superimposed upon a body , voiced by actor Michael Keaton , discussing the merits of the new dollar coin . 
 Beginning in January 2000 , the Mint began sending dollar coins to Wal @-@ Mart and Sam 's Club stores across the United States in order to help promote and circulate the coins . In total , $ 100 million worth of the dollars were shipped to the stores as part of the promotion . Some store owners criticized the Mint 's partnership with Wal @-@ Mart and Sam 's Club as being unfair to smaller retailers . In response , Diehl noted that " every retailer and commercial establishment has the right to carry the Golden Dollar . The Mint 's agreement with Wal @-@ Mart is designed to encourage all retailers and commercial businesses in the nation to use the new Golden Dollar in everyday transactions . " 
 During this time , the Mint began a partnership with the General Mills company , in which 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 boxes of Cheerios cereal would contain a 2000 @-@ dated Lincoln cent as a prize , one in every 2 @,@ 000 boxes would contain a new Sacagawea dollar and one in every 4 @,@ 400 would hold a certificate redeemable for 100 Sacagawea dollars . It was later discovered that the dollars included in every 2 @,@ 000 boxes were in fact early strikes , differing from those ultimately issued for circulation by the number of tail feathers on the eagle . Approximately 5 @,@ 500 of the coins were included in the boxes of cereal . 
 = = = Gold dollars = = = 
 In 1999 , the Mint struck a number of Sacagawea dollars in <unk> fine ( 22 @-@ karat ) gold . During the initial production of the coins , they were denominated at five dollars in order to help the public distinguish them from their circulating counterparts . The plan was to sell gold versions of the coins to collectors . On March 20 , this plan was halted when some Congressmen questioned the authority of Mint officials to strike the coins in a composition different from what had already been authorized . Full @-@ scale coin production never took place even though the Mint maintained that it did have authority to do so , as the coins would be considered numismatic items and not regular @-@ issue coins . Similar gold coins were also struck , this time bearing the denomination of one dollar and a " W " mint mark , signifying that the coins were struck at the West Point Mint . In total , 39 such coins were struck , twelve of which were found to be of adequate quality , while the rest were eventually destroyed . Unlike those denominated at five dollars , the one dollar pieces were " struck to commemorate the historic flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia in July 1999 " , according to Former Mint Director Ed Moy . The twelve surviving gold dollars were sent into space aboard Columbia on mission STS @-@ 93 in July 1999 . Following the return of the shuttle , the coins were placed in storage at Fort Knox , where they remained until 2007 , when they were exhibited at the American Numismatic Association World 's Fair of Money in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . After the event , the coins were returned to Fort Knox ; however , the Mint is currently planning to loan the coins to various museums throughout the country . 
 = = = Mule error = = = 
 In May 2000 , an error coin bearing the George Washington obverse design of a U.S. state quarter and the eagle reverse of a Sacagawea dollar was discovered in a roll of dollar coins purchased from a bank in Mountain Home , Arkansas . The undated coin , known as a double @-@ denomination mule , was the first of eleven discovered and authenticated . Mint officials estimate that the coins , which bear the ' P ' mint mark for Philadelphia , were struck from late April to early May 2000 . They were produced on dollar @-@ coin planchets clad with manganese bronze , not quarter planchets with copper @-@ nickel cladding . 
 Following the initial discovery , a bin containing several thousand of the error coins was impounded at the Philadelphia Mint , and all such coins within it were ordered melted . Some of the coins that had been released were eventually tracked back to a coin @-@ wrapping facility near Philadelphia . Employees at the wrapping facility were instructed to watch for any of the coins ; those discovered were turned over to the Mint . 
 A subsequent federal investigation into the incident found that the error coins had been struck accidentally , but two former Mint employees were guilty of selling some of the dollars , resulting in imprisonment and fines for both individuals . In 2002 , Mint officials announced that two of the ten coins then reported had entered circulation through legal channels , but the other eight were of dubious origins and might be seized . However , as of 2011 , the federal government has not attempted to seize the eight examples considered of dubious origin . 
 As of August 2011 , eight of the eleven error coins , including the one initially discovered in Arkansas , are owned by a New Mexico collector who purchased them between 2000 and 2003 , paying as high as $ 75 @,@ 000 for a single specimen . Of the other three documented mules , one is owned by its discoverer , a Missouri collector , another was purchased by an unnamed collector , and the third , first reported in 2011 , was purchased in 2011 by a Chicago dealer from an individual who had owned the coin for about ten years . Sale prices as high as $ 200 @,@ 000 have been reported . Three different die combinations have been identified among the eleven available error coins . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The coin received mixed reviews from the nation 's senators . In an interview with Associated Press columnist Suzanne Gamboa , Republican Senator Phil Gramm of Texas described United States currency as " crummy " . Gramm , who was one of the senators who voted for the bill containing the legislation that authorized it , praised the design of the Sacagawea dollar as being an improvement over the other coin designs then in production . Despite his praise of the design , Gramm condemned the Mint 's approach to marketing the coin , stating that if the United States Mint were the Franklin Mint , they would be " sued for deceptive advertisement . " He also noted his belief that the Mint had repeated the earlier mistakes of the Susan B. Anthony dollar by issuing a coin that was tailored to the requests of the vending machine industry rather than the average consumer . Texas Republican Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison criticized both the Sacagawea design as well the coin 's size in relation to the other coins in circulation at the time . Hutchison felt that the new coin lacked the necessary heft to easily distinguish it from the lower denominations , and that the dollar , as well as the other coins and currency then in circulation " looks like play money . " Senators Mike DeWine of Ohio and Byron Dorgan of North Dakota , Republican and Democrat respectively , praised the design and the distinctiveness of the golden color . 
 The series proved unpopular in everyday commerce . Mintage dropped by 90 % the following year . From 2002 through 2008 , Sacagawea dollars were only struck for sale to collectors . The Federal Reserve Bank ordered none of the Native American series after their issuance beginning in 2009 . In December 2009 , it was noted by a Federal Reserve official that there were currently 857 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @-@ dollar coins ( including Presidential dollars ) in government storage vaults , an amount estimated to satisfy the demand for twelve years . 
 Despite their unpopularity in the United States , the coins proved popular for commerce in El Salvador and Ecuador , nations that use the United States dollar . 
 = = Mintage figures = = 
 = = Coin and Currency Sets = = 
 Besides the annual proof and uncirculated sets , Sacagawea dollars with special finishes have also been inserted into several mint packages . These include the following : 
 = Quatermass and the Pit = 
 Quatermass and the Pit is a British television science @-@ fiction serial transmitted live by BBC Television in December 1958 and January 1959 . It was the third and last of the BBC 's Quatermass serials , although the chief character , Professor Bernard Quatermass , reappeared in a 1979 ITV production called Quatermass . Like its predecessors , Quatermass and the Pit was written by Nigel Kneale . 
 The serial continues the loose chronology of the Quatermass adventures . Workmen excavating a site in Knightsbridge , London , discover a strange skull and what at first appears to be an unexploded bomb . Quatermass and his newly appointed military superior at the British Experimental Rocket Group , Colonel Breen , become involved in the investigation when it becomes apparent that the object is an alien spacecraft . The ship and its contents have a powerful and malign influence over many of those who come in contact with it , including Quatermass . It becomes obvious to him that the aliens , probably from Mars , had been abducting pre @-@ humans and modifying them to give them psychic abilities much like their own before returning them to Earth , a genetic legacy responsible for much of the war and strife in the world . 
 The serial has been cited as having influenced Stephen King and the film director John Carpenter . It featured in the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes compiled by the British Film Institute in 2000 , which described it as " completely gripping " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Quatermass Experiment ( 1953 ) and Quatermass II ( 1955 ) , both written by Nigel Kneale , had been critical and popular successes for the BBC , and in early 1957 the corporation decided to commission a third serial . Kneale had left the BBC shortly before , but was hired to write the new scripts on a freelance basis . 
 The British Empire had been in transition since the 1920s , and the pace accelerated in the wake of the Second World War . More and more member states demanded independence , and a series of crises erupted during the 1950s , including the 1952 Mau Mau Uprising in Kenya and the Suez Crisis of 1956 . During the same period immigration into Britain from the Indian subcontinent and the Caribbean was on the increase , causing some resentment among elements of the native population . At the time Kneale was working on his scripts black communities in Nottingham and London came under attack from mobs of white Britons ; Kneale became keen to develop the serial as an allegory for the emerging racial tensions that culminated in the Notting Hill race riots of August and September 1958 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Workmen discover a pre @-@ human skull while building in the fictional Hobbs Lane ( formerly Hob 's Lane , Hob being an antiquated name for the Devil ) in Knightsbridge , London . Dr Matthew Roney , a paleontologist , examines the remains and reconstructs a dwarf @-@ like humanoid with a large brain volume , which he believes to be a primitive man . As further excavation is undertaken , something that looks like a missile is unearthed ; further work by Roney 's group is halted because the military believe it to be an unexploded Second World War bomb . 
 Roney calls in his friend Professor Bernard Quatermass of the British Rocket Group to prevent the military from disturbing what he believes to be an archaeological find . Quatermass and Colonel Breen , recently appointed to lead the Rocket Group over Quatermass 's objections , become intrigued by the site . As more of the artefact is uncovered additional fossils are found , which Roney dates to five million years , suggesting that the object is at least that old . The interior is empty , and a symbol of five intersecting circles , which Roney identifies as the occult pentacle , is etched on a wall that appears to conceal an inner chamber . 
 The shell of the object is so hard that even a boron nitride drill makes no impression , and when the attempt is made , vibrations cause severe distress in people around the object . Quatermass interviews local residents and discovers ghosts and poltergeists have been common in the area for decades . A hysterical soldier is carried out of the object , claiming to have seen a dwarf @-@ like apparition walk through the wall of the artefact , a description that matches a 1927 newspaper account of a ghost . 
 Following the drilling , a hole opens up in the object 's interior wall . Inside , Quatermass and the others find the remains of insect @-@ like aliens resembling giant three @-@ legged locusts , with stubby antennae on their heads giving the impression of horns . As Quatermass and Roney examine the remains , they theorise the aliens may have come from a planet habitable five million years ago – Mars . 
 While clearing his equipment from the craft the drill operator triggers more poltergeist activity , and runs through the streets in a panic until he finds sanctuary in a church . Quatermass and Roney find him there , and he describes visions of the insect aliens killing each other . As Quatermass investigates the history of the area , he finds accounts dating back to medieval times about devils and ghosts , all centred on incidents where the ground was disturbed . He suspects a psychic projection of these beings has remained on the alien ship and is being seen by those who come into contact with it . 
 Quatermass decides to use Roney 's optic @-@ <unk> , a device that records impressions from the optical centres of the brain , and see the visions for himself . Roney 's assistant , Barbara Judd , is most sensitive ; placing the device on her , they record a violent purge of the Martian hive to root out unwanted mutations . Quatermass concludes that in its most primitive phase mankind was visited by this race of Martians . Some apes and primitive pre @-@ humans were taken away and genetically altered to give them abilities such as telepathy , telekinesis and other psychic powers . They were then returned to Earth , and the buried artefact is one of the ships that had crashed at the end of its journey . With their home world dying , the aliens had tried to change humanity 's ancestors to have minds and abilities similar to their own , but with a bodily form adapted to life on Earth . 
 But the aliens became extinct before completing their work . As the human race bred and evolved , only a percentage retained their psychic abilities , which surfaced only sporadically . For centuries the buried ship had occasionally triggered those dormant abilities , which explained the reports of poltergeists ; people were unknowingly using their own telekinesis to move objects around , and the ghost sightings were traces of a racial memory . The authorities , and Breen in particular , find this explanation preposterous despite being shown the recording of Barbara 's vision . They believe that the craft is a Nazi propaganda weapon and the alien bodies fakes designed to create exactly the impressions that Quatermass has succumbed to , and decide to hold a media event to stem the rumours that are already spreading . 
 Quatermass warns that if implanted psychic powers survive in the human race , there could also still be an ingrained compulsion to enact the " Wild Hunt " of a race purge , but the media event goes ahead regardless . The power cables that string into the craft fully activate it for the first time , and glowing and humming like a living thing it starts to draw upon this energy source and awaken the ancient racial programming . Those Londoners in whom the alien admixture remains strong fall under the ship 's influence ; they merge into a group mind and begin a telekinetic mass murder of those without the alien genes , an ethnic cleansing of those the alien race mind considers to be impure and weak . 
 Breen stands transfixed and is eventually consumed by the energies from the craft as it slowly melts away and an image of a Martian " devil " floats in the sky above London . Fires and riots erupt , and after Quatermass succumbs to the mass psychosis he attempts to kill Roney , who does not have the alien gene and is therefore immune to the alien influence . Roney manages to shake Quatermass out of his trance , and remembering the legends of demons and their aversion to iron and water , he proposes that a sufficient mass of iron connected to wet earth may be sufficient to short @-@ circuit the apparition . Quatermass acquires a length of iron chain and tries to reach the " devil " but succumbs to its psychic pressure . Roney manages to walk up to the apparition and hurls the chain at it , resulting in him and the spacecraft being reduced to ashes . 
 At the conclusion of the final episode Quatermass gives a television broadcast , at the end of which he delivers a warning directly to camera : " If we cannot control the inheritance within us , this will be their [ the Martians ' ] second dead planet . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 For the third time in as many serials the title role was played by a different actor , this time by André Morell ; the part had initially been offered to Alec Clunes , but he declined it . Morell had a reputation for playing authority figures , such as Colonel Green in The Bridge on the River Kwai ( 1957 ) , and had previously worked with Kneale and Cartier when he appeared as O 'Brien in their BBC television adaptation of Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four ( 1954 ) . He had been the first actor offered the part of Quatermass , for the original serial The Quatermass Experiment in 1953 ; he turned the part down . Morell 's portrayal of Quatermass has been described as the definitive interpretation of the character . 
 Colonel Breen was played by Anthony Bushell , who was known for various similar military roles – including another bomb disposal officer in The Small Back Room ( 1949 ) – and preferred to be addressed as " Major Bushell " , the rank he held during the Second World War . Roney was played by Canadian actor Cec Linder , John Stratton played Captain Potter , and Christine Finn played the other main character , Barbara Judd . She went on to provide the voices for various characters in the popular 1960s children 's television series Thunderbirds . 
 For the first time , Kneale used a character from a previous serial other than Quatermass himself , the journalist James Fullalove from The Quatermass Experiment . The production team had hoped that Paul Whitsun @-@ Jones would be able to reprise the part ; he was unavailable and Brian Worth was cast instead . Michael Ripper appeared as an army sergeant ; he had been in Hammer Film Productions ' adaptation of the second Quatermass serial , Quatermass 2 , the previous year . The drama also featured future Dad 's Army actress Nan Braunton as Miss Dobson . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The director assigned was Rudolph Cartier , with whom Kneale had a good working relationship ; the two had collaborated on the previous Quatermass serials , as well as the literary adaptations Wuthering Heights ( 1953 ) and Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four ( 1954 ) . The budget of £ 17 @,@ 500 allocated for Quatermass and the Pit was larger than that of the previous Quatermass productions . Pre @-@ production began in September 1958 , while Cartier was still working on A Tale of Two Cities and A Midsummer Night 's Dream for the BBC . As the two previous Quatermass serials had been scheduled in half @-@ hour slots but , performed live , had overrun , Cartier requested 35 @-@ minute slots for the six episodes of Quatermass and the Pit . This was agreed in November 1958 , just before the start of production on 24 November . The six episodes – " The <unk> " , " The Ghosts " , " Imps and Demons " , " The Enchanted " , " The Wild Hunt " and " Hob " – were broadcast on Monday nights at 8 pm from 22 December 1958 to 26 January 1959 . 
 Each episode was predominantly live from Studio 1 of the BBC 's Riverside Studios in Hammersmith , London . The episodes were rehearsed from Tuesday to Saturday , usually at the Mary Wood Settlement in Tavistock Place , London , with camera rehearsals in the morning and afternoon of transmission . Not every scene was live ; a significant amount of material was on 35 mm film and inserted during the performance . Most filming involved scenes set on location or those too technically complex or expansive to achieve live . The latter were shot at Ealing Studios , acquired by the BBC in 1955 , where Cartier worked with the cinematographer A. A. Englander . Pre @-@ filming was also used to show the passage of time in the second episode ; the archaeological dig at Ealing was shown to have dug deeper into the ground than the equivalent set at Riverside , enabling a sense of time having elapsed that would not have been possible in an all @-@ live production . 
 Made just before videotape became general at the BBC , all six episodes of Quatermass and the Pit were preserved for a possible repeat by being telerecorded on 35 mm film . This was achieved with a specially @-@ synchronised film camera capturing the output of a video monitor ; the process had been refined throughout the 1950s and recordings of Quatermass and the Pit are of high technical quality . The serial was repeated in edited form as two 90 @-@ minute episodes , entitled " 5 Million Years Old " and " Hob " , on 26 December 1959 and 2 January 1960 . The third episode , " Imps and Demons " , was re @-@ shown on BBC Two on 7 November 1986 as part of the " <unk> " season , celebrating 50 years of BBC television . 
 Quatermass and the Pit was the last original production on which Kneale collaborated with Rudolph Cartier . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 Special effects were handled by the BBC Visual Effects Department , formed by Bernard Wilkie and Jack Kine in 1954 . Kine or Wilkie oversaw effects on a production ; due to the number of effects , both worked on Quatermass and the Pit . The team pre @-@ filmed most of their effects for use during the live broadcasts . They also oversaw practical effects for the Ealing filming and Riverside transmission , and constructed the bodies of the Martian creatures . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music was credited to Trevor Duncan , a pseudonym used by BBC radio producer Leonard <unk> , whose music was obtained from stock discs . Quatermass and the Pit also used sound effects and electronic music to create a disturbing atmosphere . These tracks were created for the serial by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop , overseen by Desmond Briscoe ; Quatermass and the Pit was one of the productions for which Briscoe and the workshop became most renowned . It was the first time electronic music had been used in a science @-@ fiction television production . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Quatermass and the Pit was watched by an average audience of 9 @.@ 6 million viewers , peaking at 11 million for the final episode . The Times ' television reviewer praised the opening episode the day after its transmission . Pointing out that " Professor Bernard Quatermass ... like all science fiction heroes , has to keep running hard if he is not to be overtaken by the world of fact " , the anonymous reviewer went on to state how much he had enjoyed the episode as " an excellent example of Mr. Kneale 's ability to hold an audience with promises alone ; smooth , leisurely , and without any sensational incident " . 
 Kneale went on to use the Martian " Wild Hunt " as an allegory for the recent Notting Hill race riots , but some Black British leaders were upset by the depiction of racial tensions in the first episode . " Leaders of coloured minorities here to @-@ day criticized the BBC for allowing a report that ' race riots are continuing in Birmingham , ' to be included in a fictional news bulletin during the first instalment of the new Quatermass television play last night " , reported The Times ' Birmingham correspondent . 
 These themes and subtexts were highlighted by the British Film Institute 's review of the serial when it was included in their TV 100 list in 2000 , in 75th position – 20th out of the dramas featured : " In a story which mined mythology and folklore ... under the guise of genre it tackled serious themes of man 's hostile nature and the military 's perversion of science for its own ends . " The theme of military takeover of peaceful scientific research was also considered favourably by Patrick Stoddart , writing for The Sunday Times in 1988 : " Last week I watched a BBC drama in which a scientist fought against smirking government ministers and power @-@ crazed army officers to stop his peaceful rocket research group being turned into a Star Wars vehicle to put missiles on the moon . They won . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 In a 2006 Guardian article Mark Gatiss wrote " What sci @-@ fi piece of the past 50 years doesn 't owe Kneale a huge debt ? ... The ' ancient invasion ' of Quatermass and the Pit cast a huge shadow ... its brilliant blending of superstition , witchcraft and ghosts into the story of a five @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old Martian invasion is copper @-@ bottomed genius . " Gatiss was a scriptwriter for Doctor Who , a programme that had been particularly strongly influenced by the Quatermass serials throughout its history . Derrick Sherwin , the producer of Doctor Who in 1969 , acknowledged Quatermass and the Pit 's influence on the programme 's move towards more realism and away from " wobbly jellies in outer space " . The 1971 and 1977 Doctor Who serials The Dæmons and Image of the <unk> share many elements with Quatermass and the Pit : the unearthing of an extraterrestrial spaceship , an alien race that has interfered with human evolution and is the basis for legends of devils , demons and witchcraft , and an alien influence over human evolution . 
 The writer and critic Kim Newman , speaking about Kneale 's career in a 2003 television documentary , cited Quatermass and the Pit as perfecting " the notion of the science @-@ fictional detective story " . Newman also discussed the programme as an influence on the horror fiction writer Stephen King , claiming that King had " more or less rewritten Quatermass and the Pit in The Tommyknockers " . 
 After Quatermass and the Pit Kneale felt that it was time to rest the character . By the early 1970s he had decided there were new avenues to explore , and the BBC planned a fourth Quatermass serial in 1972 . The BBC did not proceed with the project , and Kneale 's scripts were produced in 1979 as a four @-@ part serial for Thames Television titled Quatermass . 
 = = Other media = = 
 As with the previous two Quatermass serials , the rights to adapt Quatermass and the Pit for the cinema were purchased by Hammer Film Productions . Their adaptation was released with the same title as the original in 1967 , directed by Roy Ward Baker and scripted by Kneale . Scottish actor Andrew Keir starred as Quatermass , the role for which he was best remembered and regarded particularly highly in comparison to the previous film Quatermass , Brian Donlevy . The film , made in colour , is regarded by many commentators as a classic of the genre for the way it blends science fiction with the supernatural . In the United States the film was retitled Five Million Years to Earth . 
 A script book of Quatermass and the Pit was released by Penguin Books in April 1960 , with a cover by Kneale 's artist brother Bryan Kneale . In 1979 this was re @-@ published by Arrow Books to coincide with the transmission of the fourth and final Quatermass serial on ITV ; this edition featured a new introduction by Kneale . The theatrical company Creation Productions staged a live adaptation of Quatermass and the Pit in a quarry near Nottingham in August 1997 . 
 The BBC made Quatermass and the Pit available to buy on VHS videotape in 1988 , edited into a two @-@ part compilation format . This was a new compilation made from the episodic film recordings , which had optical sound and <unk> film inserts . This was re @-@ released on VHS by Paradox Films , Total Home Entertainment and Revelation Films in 1995 , and subsequently on DVD by Revelation Films in 2000 . The full , unedited , episodic version of the serial was released on DVD by BBC Worldwide in 2005 , as part of The Quatermass Collection box set . Also included were the surviving two episodes of The Quatermass Experiment , all of Quatermass II and various extra features . 
 For the box set release , Quatermass and the Pit was extensively restored . A process called <unk> was applied to all of the scenes originally broadcast live , restoring the fluid interlaced video look they would have had on transmission , but which was lost during the telerecording process . For the pre @-@ filmed scenes , most of the high @-@ quality original 35 mm film inserts still existed , as they had been spliced into the 1959 – 60 compilation repeat version in place of the lower @-@ quality telerecorded versions of the same sequences . As this compilation also survived in the BBC archives , these film sequences were able to be digitally remastered and inserted into the newly restored episodic version for the DVD release . The compilation used a separate magnetic soundtrack , and although the original had decayed a safety copy had survived . This yielded better sound quality than the optical soundtracks accompanying the original episodes , and was therefore the main source for the audio remastering except in the case of scenes that were not in the compilation , and in a few cases where faults on the magnetic tracks necessitated their replacement by the optical versions . 
 = = Parodies = = 
 A 1959 episode of the BBC radio comedy series The Goon Show parodied Quatermass and the Pit . The episode , " The Scarlet Capsule " , was written by Spike Milligan , and used the original BBC Radiophonic Workshop sound effects made for the television serial . The episode has been released on several LP and CD compilations by EMI , but owing to copyright restrictions the show 's musical interludes have been removed and the closing playout heavily abridged . A more complete version has been broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra ( formerly BBC7 ) . 
 The serial was also parodied by the BBC television comedy series Hancock 's Half Hour in an episode entitled " The Horror Serial " , transmitted the week following the final episode . In it , Tony Hancock has just finished watching the final episode of Quatermass and the Pit , and becomes convinced that there is a crashed Martian space ship buried at the end of his garden . ( It is in fact an unexploded bomb , although Hancock claims that the warning " Achtung ! " is really the Martian for Acton . ) This episode no longer exists in the BBC 's archives but a private collector 's audio @-@ only recording has been discovered . 
 It was parodied a third time in a sketch from the final series of The Two Ronnies in 1986 : the sketch featured a guest appearance from Joanna Lumley . 
 = Nycticebus kayan = 
 The Kayan River slow loris ( Nycticebus kayan ) is a strepsirrhine primate and a species of slow loris that is native to the northern and central highland region of the island of Borneo . The species was originally thought to be a part of the Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) population until 2013 , when a study of museum specimens and photographs identified distinct facial markings , which helped to differentiate it . It is distinguished by the high contrast of its black and white facial features , as well as the shape and width of the stripes of its facial markings . 
 The species is named after the Kayan River , which runs through its native habitat . As with other slow lorises , this arboreal and nocturnal species primarily eats insects , tree gum , nectar , and fruit and has a toxic bite , a unique feature among primates . Although not yet evaluated by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) , it is likely to be listed as " Vulnerable " or placed in a higher @-@ risk category when its conservation status is assessed . It is primarily threatened by habitat loss and the illegal wildlife trade . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 N. kayan is a strepsirrhine primate , and species of slow loris ( genus Nycticebus ) within the family Lorisidae . Museum specimens of this animal had previously been identified as the Bornean slow loris ( Nycticebus menagensis ) , first described by the English naturalist Richard Lydekker in 1893 as Lemur menagensis . In 1953 , all of the slow lorises were lumped together into a single species , the Sunda slow loris ( Nycticebus coucang ) . In 1971 , that view was refined by distinguishing the pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) as a species , and by further identifying four subspecies , including N. coucang menagensis , the Bornean slow loris . The Bornean slow loris was elevated to the species level ( as N. menagensis ) in 2006 , when molecular analysis showed it to be genetically distinct from N. coucang . 
 A 2013 review of museum specimens and photographs attributed to N. menagensis resulted in elevating two of its former subspecies to the species N. bancanus and N. borneanus . Additionally , N. kayan was recognized as a new species , distinct from the nominate subspecies , N. menagensis . All newly recognized or elevated species showed significant differences in their " facemask " — the coloration patterns on their face . Analysis of the facemask patterns suggests that N. kayan diverged from N. menagensis and N. borneanus through sympatric speciation ( divergent evolution of organisms living in the same geographic region ) , while geographic barriers may account for its divergence with N. bancanus ( allopatric speciation ) . 
 N. kayan is named after the Kayan River , which runs through its native habitat and near <unk> , the type locality of the original specimen . The holotype , AMNH <unk> , was originally collected on 8 October 1935 by Baron V. von <unk> near <unk> in the province of East Kalimantan in Borneo and is housed in the American Museum of Natural History in New York . It consists of a male skin and skull , with a head @-@ body length of 257 @.@ 3 mm ( 10 @.@ 1 in ) . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 Like other slow lorises , it has a vestigial tail , round head , and short ears . It has a rhinarium ( the moist , naked surface around the nostrils of the nose ) and a broad , flat face with large eyes . Like N. menagensis , this and all other Bornean species lack a second upper incisor , which distinguishes them from other slow lorises . On its front feet , the second digit is smaller than the rest ; the big toe on its hind foot opposes the other toes , which enhances its gripping power . Its second toe on the hind foot has a curved grooming claw that it uses for scratching and grooming , while the other nails are straight . It also possesses a specialized arrangement of lower front teeth , called a toothcomb , which is also used for grooming , as with other lemuriform primates . On the ventral side of its elbow , it has a small swelling called the brachial gland , which secretes a pungent , clear oily toxin that the animal uses defensively by wiping it on its toothcomb . 
 The face mask of N. kayan differs from those of other Bornean lorises in several ways . First , the top of the dark ring around its eyes is either rounded or pointed ( not diffuse at the edges ) and the bottom stretches below the zygomatic arch , and sometimes extends as far down as the jaw . Second , the stripe between the eyes is occasionally bulb @-@ shaped , compared to the rectangular stripe seen in the neighboring species . Also , a light band of fur in front of the ears is usually intermediate in width compared to the narrow and wide bands seen in the other Bornean species . Compared to N. menagensis , the facemask of N. kayan has more contrast between its dark black and white features , and its ears are always covered in hair , whereas those of N. menagensis are generally naked . Overall , its fur is generally longer and fluffier compared to N. menagensis . Based on a limited number of specimens , the species is about 273 @.@ 4 mm ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) long , and weighs about 410 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 9 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 N. kayan is found in central and northern Borneo . Its range extends south to the Mahakam and Rajang Rivers in the Indonesian province of East Kalimantan and the Malaysian province of Sarawak , respectively , and north to southern side of Mount Kinabalu in the Malaysian province of Sabah . Although it is not found along the coast , its range spans Borneo from east to west . Its range overlaps that of N. menagensis in East Kalimantan and Sabah , and N. borneanus is a neighboring species . 
 = = Habitat and ecology = = 
 Like other slow lorises , N. kayan is arboreal , nocturnal , and omnivorous , eating primarily insects , tree gum , nectar , and fruit . Likewise , this species has a toxic bite , a unique feature found only in slow lorises among primates . The toxin is produced by licking a brachial gland ( a gland by its elbow ) , and the secretion mixes with its saliva to activate . The toxic bite is a deterrent to predators , and the toxin is also applied to the fur during grooming as a form of protection for infants . When threatened , slow lorises may also lick their brachial glands and bite the aggressors , delivering the toxin into the wound . Slow lorises can be reluctant to release their bite , which is likely to maximize the transfer of toxins . 
 The face mask may help the species identify potential mates by distinguishing species , and may serve as an anti @-@ predator strategy by making its eyes appear larger than they really are . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 While Nycticebus kayan has yet to be assessed by the IUCN , N. menagensis was listed as " Vulnerable " as of 2012 . Because that species has been divided into four distinct species , each of the new species faces a higher risk of extinction . Accordingly , each of them are expected to be listed as " Vulnerable " at least , with some of them likely to be assigned to a higher @-@ risk category . 
 Between 1987 and 2012 , one @-@ third of Borneo 's forests were lost , making habitat loss one of the greatest threats to the survival of N. kayan . The illegal wildlife trade is also a major factor , with loris parts commonly sold for traditional medicine . Further , viral videos on YouTube promote the exotic pet trade . However , all slow loris species are protected from commercial trade under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) . 
 = Home ( Glee ) = 
 " Home " is the sixteenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on April 27 , 2010 . It was directed by Paris Barclay and written by series creator Brad Falchuk . " Home " sees new cheerleader Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) deal with body image issues , while Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) sets his dad and Finn Hudson 's mom together , in an attempt to get closer to Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , and club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is reunited with his friend April Rhodes ( Kristin Chenoweth ) . Chenoweth first appeared in Glee in the episode " The Rhodes Not Taken " . She enjoyed the role of April so much that she agreed to return for " Home " , and has expressed an interest in reappearing in the future . 
 The episode features cover versions of five songs , all of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and four of which are included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 – Showstoppers . " Home " was watched by 12 @.@ 18 million American viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Both Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times and Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly recommended that Chenoweth receive an Emmy nomination for her performance , and Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald opined that the episode itself should be submitted for Emmy consideration . Jean Bentley of MTV felt that Chenoweth was overused in the episode , however , and criticized the songs performed as being unrecognizable to younger viewers . Todd VanDerWerff of The A. V. Club felt that the episode was poorly balanced , and Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle deemed " Home " the weakest episode of Glee thus far . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In preparation for an interview with Splits Magazine , cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) demands that new cheerleader Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) lose ten pounds in a week . She reserves the school auditorium for cheer practice , so glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) has to find the club a new rehearsal space . He visits a local roller rink where he finds former glee club member April Rhodes ( Kristin Chenoweth ) , who tells him that she is the mistress of the wealthy eighty @-@ year @-@ old tycoon who owns the rink . Upon learning that Will is looking to sublet his apartment , April invites herself to visit . After spending the night sharing a bed , Will forbids April from staying over again and tells her she is worth more than being a mistress . April says she will break up with her tycoon . 
 Mercedes struggles to eat healthily and her mid @-@ week weigh @-@ in shows that she has gained two pounds . She begins extreme dieting and faints in the school cafeteria . Former cheerleading captain Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) sympathizes with Mercedes , commending her for being so comfortable in her own body and advising her not to let being a cheerleader detract from that . Though Mercedes is embarrassed , Quinn tells her that she is beautiful . On the day of the pep rally , Mercedes abandons the planned routine , and instead sings " Beautiful " . The journalist from Splits Magazine assumes that Sue engineered the performance and expresses his admiration for her , promising her positive publicity from his article . 
 Glee club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) sets up his widower father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) with Finn Hudson 's ( Cory Monteith ) widowed mother Carole ( Romy Rosemont ) . He believes that it will help him become closer to Finn , for whom he has feelings . Finn is upset when Carole sells their old furniture , and stops his late father 's recliner from being sold . He is initially hostile to her dating someone new , but begins to bond with Burt over sports at a group dinner . Kurt feels left out , and later asks Finn to help him break up their parents . Finn initially agrees , but relents after Burt tells him that he loves Carole and would never hurt her . They watch a basketball game together and Finn allows Burt to sit in his father 's recliner , while Kurt watches on sadly through the window . 
 When April attempts to break up with her tycoon , he has a stroke and dies . His wife gives April $ 2 million in hush money , and April uses some of it to buy the auditorium for the glee club . She plans to go to Broadway to launch the first all @-@ white production of The Wiz . The episode ends with April and the glee club performing " Home " from The Wiz . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Home " was directed by Paris Barclay , who also directed " Wheels " , Glee 's ninth episode . It was written by series co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk , who deemed the episode potentially the best of the series so far . " Home " sees the return of guest star Kristin Chenoweth , who first appeared in episode five , " The Rhodes Not Taken " , as former glee club member April Rhodes . Prior to her first appearance , Chenoweth was already acquainted with Glee creator Ryan Murphy , having appeared in his 2006 film Running with Scissors . Murphy commented that he loves writing for Chenoweth , and both he and Chenoweth expressed their desire for April to return to Glee in the future , with Chenoweth stating : " This part is like nothing I 've had the chance to do on TV . " It was confirmed in October 2009 that Chenoweth would reprise the role of April later in the first season , and on March 14 , 2010 that her return would occur in " Home " . 
 While Glee also features Chenoweth 's former Wicked co @-@ star Idina Menzel as recurring character Shelby Corcoran , the producers declined to give the two scenes together , explaining that the series is story @-@ driven , and as re @-@ uniting the two on @-@ screen did not work for storytelling purposes , it was deemed unnecessary . Of Chenoweth 's future with Glee beyond " Home " , Falchuk commented that the producers want to " have her around as much as possible " , and although no plans have been solidified , she may return in the second season . He expanded : " [ When ] you have talents like that , it 's very hard to not want them back . The one advantage we have , I think , is that we have so many incredibly talented people in our … cast that … we don 't need [ guest actors ] as much . But there are certain very special people that , of course , you 'd always be interested in . " 
 The episode features a cover version of " A House Is Not a Home " , performed by Colfer and Monteith , as well as a mash @-@ up of " A House Is Not a Home " and " One Less Bell to Answer " , performed by Chenoweth and Morrison . Morrison and Chenoweth also duet on The Pointer Sisters ' version of " Fire " . In keeping with the " home " theme of the episode , Mötley Crüe 's ballad " Home Sweet Home " ( and also " Heart of Glass " by Blondie , although this isn 't about home ) can be heard in the roller rink scene , but was not covered by the cast . Chenoweth performs " Home " from The Wiz , and Riley sings " Beautiful " by Christina Aguilera . The songs performed were all released as singles , available for digital download . Each track except " Fire " and " Home Sweet Home " is also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 – Showstoppers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Home " was watched by 12 @.@ 18 million American viewers and attained a 5 @.@ 2 / 13 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 91 million viewers and was the second most @-@ watched show of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels , beaten only by Britain 's Got More Talent . In Canada , Glee was watched by 2 @.@ 16 million viewers , making Glee the tenth most @-@ viewed program of the week . In Australia , the episode lead in its timeslot in all key demographics , and was watched by 1 @.@ 3 million viewers , making Glee the 16th most @-@ viewed show of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Home " received mixed reviews from critics . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times deemed it the series ' most emotional episode , and his favorite next to " Wheels " . Kennedy praised O 'Malley 's performance as " nothing short of perfection " and recommended that Chenoweth receive an Emmy nomination for her performance . Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly concurred that Chenoweth 's performance was Emmy @-@ worthy , though felt she may have been slightly overused in the episode . Stack noted that he did not love " Home " upon his first viewing , but praised it for adding depth to the characters and tackling body image and sexuality issues . Rick Bentley of McClatchy Newspapers called the episode " as perfect as television can get " , praising Colfer 's performance and also deeming him deserving of an Emmy nomination . Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald similarly assessed that " Home " is : " the strongest episode of the season to date , the one Fox should submit for Emmy consideration . " Perigard was impressed by the range shown by O 'Malley , and opined that the episode as a whole had no low @-@ points . 
 In contrast , Jean Bentley of MTV described " Home " as " an hour of television better suited for Internet surfing than actually paying attention . " She criticized the songs as being unrecognizable to younger viewers , and called the main plots " emotional <unk> , with not much comic relief in between . " Bentley felt that Chenoweth was overused , and called her appearance in the episode " nonsensical and unnecessary " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " C " . He felt that the three main plot strands were poorly balanced , resulting in an episode with " powerful moments that drown as they 're nearly subsumed by everything else going on . " VanDerWerff criticized Mercedes ' storyline as being too abrupt , and deemed her performance of " Beautiful " : " so forced that it loses any power it might have from what 's a genuinely nice arrangement of the song . " Finally , he expressed his concern that the prevalence of songs in Glee may detract from the quality of the show . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle also criticized the episode , deeming it the weakest of the series so far , and one that left him underwhelmed . 
 = Saint @-@ Sylvestre coup d 'état = 
 The Saint @-@ Sylvestre coup d 'état was a coup d 'état staged by Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa , leader of the Central African Republic ( CAR ) army , and his military officers against the government of President David Dacko on 31 December 1965 and 1 January 1966 . Dacko , Bokassa 's cousin , took over the country in 1960 , and Bokassa , a military officer in the French army , joined the CAR army in 1962 . By 1965 , the country was in turmoil — plagued by corruption and slow economic growth , while its borders were breached by rebels from neighboring countries . Dacko obtained financial aid from the communist People 's Republic of China , but despite this support , the country 's problems persisted . Bokassa made plans to take over the government ; Dacko was made aware of this , and attempted to counter by forming the gendarmerie headed by Jean Izamo , who quickly became Dacko 's closest adviser . 
 With the aid of Captain Alexandre Banza , Bokassa started the coup New Year 's Eve night in 1965 . First , Bokassa and his men captured Jean Izamo , locking him in a cellar at Camp de Roux . Bokassa 's men then occupied the capital , Bangui , and overpowered the gendarmerie and other resistance . After midnight , Dacko headed back to the capital , where he was promptly arrested , forced to resign from office and then imprisoned at Camp Kassaï . According to official reports , eight people were killed for resisting the coup . By the end of January 1966 , Izamo was tortured to death , but Dacko 's life was spared because of a request from the French government , which Bokassa was trying to satisfy . Bokassa justified the coup by claiming he had to save the country from falling under the influence of communism , and cut off diplomatic relations with China . In the early days of his government , Bokassa dissolved the National Assembly , abolished the Constitution and issued a number of decrees , banning begging , female circumcision , and polygamy , among other things . Bokassa initially struggled to obtain international recognition for the new government . However , after a successful meeting with the president of Chad , Bokassa obtained recognition of the regime from other African nations , and eventually from France , the former colonial power . 
 Bokassa 's right @-@ hand man Banza attempted his own coup in April 1969 , but one of his co @-@ conspirators informed the president of the plan . Banza was put in front of a military tribunal and sentenced to death by firing squad . Dacko , who remained in isolation at Camp de Roux , sent a letter to the Chinese ambassador in Brazzaville in June 1969 , which Bokassa intercepted . Bokassa charged Dacko with threatening state security and transferred him to the infamous Ngaragba Prison , where many prisoners taken captive during the coup were still being held . A local judge convinced Bokassa that there was a lack of evidence to convict Dacko , who was instead placed under house arrest . In September 1976 , Dacko was named personal adviser to the president ; the French government later convinced him to take part in a coup to overthrow Bokassa , who was under heavy criticism for his ruthless dictatorial rule . This coup was carried out on 20 and 21 September 1979 , when Dacko became president again , only to be overthrown in another coup two years later . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1958 , after the French Fourth Republic began to consider granting independence to most of its African colonies , nationalist leader Barthélemy Boganda met with Prime Minister Charles de Gaulle to discuss terms for the independence of Oubangui @-@ Chari , a French colonial territory which later became the Central African Republic ( CAR ) . De Gaulle accepted his request , and on 1 December 1958 , Boganda declared the establishment of the autonomous CAR , with full independence to follow soon . He became the autonomous territory 's first Prime Minister and intended to serve as the first President of the independent CAR . However , he was killed in a plane crash on 29 March 1959 , while en route to the capital , Bangui . 
 Boganda 's right @-@ hand man Abel Goumba , described as " intelligent , honest , and strongly nationalistic " by author Brian Titley in Dark Age : The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa , succeeded him as the leader of the CAR . In May 1959 , a month into Goumba 's term , David Dacko took control of the government . Dacko , a former member of Boganda 's cabinet and party leader of the Movement for the Social Evolution of Black Africa ( MESAN ) , had the support of the French high commissioner Roger <unk> , the Bangui chamber of commerce and Boganda 's widow Michelle Jourdain . Two months later , Dacko dismissed Goumba from his new post as minister of finance . Goumba and Pierre <unk> , the former president of the National Assembly who was ousted by Dacko , left the MESAN party and organized their own opposition party , Democratic Evolution Movement of Central Africa ( MEDAC ) , on 25 June 1960 . Meanwhile , on August 13 , 1960 , Boganda 's dream was realized when the Central African Republic ( CAR ) attained formal independence from France . 
 MEDAC became moderately popular , was approved by Etienne <unk> ( the Dacko @-@ appointed president of MESAN ) , and received significant support in by @-@ elections on 20 September . Dacko viewed MEDAC as a dissident party and sought to disestablish it — he soon received power from the National Assembly to deal with his opponents in any way he saw fit . In December 1960 , Dacko dissolved MEDAC and Goumba was arrested for " fomenting disorder by questioning Dacko 's assumption of power " . Goumba was eventually sentenced to life in prison , but fled into exile in France . 
 On 1 January 1962 , Dacko 's cousin , Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa , left the French Army and joined the military forces of the CAR with the rank of battalion commandant . Over a year later , Bokassa became commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the 500 soldiers in the Central African army . Due to his relation to Dacko and experience abroad in the French military , Bokassa was able to quickly rise through the ranks of the army , becoming the Central African army 's first colonel on 1 December 1964 . 
 Bokassa sought recognition for his status as the army 's leader ; he frequently appeared in public wearing all his military decorations , and in ceremonies often tried to sit next to President Dacko to hint at his importance in the government . Bokassa constantly involved himself in heated arguments with Jean @-@ Paul <unk> , the government 's chief of protocol , who admonished him for not following the correct order of seating at presidential tables . At first , Dacko found his cousin 's antics for power and recognition amusing . Despite the recent rash of African military coups , Dacko publicly dismissed the possibility that Bokassa would someday try to take control of the country . At a state dinner , he said , " Colonel Bokassa only wants to collect medals and he is too stupid to pull off a coup d 'état " . Other members of Dacko 's cabinet saw Bokassa as a major threat to the regime . Jean @-@ Arthur <unk> , the minister of interior , recommended that Bokassa be brought into the cabinet , which he hoped would both satisfy the colonel 's desire for recognition and break his connections with the army . To prevent the possibility of a military coup , Dacko created the gendarmerie , an armed police force of 500 , headed by Jean Izamo , and a 120 @-@ member presidential security guard , led by Prosper <unk> . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Dacko 's government faced a number of problems during 1964 and 1965 : the economy experienced stagnation , the bureaucracy started to fall apart , and the country 's boundaries were constantly breached by Lumumbists from the south and the rebel Sudan People 's Liberation Army from the east . Under pressure from radicals in MESAN and in an attempt to cultivate alternative sources of support and display his independence in foreign policy , Dacko established diplomatic relations with the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) in September 1964 . A delegation led by Meng <unk> and agents of the Chinese government toured the country , showing Communist propaganda films . Soon after , the PRC gave the CAR an interest @-@ free loan of one billion CFA francs ( 20 million French francs ) ; however , the aid failed to prevent the prospect of a financial collapse for the country . Another problem which plagued the government was widespread corruption . Bokassa felt that he needed to take over the CAR government to remove the influence of Communism and solve all the country 's problems . According to Samuel Decalo , a scholar on African government , Bokassa 's personal ambitions most likely played the most important role in his decision to launch a coup against the government . 
 Dacko sent Bokassa to Paris as part of a delegation for the Bastille Day celebrations in July 1965 . After attending a 23 July ceremony to mark the closing of a military officer training school he had attended decades earlier , Bokassa planned to return to the CAR . However , Dacko had forbidden his return , and Bokassa spent the next few months trying to obtain the support of friends in the French and Central African armed forces . Dacko eventually yielded to pressure and allowed Bokassa back in October . 
 Tensions between Dacko and Bokassa increased . In December , Dacko approved a budget increase for Izamo 's gendarmerie , but rejected the budget proposal for Bokassa 's army . At this point , Bokassa told friends he was annoyed by Dacko 's treatment and was " going for a coup d 'état " . Dacko planned to replace Bokassa with Izamo as his personal military adviser , and wanted to promote army officers loyal to the government , while demoting Bokassa and his close associates . Dacko was not silent about his plans ; he hinted at his intentions to elders of the <unk> village , who informed Bokassa of the plan in turn . Bokassa realized he had to act against Dacko quickly , and worried that his 500 @-@ man army would be no match for the gendarmerie and the presidential guard . He was also concerned the French would intervene to aid Dacko , as had occurred after the 23 February 1964 coup d 'état in Gabon against President Léon M 'ba . After receiving word of the coup from the country 's vice president , officials in Paris sent paratroopers to Gabon in a matter of hours and M 'ba was quickly restored to power . 
 Bokassa found substantive support from his co @-@ conspirator , Captain Alexandre Banza , who was commander of the Camp Kassaï military base in northeast Bangui , and , like Bokassa , had served in the French army in posts around the world . Banza was an intelligent , ambitious and capable man who played a major role in planning the coup . By December , many people began to anticipate the potential turmoil that would result . Dacko 's personal advisers alerted him that Bokassa " showed signs of mental instability " and needed to be arrested before he sought to bring down the government , but Dacko failed to heed these warnings . 
 = = Coup d 'état on 31 December and 1 January = = 
 Early in the evening of 31 December 1965 , Dacko left the Palais de la Renaissance to visit one of his ministers ' plantations southwest of the capital . At 22 : 30 WAT ( UTC 21 : 30 ) , Captain Banza gave orders to his officers to begin the coup : one of his captains was to subdue the security guard in the presidential palace , while the other was to take control of Radio @-@ Bangui to prevent communication between Dacko and his followers . Bokassa called Izamo at his headquarters , asking him to come to Camp de Roux to sign some papers that needed his immediate attention . Izamo , who was at a New Year 's Eve celebration with friends , reluctantly agreed and traveled in his wife 's car to the camp . Upon arrival , he was confronted by Banza and Bokassa , who informed him of the coup in progress . When asked if he would support the coup , Izamo said no , leading Bokassa and Banza to overpower him and hold him in a cellar . 
 Shortly after midnight , in the first minutes of 1 January 1966 , Bokassa and Banza organized their troops and told them of their plan to take over the government . Bokassa claimed that Dacko had resigned from the presidency and given the position to his close advisor Izamo , then told the soldiers that the gendarmerie would take over the CAR army , which had to act now to keep its position . He then asked the soldiers if they would support his course of action ; the men who refused were locked up . At 00 : 30 WAT , Bokassa and his supporters left Camp de Roux to take over the capital . They encountered little resistance and were able to take Bangui . Bokassa and Banza then rushed to the Palais de la Renaissance , where they tried to arrest Dacko , who was nowhere to be found . Bokassa began to panic , as he believed the president had been warned of the coup in advance , and immediately ordered his soldiers to search for Dacko in the countryside until he was found . 
 Dacko was not aware of the events taking place in the capital . After leaving his minister 's plantation near midnight , he headed to Simon Samba 's house to ask the Aka Pygmy leader to conduct a year @-@ end ritual . After an hour at Samba 's house , he was informed of the coup in Bangui . According to Titley , Dacko then left for the capital , in hopes of stopping the coup with the help of loyal members of the gendarmerie and French paratroopers . Others like Thomas E. O 'Toole , professor of sociology and anthropology at St. Cloud State University , believe that Dacko was not trying to mount a resistance — instead , he was planning on resigning and handing his power over to Izamo . In any case , Dacko was arrested by soldiers patrolling <unk> Junction , on the western border of the capital . He was taken back to the presidential palace , where Bokassa hugged the president and told him , " I tried to warn you — but now it 's too late " . President Dacko was taken to Ngaragba Prison in east Bangui at around 02 : 00 WAT . In a move that he thought would boost his popularity in the country , Bokassa ordered prison director Otto Sacher to release all prisoners in the jail . Bokassa then took Dacko to Camp Kassaï at 03 : 20 WAT , where the president was forced to resign from office . Later , Bokassa 's officers announced on Radio @-@ Bangui that the Dacko government had been toppled and Bokassa had taken over control . In the morning , Bokassa addressed the public via Radio @-@ Bangui : 
 Central Africans ! Central Africans ! This is Colonel Bokassa speaking to you . Since 3 : 00 AM this morning your army has taken control of the government . The Dacko government has resigned . The hour of justice is at hand . The bourgeoisie is abolished . A new era of equality among all has begun . Central Africans , wherever you may be , be assured that the army will defend you and your property ... Long live the Central African Republic ! 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Officially , eight people died trying to resist the coup . Afterwards , Bokassa 's officers went around the country , arresting Dacko 's political allies and close friends , including Simon Samba , Jean @-@ Paul <unk> and more than 60 presidential security guards , who were all taken to Ngaragba Prison . Prosper <unk> , the director of the presidential security , fled the country . Weeks later , he was detained by the Congolese and handed over to Bokassa on 23 January 1966 . At Camp Kassaï , he was beaten and tortured to death , in full view of Bokassa , Banza and Dacko . Jean Izamo met a similar fate : he was transferred to Ngaragba Prison on 10 January , but was tortured to death by the month 's end . President Dacko 's life was spared , as Bokassa wanted international recognition for his government and France had threatened to cut off aid to the CAR if Dacko was killed . Bokassa had Dacko detained in a small room at Camp Kassaï , where he was cut off from communication with the outside world and placed on a highly restrictive diet . On 3 February , he was taken to Camp de Roux , where he remained in isolation . 
 In the meantime , Bokassa engaged in self @-@ promotion before the media , showing his countrymen his French army medals , and displaying his strength , fearlessness and masculinity . He formed a new government called the Revolutionary Council , invalidated the constitution and dissolved the National Assembly , calling it " a lifeless organ no longer representing the people " . In his address to the nation , Bokassa claimed that the government would hold elections in the future , a new assembly would be formed , and a new constitution would be written . He also told his countrymen that he would give up his power after the communist threat had been eliminated , the economy stabilized , and corruption rooted out . President Bokassa allowed MESAN to continue functioning , but barred all other political organizations from the country . In the coming months , Bokassa imposed a number of new rules and regulations : men and women between the ages of 18 to 55 had to provide proof that they had jobs , or else they would be fined or imprisoned ; begging was banned ; tom @-@ tom playing was allowed during the nights and weekends ; and a " morality brigade " was formed in the capital to monitor bars and dance halls . Polygamy , dowries and female circumcision were all abolished . Bokassa also opened a public transport system in Bangui and subsidized the creation of two national orchestras . 
 Despite the positive changes in the country , Bokassa had difficulty obtaining international recognition for his new government . He tried to justify the coup by explaining that Izamo and communist Chinese agents were trying to take over the government and that he had to intervene to save the CAR from the influence of communism . He alleged that Chinese agents in the countryside had been training and arming locals to start a revolution , and on 6 January 1966 , he dismissed the communist agents from the country and cut off diplomatic relations with China . Bokassa also believed that the coup was necessary in order to prevent further corruption in the government . 
 Bokassa first secured diplomatic recognition from President François Tombalbaye of neighboring Chad , whom he met in <unk> , <unk> . After Bokassa reciprocated by meeting Tombalbaye on 2 April 1966 along the southern border of Chad at Fort Archambault , the two decided to help one another if either was in danger of losing power . Soon after , other African countries began to diplomatically recognize the new government . At first , the French government was reluctant to support the Bokassa regime , so Banza went to Paris to meet with French officials to convince them that the coup was necessary to save the country from turmoil . Bokassa met with Prime Minister Georges Pompidou on 7 July 1966 , but the French remained noncommittal in offering their support . After Bokassa threatened to withdraw from the franc monetary zone , President Charles de Gaulle decided to make an official visit to the CAR on 17 November 1966 . To the Bokassa regime , this visit meant that the French had finally accepted the new changes in the country . 
 = = = Banza and Dacko = = = 
 Alexandre Banza , who stood by Bokassa throughout the planning and execution of the coup , served as minister of finance and minister of state in the new government . Banza was successful in his efforts at building the government 's reputation abroad ; many believed that the natural @-@ born leader would no longer accept serving as Bokassa 's right @-@ hand man . In 1967 , Banza and Bokassa had a major argument regarding the country 's budget , as Banza adamantly opposed Bokassa 's extravagance at government events . Bokassa moved to Camp de Roux , where he felt he could safely run the government without having to worry about Banza 's thirst for power . On 13 April 1968 , Bokassa demoted Banza from minister of finance to minister of health , but let him remain in his position as minister of state . The following year , Banza made a number of remarks highly critical of Bokassa and his management of the economy . At this point , Bokassa realized that his minister would soon attempt to take over power in the country , so he removed him as his minister of state . 
 Banza revealed his intention to start a coup to Lieutenant Jean @-@ Claude Mandaba , the commanding officer of Camp Kassaï , who promptly informed Bokassa . When he entered Camp Kassaï on 9 April 1969 ( the coup was planned for that evening ) , Banza was ambushed , thrown into the trunk of a Mercedes and taken directly to Bokassa by Mandaba and his soldiers . At his house in <unk> , Bokassa nearly beat Banza to death before Mandaba suggested that Banza be put on trial for appearance 's sake . On 12 April , Banza presented his case before a military tribunal at Camp de Roux , where he admitted to his plan , but stated that he had not planned to kill Bokassa . Nevertheless , he was sentenced to death by firing squad , taken to an open field behind Camp Kassaï , executed and buried in an unmarked grave . 
 Ex @-@ President Dacko remained in isolation at Camp de Roux , where the French government , which expressed concern for his well @-@ being , sent a military attaché to visit him . Dacko told the attaché that he had not been given anything to read for more than two years ; the attaché negotiated with the prison head to get Dacko some books . However , Dacko 's living conditions failed to improve , and in June 1969 , Dacko sent a letter to the Chinese ambassador in Brazzaville , asking that he offer financial support to his family . The message was intercepted and handed over to Bokassa , who thought the letter was ample reason for him to get rid of Dacko . Dacko was charged with threatening state security and transferred to Ngaragba Prison . However , Bokassa dropped the charges on 14 July , after Judge Albert Kouda convinced him that there was insufficient evidence to get a conviction . Dacko stayed at the Palais de la Renaissance until his health improved , after which he was sent to live in <unk> , Lobaye under house arrest . It was not until October 1969 — almost four years after the coup — that Bokassa began releasing other prisoners from Ngaragba . 
 Dacko remained under house arrest until he was named private adviser to President Bokassa on 17 September 1976 . Bokassa dissolved the government and formed the Central African Empire , which led to increasing international criticism in the late 1970s . Dacko managed to leave for Paris , where the French convinced him to cooperate in a coup to remove Bokassa from power and restore him to the presidency . Dacko was installed as president on 21 September 1979 , but was once again removed from power by his army chief of staff , André Kolingba , in a bloodless coup d 'état on 1 September 1981 . Bokassa lived in exile in Paris and was sentenced to death in absentia in December 1980 . Upon returning to the CAR in October 1986 , he was arrested and charged with treason , murder , cannibalism and embezzlement . He was cleared on the cannibalism charges , but was convicted on the rest and sentenced to death on 12 June 1987 . Kolingba commuted his sentence to life imprisonment in February 1988 , and then commuted it again to 20 years in prison . Kolingba later declared amnesty for all prisoners , so Bokassa was released from prison on 1 August 1993 . 
 = The King 's Speech = 
 The King 's Speech is a 2010 British biographical drama film directed by Tom Hooper and written by David Seidler . Colin Firth plays King George VI who , to cope with a stammer , sees Lionel Logue , an Australian speech and language therapist played by Geoffrey Rush . The men become friends as they work together , and after his brother abdicates the throne , the new king relies on Logue to help him make his first wartime radio broadcast on Britain 's declaration of war on Germany in 1939 . 
 Seidler read about George VI 's life after overcoming a stuttering condition he endured during his youth . He started writing about the relationship between the monarch and his therapist as early as the 1980s , but at the request of the King 's widow , Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother , postponed work until her death in 2002 . He later rewrote his screenplay for the stage to focus on the essential relationship between the two protagonists . Nine weeks before filming began , Logue 's notebooks were discovered and quotations from them were incorporated into the script . 
 Principal photography took place in London and around Britain from November 2009 to January 2010 . The opening scenes were filmed at Elland Road , Leeds , and Odsal Stadium , Bradford , both locations standing in for the old Wembley Stadium . For indoor scenes , Lancaster House substituted for Buckingham Palace , and Ely Cathedral stood in for Westminster Abbey , while the weaving mill scene was filmed at the Queen Street Mill in Burnley . The cinematography differs from that of other historical dramas : hard light was used to give the story a greater resonance and wider than normal lenses were employed to recreate the King 's feelings of constriction . A third technique Hooper employed was the off @-@ centre framing of characters : in his first consultation with Logue , George VI is captured hunched on the side of a couch at the edge of the frame . 
 Released in the United Kingdom on 7 January 2011 , The King 's Speech was a major box office and critical success . Censors initially gave it adult ratings due to profanity , though these were later revised downwards after criticism by the makers and distributors in the UK and some instances of swearing were muted in the US . On a budget of £ 8 million , it earned over £ 250 million internationally ( $ 400 million ) . It was widely praised by film critics for its visual style , art direction , and acting . Other commentators discussed the film 's representation of historical detail , especially the reversal of Winston Churchill 's opposition to abdication . The film received many awards and nominations , particularly for Colin Firth 's performance ; his Golden Globe Award for Best Actor was the sole win at that ceremony from seven nominations . The King 's Speech won seven British Academy Film Awards , including Best Film , Best Actor ( Firth ) , Best Supporting Actor ( Rush ) , and Best Supporting Actress ( Helena Bonham Carter ) . The film also won four Academy Awards : Best Picture , Best Director ( Hooper ) , Best Actor ( Firth ) , and Best Original Screenplay ( Seidler ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Prince Albert , Duke of York , the second son of King George V , stammers through his speech closing the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Stadium . The Duke has given up hope of a cure , but his wife Elizabeth persuades him to see Lionel Logue , an Australian speech therapist living in London . During their first session , Logue insists on being called Lionel by his patient and on breaching royal etiquette by calling the Prince " Bertie " , a name used only by his family . When the Duke decides Logue 's treatment is unsuitable , Logue bets him that he can recite Hamlet 's " To be , or not to be " soliloquy without trouble and distracts him by playing music through headphones while recording his performance on an acetate record . Prince Albert leaves in anger but Logue offers him the recording as a keepsake . 
 After King George V makes his 1934 Christmas radio address , he explains to his son the importance of broadcasting to a modern monarchy and demands that Albert train himself , starting with a reading of his father 's speech . His attempt to do so is a failure . Later , the Duke plays Logue 's recording and hears himself reciting unhesitatingly . He therefore returns to Logue , where he and his wife both insist that Logue focus only on physical exercises , not therapy . Logue teaches his patient muscle relaxation and breath control but continues to probe gently and persistently at the psychological roots of the stutter . Albert eventually reveals some of the pressures of his childhood and the two men start to become friends . 
 With George V ’ s death in 1936 , his eldest son David ascends the throne as King Edward VIII , but causes a constitutional crisis with his determination to marry Wallis Simpson , an American socialite divorcée who is still legally married to her second husband . It is pointed out that Edward , as head of the Church of England , cannot marry her , even if she receives her second divorce , because both her previous husbands are alive . 
 At his next session , Albert expresses his frustration that while his speech has improved when talking to most people , he still stammers when talking to his own brother and reveals the extent of Edward VIII 's folly with Simpson . When Logue insists that Albert could be a good king instead , the latter labels such a suggestion as treason and dismisses Logue . When King Edward decides to abdicate in order to marry Simpson , Albert reluctantly succeeds as King George VI . The new king and queen visit Logue to make up the quarrel , startling Mrs. Logue , who was unaware that the new King had been her husband 's patient . 
 During preparations for his coronation in Westminster Abbey , George learns that Logue has no formal qualifications . When confronted , Logue explains how he was asked to help shell @-@ shocked Australian soldiers returning from The Great War . Since George remains unconvinced of his own fitness for the throne , Logue sits in King Edward 's Chair and dismisses the underlying Stone of Scone as a trifle . Goaded by Logue 's seeming disrespect , the King surprises himself with his own sudden burst of outraged eloquence and allows Logue to rehearse him for the ceremony . 
 Upon Britain 's declaration of war with Nazi Germany in 1939 , King George summons Logue to Buckingham Palace to prepare for his upcoming radio address to Britain and the Empire . Knowing the challenge that lies before him , the Archbishop of Canterbury , Winston Churchill and Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain are present to offer support . George and Logue are then left in the broadcasting room . He delivers his speech with Logue conducting him , but by end is speaking freely . Preparing to leave the room for the congratulations of those present in the palace , Logue mentions to the King that he still had difficulty enunciating ' w ' and the King jokes back , " I had to throw in a few so they 'd know it was me " . 
 After the King and his family step onto the balcony of the palace and are applauded by the crowd , a title card explains that Logue was always present at King George VI 's speeches during the war and that they remained friends for the rest of their lives . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Colin Firth as King George VI 
 Geoffrey Rush as Lionel Logue 
 Helena Bonham Carter as Queen Elizabeth 
 Guy Pearce as King Edward VIII 
 Timothy Spall as Winston Churchill 
 Derek Jacobi as Archbishop Cosmo Lang 
 Jennifer Ehle as Myrtle Logue 
 Anthony Andrews as Stanley Baldwin 
 Claire Bloom as Queen Mary 
 Eve Best as Wallis Simpson 
 Freya Wilson as Princess Elizabeth 
 Tim Downie as the Duke of Gloucester 
 Roger Hammond as Dr. Blandine Bentham 
 Ramona Marquez as Princess Margaret 
 Michael Gambon as King George V 
 Roger Parrott as Neville Chamberlain 
 Richard Dixon as the King 's Private Secretary 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As a child , David Seidler developed a stammer , which he believes was caused by the emotional trauma of World War II and the murder of his grandparents during the Holocaust . King George VI 's success in overcoming his stammer inspired the young Seidler , " Here was a stutterer who was a king and had to give radio speeches where everyone was listening to every syllable he uttered , and yet did so with passion and intensity . " When Seidler became an adult , he resolved to write about King George VI . During the late 1970s and 1980s he voraciously researched the King , but found a dearth of information on Logue . Eventually Seidler contacted Dr. Valentine Logue , who agreed to discuss his father and make his notebooks available if the Queen Mother gave her permission . She asked him not to do so in her lifetime , and Seidler halted the project . 
 The Queen Mother died in 2002 . Three years later , Seidler returned to the story during a bout of creative work inspired by a recovery from cancer . His research , including a chance encounter with an uncle whom Logue had treated , indicated he used mechanical breathing exercises combined with psychological counselling to probe the underlying causes of the condition . Thus prepared , Seidler imagined the sessions . He showed the finished screenplay to his wife , who liked it , but pronounced it too " seduced by cinematic technique " . She suggested he rewrite it as a stage play to focus on the essential relationship between the King and Logue . After he had completed it , he sent it to a few friends who worked in theatre in London and New York for feedback . 
 In 2005 , Joan Lane of Wilde Thyme , a production company in London , received the script . Lane started talking with Simon Egan and Gareth Unwin of Bedlam Productions , and they invited Seidler to London to rewrite the play again , this time for the screen . Together , Lane and Bedlam Productions organised a reading of the play in Pleasance Theatre , a small house in north London , to a group of Australian expatriates , among whom was Tom Hooper 's mother . She called her son and said , " I 've found your next project " . 
 Instead of trying to contact his agent , Lane asked an Australian staff member to hand @-@ deliver the script to Geoffrey Rush 's house , not far away from hers in Melbourne . Unwin reports that he received a four @-@ page e @-@ mail from Rush 's manager admonishing them for the breach of etiquette , but ending with an invitation to discuss the project further . Iain Canning from See @-@ Saw Films became involved and , in Gareth Unwin 's words : " We worked with ex @-@ chair of BAFTA Richard Price , and started turning this story about two grumpy men sitting in a room into something bigger . " Hooper liked the story , but thought that the original ending needed to be changed to reflect events more closely : " Originally , it had a Hollywood ending ... If you hear the real speech , he 's clearly coping with his stammer . But it 's not a perfect performance . He 's managing it . " 
 The production team learned — some nine weeks prior to the start of filming — of a diary containing Logue 's original notes on his treatment of the Duke . They then went back and re @-@ worked the script to reflect what was in the notes . Hooper said some of the film 's most memorable lines , such as at the climax , when Logue smiles , " You still stammered on the W " to the King , who replies , " I had to throw in a few so they would know it was me " were direct quotations from Logue 's notes . Changes from the script to reflect the historical record included Michael Gambon improvising the ramblings of George V as he signed away authority , and the decision to dress the Duke in an overcoat rather than regal finery in the opening scene . 
 Seidler thought Paul Bettany would be a good choice to play King George VI , Tom Hooper preferred Hugh Grant , though both actors refused the offer . Once they met with Firth and heard him read for the part , Seidler and Hooper were convinced of his suitability for the role . 
 The UK Film Council awarded the production £ 1 million in June 2009 . Filming began in December 2009 , and lasted 39 days . Most was shot in the three weeks before Christmas because Rush would be performing in a play in January . The schedule was further complicated by Bonham Carter 's availability : she worked on Harry Potter during the week , so her scenes had to be filmed during the weekend . 
 = = = Location and design = = = 
 The set design presented a challenge for the film @-@ makers : period dramas rely to an extent on the quality of production , but their budget was a relatively limited £ 8 million . The film had to be authentic — combining regal opulence with scruffy , depression @-@ era London . On 25 November 2009 , the crew took over the <unk> buildings in Southwark . The entire street was transformed into 1930s London . Large advertisements , for ( among other things ) Bovril and fascism were placed on the walls ; streets were sprayed with grit and buildings with grime . A neighbour of Hooper 's had told him the smog in London at the time was so thick that cars had to be guided by someone walking in front . To create this scene the crew pumped in so much artificial smoke that the fire alarms in a nearby boutique sounded . According to Hooper , the scene was a good opportunity to show Logue 's socio @-@ economic background . 
 On 26 November , a week 's filming with Firth , Rush , and Jacobi began at Ely Cathedral , the location used for Westminster Abbey . The production had asked for permission to film in the Abbey but were denied due to the demands of tourism . Though Lincoln Cathedral is architecturally a closer match to the Abbey , they preferred Ely , a favoured filming location . Its size allowed them to build sets showing not just the coronation , but the preparations before it . 
 Lancaster House , an opulent , government @-@ owned period house in London , was used for the interiors of Buckingham Palace that the King walks through prior to making his speech and for the official photograph afterwards ; it cost £ 20 @,@ 000 a day to rent . The 1936 Accession Council at St. James 's Palace , where George VI swore an oath , was filmed in February in the Livery Hall of Drapers ' Hall , after principal photography had been completed . The room , ornate and vast , met the occasion : the daunting nature of the new King 's responsibilities was shown by surrounding him with rich detail , flags and royal portraiture . 
 The crew investigated Logue 's former consultation rooms , but they were too small to film in . Instead , they found a high , vaulted room not far away in 33 Portland Place . Eve Stewart , the production designer , liked the mottled , peeling wallpaper there so much that she recreated the effect throughout the entire room . In his DVD commentary , Hooper said he liked Portland Place as a set because it felt " lived @-@ in " , unlike other period houses in London . The scenes of the Duke of York at home with his family were also filmed here ; showing the Prince living in a townhouse " subverted " expectations of a royal drama . 
 The opening scene , set at the closing ceremony of the 1925 British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Stadium , was filmed on location at Elland Road , home of Leeds United , and Odsal Stadium , home of Bradford RLFC . Elland Road was used for the speech elements of the prince stammering his way through his first public address , and Odsal Stadium was selected because of the resemblance of its curved ends to Wembley Stadium in 1925 . The crew had access to the stadium only at 10 pm , after a football game . They filled the terraces with inflatable dummies and over 250 extras dressed in period costumes . Live actors were interspersed to give the impression of a crowd . Additional people , as well as more ranks of soldiers on the pitch , were added in post @-@ production with visual effects . 
 Other locations include Cumberland Lodge , Harley Street , Knebworth , Hatfield House , the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , Queen Street Mill Textile Museum in Burnley , and Battersea Power Station , which doubled as a BBC wireless control room . The final cut of the film was completed on 31 August 2010 . 
 = = = Dialogue = = = 
 In developing his portrayal of George VI 's stammer , Firth worked with Neil Swain , the voice coach for the film . His sister , Kate Firth , also a professional voice coach to actors , proposed exercises the King might have done with Logue , and made suggestions on how to imagine Logue 's mix of physical and psychological coaching for the film . In addition , Firth watched archive footage of the King speaking . In an interview with Allan Tyrer published by the British <unk> Association , Swain said : " [ It ] was very interesting while we were working on the film just to think tonally how far we could go and should go with the strength of George 's stammer . I think a less courageous director than Tom [ Hooper ] – and indeed a less courageous actor than Colin [ Firth ] – might have felt the need to slightly sanitise the degree and authenticity of that stammer , and I 'm really really pleased that neither of them did . " In May 2011 Firth said he was finding traces of the stammer difficult to eliminate : " You can probably hear even from this interview , there are moments when it ’ s quite infectious , " he said . " You find yourself doing it and if I start thinking about it the worse it gets . If nothing else it ’ s an insight into what it feels like . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's original score was composed by Alexandre Desplat . In a film about a man struggling to articulate himself , Desplat was wary of overshadowing the dramaturgy : " This is a film about the sound of the voice . Music has to deal with that . Music has to deal with silence . Music has to deal with time . " The score is a sparse arrangement of strings and piano ( with the addition of oboe and harp in one cut ) , intended to convey the sadness of the King 's muteness , and then the growing warmth of friendship between him and Logue . The minimalist approach emphasises the protagonist 's struggle for control . Desplat used the repetition of a single note to represent the stickiness of the King 's speech . As the film progresses , growing banks of warm strings swaddle the deepening friendship between the two leads . The music rises to a climax in the coronation scene . Hooper originally wanted to film the scene without music , but Desplat argued that it was the real climax of the story — the point when the friendship was ratified by their decision to trust each other . " That is really rare " , said Desplat , " mostly you have love stories " . 
 To create a dated sound , the score was recorded on old microphones extracted from the EMI archives which had been specially made for the royal family . The music played during the broadcast of the 1939 radio speech at the climax of the film is from the 2nd movement ( Allegretto ) of Beethoven 's 7th Symphony ; it was added by Tariq Anwar , the editor . When Desplat later joined the team to write the music , he praised and defended Anwar 's suggestion . Hooper further remarked that the stature of the piece helps elevate the status of the speech to a public event . 
 The score was nominated for several awards , including Best Original Score at the Oscars , Golden Globes , and BAFTAs , winning the latter award . The score also won a Grammy at the 54th Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Alexandre Desplat , except where noted . 
 = = Visual style = = 
 Hooper employed a number of cinematic techniques to evoke the King 's feelings of constriction . He and cinematographer Danny Cohen used wider than normal lenses to photograph the film , typically 14mm , 18mm , <unk> , 25mm and 27mm , where the subtle distortion of the picture helps to convey the King 's discomfort . For instance , the subjective point of view shot during the Empire exhibition speech used a close up of the microphone with a wider lens , similar to the filming technique used for one of the Duke 's early consultations with a physician . In The New York Times , Manohla Dargis wrote that the feeling of entrapment inside the King 's head was rendered overly literal with what she believed to be a fisheye lens , though in these scenes the wider lenses were used . Hooper also discussed using the 18mm lens , one he likes " because it puts human beings in their context " . 
 Roger Ebert noted that the majority of the film was shot indoors , where oblong sets , corridors , and small spaces manifest constriction and tightness , in contrast to the usual emphasis on sweep and majesty in historical dramas . Hooper used wide shots to capture the actors ' body language , particularly Geoffrey Rush , who trained at L 'École Internationale de Théâtre Jacques Lecoq in Paris and " is consequently brilliant in the way he carries his body " . Hooper widened his scope first to capture Rush 's gestures , then full body movements and silhouettes . The approach carried over to Firth as well . In the first consultation scene , the Duke is squeezed against the end of a long couch framed against a large wall , " as if to use the arm of the sofa as a kind of friend , as a security blanket ? " Martin Filler praised the " low @-@ wattage " cinematography of Danny Cohen , as making everything look like it has been " steeped in strong tea " . 
 At other times , the camera was positioned very close to the actors to catch the emotion in their faces : " If you put a lens 6 inches from somebody 's face , you get more emotion than if you 're on a long lens 20 feet away , " Cohen said in an interview . Hooper sought a second subtlety while filming the first consultation room scene between the two men , having placed the camera 18 inches from Colin Firth 's face : " I wanted the nervousness of the first day to percolate into his performances . " 
 Historical dramas traditionally tend to use " soft light " , but Hooper wanted to use a harsher glare , which gives a more contemporary feel , and thus a greater emotional resonance . To achieve the effect , the lighting team erected huge blackout tents over the Georgian buildings , and used large lights filtered through Egyptian cotton . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 The filmmakers not only tightened the chronology of the events to just a few years but even shifted the actual timeline of treatment : the Duke of York actually began work with Logue in October 1926 , ten years before the abdication crisis , and the improvement in his speech was apparent in months rather than years , as is suggested by the film . In a 1952 newspaper interview with John Gordon , Logue said that " <unk> and without stuttering , he opened the Australian parliament in Canberra in 1927 " ; this was just seven months after the Duke began to work with Logue . 
 Hugo Vickers , an adviser on the film , agreed that the alteration of historical details to preserve the essence of the dramatic story was sometimes necessary . The high @-@ ranking officials , for instance , would not have been present when the King made his speech , nor would Churchill have been involved at any level , " but the average viewer knows who Churchill is ; he doesn 't know who Lord Halifax and Lord Hoare are . " 
 Robert Logue , a grandson of Lionel , doubted the film 's depiction of the speech therapist , stating " I don 't think he ever swore in front of the King and he certainly never called him ' Bertie ' " . Andrew Roberts , an English historian , states that the severity of the King 's stammer was exaggerated and the characters of Edward VIII , Wallis Simpson , and George V made more antagonistic than they really were , to increase the dramatic effect . 
 Christopher Hitchens and Isaac Chotiner challenged the film 's portrayal of Winston Churchill 's role in the abdication crisis . It is well established that Churchill encouraged Edward VIII to resist pressure to abdicate , whereas he is portrayed in the film as strongly supportive of Prince Albert and not opposed to the abdication . Hitchens attributes this treatment to the " cult " surrounding Churchill 's legacy . In a smart , well @-@ made film " would the true story not have been fractionally more interesting for the audience ? " he wondered . They also criticised the film for failing to indict the appeasement of the era . While the film never directly mentions the issue , Hitchens and Chotiner argue that it implies that George VI was against appeasement , especially in the final scene portraying " Churchill and the King at Buckingham Palace and a speech of unity and resistance being readied for delivery " . Far from distancing himself from Chamberlain 's appeasement policy , King George VI dispatched a car to meet Neville Chamberlain when he returned from signing the Munich Agreement with Hitler in September 1938 . The King and Chamberlain then stood on the balcony of Buckingham Palace , acclaimed by cheering crowds . This led historian Steven Runciman to write that by acting as he did to endorse Chamberlain 's foreign policy , King George VI perpetrated " the biggest constitutional blunder that has been made by any sovereign this century . " The Guardian corrected the portrayal of Stanley Baldwin as having resigned due to his refusal to order Britain 's re @-@ armament , when he in fact stepped down as " a national hero , exhausted by more than a decade at the top " . 
 Martin Filler acknowledged that the film legitimately used artistic licence to make valid dramatic points , such as in the probably imagined scene when George V lectures his son on the importance of broadcasting . Filler cautions that George VI would never have tolerated Logue addressing him casually , nor swearing , and the King almost certainly would have understood a newsreel of Hitler speaking in German . Filler makes the larger point that both the King and his wife were , in reality , lukewarm towards Churchill because of the latter 's support for his brother during the abdication crisis . They only warmed to Churchill later in the war , because of his performance as a wartime leader . 
 Commenting on the film 's final scene on the balcony of Buckingham Palace , Andrew Roberts has written , " The scene is fairly absurd from a historical point of view – Neville Chamberlain and Winston Churchill were not present and there were no cheering crowds outside Buckingham Palace . " Overall , Roberts praises the film as a sympathetic portrayal of the King 's " quiet , unassuming heroism " , and he states : " The portrayals by Firth and Bonham Carter are sympathetic and acute , and the movie ’ s occasional factual <unk> should not detract from that . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Cinema release = = = 
 The film had its world première on 6 September 2010 at the Telluride Film Festival in the United States . It was screened at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival , on Firth 's 50th birthday , where it received a standing ovation and won the People 's Choice Award . The cinema release poster was re @-@ designed to show an extreme close @-@ up of Firth 's jaw and a microphone after Hooper criticised the first design as a " train smash " . Tim Appelo called the original , air @-@ brushed effort , which showed the three leads , " shockingly awful " though the new one " really is worthwhile " . 
 The film was distributed by Transmission Films in Australia and by Momentum Pictures in the United Kingdom . The Weinstein Company distributed it in North America , Germany , Benelux , Scandinavia , China , Hong Kong , and Latin America . The film was released in France on 2 February 2011 , under the title Le <unk> d 'un roi . It was distributed by Wild Bunch Distribution . 
 = = = Ratings controversy = = = 
 The film was initially given a 15 certificate by the British Board of Film Classification , due to a scene where Logue encourages the King to shout profanities , which he could do so without stuttering . At the London Film Festival , Hooper criticised the decision , questioning how the board could certify the film " 15 " for bad language but allow films such as Salt ( 2010 ) and Casino Royale ( 2006 ) to have " 12A " ratings , despite their graphic torture scenes . Following Hooper 's criticism , the board lowered the rating to " 12A " , allowing children under 12 years of age to see the film if they are accompanied by an adult . Hooper levelled the same criticism at the Motion Picture Association of America , which gave the film an " R " rating , preventing anyone under the age of 17 from seeing the film without an adult . In his review , Roger Ebert criticised the " R " rating , calling it " utterly inexplicable " , and wrote , " This is an excellent film for teenagers . " 
 In January 2011 Harvey Weinstein , the executive producer and distributor , said he was considering having the film re @-@ edited to remove some profanity , so that it would receive a lower classification and reach a larger audience . Hooper , however , refused to cut the film , though he considered covering the swear words with bleeps . Helena Bonham Carter also defended the film , saying , " [ The film ] is not violent . It 's full of humanity and wit . [ It 's ] for people not with just a speech impediment , but who have got confidence [ doubts ] . " After receiving his Academy Award , Colin Firth noted that he does not support re @-@ editing the film ; while he does not condone the use of profanity , he maintains that its use was not offensive in this context . " The scene serves a purpose " , Firth states . An alternate version , with some of the profanities muted out , was classified as " PG @-@ 13 " in the United States ; this version was released to cinemas on 1 April 2011 , replacing the R @-@ rated one . The PG @-@ 13 version of this film is not available on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In Great Britain and Ireland , the film was the highest earning film on its opening weekend . It took in £ 3 @,@ 510 @,@ 000 from 395 cinemas . The Guardian said that it was one of the biggest takes in recent memory , and compared it to Slumdog Millionaire ( 2008 ) , which , two years earlier , earned £ 1 @.@ 5 million less . The King 's Speech continued a " stunning three weeks " atop the UK Box office , and earned over £ 3 million for four consecutive weekends , the first film to do so since Toy Story 3 ( 2010 ) . After five weeks on UK release , it was hailed as the most successful independent British film ever . 
 In the United States The King 's Speech opened with $ 355 @,@ 450 ( £ 220 @,@ 000 ) in four cinemas . It holds the record for the highest per @-@ cinema gross of 2010 . It was widened to 700 screens on Christmas Day and 1 @,@ 543 screens on 14 January 2011 . It eventually made $ 138 million in North America overall . 
 In Australia The King 's Speech made more than A $ 6 @,@ 281 @,@ 686 ( £ 4 million ) in the first two weeks , according to figures collected by the Motion Picture Distributors Association of Australia . The executive director of Palace Cinemas , Benjamin <unk> , said customer feedback on the film was spectacular . " It 's our No.1 for all the period , all throughout the country . ... I think this is more successful than Slumdog Millionaire and a more uplifting film . It 's a good example of a film that started out in the independent cinemas and then spread to the mainstream cinemas . " 
 Of the film 's net profit , estimated to amount to $ 30 – 40 million ( £ 20 – 25 million ) from the cinema release alone , roughly 20 % will be split between Geoffrey Rush ( as executive producer ) , Tom Hooper and Colin Firth , who receive their bonuses before the other stakeholders . The remaining profit is to be split equally between the producers and the equity investors . The UK Film Council invested £ 1 million of public funds from the United Kingdom lottery into the film . In March 2011 Variety estimated that the return could be between fifteen and twenty times that . The Council 's merger into the British Film Institute means that the profits are to be returned to that body . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The King 's Speech has received widespread critical acclaim , with Firth 's performance receiving strong acclaim . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 95 % based on reviews from 261 critics ; their average rating was calculated as 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . It summarised the critical consensus as : " Colin Firth gives a masterful performance in The King 's Speech , a predictable but stylishly produced and rousing period drama . " Metacritic gave the film a weighted score of 88 / 100 , based on 41 critiques , which it ranks as " universal acclaim " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare " A + " grade . Empire gave the film five stars out of five , commenting , " You 'll be lost for words . " Lisa Kennedy of the Denver Post gave the film full marks for its humane qualities and craftsmanship : " It is an intelligent , winning drama fit for a king – and the rest of us " , she said . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times awarded the film a full four stars , commenting that " what we have here is a superior historical drama and a powerful personal one . " Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave four stars out of five , stating , " Tom Hooper 's richly enjoyable and handsomely produced movie ... is a massively confident crowd @-@ pleaser . " 
 Manohla Dargis , whilst generally ambivalent towards the film , called the lead performances one of its principal attractions . " With their volume turned up , the appealing , impeccably professional Mr. Firth and Mr. Rush rise to the acting occasion by twinkling and growling as their characters warily circle each other before settling into the therapeutic swing of things and unknowingly preparing for the big speech that partly gives the film its title , " she wrote . The Daily Telegraph called Guy Pearce 's performance as Edward VIII " formidable ... with glamour , charisma and utter self @-@ absorption " . Empire said he played the role well as " a flash harry flinty enough to shed a nation for a wife . " The New York Times thought he was able to create " a thorny tangle of complications in only a few abbreviated scenes " . Hooper praised the actor in the DVD commentary , saying he " nailed " the 1930s royal accent . Richard Corliss of Time magazine named Colin Firth 's performance one of the Top 10 Movie Performances of 2010 . 
 The British <unk> Association welcomed the release of The King 's Speech , congratulating the film makers on their " realistic depiction of the frustration and the fear of speaking faced by people who stammer on a daily basis . " It said that " Colin Firth 's portrayal of the King 's stammer in particular strikes us as very authentic and accurate . " The Royal College of Speech and Language <unk> welcomed the film , and launched their " Giving Voice " campaign around the time of its commercial release . 
 <unk> , a French cinema website , gave the film an average of four out of five stars , based on a survey of 21 reviews . Le Monde , which characterised the film as the " latest manifestation of British narcissism " and summarised it as " We are ugly and boring , but , By Jove ! , we are right ! " , nevertheless admired the performances of Firth , Rush , and Bonham Carter . It said that , though the film swept British appeasement under the carpet , it was still enjoyable . 
 Slovenian Marxist philosopher and cultural critic Slavoj Žižek has incorporated the film into his critique of ideology by describing it as " reactionary , " interpreting the king 's stutter as evidence that he " displays a minimum of common sense , experiencing the stupidity of seriously accepting that one is king by divine will " and claiming that " the task of the Australian voice @-@ coach is to render him stupid enough to accept his being a king as his natural property . " Žižek thus interprets the king 's stutter as a case of what is referred to in Lacanian psychoanalysis as " symbolic castration . " 
 Queen Elizabeth II , the daughter and successor of King George VI , was sent two copies of the film before Christmas 2010 . The Sun newspaper reported she had watched the film in a private screening at Sandringham House . A palace source described her reaction as being " touched by a moving portrayal of her father " . Seidler called the reports " the highest honour " the film could receive . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 83rd Academy Awards , The King 's Speech won the Academy Award for Best Picture , Best Director ( Hooper ) , Best Actor ( Firth ) , and Best Original Screenplay ( Seidler ) . The film had received 12 Oscar nominations , more than any other film in that year . Besides the four categories it won , the film received nominations for Best Cinematography ( Danny Cohen ) and two for the supporting actors ( Bonham Carter and Rush ) , as well as two for its mise @-@ en @-@ scène : Art Direction and Costumes . 
 At the 64th British Academy Film Awards , it won seven awards , including Best Film , Outstanding British Film , Best Actor for Firth , Best Supporting Actor for Rush , Best Supporting Actress for Bonham Carter , Best Original Screenplay for Seidler , and Best Music for Alexandre Desplat . The film had been nominated for 14 BAFTAs , more than any other film . At the 68th Golden Globe Awards , Firth won for Best Actor . The film won no other Golden Globes , despite earning seven nominations , more than any other film . 
 It is also the first Weinstein film to win the Oscar for Best Picture . 
 At the 17th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Firth won the Best Actor award and the entire cast won Best Ensemble , meaning Firth went home with two acting awards in one evening . Hooper won the Directors Guild of America Awards 2010 for Best Director . The film won the Darryl F. Zanuck Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture at the Producers Guild of America Awards 2010 . 
 The King 's Speech won the People 's Choice Award at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival , Best British Independent Film at the 2010 British Independent Film Awards , and the 2011 Goya Award for Best European Film from the Academia de las Artes y las Ciencias <unk> de España ( Spanish Academy of Cinematic Art and Science ) . 
 = Tang Da Wu = 
 Tang Da Wu ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ̌ ŋ <unk> ] ; born 1943 ) is a Singaporean artist who works in a variety of media , including drawing , painting , sculpture , installation art and performance art . Educated at Birmingham Polytechnic and Goldsmiths ' College , University of London , Tang gave his first solo exhibition , consisting of drawings and paintings , in 1970 at the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry . He began engaging in performance art upon returning to Singapore in 1979 following his undergraduate studies . 
 In 1988 , Tang founded The Artists Village . The first art colony to be established in Singapore , it aimed to encourage artists to create experimental art . Members of the Village were among the first contemporary artists in Singapore , and also among the first to begin practising installation art and performance art . There , Tang mentored younger artists and informed them about artistic developments in other parts of the world . He also organized exhibitions and symposia at the Village , and arranged for it to collaborate with the National Museum Art Gallery and the National Arts Council 's 1992 Singapore Festival of the Arts . 
 In January 1994 , the National Arts Council ( NAC ) stopped funding unscripted performance art following a controversial performance by Josef Ng that was regarded as obscene by many members of the public . From that time , Tang and other performance artists mostly practised their art abroad , although some performances were presented in Singapore as dance or theatre . For his originality and influence in performance art in Southeast Asia , among other things , Tang won the Arts and Culture Prize in 1999 at the 10th Fukuoka Asian Culture Prizes . The NAC eventually reversed its no @-@ funding rule on performance art in September 2003 . Tang was one of four artists who represented Singapore at the 2007 Venice Biennale . Tang 's work is part of the collection of the Singapore Art Museum , Queensland Art Gallery and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum . 
 Tang has expressed concern about environmental and social issues through his art , such as the works They <unk> the Rhino , Chop Off His Horn and Make This Drink ( 1989 ) and Tiger 's Whip ( 1991 ) . He believes in the potential of the individual and collective to effect social changes , and his art deals with national and cultural identities . Tang has participated in numerous community and public art projects , workshops and performances . 
 = = Education and personal life = = 
 Tang Da Wu was born Thang Kian <unk> in Singapore in 1943 , the eldest of four sons . His second brother Thang Kiang How is himself a visual artist based in Singapore . His father was a journalist with the Chinese daily newspaper Sin Chew Jit Poh . He studied at a Chinese @-@ medium school , but disliked English and mathematics and was often scolded by his teachers . He preferred playing after school with neighbourhood children and learned to speak Malay and Chinese from them . He also enjoyed drawing , and gained confidence when his secondary school paintings were accepted in art competitions . 
 In 1968 , Tang was awarded a diploma in youth and community works from the National Youth Leadership Institute . Two years later , in 1970 , his first solo exhibition of drawings and paintings sponsored by the Singapore Art Society was staged at the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry . Subsequently , he went to the United Kingdom to study , majoring in sculpture . He graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts ( BFA ) , with first class honours , from the School of Fine Art , Birmingham Polytechnic , in 1974 . While abroad he changed his name to Da Wu , which is Mandarin for " big mist " . Tang later returned to the UK and attended advanced courses at the Saint Martins School of Art . He received a Master of Fine Arts ( MFA ) in 1985 from Goldsmiths ' College , University of London , and a doctorate in 1988 . 
 Tang is married to an Englishwoman , Hazel McIntosh . They have a son , Ben Zai , known professionally as Zai Tang , who is a sound artist living in the UK . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career and founding of The Artists Village = = = 
 Returning to Singapore in 1979 after completing his undergraduate studies , Tang engaged in performance art , works of art that are composed of actions performed by the artist at a certain place and time . The following year , he staged a work of installation art called Earthworks at the National Museum Art Gallery . This comprised two works , The Product of the Sun and Me and The Product of the Rain and Me , which were made up of dishes of earth , lumps of soil , and pieces of soiled and water @-@ stained linen which he had hung in gullies at Ang Mo Kio , a construction site in the process of being turned into a public housing estate . Installation art uses sculptural materials , and sometimes other media such as sound , video and performance , to modify the way a particular space is experienced . 
 In 1988 , Tang founded The Artists Village , originally located at 61B Lorong <unk> in rural Ulu Sembawang , in the north part of Singapore . The first art colony to be established in Singapore , its goal was to inspire artists to create experimental art . Tang described the Artists Village as : 
 ... [ an ] alternative venue dedicated to the promotion and encouragement of experimental and alternative arts in Singapore . It endeavors to establish an open space for artists to mature at their own pace , and to provide a conducive environment which allows them to experiment , experience and exchange ideas . 
 T.K. Sabapathy noted : " The Village was a beacon , and Da Wu both a catalyst and mentor . " Among the artists who moved to the Village were Ahmad <unk> , <unk> Fadil , Amanda Heng , Ho Soon <unk> , Lim Poh Teck , Tang Mun Kit , Wong Shih Yaw , Julian Yasin and Zai Kuning . They were among the first contemporary artists in Singapore , and also among the first to begin practising installation art and performance art . Tang mentored younger artists and exposed them to artistic developments in other parts of the world . He also organized exhibitions and symposia at the Village , and arranged for collaborations with the National Museum Art Gallery and the National Arts Council 's 1992 Singapore Festival of the Arts . Although The Artists Village lost its original site in 1990 due to land development , it was registered as a non @-@ profit society in February 1992 and now stages events in various public spaces . 
 = = = Difficulties with performance art = = = 
