 = Typhoon Nancy ( 1982 ) = 
 Typhoon Nancy , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Weling , was a destructive typhoon that moved through Vietnam and the Philippines during October 1982 . The typhoon originated from an area of convection and was first classified as a tropical cyclone on October 10 . The system attained gale @-@ force winds the next day , and slowly deepened thereafter . Although Nancy initially moved west , the system maintained a general westward course for much of its duration , striking Luzon on October 14 at peak intensity of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . It weakened to tropical storm strength overland , but re @-@ intensified to typhoon intensity over the South China Sea . Nancy hit northern Vietnam on the October 18 , and weakened almost immediately thereafter , before dissipating on October 20 inland over Vietnam . 
 In the Philippines , damage was the worst in Cagayan and Isabela . In the former , 4 @,@ 378 homes were destroyed while 2 @,@ 250 houses were destroyed in the latter . Nationwide , 96 people were killed and 30 others were listed as missing . Additionally , 186 were injured . A total of 12 @,@ 464 homes were destroyed while 34 @,@ 111 others were damaged . Moreover , 301 @,@ 431 persons were " affected " by the storm , or 51 @,@ 532 families . Damage totaled to $ 56 million ( 1982 USD ) , including $ 18 million from infrastructure and $ 26 million from agriculture . While <unk> Vietnam , the typhoon killed 30 people . Around 72 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed , leaving 125 @,@ 000 people homeless . Throughout the country , 450 @,@ 000 acres ( 182 @,@ 110 ha ) of rice were destroyed . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Nancy originated from a large area of convection situated in the middle of the Pacific Ocean , which began to consolidate on October 8 within a favorable environment aloft . The convection separated from an upper @-@ level low embedded within a tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) . Later that day , the area of convection degenerated into a " random area of cloudiness . " The TUTT drifted west while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that a tropical depression formed within the area of convection that was now located south of the TUTT . Early on October 10 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the system . At 0730 UTC , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued by the JTWC while located 370 km ( 230 mi ) north of Guam . 
 Following an increase in reorganization , a Hurricane Hunter flight indicated winds of 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) early on October 11 . Later that morning , the JMA upgraded the cyclone into a tropical storm . Following Hurricane Hunter reports , which indicated winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Based on this , the JTWC upgraded the depression into a tropical storm and named it Nancy . Initially , the JTWC expected the system to track northwards and eventually re @-@ curve , but this did not occur . Nancy maintained its intensity for 24 hours while tracking westward before rapidly turning west due to a change in steering patterns . Meanwhile , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Weling . Midday on October 12 , the JMA upgraded Nancy into a severe tropical storm . At 0000 UTC on October 13 , the same agency classified Nancy into a typhoon . Later that day , the JTWC followed suit . By midday on October 14 , the JTWC predicted Nancy to turn northwest into China due to the anticipation of a mid @-@ latitude trough south of South Korea deepening . At 0600 UTC , the JMA reported that Nancy reached its peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 935 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Meanwhile , the JTWC reported peak intensity of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , a Category 4 hurricane equivalent on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . Six hours later , Typhoon Nancy moved ashore in northern Luzon while still at peak intensity . 
 The storm rapidly weakened over land . Although the JTWC downgraded Nancy to a tropical storm , the JMA kept the storm at typhoon intensity throughout landfall . After entering the South China Sea , the JTWC upped Nancy to typhoon status as it entered an area with favorable mid- to upper @-@ level winds . Continuing to gain strength , the JMA raised the intensity of Nancy to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) on October 16 . Shortly thereafter , Nancy crossed Hainan Island . After weakening slightly overland , the storm resumed strengthening once offshore . According to the JMA , Nancy attained a secondary peak , with winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) at 0600 UTC on October 17 . The tropical cyclone moved on a slow northwesterly track along the southern periphery of the ridge . While passing slightly north of the Paracel Islands , the JTWC estimated winds of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , equivalent to a high @-@ end Category 1 hurricane on the SSHWS . Late on October 18 , Nancy made landfall along the coast of Vietnam , just north of Vinh . At the time of landfall , both agencies estimated that Nancy was a typhoon . Within hours , the convection ceased , though the JMA kept monitoring the system until October 20 , when it finally dissipated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of Nancy , typhoon warnings were issued for much of Luzon . Many residents left for shelter prior to landfall . Typhoon Nancy passed through 10 provinces in the Philippines , resulting in widespread destruction . Damage was the worst in Cagayan and Isabela , where 56 people were hurt . In the former , 4 @,@ 378 dwellings were destroyed . In Isabela , 2 @,@ 250 houses were destroyed , displacing 35 @,@ 744 residents . Along a river in Isabela , ten bodies were found . Elsewhere , 800 homes were destroyed in Tuguegarao , leaving 1 @,@ 000 homeless and two injured . In Kalinga @-@ Apayao , four fatalities occurred . Throughout the nation , many roads were closed due to mudslides . Mass destruction was reported in rice fields , as well as tobacco and cotton plantations . However , this total was later revised upwards to $ 56 million ( 1982 USD ) , which includes $ 18 million from infrastructure and $ 26 million from agriculture . A total of 96 people died ; 81 of the fatalities were from just three provinces . Most of the deaths were by drowning . Thirty others were rendered as missing and 186 people were injured . A total of 12 @,@ 464 dwellings were destroyed while 34 @,@ 111 others were damaged . Furthermore , 301 @,@ 431 people were " affected " by the storm , or 51 @,@ 532 families . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 While making landfall in central Vietnam , winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) were measured due to the typhoon . A total of 30 persons perished . Around 72 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . Moreover , 125 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in Vinh . In all , 450 @,@ 000 acres ( 182 @,@ 110 ha ) of rice were destroyed ; approximately 150 @,@ 000 acres ( 60 @,@ 705 ha ) of rice were submerged in the Thanh Hóa province alone . In addition , many houses were submerged in Nghe <unk> . Bình Trị Thiên was also affected by Nancy , but no casualties occurred there . 
 = RAF Uxbridge = 
 RAF Uxbridge was a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) station in Uxbridge , within the London Borough of Hillingdon , occupying a 44 @.@ 6 @-@ hectare ( 110 @-@ acre ) site that originally belonged to the Hillingdon House estate . The British Government purchased the estate in 1915 , three years before the founding of the RAF . Until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , the station was open to the public . 
 The station is best known as the headquarters of No. 11 Group RAF , which was responsible for the aerial defence of London and the south @-@ east of England during the Battle of Britain . Hillingdon House served as the group 's headquarters . A bunker , subsequently known as the Battle of Britain Bunker , was built nearby to house the 11 Group Operations Room , which controlled fighter squadrons operating within the group . The Operations Room was also responsible for providing air support during the evacuation of Dunkirk in May 1940 ( Operation Dynamo ) and the D @-@ Day landings ( Operation Overlord ) . It was here that Winston Churchill first said , " Never was so much owed by so many to so few " , which he repeated in a speech to Parliament four days later . 
 RAF Uxbridge closed on 31 March 2010 as part of a reduction in the number of Ministry of Defence properties in the Greater London area . Many of its remaining military units were relocated to nearby RAF Northolt the following day . Plans for redevelopment , consisting of a mixture of new residential and commercial properties and the retention of all listed buildings , were approved in January 2011 . A small part of the station incorporating the Battle of Britain Bunker retains the RAF Uxbridge name and is maintained by RAF Northolt . 
 The River Pinn runs through the site from north to south , passing Hillingdon House and the Battle of Britain Bunker . The land around the river is mainly wooded and designated as greenbelt , and Hillingdon Golf Course borders the south of the station . A footpath through the site that had closed in 1988 was reopened in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The area that became RAF Uxbridge was originally part of the estate of Hillingdon House , built as a hunting lodge in 1717 by the Duke of Schomberg , who staged regular hunts in the grounds . He was a German @-@ born general serving under William of Orange ( later King William III ) , knighted for his part in the 1690 Battle of the Boyne . 
 The Marchioness of Rockingham , widow of Prime Minister Charles Watson @-@ Wentworth , 2nd Marquess of Rockingham , bought the house in 1786 for £ 9 @,@ 000 following her husband 's death and lived there until her own death in 1804 . She left the estate to her stepsister Elizabeth , widow of William Weddell MP , who sold it to Josias Du Pré Porcher in 1805 . 
 In 1810 the estate was sold to Richard Henry Cox , grandson of Richard Cox , founder of the travel company Cox & Kings . Cox & Co , as the company was then known , was formed after Richard Cox was appointed agent to the Foot Guards ( later the Grenadier Guards ) , and provided banking services for many regiments of the British Army by the end of the 18th century . The mansion was completely rebuilt after it burnt down in 1844 and later received a Grade II listing . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 In 1914 the mansion was put on the market by the estate of Frederick Cox , Richard Henry Cox 's grandson . It was described as " a brick and stone building , partly stuccoed , with extensive outbuildings and ornamental gardens . " The house and gardens , together with the surrounding parkland and an artificial lake created by damming a section of the River Pinn , amounted to over 81 ha ( 200 acres ) . 
 The British Government purchased the estate in 1915 , with the intention of establishing a prisoner of war camp . The local population strongly opposed the plan , causing the government to relent , and the site instead became the Canadian Convalescent Hospital to care for troops evacuated from the front line during the First World War . The hospital opened on 20 September 1915 and was joined on 19 November 1917 by the Royal Flying Corps Armament School which moved into Hillingdon House with 114 officers and 1156 men , making a donation of £ 2289 , 12s and 9d to the Canadian Red Cross . The RFC used parts of the estate not required by the Canadians , and established firing ranges for the training of recruits in ground gunnery . A total of eight of these ranges were built along the River Pinn ; one remains today . The hospital closed on 12 December 1917 . 
 On 1 April 1918 , the Uxbridge site came under control of the Royal Air Force , which had been formed that day by the amalgamation of the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service . The following month it became the first RAF station to receive a royal visit , from King George V. 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 The Recruits Training Depot and a detachment of the RAF Depot from RAF Halton arrived in August 1919 , merging to form No. 1 Depot , RAF Uxbridge . The station itself was designated RAF Central Depot , Uxbridge . The site was then split to form two new RAF stations , the area to the east of the River Pinn heading uphill to Hillingdon House becoming RAF Hillingdon and the remainder RAF Uxbridge . That year , the building that became the station cinema was opened , designed by Lieutenant <unk> Clift of the Royal Engineers , and served as a lecture hall for new recruits . The RAF School of Music moved to RAF Uxbridge from Hampstead in September 1919 . Headquarters Southern Area , Southern Area Medical Headquarters , Southern Area Barrack Stores , and the Southern Area and South Eastern Area Headquarters of the Air Construction Service moved into Hillingdon House in October 1919 . T. E. Lawrence , better known as " Lawrence of Arabia " , underwent initial training at the Uxbridge Depot in 1922 after enlisting in the RAF under the assumed name John Hume @-@ Ross . He recounted his experiences in The Mint . 
 Uxbridge Football Club was provided with the use of the station stadium from 1923 and played evening matches there . Ten barrack blocks designed by A. Gilpin were built around the parade ground in 1925 , as was the RAF officers ' hospital and the original Operations Room , controlled by the Fighting Area of Air Defence of Great Britain ( ADGB ) . The Air Ministry chose RAF Uxbridge as the new base for ADGB on 14 January 1926 owing to its proximity to Whitehall . The site had the added advantage of lying on the fringes of London and therefore difficult for an enemy to locate and bomb . Having also housed a gymnasium , the lecture hall building became the station cinema in 1927 , initially for the use of station personnel only but soon opened to the general public . On 1 March 1929 , the headquarters of the Royal Observer Corps ( ROC ) was established at Hillingdon House ; Air Commodore Edward Masterman was appointed as its first commandant . The Observer Corps remained at RAF Uxbridge until 1 March 1936 , when it transferred to RAF Bentley Priory . 
 Owing to its wooden construction the original Operations Room could only be used during the summer months ; maintenance of the signalling and communications equipment became difficult under damp winter conditions . A memo dated 16 January 1933 , sent to the senior Air Staff Officer , Wing Commander <unk> , stated : 
 Uxbridge Royal Air Force buildings would provide an easy bombing target from all points of view , I feel that our Operations Room at least must go underground ... and the sooner it is put there the better , as not only will the re @-@ installation of communications and apparatus generally take time , but if that machinery is to function smoothly in a sudden emergency , installation must have been completed and the whole layout repeatedly worked and tried out before the danger of such emergency arises . 
 Douglas Bader arrived at the military hospital in 1932 to recover from the amputation of his legs following an air crash . During his stay Bader met the <unk> brothers , who were beginning to make lightweight artificial legs from aluminium . Once fitted with artificial legs , Bader fought hard to regain his former abilities and in time his efforts paid off . He was able to drive a specially modified car , play golf and even dance . During his convalescence , Bader met his future wife Thelma Edwards , a waitress at a nearby pub called the Pantiles . 
 Formed on 1 May 1936 , No. 11 Group RAF was headquartered at RAF Uxbridge under the command of Air Vice Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté , who was succeeded by Sir Ernest Gossage in January 1937 . The ADGB was reorganised on 13 July 1936 , with control of fighter aircraft passing to the newly established RAF Fighter Command , which moved to RAF Bentley Priory . The following day the remaining elements of ADGB became RAF Bomber Command , headquartered in Hillingdon House . 
 Planning for the new No. 11 Group Operations Room ( within what became known as the Battle of Britain Bunker ) began in August 1937 . Initially it was to be buried 66 feet ( 20 m ) below ground , but problems with the local London Clay on the site meant it was eventually built by Sir Robert McAlpine at a depth of 60 feet ( 18 m ) , although it was still able to withstand being hit by a 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bomb . The bunker was designed by Bob Creer of the Air Ministry . Work began in February 1939 and finished in August , ten days before the outbreak of the Second World War . The original Operations Room on the surface remained as a back @-@ up , but was not required for that purpose and was subsequently renamed Building 76 . Also in August 1939 , Bomber Command moved to Iver and on 2 September the new Operations Room and RAF Uxbridge reached operational war readiness . The station closed to the public on the outbreak of war , and the football club was required to suspend its use of the stadium . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 During the war RAF Uxbridge was tasked with despatching personnel to and from training and operational units in Northern France . It also housed the RAF Uxbridge Language School , where Polish Air Force pilots were taught key RAF codewords . Pilots practised formation flying on the station football pitch , using tricycles fitted with radios , compasses and speed indicators . British Expeditionary Force troops returning from Dunkirk were processed at Uxbridge . In mid @-@ 1940 , staff at the station processed an average of 2 @,@ 500 recruits and experienced troops per week . 
 During the Battle of Britain , between July and October 1940 , RAF Fighter Command at RAF Bentley Priory received air threat warnings that it filtered to remove duplication , doubt and confusion . These were then forwarded to the Operations Room at RAF Uxbridge , which allocated appropriate defence resources and passed orders on to No. 11 Group sector airfields . No. 11 Group personnel doubled to 20 @,@ 000 between April and November 1940 . The RAF officers ' hospital was converted to the Women 's Auxiliary Air Force ( WAAF ) hospital early in 1940 . 
 While overseeing the operations at RAF Uxbridge , Air Vice Marshal Park stayed in a house opposite the entrance to the bunker . He used a small door to reach the bunker from the house each day . The house , named after the war in Park 's honour , was demolished in 1996 to make way for newly constructed married quarters ; only the garden wall and door were retained . Wing Commander Willoughby de Broke received the Air Force Cross on 11 July 1940 for his service as a Senior Operations Officer for No. 11 Group , working within the Operations Room . Prime Minister Winston Churchill visited the station on 16 August 1940 , to monitor the battle from the Operations Room . He subsequently made his well @-@ known comment , " Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few " to General Ismay as they got into their car to leave . Churchill repeated the quote in a speech to Parliament four days later . King George VI and Queen Elizabeth visited the station on 6 September . Churchill was again present at RAF Uxbridge on the fiercest day of fighting of the entire battle : Battle of Britain Day , 15 September 1940 . As the last squadrons were sent into battle , Churchill asked Air Vice Marshal Sir Keith Park , " How many reserves have we ? " Park answered " There are none " . 
 A delayed @-@ action landmine fell on the station on 26 September 1940 , between the police school and WAAF Quarters , where it remained until it was defused the following day . On 28 September a bomb fell into a tree 50 yards ( 46 m ) from the Operations Room and was later defused in Harefield . A Junkers Ju 88 attacked the station on 6 October 1940 , dropping a bomb beside the Navy , Army and Air Force Institutes ( NAAFI ) grocery shop . The device damaged water and gas mains but caused no casualties . Few bombs fell on the station ; Luftwaffe pilots may have mistaken the glass greenhouses at the Lowe & <unk> plant nursery west of the station for a large body of water not on their maps . 
 The king and queen returned on 1 November 1941 , by which time a " Royal Box " had been installed in the Operations Room to allow them to observe the plotting activities . During 1942 , General Charles de Gaulle , Sir Anthony Eden and Lord Mountbatten all visited the 11 Group Operations Room . The actors Rex Harrison ( then a squadron leader liaising with Bomber Command ) , Cyril Raymond and Ronald Adam all served within the Operations Room during the war . 
 In 1941 , a division of the Meteorological Office was established at RAF Uxbridge as part of the Intelligence Branch . On 1 July that year the station Sick Quarters were merged with the WAAF hospital to create the RAF Station Hospital . No. 11 Group was involved in providing air support for the Dieppe Raid ( Operation Jubilee ) on 19 August 1942 . Air Marshal Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory commanded participating Allied air forces from the 11 Group Operation Room . The air operations section of Operation Overlord , the 6 June 1944 Normandy landings ( D @-@ Day ) , was also controlled from RAF Uxbridge . Orders from the station were the only ones issued to Allied air units on the day . The headquarters of the 2nd Tactical Air Force and 9th Tactical Air Force of the USAAF were stationed at Uxbridge while preparations were made for the invasion . On D @-@ Day , the 11 Group Controller was responsible for ensuring sufficient air patrols of the United Kingdom , the main shipping routes , and the beach landing areas . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 RAF Uxbridge served as an athlete 's village for the male competitors in the 1948 Summer Olympics . Swimmers trained at nearby Uxbridge Lido , and female athletes were housed at RAF West Drayton . Personnel from RAF Uxbridge were moved out to RAF Stanmore Park and transported back to the station daily for their shifts . In 1949 , the RAF Cricket Association opened on Vine Lane on the western boundary of the station . Also moving into the stations grounds in October of that year were the 14F squadron or the Air Training Corps , their access also being via Vine <unk> station 's crest was approved in April 1953 , incorporating a drill sergeant 's pace stick to symbolise the training of recruits , and a bugle to represent the Central Band of the RAF ; Uxbridge was the first RAF station in Middlesex to have a crest approved . 
 The ceremonial entrance to the north @-@ west of the station , St Andrew 's Gate , was officially opened on 16 December 1957 to mark the link between Uxbridge and the Royal Air Force . A memorial to the personnel of No. 11 Group , made of Cornish granite , was placed in the ground above the Operations Room in 1957 . No. 11 Group moved to RAF Martlesham Heath on 14 April 1958 and the room was soon sealed in its original condition . The memorial was unveiled by Air Chief Marshal Lord Dowding on 23 April 1958 in a ceremony attended by Group Captain Douglas Bader and Wing Commander Lord Willoughby de Broke , among others , and marked by a flypast of the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight . Control of RAF Hillingdon passed from Fighter Command to Technical Training Command that year , at which time the entire site became known as RAF Uxbridge . The RAF School of Education moved into Hillingdon House from RAF <unk> on 10 November 1958 , and the station was subsequently merged with No. 22 Group RAF . 
 The station was granted the Freedom of the London Borough of Hillingdon on 19 March 1960 , an honour allowing the station 's personnel to march throughout the borough in uniform . On 1 November that year , the Queen 's Colour Squadron of the RAF Regiment moved to Uxbridge and the Southern Region Air Traffic Services headquarters moved into Hillingdon House . After the war , the station was already home to the London Area Control Centre , renamed the London Air Traffic Control Centre in 1948 and the Uxbridge Air Traffic Control Centre in 1957 . This eventually transferred to RAF West Drayton but remained under the parentage of RAF Uxbridge . 
 The 11 Group Operations Room was extensively surveyed in order for a replica to be built at Pinewood Studios for the 1969 film Battle of Britain . Scenes for the 1996 television miniseries Over Here and an episode of Richard Holmes ' War Walks were filmed in the Operations Room itself . The reinforced <unk> building was built on the site in the 1970s to house communications equipment . Although no longer used for this purpose , the building contains two fuel storage tanks . The main entrance to the station was moved in 1972 from beside the station cinema to its present location roughly 50 yards ( 46 m ) south . 
 Over nine months in 1975 , the 11 Group Operations Room was restored by No. 9 Signals Unit . The original map was repaired and returned to the table by the RAF Cartography unit , and the board detailing the readiness and activities of each sector squadron was rebuilt to resemble its status on 15 September 1940 . In 1985 a museum was created within the bunker by Warrant Officer " Chris " Wren and the Operations Room opened for group visits . 
 In January 1981 , the Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) planted a bomb in the Suvla barrack block at RAF Uxbridge . The device was discovered and the 35 RAF musicians and 15 airmen living there were evacuated before it exploded . Following the incident , an enquiry began and security at all RAF stations was reviewed . The following year , many RAF personnel from the station were deployed during the Falklands War . The station went on to celebrate its 70th anniversary in 1987 by staging several events that raised £ 30 @,@ 000 for the RAF Benevolent Fund . 
 RAF Uxbridge also became involved in Operation Granby following the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 . Personnel at Uxbridge were prepared for service in the Gulf at that time , and deployed that year in December . During the aerial assault on Iraq in January 1991 , support group meetings began at the station for the families of service personnel serving during the Gulf War . Prince Edward , Earl of Wessex , visited one of these groups in February 1991 . 
 The station church , St Luke 's , became structurally unsound on 21 November 1990 after the foundations failed . The building dated back to 1933 and had been constructed of wood ; the walls were pushed out and the floor rose by 4 inches ( 100 mm ) . In March 1993 , the Leigh @-@ Mallory bridge was opened across the River Pinn , and the church moved into a new permanent home , Building 231 , in March 1995 . Jim Bolger , then Prime Minister of New Zealand , visited the station in May , and in October , the station 's new sports centre opened . 
 RAF Uxbridge personnel were once more prepared for action in the Gulf in 2003 in readiness for Operation Telic in Iraq . A support network for the families of service personnel sent into action was again established at the station . In March 2003 the Under @-@ Secretary of State for Defence was briefed at Uxbridge as part of preparations for a visit to the Gulf . 
 Personnel paraded through Uxbridge town centre on 28 November 2007 , exercising the freedom of the borough granted to the station in 1960 . RAF Uxbridge became a satellite station of RAF Northolt on 1 April 2008 , in preparation for the eventual closure . In the final years of RAF ownership , the Service Prosecuting Authority and Civil Aviation Authority 's UK <unk> Board ( investigating air proximity incidents ) was based in Hillingdon House . The final of the national Carnegie Champions schools rugby tournament was held at the station in August 2008 . The link between RAF Uxbridge and the Royal Observer Corps was renewed in 2008 with the closure of RAF Bentley Priory and the relocation to Uxbridge of ROC memorabilia from the Priory Officers ' Mess for safekeeping and display . The Royal Observer Corps had been stood down from operational duties in December 1995 . 
 The Queen 's Colour Squadron returned from a six @-@ month tour of duty in Afghanistan in 2009 , marked by a homecoming parade through Uxbridge town centre held on 5 August 2009 . More than 20 @,@ 000 people watched the parade , which started from Uxbridge Magistrates Court , passing along the town 's High Street to the RAF station . 
 = = RAF units = = 
 Sources : RAF Uxbridge 90th Anniversary 1917 – 2007 , RAF Uxbridge – A Fond Farewell , and Ministry of Defence . 
 = = Closure and redevelopment = = 
 Prior to the closure of RAF Uxbridge , Queen Elizabeth II sent a message to the station in February 2010 , via her equerry , Wing Commander A.D. Calame , who had served as Officer Commanding the Queen 's Colour Squadron between 10 August 2005 and 16 July 2007 : 
 Her Majesty was interested to hear that , in this anniversary year , the historic Number 11 Group Operations Rooms Bunker has been listed and will be preserved as a Royal Air Force asset . Hopefully , the facility will continue as a permanent reminder of those who fought and won the Battle of Britain . 
 Her Majesty hopes that the relocation to Royal Air Force Northolt will continue to progress well , and wishes all personnel at Uxbridge best wishes for the future . 
 The station closed on 31 March 2010 as part of the Ministry of Defence 's Project MoDEL , a programme to reduce the number of defence sites in Greater London in favour of a core site at RAF Northolt . The closure ceremony was overseen by the Mayor of Hillingdon and included parades and the final lowering of the Royal Air Force Ensign over the parade ground . A Supermarine Spitfire conducted a flypast of the station . The final units marched to their new station at RAF Northolt the following day . The station , which had received the Freedom of the Borough of Hillingdon , returned the award to the London Borough of Hillingdon as part of the ceremony , though this was returned on 4 September to be stored in the museum of the Battle of Britain Bunker . A commemorative blue plaque dedicated to Douglas Bader was unveiled by the Mayor of Hillingdon at the entrance to the Officers ' Mess . 
 The Middlesex Wing Headquarters of the Air Training Corps ( ATC ) had been based at the station together with No. 1083 Squadron ATC , which met on Mondays and Thursdays for parade nights . As part of the closing ceremony , personnel of No. 1083 Squadron were presented with the station crest to adopt as their own . The squadron continued to meet at the station until July 2010 , when a newly refurbished building at the TA Centre on Honeycroft Hill became available . 
 The Grade I listed Battle of Britain Bunker is now preserved as a museum open to the public , while the Grade II listed Hillingdon House will be partially converted into a restaurant . The station cinema is also Grade II listed . The Battle of Britain War Memorial is a scheduled protected monument . Although not listed , several other buildings on the site were identified within the plans for possible retention : the Sick Quarters , the Officers ' Mess , the original gymnasium , the carpenters ' block in the grounds of Hillingdon House and a building near the Battle of Britain Bunker . St. Andrew 's Gate will be retained , as will the Mons barrack block adjacent to the parade ground . 
 Plans to develop the remaining 44 @.@ 6 hectares ( 110 acres ) of the site were approved by the London Borough of Hillingdon in January 2011 for 1 @,@ 340 homes , shops , a theatre and a primary school to be built over 10 years . The council intends the development to become an extension of Uxbridge town centre . Early suggestions from the Leader of Hillingdon Council included a theatre with a statue of T.E. Lawrence outside , and a new museum built around the Battle of Britain Bunker . MP for Uxbridge John Randall called in 2009 for Hillingdon Hospital to be relocated to the site as an alternative to a planned rebuilding project on its existing site . The hospital trust ruled out such a move due to the projected costs . 
 The area around the Battle of Britain Bunker , including the No. 11 Group memorial , will retain the RAF Uxbridge name and be maintained by RAF Northolt as an exclave . The Royal Air Force Ensign was moved to the area , together with the Supermarine Spitfire gate guardian , a fibreglass replica of aircraft <unk> . The Spitfire was refurbished and painted in the D @-@ Day invasion colours of No. 33 Squadron as aircraft <unk> , funded by the London Borough of Hillingdon . Uxbridge 's first gate guardian was a real Supermarine Spitfire which was unveiled on 23 May 1973 . This was sold to a collector for restoration and replaced by the current guardian in 1988 . At a service commemorating the Battle of Britain in September 2010 , a new Hawker Hurricane gate guardian in the markings of No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron was unveiled , also near the bunker . The guardian is a fibreglass replica of the aircraft flown by Witold Urbanowicz during the Battle of Britain . 
 The South Hillingdon branch of the St. John Ambulance service was based at RAF Uxbridge until the closure in 2010 led to a period of uncertainty over its relocation . Eventually , RAF Northolt provided the charity with new premises , which were available from January 2011 . 
 In June 2011 , it was announced that the public right of way from St Andrew 's Gate in the north @-@ west to Vine Lane in the north @-@ east would be reopened , after work to fence off the pathway was completed . The path , 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) long , was the subject of a petition submitted to Hillingdon Council in 2010 and had been closed since 1988 . The path was reopened in early August 2011 . 
 Since closing , the site has been used extensively for filming . Most recently , scenes for the television drama Endeavour , set in the 1960s , were filmed there . 
 In April 2012 , VSM Estates announced it would be completing the purchase of the site from the MoD , with a view to commencing building work by the end of the year . VSM were provided with a £ 60 million five @-@ year loan by HSBC , together with funding from joint parent companies , St. Modwen Properties and Vinci plc . Persimmon will develop 8 @.@ 9 hectares ( 22 acres ) of the site with 500 homes under an existing joint venture agreement with St Modwen . Demolition of the site in phases began in October 2012 . The site will be developed under the St Andrew 's Park name . 
 A wood commemorating the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II was planted within the site in May 2012 . Each school in the London Borough of Hillingdon was invited to plant a tree , and the Station Commander of RAF Northolt , Group Captain Tim O 'Brien , also planted one on behalf of the RAF . The wood was officially dedicated by the London Borough of Hillingdon 's Representative Deputy Lieutenant , Wing Commander Edna Partridge , on 19 July 2012 . 
 A ground @-@ breaking ceremony was held on 2 July 2013 on the site , attended by the Mayor of Hillingdon and cabinet members of Hillingdon Council . The development is due to be completed within seven years . 
 A new primary school , built on the site of the former sports ground and gym , opened in September 2014 . Named the John Locke Academy , the school will have 630 primary places and 90 nursery places when fully subscribed . 
 An additional planning application for the construction of office buildings was submitted by St. Modwen in June 2015 . 
 = Audrey Pauley = 
 " Audrey Pauley " is the eleventh episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired on the Fox network on March 17 , 2002 . It was written by Steven Maeda and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology , or overarching fictional history , of The X @-@ Files . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 4 @.@ 8 , being watched by 8 million viewers . It has generally received positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , after being in a car accident , Reyes awakens in a surreal hospital . Doggett and a comatose Reyes struggle to prevent her organ donor card from being acted upon . The two , however , soon discover a unique woman , Audrey Pauley , who has the ability to communicate with both those conscious and unconscious . 
 " Audrey Pauley " guest starred Tracey Ellis as the title character ; she had previously appeared as a major character in the third season episode " Oubliette " . Gish has called the episode one of her favorites to film . In addition , it contained several elaborate stunts and effect sequences , many of which were created in unique manners . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After driving home from work , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) is struck by a drunk driver and transported to a hospital , where she is examined by Dr. Preijers ( Jack Blessing ) and Nurse Edwards ; she soon slips into a coma . Reyes , however , wakes up moments later in the same room all alone . Running to the door , she discovers that the hospital is floating in a dark void . She soon finds two other patients , Stephen Murdoch ( Stan Shaw ) , and Mr. Barreiro ( Del Zamora ) . They assume that they are dead . Reyes , however , maintains that they are still alive . 
 Meanwhile , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) tells John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) that Reyes is <unk> , a fact that Doggett refuses to believe . Preijers informs Doggett and Scully that , since Reyes was an organ donor , in a few days her life @-@ support will be pulled and the hospital will harvest her remains . In the floating hospital , Reyes sees a woman ( Tracey Ellis ) standing in the hallway , but she disappears . At that moment , Barreiro begins screaming and is engulfed in blue electricity before disappearing . In the real world , it is revealed that Barreiro , a fellow comatose patient , has had his life support removed by Preijers . Nearby stands the mystery woman that Reyes encountered : Audrey Pauley . 
 Doggett begins looking into ways to save Reyes , noting an anomaly in her <unk> that suggests stifled brain activity . While visiting her room , Doggett runs into Audrey who tells her that Reyes ' soul is not gone yet . Audrey walks to her room in the basement , where a model of the hospital has been built . By concentrating her mind , she is able to move into the floating hospital where Reyes is trapped . Once there , she finds Reyes and asks her to tell Doggett that he 's a " dog person " , a reference to a conversation the two had before Reyes ' crash . After relaying the message , Doggett is determined that Reyes is not gone and , following Audrey , learns about her hospital model . 
 Meanwhile , Nurse Edwards ( Vernee Watson @-@ Johnson ) confronts Preijers about an injection she saw him give Reyes ; he kills Edwards to cover his tracks . Later , in the floating hospital , Stephen collapses and disappears when he too is pulled off of life support . After Doggett is spotted with Audrey in the basement by Preijers , he begins to worry that she could expose what he is doing . He injects the same drug he used to kill Edwards , but Audrey is able to concentrate and move into the floating hospital one last time . She informs Reyes that her only way out is to jump into the void . Reyes does so and wakes up in her hospital bed moments before her organs are to be harvested . Doggett runs down to Audrey 's room only to find that Preijers has killed her . Doggett manages to capture Preijers before he can escape . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Audrey Pauley " was written by Steven Maeda and directed by Kim Manners . The entry was Maeda 's second ninth season entry after " 4 @-@ D " . The episode features guest star Tracey Ellis as the titular Audrey Pauley . Ellis had previously appeared as a major character in the third season episode " Oubliette " . Annabeth Gish later noted that the episode , along with " 4 @-@ D " , were her " two favorite episodes " because they " are stand @-@ alone episodes about Reyes and Doggett . Wonderful acting challenges , and the stories were fantastic . " Robert Patrick , whose friend Ted Demme had recently died , was worried about bringing too much emotion onto the set . He later noted , " I was kind of raw . I remember being a little worried about bringing too much emotion to it . I felt safe with Kim ; he knew I was going through a tough time . " 
 The episode contained several elaborate stunts and effect sequences . Gish performed all of her stunts in the episode , including one shot when she jumped from a thirty foot descender . She later called the sequence " the biggest stunt of my career . " For several of the special effect shots , Manners was forced to compromise on his original decision . One specific shot , wherein Audrey Pauley had to disappear after appearing in front of Gish , was originally going to be done via CGI . Eventually , Manners decided to " tie the two actresses [ Gish and Ellis ] together [ ... ] and then you [ cut ] to Annabeth and in her face there 's an ' oh shit ' reaction , and then [ pan ] straight up on a crane , all right , and see that she 's completely alone . " He called effects like these " creative ways to trim [ the ] budget . " To create the floating hospital scene , a small door set was merged with a CGI hospital . Initially , the scene used a straight flat " piece of cement " as the bottom of the building . The effects team tried adding a " big piece of earth " under the building , but Paul Rabwin felt it looked too much like The Little Prince , so the piece of earth was removed . The final result also removed the cement @-@ like base . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Audrey Pauley " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 17 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on January 26 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 1 million households , 8 million viewers , and ranked as the sixty @-@ eighth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 17 . " Audrey Pauley " earned a Nielsen household rating of 4 @.@ 8 , meaning that roughly 4 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , were tuned in to the episode . 
 The episode has generally received positive reviews from television critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a glowing review and rated it five stars out of five . The two noted that " this is what The X @-@ Files should be doing now " and that " this would have been the template on which to have built a series starring Doggett and Reyes . " Furthermore , they noted that the script was " written and directed with so much restraint " , that is makes many of the emotional scenes " more affecting " . Shearman and Pearson ultimately called the end result " clever , thoughtful , [ … ] very moving " and " beautiful " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was a strong episode , with a lot of wonderful character exploration and an interesting concept . However , there were some weaknesses throughout , typical of Steve Maeda ’ s episodes , and that detracted from the episode in some places . Still , another winner in this underrated final season . " Lionel Green from Sand Mountain Reporter named the episode one of his " 13 all @-@ time favorite episodes " of The X @-@ Files , ranking it at number three . He wrote that the episode was " powerful " due to its themes of " faith , love and sacrifice . " He concluded that it was " the best one starring the new agents , Doggett and Reyes . " M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , praised the performances of Robert Patrick and Annabeth Gish while stating that the visuals in the dream sequences were " pitch @-@ perfect " . 
 Jessica Morgan , however , from Television Without Pity , gave the episode a more mixed review . She criticized the character of Monica Reyes and called her " <unk> " . She ultimately gave the episode a C + grade . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk called the entry " borderline weird " and used it as evidence that " the ninth season [ is ] arguably the worst season of the series . " The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen was generally <unk> writing " It ’ s not a bad episode , exactly , but there doesn ’ t seem to be a lot of point to it . ... it makes for a forgettable hour . " 
 = Pedra Branca dispute = 
 The Pedra Branca dispute [ 2008 ] ICJ 2 was a territorial dispute between Singapore and Malaysia over several islets at the eastern entrance to the Singapore Strait , namely Pedra Branca ( previously called Pulau Batu Puteh and now Batu Puteh by Malaysia ) , Middle Rocks and South Ledge . The dispute began in 1979 and was largely resolved by the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) in 2008 , which opined that Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore and Middle Rocks belonged to Malaysia . 
 In early 1980 , Singapore lodged a formal protest with Malaysia in response to a map published by Malaysia in 1979 claiming Pedra Branca . In 1989 Singapore proposed submitting the dispute to the ICJ . Malaysia agreed to this in 1994 . In 1993 , Singapore also claimed the nearby islets Middle Rocks and South Ledge . In 1998 the two countries agreed on the text of a Special Agreement that was needed to submit the dispute to the ICJ . The Special Agreement was signed in February 2003 , and the ICJ formally notified of the Agreement in July that year . The hearing before the ICJ was held over three weeks in November 2007 under the name Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) . 
 Singapore argued that Pedra Branca was terra nullius , and that there was no evidence the island had ever been under the sovereignty of the Johor Sultanate . In the event the Court did not accept this argument , Singapore contended that sovereignty over the island had passed to Singapore due to the consistent exercise of authority over the island by Singapore and its predecessor , the United Kingdom . The actions taken included selecting Pedra Branca as the site for Horsburgh Lighthouse and constructing the lighthouse , requiring Malaysian officials wishing to visit the island to obtain permits , installing a military rebroadcast station on the island , and studying the feasibility of reclaiming land around the island . Malaysia had remained silent in the face of these activities . In addition , it had confirmed in a 1953 letter that Johor did not claim ownership of the island , and had published official reports and maps indicating that it regarded Pedra Branca as Singapore territory . Middle Rocks and South Ledge should be regarded as dependencies of Pedra Branca . 
 Malaysia 's case was that Johor had original title to Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge . Johor had not ceded Pedra Branca to the United Kingdom , but had merely granted permission for the lighthouse to be built and maintained on it . The actions of the United Kingdom and Singapore in respect of the Horsburgh Lighthouse and the waters surrounding the island were not actions of the island 's sovereign . Further , the 1953 letter had been unauthorised and the official reports and maps it had issued were either irrelevant or inconclusive . 
 On 23 May 2008 , the Court ruled that Pedra Branca is under Singapore 's sovereignty , while Middle Rocks belongs to Malaysia . As regards South Ledge , the Court noted that it falls within the apparently overlapping territorial waters generated by mainland Malaysia , Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks . As it is a maritime feature visible only at low tide , it belongs to the state in the territorial waters of which it is located . Malaysia and Singapore have established what they have named the Joint Technical Committee to delimit the maritime boundary in the area around Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks , and to determine the ownership of South Ledge . 
 = = Dispute = = 
 Pedra Branca is a small granite outcrop located 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) east of Singapore and 7 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 14 @.@ 3 km ; 8 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Johor , Malaysia , where the Singapore Strait meets the South China Sea . There are two maritime features near the island : Middle Rocks , 0 @.@ 6 nautical miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ; 0 @.@ 69 mi ) south of Pedra Branca , which consists of two clusters of small rocks about 250 metres ( 820 ft ) apart ; and South Ledge , 2 @.@ 2 nautical miles ( 4 @.@ 1 km ; 2 @.@ 5 mi ) south @-@ south @-@ west of Pedra Branca , which is visible only at low tide . 
 Singapore has been administering Pedra Branca since Horsburgh Lighthouse was built on the island by its predecessor , the United Kingdom , between 1850 and 1851 . Singapore was ceded by Sultan Hussein Shah and Temenggung Abdul Rahman Sri Maharajah of Johor to the British East India Company under a Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of 2 August 1824 ( the Crawfurd Treaty ) , and became part of the Straits Settlements in 1826 . At the time when the lighthouse on the island was constructed , the Straits Settlements were under British rule through the Government of India . 
 On 21 December 1979 , the Director of National Mapping of Malaysia published a map entitled Territorial Waters and Continental Shelf Boundaries of Malaysia showing Pedra Branca to be within its territorial waters . Singapore rejected this " claim " in a diplomatic note of 14 February 1980 and asked for the map to be corrected . In the late 1980s , Attorney @-@ General of Singapore Tan Boon Teik was despatched by the Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew to disclose the documentary evidence which Singapore had to the Malaysian Attorney @-@ General , to demonstrate the strength of Singapore 's case . However , the dispute was not resolved by an exchange of correspondence and intergovernmental talks in 1993 and 1994 . In the first round of talks in February 1993 the issue of sovereignty over Middle Rocks and South Ledge was also raised . Malaysia and Singapore therefore agreed to submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) . 
 = = Procedural matters = = 
 Singapore first suggested submitting the territorial dispute to the ICJ in 1989 . The suggestion was accepted by Malaysia in 1994 . In 1998 , the text of a Special Agreement to bring the matter before the ICJ was agreed , and the Agreement was signed by the two countries at Putrajaya , Malaysia , on 6 February 2003 . It was notified to the Court in July 2003 . The case was assigned the name Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) . 
 Following directions issued by the Court , the parties exchanged memorials on 25 March 2004 , counter @-@ memorials on 25 January 2005 , and replies on 25 November 2005 . As the parties informed the Court by a letter dated 23 January 2006 that <unk> were unnecessary , the written proceedings were closed . The Court determined by drawing lots that Singapore would present its case first . Public hearings were held between 6 and 23 November 2007 , with Singapore presenting its case from 6 to 9 November , and Malaysia doing the same from 13 to 16 November 2007 . Each country was then given two days to respond , with 19 and 20 November allocated to Singapore , and 22 and 23 November allocated to Malaysia . The persons who spoke for the parties were : 
 For Singapore : Tommy Koh , Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large , Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) ; Professor of Law at the National University of Singapore ( acting as Singapore 's Agent ) ; 
 Chao Hick Tin , Attorney @-@ General of Singapore ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; 
 Chan Sek Keong , Chief Justice of Singapore ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; 
 Alain Pellet , Professor at the Paris X University Nanterre ; member and former Chairman of the United Nations International Law Commission ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; 
 Ian <unk> , <unk> , Q.C. , <unk> ; member of the English Bar ; Chairman of the UN International Law Commission ; Emeritus Chichele Professor of Public International Law , University of Oxford ; member of the Institut de Droit International ; Distinguished Fellow , All Souls College , Oxford ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; 
 Rodman R. Bundy , <unk> à la Cour d <unk> de Paris ; member of the New York State Bar Association ; Frere <unk> / Eversheds , Paris ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; 
 Loretta <unk> , <unk> à la Cour d <unk> de Paris ; member of the Rome Bar ; Frere <unk> / Eversheds , Paris ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; and 
 S. Jayakumar , Deputy Prime Minister ; Co @-@ ordinating Minister for National Security and Minister for Law ; Professor of Law at the National University of Singapore ( Counsel and Advocate ) . 
 For Malaysia : Abdul Kadir Mohamad , Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large , Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Malaysia ; Adviser for Foreign Affairs to the Prime Minister ( Malaysia 's Agent ) ; 
 Farida <unk> , Ambassador of Malaysia to the Netherlands ( Co @-@ Agent ) ; 
 Abdul Gani <unk> , Attorney @-@ General of Malaysia ( Counsel ) ; 
 Elihu Lauterpacht , <unk> , Q.C. , Honorary Professor of International Law , University of Cambridge ; member of the Institut de Droit International ; member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration ( Counsel ) ; 
 James Crawford , S.C. , <unk> , Whewell Professor of International Law , University of Cambridge ; member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; 
 Nicolaas Jan <unk> , Professor of Public International Law , Leiden University ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; 
 Marcelo G. Kohen , Professor of International Law , Graduate Institute of International Studies , Geneva ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; and 
 Penelope Nevill , college lecturer , Downing College , Cambridge . 
 The case was presided over by ICJ Vice @-@ President Judge <unk> Shawkat Al @-@ <unk> , alongside 13 other judges and two ad hoc judges appointed by the two countries . The judges were Raymond <unk> from Madagascar , Shi <unk> from the People 's Republic of China , Abdul G. Koroma from Sierra Leone , Gonzalo Parra <unk> from Venezuela , Thomas <unk> from the United States , Hisashi <unk> from Japan , Bruno <unk> from Germany , Peter <unk> from Slovakia , Ronny Abraham from France , Kenneth Keith from New Zealand , Bernardo Sepúlveda Amor from Mexico , Mohamed <unk> from Morocco and Leonid <unk> from Russia . As the Bench of the Court did not include any judges of the nationality of either party , the parties exercised their right to choose judges ad hoc to sit in the case . Singapore appointed <unk> <unk> Rao from India , and Malaysia Christopher John Robert Dugard from South Africa . 
 = = Singapore 's case = = 
 = = = Pedra Branca terra nullius = = = 
 Singapore argued that in 1847 Pedra Branca was terra nullius ( Latin for " land belonging to no one " ) as it had never been the subject of a prior claim or manifestation of sovereignty by any sovereign entity . It denied Malaysia 's claim that the island had been under Johor 's sovereignty . It contended there was no evidence that the Johor Sultanate had claimed or exercised authority over Pedra Branca between 1512 and 1641 . This period began with the fall of the Malacca Sultanate to the Portuguese in 1512 , who continued to harass the Johor Sultanate during this time , as did the Aceh Sultanate . Similarly , there was no evidence of Johor 's sovereignty over Pedra Branca between 1641 and 1699 , when Johor 's power and influence were at their height ; between 1699 and 1784 when the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah II in 1699 without a clear heir led to instability , during which many vassals broke away from the Sultanate ; and between 1784 and 1824 when , according to a 1949 annual report of the Johor government , the Sultanate was in a " state of dissolution " by the beginning of the 19th century . 
 To support its assertion that the Sultan of Johor did not have sovereignty over Pedra Branca , Singapore contended that the traditional Malay concept of sovereignty was based mainly on control over people and not over territory . Thus , the only reliable way to determine whether a particular territory belonged to a ruler was to find out whether the inhabitants pledged allegiance to that ruler . This was difficult to do with respect to Pedra Branca since it was isolated and uninhabited , and Malaysia had not provided clear evidence of a direct claim to or actual exercise of sovereign authority over the island . 
 In addition , Singapore claimed that the old Johor Sultanate , which controlled a maritime Malay empire from a capital on the Johor River , was not the same as the new Johor Sultanate occupying only the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula that came into existence after the signing of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty of 1824 between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . In its view , the Anglo – Dutch Treaty did not divide up the Singapore Strait , in which Pedra Branca is situated , between the new Johor Sultanate under the British sphere of influence and the Riau @-@ Lingga Sultanate under Dutch influence . Instead , both Britain and the Netherlands could access the Strait freely . Therefore , there was a legal vacuum with regard to sovereignty over the island , enabling the British to lawfully take possession of it between 1847 and 1851 . 
 Following the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah III of Johor in 1812 , his two sons Hussein and Abdul Rahman vied for the throne of the Johor Sultanate . The United Kingdom recognised the elder son Hussein , who was based in Singapore , as the rightful heir , while the Netherlands recognised the younger son Abdul Rahman who was based in Riau ( now Bintan , Indonesia ) . A year after the Anglo – Dutch Treaty , Abdul Rahman sent a letter dated 25 June 1825 to Hussein . In it he stated that , " in complete agreement with the spirit and the content of the treaty concluded between their Majesties , the Kings of the Netherlands and Great Britain " , he donated to his older brother " [ t ] he part of the lands assigned to [ Great Britain ] " : 
 Your territory , thus , extends over Johor and Pahang on the mainland or on the Malay Peninsula . The territory of Your Brother [ Abdul Rahman ] extends out over the islands of Lingga , Bintan , Galang , Bulan , <unk> and all other islands . Whatsoever may be in the sea , this is the territory of Your Brother , and whatever is situated on the mainland is yours . 
 On the basis of this letter , Singapore argued that Abdul Rahman had only donated the mainland territories to Hussein and had retained sovereignty over all the islands in the sea . Pedra Branca therefore never became a part of Johor . 
 = = = Lawful taking of ownership = = = 
 In the event that the Court rejected the argument that Pedra Branca was terra nullius in 1847 , Singapore contended that the selection of Pedra Branca as the site for Horsburgh Lighthouse and the construction of the lighthouse between 1847 and 1851 constituted a taking of possession of the island à titre de souverain ( with the title of a sovereign ) . The British Crown obtained title over the island in accordance with legal principles governing the acquisition of territory at that time . This title was maintained by the United Kingdom and its lawful successor , the Republic of Singapore . 
 Singapore claimed that it and its predecessor the United Kingdom had demonstrated a consistent exercise of authority over the island through various acts since 1847 . For instance , during the ceremony for the laying of the foundation stone of the lighthouse on 24 May 1850 , Pedra Branca was described as a " dependency of Singapore " in the presence of the Governor of the Straits Settlements – the most senior British official in Singapore – and other British and foreign officials . The attribution of sovereignty was widely reported in local newspapers , but drew no response from the Johor authorities . Other significant acts included the following : 
 Singapore had investigated shipwrecks in the waters around the island between 1920 and 1979 . 
 It had exercised exclusive control over the use of the island and visits to the island , including requiring Malaysian officials wishing to visit the island for scientific surveys to obtain permits . 
 It had displayed British and Singapore ensigns from Horsburgh Lighthouse . Furthermore , it had acceded to a request by Malaysia in 1968 to remove the Singapore flag from another island , Pulau Pisang , which is under Malaysian sovereignty . Malaysia had made no such request in respect of Pedra Branca . 
 On 30 May 1977 , the Port of Singapore Authority ( PSA ) allowed the Republic of Singapore Navy to install a military rebroadcast station on the island . 
 On the direction of the Government of Singapore , in 1972 , 1973 , 1974 and 1978 the PSA studied the feasibility of reclaiming 5 @,@ 000 square metres ( 54 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of land around the island . Tenders for the project were sought through newspaper advertisements , though eventually the project was not proceeded with . 
 In addition , Singapore had on two occasions claimed the sea around Pedra Branca as its territorial waters . The first occasion was in July 1952 when the Chief Surveyor expressed the opinion that Singapore should claim a 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) limit around the island . Subsequently in 1967 , the Singapore Government 's Marine Department also stated in an official memorandum to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) that the waters within three miles of Pedra Branca might be considered Singapore territorial waters . 
 = = = Malaysia 's inaction and acceptance of Singapore 's sovereignty = = = 
 It was also Singapore 's case that for over 130 years since 1847 , Malaysia had been silent over Singapore 's activities and exercise of sovereignty over Pedra Branca . No other state had challenged Singapore 's claims , and she had done so without having to seek approval from any other state . During the hearing , Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large Tommy Koh highlighted this by saying : 
 A key feature of this case is the constant stream of Singapore 's acts of administration in relation to Pedra Branca , contrasted with the complete absence of Malaysian activities on Pedra Branca or within its territorial waters , and with Malaysia 's silence in the face of all these state activities of Singapore ... Such silence on Malaysia 's part is significant and must be taken to mean that Malaysia never regarded Pedra Branca as her territory . 
 On 12 June 1953 , when Singapore was a Crown Colony , its Colonial Secretary J. D. Higham wrote to the British Adviser to the Sultan of Johor to clarify the status of Pedra Branca . He noted that the rock was outside the limits ceded by Sultan Hussein Shah and the Temenggung with the island of Singapore under the 1824 Crawfurd Treaty they had entered into with the East India Company . However , the Colonial Government had been maintaining the lighthouse built on it , and " [ t ] his by international usage no doubt confers some rights and obligations on the Colony " . He therefore asked if " there is any document showing a lease or grant of the rock or whether it has been ceded by the Government of the State of Johore or in any other way disposed of " . The Acting State Secretary of Johor , M. Seth bin <unk> , replied on 21 September that " the Johore Government does not claim ownership of Pedra Branca " . Singapore contended that this reply confirmed Singapore 's sovereignty over the island and that Johor had no title , historic or otherwise , to it . 
 The Colony of Singapore became a self @-@ governing state in 1959 , and left the British Empire to join the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 . Two years later , in 1965 , Singapore became a fully independent republic . In 1959 , in an official publication regarding meteorological information collected on Pedra Branca , Malaya listed Horsburgh Lighthouse as a " Singapore " station together with the Sultan Shoal and Raffles Lighthouses . The lighthouse on Pedra Branca was described in the same way in a joint Malaysian and Singaporean publication in 1966 , the year after Singapore left the Federation . In 1967 , when the two countries began reporting meteorological information separately , Malaysia ceased referring to Horsburgh Lighthouse . In maps published by the Malayan and Malaysian Surveyor General and Director of General Mapping in 1962 , 1965 , 1970 , 1974 and 1975 , the island was indicated with the word " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " under it . The same designation was used for an island that was unquestionably under Singapore 's sovereignty . On the other hand , the designation was not used for Pulau Pisang , an island under Malaysian sovereignty on which Singapore operated a lighthouse . 
 At a news conference in May 1980 attended by Malaysia 's former Prime Minister Tun Hussein Onn and Singapore 's then Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew , the Malaysian leader admitted that the question of sovereignty over Pedra Branca was " not very clear " to Malaysia . 
 On 19 November 2007 , Singapore Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar refuted Malaysia 's claim that Singapore was attempting to subvert the status quo by claiming sovereignty of Pedra Branca . He said Singapore was " an honest , law @-@ abiding state that has never and will never do anything to endanger navigational safety , security arrangements or the Singapore Strait 's environment " . Rather , it was Malaysia that had sought to alter the status quo by publishing a map in 1979 that altered maritime boundaries with seven neighbouring countries . This was evidenced by a telegram that the Malaysian Government had sent to its overseas missions in December 1979 , notifying them that the map would " affect " Brunei , China , Indonesia , the Philippines , Thailand , Singapore and Vietnam . 
 = = = Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge one entity = = = 
 Singapore took the position that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge should be considered a single group of maritime features as Middle Rocks and South Ledge were dependencies of Pedra Branca . It relied , among others , on the Island of Palmas Case ( 1932 ) : " As regards a group of islands , it is possible that a group may under certain circumstances be regarded as in law a unit , and that the fate of the principal part may involve the rest . " It argued that the three maritime features were <unk> the same , as rock samples showed that they were all composed of a light , coarse @-@ grained biotite granite . Additionally , Malaysia had not shown any exercise of sovereignty over the uninhabited reefs of Middle Rocks and South Ledge while Singapore had consistently exercised sovereign authority in the surrounding waters . Since sovereignty over Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore , so did sovereignty over Middle Rocks and South Ledge as they were within Pedra Branca 's territorial waters . 
 = = Malaysia 's case = = 
 = = = Pedra Branca not terra nullius = = = 
 Malaysia 's case was that it had original title to Pedra Branca " from time immemorial " . The island could not at any relevant time have been terra nullius as it is and had always been part of Johor , which is now a state of Malaysia . Nothing that the United Kingdom or Singapore had done had displaced its sovereignty over it . Contrary to what Singapore had claimed , there had been no break between the old Sultanate of Johor and the new Johor Sultanate ruled by Sultan Hussein that came into existence after the signing of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty . The Treaty had the effect of leaving the islands south of the Singapore Strait within the Dutch sphere of influence ( the Riau – Lingga Sultanate ) , while the territory and islands in the Strait and to its north were within the British sphere of influence ( the new Johor Sultanate ) . A few months after the conclusion of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty , the Sultan and the Temenggung of Johor entered into the Crawfurd Treaty with the East India Company on 2 August 1824 . Article II of the Crawfurd Treaty stated : 
 Their Highnesses the Sultan Hussein Mahomed Shah and Datu <unk> Abdul Rahman Sri Maharajah hereby cede in full sovereignty and property to the Honourable the English East India Company , their heirs and successors for ever , the Island of Singapore situated in the Straits of Malacca , together with the adjacent seas , straits , and islets , to the extent of ten geographical miles , from the coast of the said main island of Singapore . 
 Since Johor could not have ceded Singapore island and the islets in its vicinity to the British if it lacked title to them , this was evidence that the United Kingdom recognised the prior and continuing sovereignty of the Johor Sultanate over all islands in and around the Singapore Strait . 
 Malaysia challenged Singapore 's contention that Pedra Branca never became part of the new Johor Sultanate because 25 June 1825 letter from Sultan Abdul Rahman of Riau – Lingga to Sultan Hussain showed that Abdul Rahman had only donated territories on the mainland of the Malay Peninsula to Hussein and had retained sovereignty over all the islands in the sea . Malaysia submitted Abdul Rahman 's statement that his territory " extends out over the islands of Lingga , Bintan , Galang , Bulan , <unk> and all other islands " had to be read in the context of Article XII of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty , which guaranteed that no " British Establishment " would be made " on the Carimon Isles , or on the Island of Bantam , Bintang , Lingin , or on any of the other Islands South of the Straits of Singapore " . Three of the islands mentioned by Abdul Rahman – Bintan , <unk> and Lingga – were islands that the British had agreed were not within their sphere of influence , while the other two – Bulan and Galang – lay south of the Singapore Strait . Therefore , the phrase " all other islands " in Abdul Rahman 's letter referred only to islands lying within the Dutch sphere of influence . The letter was simply formal recognition that Abdul Rahman did not claim sovereignty over Johor . 
 The Johor Sultanate 's title to the island was also confirmed by ties of loyalty that existed between the Sultanate and the Orang Laut , a nomadic sea people who in the past had inhabited the maritime areas of the Singapore Strait , carrying out fishing and piracy , and had visited Pedra Branca quite frequently . This was evidenced by three 19th @-@ century letters written by British officials , including one dated November 1850 by John Turnbull Thomson , the Government Surveyor of Singapore , which had reported on the need to exclude the Orang Laut from Pedra Branca where Horsburgh Lighthouse was being built . Thomson noted that they " frequently visit the rock so their visits should never be encouraged nor any trust put in them ... In the straits and islets of the neighbouring shores and islands many lives are taken by these people . " 
 Malaysia rejected Singapore 's argument that the traditional Malay concept of sovereignty was based mainly on control over people and not over territory . It stated that authority in states throughout the world is based on a combination of control over people and territory , and that this applies to the Malay States as it does to any other state . Since the Johor Sultanate was established in the 16th century , it always had rulers who were recognised as such and who thus commanded people 's allegiance and therefore controlled the territory where those people lived . 
 = = = Actions of United Kingdom and Singapore those of lighthouse operator = = = 
 Malaysia averred that the actions of the United Kingdom and its successor Singapore in constructing and maintaining Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca were actions of the operator of the lighthouse and not the sovereign of the island . Johor had at no time ceded the island to the United Kingdom , but instead had merely granted permission for the lighthouse to be built and maintained on it . 
 Captain James Horsburgh , a Scottish hydrographer to the British East India Company who had prepared many charts and sailing instructions for the East Indies , China , New Holland , the Cape of Good Hope and other intermediate ports , died in May 1836 . Merchants and mariners felt that the building of one or more lighthouses would be a fitting tribute to him , and in as early as November 1836 Pedra Branca was proposed as one of the preferred sites . By 1844 , preference had been expressed for Romania Outer Island , or Peak Rock . Some time in November 1844 , the Governor of the Straits Settlements , William John Butterworth , wrote to the Sultan and the Temenggung of Johor regarding the matter . His letters have not been found , but English translations of the replies , dated 25 November 1844 , exist . The Sultan said : 
 I have received my friend 's letter , and in reply desire to acquaint my friend , that I perfectly understand his wishes , and I am exceedingly pleased at the intention expressed therein , as it ( a Light House ) will enable Traders and others to enter and leave this Port with greater Confidence . 
 The Temenggung responded thus : 
 I have duly received my friend 's communication , and understand the contents . My friend is desirous of erecting a Light House near Point Romania . I can have no possible objection to such a measure , indeed I am much pleased that such an undertaking is in contemplation . I wish to be guided in all matters by the Government , so much so , that the [ East India ] company are at full liberty to put up a Light House there , or any spot deemed eligible . 
 Myself and family for many years have derived support from Singapore , our dependence is wholly on the English Government , and we hope to merit the protection of , and be favoured by the Company on all occasions consistent with propriety . 
 Three days later , on 28 November 1844 , the Governor wrote to the Secretary of the Government in India to recommend that the lighthouse be sited on Peak Rock . Among other things , he said that " [ t ] his Rock is part of the Territories of the Rajah of Johore , who with the <unk> ... have willingly consented to cede it gratuitously to the East India Company " , and enclosed the replies received from the Sultan and Temenggung . Nonetheless , Malaysia argued that the Sultan and Temenggung 's letters amounted to no more than permission to the United Kingdom to build and operate a lighthouse on Peak Rock or some other suitable location . 
 On 13 November , Malaysia 's Agent , Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large Abdul Kadir Mohamad , alleged that Singapore was trying to " subvert " a 150 @-@ year @-@ old arrangement under which Singapore operated Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca , which was Malaysia 's territory . He also suggested that if permitted to do so , Singapore would upset the peace and stability of the area where the island is located . He said that if Singapore reclaimed land around Pedra Branca , " [ q ] <unk> apart from the possible effects on the environment and navigation in the Strait , this could lead to potentially serious changes to the security arrangements in the eastern entrance of the Strait " . According to Malaysian Attorney @-@ General Abdul Gani <unk> , Singapore had first raised the issue of sovereignty over Pedra Branca on 13 April 1978 during a meeting between officials , saying it had " incontrovertible legal evidence " of its sovereignty over the island though it had never produced any documents in support . Prior to that , the sovereignty of the island had never been disputed . The 1980 statement by the then Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Hussein Onn concerning the " unclear " position of the island had also been premised on these documents which former Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew had claimed were in Singapore 's possession . The statement was therefore merely a friendly and respectful statement of a visiting prime minister at a press conference which had no probative value in court . All Hussein Onn had meant was that the matter required further discussion between the two countries . 
 = = = = 1953 letter by Acting State Secretary of Johor unauthorised = = = = 
 Concerning the letter of 21 September 1953 in which the Acting State Secretary of Johor informed the Colonial Secretary of Singapore that " the Johore Government does not claim ownership of Pedra Branca " , Malaysia submitted that the Colonial Secretary 's enquiry of 12 June 1953 about the status of Pedra Branca showed that the Singapore authorities had no conviction that the island was part of its territory . 
 Further , the Acting State Secretary " was definitely not authorized " and did not have " the legal capacity to write the 1953 letter , or to renounce , disclaim , or confirm title of any part of the territories of Johor " . Under two treaties of 21 January 1948 , the Johor Agreement between the British Crown and the Sultan of Johor and the Federation of Malaya Agreement between the British Crown and nine Malay States including Johor , Johor transferred all its rights , power and jurisdiction on matters relating to defence and external affairs to the United Kingdom . These powers were exercisable by the Federal High Commissioner appointed by the United Kingdom and not by the Johor State Secretary . The Acting State Secretary had improperly taken it upon himself to reply to the Colonial Secretary 's letter and had not submitted a copy of it to the Chief Secretary of Johor . There was no evidence that the Chief Secretary or the High Commissioner was aware of its contents . 
 = = = = Singapore 's actions in respect of Pedra Branca not as sovereign = = = = 
 Regarding Singapore 's contentions that it had exercised sovereign authority over Pedra Branca in various ways , Malaysia responded as indicated below : 
 Investigation of shipwrecks in vicinity of Pedra Branca . Singapore had duties to investigate hazards to navigational safety and to publish information about such hazards in its capacity as a lighthouse operator , and under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea . Therefore , by investigating and reporting on shipwrecks and maritime hazards within Pedra Branca 's territorial waters Singapore had acted in accordance with best practice and not à titre de souverain . The circumstances of the particular investigations also meant that Singapore 's ability to carry them out was not based on its sovereignty over the island . 
 Display of British and Singapore ensigns on island . Ensigns , associated with maritime matters , are marks of nationality and not sovereignty . Singapore had also not demonstrated any sovereign intent in the flying of the British and Singapore ensigns from Horsburgh Lighthouse . The Pulau Pisang incident was not an acknowledgement by Malaysia of Singapore 's sovereignty over Pedra Branca ; it had been a matter of domestic political sensibility – Pulau Pisang is much larger than Pedra Branca and has a small local population . 
 Installation of military communications equipment and plans to reclaim land . Malaysia alleged that Singapore 's installation of military communications equipment on Pedra Branca was done secretly , and that it had only learned about this when it received Singapore 's memorial in the case . As regards Singapore 's plans to reclaim land around the island , Malaysia said it could not have reacted to some of the documents as they had been secret . 
 = = = = Meteorological reports irrelevant ; maps inconclusive = = = = 
 In response to Singapore 's contention in respect of meteorological reports published by Malaysia that had indicated Pedra Branca as a Singapore station , Malaysia said the fact that it recognised Horsburgh Lighthouse as a Singapore rainfall station did not amount an acknowledgement of sovereignty . The six maps that it had published between 1962 and 1975 which had printed the word " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " beneath the island were inconclusive . This was because the annotating could be assessed differently , the maps contained disclaimers stating they could not be considered an authority on the delimitation of international or other boundaries , and maps do not create title and cannot amount to admissions unless incorporated into treaties or used in inter @-@ state negotiations . 
 = = = Middle Rocks and South Ledge belong to Malaysia = = = 
 Malaysia contended that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge were not a single identifiable entity . The historical record showed that the three maritime features were never formally described as a single island with <unk> islands , or as a group of islands . Middle Rocks and South Ledge were therefore under Johor sovereignty at the time of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty and fell within the British sphere of influence under the Treaty . Malaysia had exercised consistent acts of sovereignty over them within the limits of their character . For instance , in 1968 the Malaysian Government used and granted petroleum concessions which extended to the area of Middle Rocks and South Ledge . Also , an internal confidential document dated 16 July 1968 entitled " Letter of Promulgation " by the Chief of the Royal Malaysian Navy included charts showing that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge were within Malaysia 's territorial waters , and the features were included within Malaysian fisheries waters in the Fisheries Act 1985 . Singapore had neither protested against these manifestations of sovereignty , nor advanced any claims over Middle Rocks and South Ledge in 1980 when it began claiming that Pedra Branca belonged to it . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Reliability of Malaysia 's photograph of Pedra Branca = = = 
 In the course of the hearing , to demonstrate Pedra Branca 's proximity to the Johor mainland , Malaysia produced a photograph taken of Pedra Branca with Point Romania and a hill named Mount Berbukit , both in Johor , in the background . However , on 19 November 2007 Singapore produced another photograph taken using a camera that approximated what the human eye sees , and pointed out that in it Mount Berbukit appeared much smaller . It alleged that Malaysia 's photograph had been taken using a telephoto lens , which had exaggerated the height of Mount Berbukit by about seven times . Singapore 's then Attorney @-@ General Chao Hick Tin said that the photograph had been " an attempt to convey a subliminal message of proximity between Pedra Branca and the coast of Johor " , but it was not an accurate reflection of what visitors to Pedra Branca would see if they were looking towards Johor . 
 Malaysia claimed its photograph was obtained from an online blog , Singapore called the blog " most unusual " , noting that it had been created only a month earlier ; that the photograph had only been uploaded on 2 November , four days before the oral proceedings in the case had commenced ; and that there was no information on the blogger 's identity . 
 In its rebuttal on 24 November , Malaysia said that the difference between the photographs was " all a question of perspective " and that the matter was not worth discussing . 
 = = = Missing 1844 letters = = = 
 A key thrust of Malaysia 's case was that the British had received explicit permission from Johor to build a lighthouse on Pedra Branca , which proved that the British had recognised Johor 's sovereignty over the island . It submitted that this was evidenced by the November 1844 letters that Governor Butterworth had written to the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor regarding the construction of the lighthouse . Malaysia said it had written to Singapore asking for copies of the letters , because if the letters still existed they were probably in Singapore 's archives in a file entitled " Letters to Native Rulers " . However , Singapore had never replied . 
 Singapore 's response was that it did not have copies of the letters . Its archives were incomplete , and searches for them in other archives had been in vain . Furthermore , the letters were more likely to be in Malaysia 's possession as the Governor had sent them to the Johor rulers . In his rebuttal of Malaysia 's case on 19 November 2007 , Singapore 's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Law S. Jayakumar expressed disappointment with Malaysia 's insinuation that Singapore had concealed the letters from the Court , which he termed " most disturbing " , " baseless " and " distracting " . 
 Malaysia did not mention the matter further in its rebuttal on 24 November . 
 = = ICJ decision = = 
 The ICJ rendered its decision on 23 May 2008 . It held by 12 votes to four that sovereignty over Pedra Branca belongs to Singapore . It further held , by 15 votes to one , that sovereignty over Middle Rocks belongs to Malaysia , and sovereignty over South Ledge belongs to the state in the territorial waters of which it is located . 
 = = = Pedra Branca originally under sovereignty of Johor Sultanate = = = 
 The Court agreed with Malaysia that the Johor Sultanate had original title to Pedra Branca , rejecting Singapore 's argument that the island was terra nullius . It found it was not disputed that Johor had established itself as a sovereign state with a certain territorial domain in Southeast Asia since it came into existence in 1512 . As Pedra Branca had always been known as a navigational hazard in the Singapore Strait , which was a vital channel for international navigation in east @-@ west trade between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea , it was inconceivable that the island had remained undiscovered by the local community . It was therefore reasonable to infer that Pedra Branca lay within the general geographical scope of the Johor Sultanate . Further , during the existence of the old Johor Sultanate , there was no evidence of any competing claims over the islands in the Singapore Strait . It also agreed with Malaysia 's submission that descriptions of the relationship between the Sultan of Johor and the Orang Laut in 19th @-@ century official British reports proved that the Sultan exercised sovereign authority over the Orang Laut . Since the Orang Laut made the islands in the Singapore Strait their habitat , this confirmed the " ancient original title " of the Johor Sultanate to those islands , including Pedra Branca . As regards Singapore 's argument that the traditional concept of Malay sovereignty was based on control over people rather than territory , the Court observed that sovereignty comprises control over both persons and territory . However , it was not necessary to deal with the point further as it had already found that Johor had territorial sovereignty over Pedra Branca . 
 The purpose of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty was to finally settle the disputes that had arisen between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands relating to their territorial possessions and commercial interests in the East Indies . It was thus most unlikely that the parties had left the maritime features in the Singapore Straits outside their spheres of influence , as Singapore had contended . Under Article XII of the Treaty , Britain had agreed that " no British Establishment shall be made on the Carimon Isles , or on the Island of Bantam , Bintang , Lingin , or on any of the other Islands South of the Straits of Singapore ... " The islands and islets within the Straits therefore fell within the British sphere of influence . This included Pedra Branca , which remained part of the territorial domain of the new Johor Sultanate . That this was the British understanding of the Treaty was confirmed by a letter dated 4 March 1825 from the Government of India to John Crawfurd , the British Resident in Singapore , which read : " [ O ] ur acquisition of these Islets [ under the Crawfurd Treaty ] is not at variance with the obligations of the Treaty concluded at London in March last [ the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty ] as they are all situated North of the Southern limits of the Straights of Singapore ... " [ Emphasis added . ] Therefore , Britain 's position was that every island north of the southern limits of the Singapore Strait fell within its sphere of influence . The Court 's reading of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty was reinforced by letter of 25 June 1825 from Sultan Abdul Rahman to his brother Sultan Hussain , which did not have the effect Singapore attributed to it . 
 Contrary to Malaysia 's submission , the Court found that the Crawfurd Treaty did not show that Britain recognised Johor 's sovereignty over all the islands in and around the Singapore Strait . Article II only referred to the cession by the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor of " the Island of Singapore ... together with the adjacent seas , straits , and islets to the extent of ten geographical miles " to the British , and could not be read as an acknowledgement by the United Kingdom that Johor sovereignty over any other territory . 
 = = = Sovereignty over Pedra Branca passed to Singapore = = = 
 The ICJ noted that under certain circumstances , sovereignty over territory may pass due to the failure of the state which has sovereignty to respond to the other state 's conduct à titre de souverain , that is , concrete manifestations of the display of territorial sovereignty by the other state . 
 Because there was no written agreement relating to Horsburgh Lighthouse and Pedra Branca , the Court was unable to determine whether the November 1844 replies by the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor to Governor Butterworth 's query amounted to a cession of the place that would be chosen for the site of the lighthouse or was merely a permission to build , maintain and operate a lighthouse there . Although the Governor had indicated in his 28 November 1844 letter to the Secretary of the Government in India to recommend that the replies amounted to a gratuitous cession to the East India Company , this understanding was not communicated to the Sultan and Temenggung . Similarly , the fact that Britain had not informed Johor about its decision to site the lighthouse on Pedra Branca might be seen either as recognition that Britain only had consent to build and operate it , or that Johor no longer had rights over the island . On the evidence adduced , the Court was unable to reach a conclusion on the issue . It also did not draw any conclusions about the construction and commissioning of the lighthouse , stating only that it saw the events as " bearing on the issue of the evolving views of the authorities in Johor and Singapore about sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh " . It noted , though , that apart from a two @-@ day visit by the Temenggung and his followers to the island in early June 1850 , Johor had no involvement in the project . 
 The Court declined to accept Malaysia 's argument that the Singapore Colonial Secretary 's query about the status of Pedra Branca in 1953 indicated that the United Kingdom had no conviction that the island was part of its territory . It felt the letter of inquiry showed the Singapore authorities were not clear about events that had occurred over a century earlier and that they were unsure their records were complete , which was understandable in the circumstances . It also disagreed that the Acting State Secretary of Johor , who had stated in his letter of reply that Johor did not claim ownership of the island , had acted without authority . The Johor Agreement was irrelevant – as the Colonial Secretary was a representative of the United Kingdom government which was not a foreign state in relation to Johor at the time , there was no question of the United Kingdom having to consent to Johor issuing the reply . The Federation of Malaya Agreement also did not assist Malaysia because the action of responding to a request for information was not an " exercise " of " executive authority " . Further , since Malaysia had not invoked this argument in its negotiations with Singapore and in the ICJ proceedings until late in the oral phase , Singapore was entitled to presume that the Acting State Secretary had acted within his authority . The meaning of the reply was clear – as of 1953 , Johor understood it did not have sovereignty over Pedra Branca , and thus the Singapore authorities had no reason to doubt that the island belonged to the United Kingdom . 
 The Court regarded as conduct à titre de souverain Singapore 's investigation of six shipwrecks in the vicinity of Pedra Branca between 1920 and 1993 , its exclusive control over visits to the island , the installation of the military rebroadcast station on the island in 1977 , and the proposed reclamation of land around it . Malaysia was correct in asserting that the flying of an ensign was not normally a manifestation of sovereignty , and that the difference in size between Pulau Pisang and Pedra Branca had to be recognised . Nonetheless , some weight could be given to the fact that Malaysia had not requested for the Singapore ensign flying at Horsburgh Lighthouse to be taken down . The fact that Malaysia had referred to the lighthouse as a Singapore station in the 1959 and 1966 meteorological reports and had omitted it from the 1967 Malaysian report favoured Singapore 's case . 
 The maps published by Malaysia between 1962 and 1975 tended to confirm that it considered Pedra Branca to fall under Singapore sovereignty . The " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " annotations on the maps in respect of the island were clear and supported Singapore 's case . The maps gave a good indication of Malaysia 's official position on the matter , and could amount to an admission . Finally , Malaysia could not rely on the disclaimers on the maps as the present matter did not concern a boundary but a distinct island . In any case , the maps were statements of geographical fact , particularly since Malaysia had itself produced and disseminated it against its own interest . 
 In view of the above , the Court held that by 1980 sovereignty over Pedra Branca had passed from Malaysia to Singapore . 
 = = = Sovereignty over Middle Rocks and South Ledge = = = 
 None of the conduct by the United Kingdom and Singapore that led to the ICJ to conclude that Singapore had gained sovereignty over Pedra Branca applied to Middle Rocks . Since Johor held the ancient original title to Middle Rocks , the Court held that this title remains with Malaysia as the successor to the Johor Sultanate . 
 South Ledge falls within the apparently overlapping territorial waters generated by the mainland of Malaysia , Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks . Although in the Special Agreement and in their final submissions Malaysia and Singapore had asked the Court to decide which state had sovereignty over Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge , the Court had not been mandated to delimit the extent of the territorial waters of the two states in the area in question . Therefore , it simply held that South Ledge , as a low @-@ tide elevation , belongs to the state in the territorial waters of which it is located . 
 = = Reactions and further developments = = 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 On 23 May 2008 , Malaysian Foreign Minister Rais Yatim described the ICJ decision as creating a " win @-@ win " situation and that both countries would " forge ahead " in their bilateral relationship . Deputy Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak called the judgment a " balanced decision " as Malaysia had been " partly successful " in its territorial claims . Interviewed by journalists at The Hague , Singapore Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar said : " We are pleased with the judgment because the court has awarded sovereignty over Pedra Branca , which is the main feature in dispute , to Singapore . " Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Hsien Loong said he was pleased with the result , and commented that bringing the dispute to the ICJ was " a good way for [ Malaysia and Singapore ] to resolve disagreements or problems while maintaining good relations with each other " . 
 = = = = Malaysia = = = = 
 On the day the ICJ released its judgment , Rais Yatim asserted that since South Ledge was within the territorial waters of Middle Rocks , " Malaysia appears to be the sovereign holder " . A week later , the Foreign Ministry of Malaysia asked the Malaysian media to cease using the Malay word Pulau ( " Island " ) for Pedra Branca and to refer to it as " Batu Puteh " or " Pedra Branca " . 
 The ICJ 's decision is final and not subject to appeal . Nevertheless , in June 2008 Rais Yatim stated that Malaysia had renewed its search for the letter written by Governor Butterworth to the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor seeking permission to build Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca . He noted that the rules of the ICJ allowed a case to be reviewed within ten years if new evidence was adduced . In response , Singapore 's Law Minister K. Shanmugam said that the city @-@ state would wait to see what new evidence the Malaysian government could come up with . 
 Several Malaysian Members of Parliament have urged the Federal Government to assert sovereignty over Pulau Pisang which also has a lighthouse on it that is operated by Singapore , or to take over administration of the lighthouse . Concerns were also expressed for Pulau <unk> near the western boundary of Malaysia and Singapore . The Menteri Besar of Johor , Abdul Ghani Othman , assured the public that Pulau Pisang belongs to Johor under a 1900 agreement between Sultan Ibrahim of Johor and British administrators in colonial Singapore . Nonetheless , Malaysian agencies have taken up efforts to stake claims over a hundred islands , reefs , rocks and other features in the South China Sea , Malacca Straits , and off Sabahan waters that Malaysia could lose to China , Indonesia and Vietnam . Two of these islands are Pulau <unk> off eastern Sabah near the Indonesian border , and Pulau Perak to the west of Penang . 
 At the opening of Johor 's 12th State Assembly in June 2008 , Sultan Iskandar of Johor pledged to reclaim the island " whatever it takes " . Speaking impromptu at the end of a prepared speech , the Sultan said in Malay : " Let us be reminded that I do not forget Pulau Batu Puteh . Pulau Batu Puteh is not Singapore 's , but it belongs to Johor . It does not matter how long it may take , I will find the way to get back the island , which belongs to Johor . " The Menteri Besar of Johor said the state government had " clearly heard " what the Sultan said , but did not elaborate . 
 On 3 September 2008 , Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah , a Kelantan prince and MP from the state , sent a letter to Rais Yatim claiming that Johor 's interests had not been raised before the ICJ . He alleged that the seas surrounding Pedra Branca had always been in Johor 's hands and had never been surrendered to the British or to Singapore , and by accepting the ICJ decision and participating in technical discussions with Singapore the Malaysian government had infringed Johor 's constitutional rights . Responding , Rais said the letter seemed designed for " political mileage " and that Johor had been fully involved in the proceedings . He told the Straits Times , " Everybody has his opinion on such matters but I , as Foreign Minister , have to abide by the dictate of the law . I have to see the letter first but it 's rather late in the day to express disappointment . " 
 = = = = Singapore = = = = 
 On 21 July 2008 , in response to questions from Singapore Members of Parliament about Pedra Branca , the Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Balaji Sadasivan stated that the maritime territory around the island included a territorial sea of up to 12 nautical miles ( 22 km ; 14 mi ) and an Exclusive Economic Zone . This was condemned by Malaysia 's Foreign Minister Rais Yatim as " against the spirit of Asean and the legal structure " as the claim was " unacceptable and unreasonable and contradicts the principles of international law " . In response , a Singapore Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman said that Singapore first stated its claim to a territorial sea and Exclusive Economic Zone on 15 September 1980 , and reiterated this claim on 23 May 2008 following the ICJ 's judgment . Both statements had made clear that if the limits of Singapore 's territorial sea or Exclusive Economic Zone overlapped with the claims of neighbouring countries , Singapore would negotiate with those countries to arrive at agreed delimitations in accordance with international law . In August 2008 , Rais said Malaysia took the view that Singapore was not entitled to claim an Exclusive Economic Zone around Pedra Branca as it considered that the maritime feature did not meet internationally recognised criteria for an island , that is , land inhabited by humans that had economic activity . 
 At the launch of S. Jayakumar and Tommy Koh 's book Pedra Branca : The Road to the World Court on 19 December 2008 , Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong commented : " The Pedra Branca case is likely to be a unique event in the history of Singapore as it is unlikely that Singapore will ever again need to seek confirmation of her title to territory under international law . " 
 = = = Resolution of outstanding issues = = = 
 Malaysia and Singapore have established what they have named the Joint Technical Committee to delimit the maritime boundary in the area around Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks , and to determine the ownership of South Ledge . Following a meeting on 3 June 2008 , the Committee agreed that a technical sub @-@ committee would be established to oversee the conduct of joint survey works to prepare the way for talks on maritime issues in and around the area . If any incident occurred in and around the waters of Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge , either side would provide humanitarian assistance to the vessels involved . Finally , both Malaysian and Singaporean fishermen could continue traditional fishing activities in those waters . In September 2008 , the Joint Technical Committee reported that its Sub @-@ Committee on Joint Survey Works was finalising technical preparations for a hydrographic survey that would provide data for future delimitation discussions . A Sub @-@ Committee on Maritime and Airspace Management and Fisheries had also been formed , and after a meeting on 20 August 2008 it decided that traditional fishing activities by both countries should continue in waters beyond 0 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 0 @.@ 9 km ; 0 @.@ 6 mi ) off Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Abdul <unk> Hamid ( Khin Maung Sein ) ( 2011 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pulau Batu Puteh : A Critical Analysis of its Legal Implications " , Malayan Law Journal 3 : 30 – 61 . 
 Abdul <unk> Hamid ( Khin Maung Sein ) ( 2011 ) , " Pedra Branca Judgment and Beyond : Issues and Challenges in its Implementation by Malaysia and Singapore " , International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 26 ( 2 ) : 335 – 342 . 
 Beckman , Robert ; Schofield , Clive ( 2009 ) , " Moving beyond Disputes over Island Sovereignty : ICJ Decision Sets Stage for Maritime Boundary Delimitation in the Singapore Strait " , Ocean Development & International Law 40 ( 1 ) : 1 – 35 , doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . 
 Colson , David A. ; <unk> , Brian J. ( 2008 ) , " International Court of Justice : Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) – Introductory Note " , International Legal Materials ( 5 ) : 833 – 835 . 
 <unk> , Sophia ( 2010 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) , Judgment of 23 May 2008 " , International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 25 ( 1 ) : 93 – 113 , doi : 10 @.@ 1163 / <unk> . 
 Lathrop , <unk> G. ( 2008 ) , " Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) " , American Journal of International Law 102 ( 4 ) : 828 – 834 , doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> , JSTOR <unk> , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 21 July 2009 . 
 Li , <unk> ; Shao , <unk> ( 2009 ) , <unk> [ Study on the Pedra Branca Dispute and Its Influence on Relations between Singapore and Malaysia and ASEAN 's Development ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 1 – 12 . 
 Mills , Alex ( 2008 ) , " The Formalism of State Sovereignty in Territorial and Maritime Disputes " , Cambridge Law Journal 67 ( 3 ) : 443 – 447 , doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Mohamed <unk> ; <unk> , Evangeline ( 2004 ) , " The Repercussions of the Similarities between Sipadan / <unk> and Pedra Branca Disputes " , Singapore Law Review 24 : 52 – 65 . 
 O 'Keefe , Roger ( 2011 ) , " Legal Title versus <unk> : Prescription and the Promise and Problems of Private Law Analogies " , International Community Law Review 13 ( 1 – 2 ) : 147 – 188 , doi : 10 @.@ 1163 / <unk> . 
 Tan , Hsien @-@ Li ( 2008 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) " , Singapore Year Book of International Law 12 : 257 – 262 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 14 April 2010 . 
 Tanaka , Yoshifumi ( 2008 ) , Passing of Sovereignty : The Malaysia / Singapore Territorial Dispute before the ICJ , The Hague Justice Portal , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 21 January 2012 . 
 Wan Siti <unk> Wan <unk> ; Adina <unk> ; Mahmud <unk> Mohd Nor ( 2009 ) , " Article 121 of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention and the Maritime Delimitation in the Straits of Singapore " , <unk> Undang @-@ undang dan Masyarakat : 13 . 
 Wang , <unk> ( 2009 ) , <unk> 、 <unk> [ An Interpretation of the Case of Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge from the Perspective of International Law ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 19 – 25 . 
 Wang , <unk> ( 2009 ) , <unk> : <unk> [ The Judgment of the International Court of Justice on Territorial Disputes between Singapore and Malaysia and Its Inspirations ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 13 – 18 . 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 " KL 's claim of original title a mirage : Jaya " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Malaysian Bar website ) , 10 November 2007 , archived from the original on 10 January 2008 , retrieved 30 September 2008 . 
 " All the pieces in Singapore 's case ' fit perfectly together ' " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) website ) , 21 November 2007 , retrieved 30 September 2008 . 
 Andy Ho ( 28 November 2007 ) , " The evidence of words : The Pedra Branca case may really just turn on two treaties of 1824 " , The Straits Times . 
 Jessica Cheam ( 24 May 2008 ) , " A good ruling , for both [ editorial ] " , The Straits Times ( reproduced at <unk> ) . 
 Zakir Hussain ( 20 December 2008 ) , " Pedra Branca story told in a book : Jayakumar and Tommy Koh give behind @-@ the @-@ scenes account of 30 @-@ year saga " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs website ) , p . A4 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Haller @-@ Trost , Renate ( 1993 ) , Historical Legal Claims : A Study of Disputed Sovereignty over Pulau Batu Puteh ( Pedra Branca ) [ Maritime briefing ; vol . 1 , no . 1 ] , Durham : International Boundaries Research Unit , Department of Geography , University of Durham , pp. 1 – 36 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ 4 . 
 Jayakumar , S. ; Koh , Tommy ( 2008 ) , Pedra Branca : The Road to the World Court , Singapore : NUS Press in association with MFA Diplomatic Academy , ISBN 978 @-@ 9971 @-@ 69 @-@ 474 @-@ 6 ( hbk . ) , ISBN 978 @-@ 9971 @-@ 69 @-@ 457 @-@ 9 ( pbk . ) . 
 = 1994 Fairchild Air Force Base B @-@ 52 crash = 
 On Friday , 24 June 1994 , a United States Air Force ( USAF ) Boeing B @-@ 52 Stratofortress crashed at Fairchild Air Force Base , Washington , United States , after the pilot , Lt Col Arthur " Bud " Holland , maneuvered the bomber beyond its operational limits and lost control . The aircraft stalled , fell to the ground and exploded , killing Holland and the other three USAF officers aboard . The crash was captured on video and was shown repeatedly on news broadcasts throughout the world . 
 The subsequent investigation concluded that the crash was attributable primarily to three factors : Holland 's personality and behavior , USAF leaders ' delayed or inadequate reactions to earlier incidents involving Holland , and the sequence of events during the aircraft 's final flight . The crash is now used in military and civilian aviation environments as a case study in teaching crew resource management . It is also often used by the U.S. Armed Forces during aviation safety training as an example of the importance of compliance with safety regulations and correcting the behavior of anyone who violates safety procedures . 
 = = Crash = = 
 At 07 : 30 local time ( Pacific Time Zone ) on 24 June 1994 , a USAF B @-@ 52H bomber crew stationed at Fairchild Air Force Base prepared to practice an aircraft demonstration flight for an airshow . The crew consisted of pilots Lt Col Arthur " Bud " Holland ( 46 years old ) , Lt Col Mark McGeehan ( 38 ) , Col Robert Wolff ( 46 ) , and weapon systems officer / radar navigator Lt Col Ken Huston ( 41 ) . Holland was the designated command pilot for the flight , with McGeehan as the copilot and Wolff as a safety observer . Holland was the chief of the 92nd Bomb Wing 's Standardization and Evaluation branch , McGeehan was the commander of the 325th Bomb Squadron , Wolff was the vice commander of the 92nd Bomb Wing , and Huston was the 325th Bomb Squadron 's operations officer . 
 The mission plan for the flight called for a demanding series of low @-@ altitude passes , 60 ° banked turns , a steep climb , and a touch @-@ and @-@ go landing on Fairchild 's runway 23 . The flight was also Wolff 's " fini flight " – a common tradition in which a retiring USAF aircrew member is met shortly after landing on his or her final flight at the airfield by relatives , friends and coworkers , and doused with water . Thus , Wolff 's wife and many of his close friends were at the airfield to watch the flight and participate in the post @-@ flight ceremony . McGeehan 's wife and two youngest sons watched the flight from the backyard of McGeehan 's living quarters , located nearby . 
 The B @-@ 52 aircraft , callsign Czar 52 , took off at 13 : 58 and completed most of the mission 's elements without incident . Upon preparing to execute the touch @-@ and @-@ go on Runway 23 at the end of the practice profile , the aircraft was instructed to go around because a KC @-@ 135 aircraft had just landed and was on the runway . Maintaining an altitude of about 250 feet ( 75 m ) above ground level ( AGL ) , Holland radioed the control tower and asked for permission to execute a 360 ° left turn , which was immediately granted by the tower controller . The B @-@ 52 then began the 360 ° left turn around the tower starting from about the midfield point of the runway . Located just behind the tower was an area of restricted airspace , reportedly because of a nuclear weapons storage facility . Apparently to avoid flying through the restricted airspace , Holland flew the aircraft in an extremely tight , steeply banked turn while maintaining the low , 250 @-@ foot ( 75 m ) AGL altitude . Approximately three @-@ quarters of the way around the turn , at 14 : 16 , the aircraft banked past 90 ° , descended rapidly , clipped power lines and hit the ground , exploding and killing the four crew members . McGeehan was seated in an ejection seat , but according to the medical statement , he had only " partially ejected at the time of impact " ; it does not state whether or not he cleared the aircraft . Huston was also seated in an ejection seat and the medical statement indicated that he had not initiated the ejection sequence . Wolff 's seat was not ejection @-@ capable . No one on the ground was injured . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The USAF immediately convened a safety investigation under the direction of the USAF 's Chief of Safety , Brigadier General Orin L. Godsey . The safety investigation board released the report of its investigation into the crash on 10 August 1994 . A final evaluation of the safety investigation was released on 31 January 1995 . The USAF safety report was distributed only to U.S. Department of Defense personnel and not to the general public . An accident investigation board , called an " AFR 110 @-@ 14 Investigation , " released a separate report in 1995 . Unlike the USAF safety investigation , the AFR 110 @-@ 14 report was released to the general public . 
 The AFR 110 @-@ 14 investigation identified several factors which contributed to the crash , including the actual crash sequence , the personality and earlier behavior of Bud Holland , previous supervision and lack of corrective action exercised by USAF officers over Bud Holland , mission planning and execution , and other environmental and human factors . 
 = = = Crash sequence = = = 
 The investigation found that as the B @-@ 52 entered its final turn sequence around the tower , its indicated airspeed ( IAS ) was 182 knots ( 337 km / h ; 209 mph ) . Although Holland increased the engine power after starting the turn , his input came too late to maintain the aircraft 's airspeed , as the B @-@ 52 turbofan engines take up to eight seconds to respond to throttle commands . Even though the airspeed indicator was available to all four aircrew members , the aircraft 's airspeed was allowed to continue to decrease . Eight seconds before impact , the aircraft 's IAS had deteriorated to 145 knots ( 269 km / h ; 167 mph ) and the aircraft 's bank angle increased past 60 ° . At this time Holland or McGeehan applied full right spoiler , right rudder , and nose @-@ up elevator , and the aircraft entered a turning flight stall ( also called accelerated stall ) . This phenomenon is a stall that occurs at a higher airspeed than the design stall speed – which always refers to straight and level flight – because of the fact that the aircraft is turning . Due to the bank of 60 ° or more , the stall speed for the aircraft at that moment was 147 knots ( 272 km / h ; 169 mph ) . Thus , flying 2 knots slower , the aircraft stalled , without having sufficient altitude to recover before striking the ground . 
 = = = Holland 's previous behavior and USAF leaders ' reactions = = = 
 The accident board stated that Bud Holland 's personality significantly influenced the crash sequence . USAF personnel testified that Holland had developed a reputation as an aggressive pilot who often broke flight safety and other rules . The rule @-@ breaking included flying below minimum clearance altitudes and exceeding bank angle limitations and climb rates . 
 An earlier incident occurred in 1991 when a B @-@ 52 piloted by Holland performed a circle above a softball game in which Holland 's daughter was participating . Beginning at 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) AGL , Holland 's aircraft executed the circle at 65 ° of bank . In a maneuver described by one witness as a " death spiral , " the nose of the aircraft continued to drop and the bank angle increased to 80 ° . After losing 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of altitude , Holland was able to regain control of the aircraft . 
 During a 19 May 1991 air show at Fairchild , Holland was the command pilot of the B @-@ 52 aerial demonstration flight . During the demonstration , Holland 's aircraft violated several safety regulations , including exceeding bank and pitch limits , flying directly over the air show spectators , and possibly violating altitude restrictions . The base and wing commander , Colonel Arne Weinman , along with his staff , observed the demonstration , but apparently took no action . 
 On 12 July 1991 , Holland commanded a B @-@ 52 for a " flyover " during a change of command ceremony for the 325th Bomb Squadron at Fairchild . During both the practice and the actual flyover , Holland 's aircraft flew at altitudes below 100 feet ( 30 m ) – well below the established minimum altitude – flew steeply banked turns in excess of 45 ° , exceeded pitch angle limits and executed a wingover . The wingover was not specifically prohibited but was not recommended because it could damage the aircraft . After witnessing the flyover , Colonel Weinman and his deputy commander for operations ( DO ) , Colonel <unk> , orally reprimanded Holland , but took no formal action . 
 During the 17 May 1992 Fairchild air show , Holland was again the command pilot of the B @-@ 52 aerial demonstration flight . During the demonstration , Holland 's aircraft again violated several safety regulations , including several low altitude steep turns in excess of 45 ° of bank and a high pitch angle climb , estimated at over 60 ° nose high which Holland finished with a wingover maneuver . The new wing commander , Colonel Michael G. <unk> , apparently took no action . One week later , the new DO , Colonel Capotosti , on his own initiative warned Holland that if he violated any more safety regulations , Capotosti would ground him ( remove him from flying status ) . Capotosti did not document his warning to Holland or take any other kind of formal action . 
 On 14 and 15 April 1993 , Holland was the mission commander of a two @-@ ship training mission to a bombing range near Guam in the Pacific Ocean . During the mission , Holland flew his B @-@ 52 closer to the other B @-@ 52 than regulations allowed . Holland also asked his navigator to videotape the bombs falling from the aircraft from inside the bomb bay , also against regulations . Holland 's navigator later brought the video to the attention of three Fairchild USAF officers . The first , Lieutenant Colonel Bullock , the current 325th Bomb Squadron commander , did not do anything about it and may have even tried to use the videotape as leverage to coerce the navigator into accepting a position as mission scheduler for the wing . The second , the deputy operations group commander , Lieutenant Colonel Harper , told the crew member to conceal the evidence . The third , the DO , allegedly responded to reports of the video by stating , " Okay , I don 't want to know anything about that video — I don 't care . " 
 At the 8 August 1993 Fairchild air show , Holland once again commanded the B @-@ 52 demonstration flight . The demonstration profile once again included bank angles greater than 45 ° , low altitude passes , and another high pitch climbing maneuver , this time in excess of 80 ° nose high . The climb was so steep that fuel flowed out of the vent holes from the aircraft 's wing tanks . The new wing commander , Brigadier General James M. Richards , and the new DO , Colonel William E. Pellerin , both witnessed the demonstration , but neither took any action . 
 On 10 March 1994 , Holland commanded a single @-@ aircraft training mission to the Yakima Bombing Range to provide an authorized photographer an opportunity to document the aircraft as it dropped training munitions . The minimum aircraft altitude permitted for that area was 500 feet ( 150 m ) AGL . During the mission , Holland 's aircraft was filmed crossing one ridgeline about 30 feet ( 10 m ) above the ground . Fearing for their safety , the photography crew ceased filming and took cover as Holland 's aircraft again passed low over the ground , this time estimated as clearing the ridgeline by only three feet ( 1 m ) . The co @-@ pilot on Holland 's aircraft testified that he grabbed the controls to prevent Holland from flying the aircraft into the ridge while the aircraft 's other two aircrew members repeatedly screamed at Holland : " Climb ! Climb ! " Holland responded by laughing and calling one of the crew members " a pussy " . 
 After that mission , the crew decided that they would never again fly with Holland and reported the incident to the bomb squadron leadership . The squadron commander , Lieutenant Colonel Mark McGeehan , reported the incident to Pellerin and recommended that Holland be removed from flying duty . Pellerin consulted with Holland and gave him an oral reprimand and warning not to repeat the behavior , but refused to take him off flying duty . Pellerin also did not document the incident or the reprimand or notify his superiors , who remained unaware of the incident . McGeehan then decided that in order to protect his aircrews , he ( McGeehan ) would be the co @-@ pilot on any future missions in which Holland was the command pilot . Evidence suggests that after this incident , " considerable animosity " existed between Holland and McGeehan . 
 In preparation for the 1994 Fairchild air show , Holland was again selected as the command pilot for the B @-@ 52 demonstration flight . On 15 June 1994 , Holland briefed the new wing commander , Colonel William Brooks , on the proposed flight plan . The demonstration profile as briefed by Holland included numerous violations of regulations , including steep bank angles , low altitude passes , and steep pitch attitudes . Brooks ordered Holland not to exceed 45 ° bank angles or 25 ° pitch attitude during the demonstration . During the first practice session , on 17 June , Holland repeatedly violated these orders . Brooks witnessed this , but took no action . Pellerin flew with Holland on that flight and reported to Brooks that , " the profile looks good to him ; looks very safe , well within parameters . " The next practice flight on 24 June ended with the crash . 
 = = = Other factors = = = 
 The demonstration profile as designed by Holland included a 360 ° turn around Fairchild 's air traffic control tower . Holland had not attempted this maneuver in previous air show demonstrations . During the final flight , Holland performed a series of 60 ° banked turns and a 68 ° pitch climb in violation of Brooks ' orders . No evidence exists that McGeehan or Wolff attempted to intervene as Holland executed the maneuvers . 
 Pellerin was originally scheduled to fly in this mission , as he had done on the 17 June flight . Pellerin was unavailable for the flight on 24 June and Wolff was selected as the replacement aircrew member . Due to the short notice of his assignment to the mission , Wolff did not participate in the pre @-@ flight briefing and boarded the aircraft after the engines were started . Thus , Wolff was not aware of the planned mission profile and did not have an opportunity to raise any objections before take @-@ off . 
 All of the aircrew involved in the crash had only limited flying time in the months before the crash . The B @-@ 52 's aircrew were apparently unaware that the aircraft had stalled until shortly before impact , indicated by a failure to apply standard recovery techniques to the aircraft once it entered the stall . The investigation reported that , even if the proper stall recovery techniques had been applied , the aircraft was likely too low to recover before hitting the ground . 
 Four days before the accident , on 20 June , Dean Mellberg , an emotionally disturbed ex @-@ USAF serviceman , entered Fairchild 's hospital and shot and killed five people and wounded many more before being killed by an Air Force Security Policeman . The crime was a major distraction for personnel stationed at Fairchild for some time afterwards . 
 = = = Conclusions = = = 
 The accident investigation concluded that the crash was primarily attributable to Holland 's personality and behavior , USAF leaders ' inadequate reactions to the previous incidents involving Holland , and the sequence of events and aircrew response during the final flight of the aircraft . Holland 's disregard for procedures governing the safe operation of the B @-@ 52 aircraft that he commanded and the absence of firm and consistent corrective action by his superior officers allowed Holland to believe that he could conduct his flight in an unsafe manner , culminating with the slow , steeply banked , 360 ° turn around the control tower . 
 The other environmental factors involved , including the addition of a new maneuver ( the 360 ° turn around the tower ) , inadequate pre @-@ flight involvement of Colonel Wolff , and the distractions from the base shooting four days prior , combined with Holland 's unsafe and risk @-@ taking piloting behavior to produce conditions favorable for the crash to occur . The final factor , according to the USAF investigation report , was the 10 @-@ knot ( 19 km / h ) wind and its effect on the maneuvers required to achieve the intended flightpath in relation to the ground . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 19 May 1995 , Pellerin pleaded guilty at a USAF court @-@ martial proceeding to two counts of dereliction of duty for his actions , or lack thereof , that contributed to the crash . He was sentenced to forfeit $ 1 @,@ 500 of salary a month for five months and received a written reprimand . The USAF did not reveal whether any other officer involved in the chain of events leading to the crash received any type of administrative or disciplinary action . Critics of USAF 's safety record stated that this crash was an example of a pattern of problems related to enforcement of safety procedures within USAF . 
 Although the accident investigation found that procedures and policies were supposedly already in place to prevent such a crash from occurring again , the fact that this crash occurred showed that in at least one instance , the existing safety policies and their enforcement had been grievously inadequate . To re @-@ emphasize the importance of adherence to existing safety policies and correcting the actions of anyone violating them at any time , the USAF quickly distributed the findings of the accident investigation throughout the service . These measures failed to prevent – sixteen years later – the occurrence in almost identical circumstances of another accident , when a C @-@ 17 transport aircraft crashed shortly after taking off from Elmendorf Air Force Base , Alaska , on an aerial display practice flight . 
 Today , the Fairchild crash is used in both military and civilian aviation environments as a training aid in teaching crew resource management and to show the importance of enforcing safety regulations . 
 Footage of the Fairchild crash was used in the making of the 2015 film Project Almanac , depicting an airline accident , which sparked public anger among relatives of Wolff and McGeehan . After an initial claim by Paramount Pictures that the video in question was of a 2009 Tokyo crash , producer Michael Bay issued an apology to the families , and the footage was removed from the film 's theatrical release and associated trailers at Bay 's request . 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 Diehl , Alan E. ( 2003 ) . Silent Knights : Blowing the Whistle on Military Accidents and Their Cover @-@ Ups . Potomac Books . ISBN 1 @-@ 57488 @-@ 544 @-@ 8 . 
 Kern , Tony T. ( 1999 ) . Darker Shades of Blue : The Rogue Pilot . McGraw @-@ Hill Professional Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ 07 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Piper , Joan L. ( 2001 ) . Chain of Events : The Government Cover @-@ up of the Black Hawk Incident and the Friendly @-@ fire Death of Lt. Laura Piper . Brassey 's . ISBN 1 @-@ 57488 @-@ 344 @-@ 5 . 
 United States Air Force ( USAF ) ( 1994 ) . Summary of AFR 110 @-@ 14 USAF Accident Investigation Board Report . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 " Brigadier General Orin L. Godsey " . Air Force Link . 1996 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . – Biography of the USAF Chief of Safety who led the initial investigation into the mishap . 
 " Brigadier General James M. Richards " . Air Force Link . 1996 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . – Biography of the Commander , 92nd Bomb Wing , Fairchild Air Force Base from August 1992 – August 1993 
 " The Crash of ' Czar 52 ' " . Check @-@ <unk> Archived from the original on 13 May 2007 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 . – Contains video footage of the crash . 
 Kern , Tony ( 1995 ) . " Darker Shades of Blue : A Case Study of Failed Leadership " . Neil Krey 's CRM Developers Forum . Archived from the original on 16 February 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 " Lt. Col. Mark C. McGeehan " . Lou Holtz / Upper Ohio Valley Hall of Fame . 2000 . Archived from the original on 12 March 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 Thompson , Mark ( 29 May 1995 ) . " Way , Way Off in the Wild Blue Yonder " . Time . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 " B @-@ 52 Bomber Crash Fairchild Air Force Base " . 24 June 1994 . Retrieved 15 June 2015 . – Video of the crash 
 " Nuclear Storage Site Linked to Plane Crash " . The New York Times . 27 April 1995 . Retrieved 7 January 2008 . 
 " B @-@ <unk> " . 5 January 2008 . Retrieved 30 January 2014 . - <unk> file of Czar 52 flight path just before crash 
 = Miles Fisher = 
 James Leslie Miles Fisher ( born June 23 , 1983 ) is an American film and television actor and musician . 
 He had a role in the 1997 CBS adaptation of the book True Women and had a starring role in the 2000 film Lone Star Struck . In 2001 , he won Best Actor at the International Teen Movie Festival ( <unk> ) in Vaughan , Ontario , Canada for his role in his short film Head Shot . He also received praise in 2001 in an article in Newsday , and this helped further his career . He appeared as a member of the First Regiment of Virginia Volunteers in the 2003 Civil War film Gods and Generals , which starred Robert Duvall . Fisher parodied actor Tom Cruise in the 2008 film Superhero Movie ; a clip of Fisher from the film became popular on the Internet . He had a recurring role as a rookie police officer in 2008 on the television series The Cleaner on A & E Network . Fisher appeared in 2009 on Gossip Girl . On the third season of the television series Mad Men , Fisher portrayed a friend of character Paul Kinsey . 
 = = Family and education = = 
 Miles Fisher is the son of Richard W. Fisher , who was formerly the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas . His mother , Nancy , serves on the national board of the American Film Institute ( AFI ) . His maternal grandfather was Representative James Collins . He was raised in Dallas , Texas , where he attended the St. Mark 's School of Texas . After his family moved to Washington , D.C. , he attended the St. Albans School . 
 Fisher graduated from Harvard University , where he was an English major . At Harvard , he was a member of the <unk> Club , the Hasty Pudding Club and the a cappella singing group the <unk> . Fisher served as the <unk> tour manager , and planned events for the group in 24 countries . He was one of the two students chosen to deliver a Harvard Oration at the 2006 Harvard graduation ceremony . His undergraduate thesis , which won the LeBaron Russell Briggs prize at Harvard , was a " screenplay about a Harvard graduate who avoided the Vietnam draft by teaching in a military prep school " . Fisher has described film as his passion and said that after graduation he intended to move to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the film industry . In 2009 Fisher resided in Los Angeles , California . 
 He married <unk> Blodgett , daughter of late actor and writer , Michael Blodgett , on June 28 , 2014 . They were introduced by Willow Bay . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2008 = = = 
 Fisher appeared in the 1997 CBS television movie adaptation of the book True Women as " Travis " , and had a starring role in the 2000 film Lone Star Struck . He received the Best Actor award at the 2001 International Teen Movie Festival ( <unk> ) in Vaughan , Ontario , Canada , for his own short film titled : Head Shot , which was among 10 @,@ 000 other entries at the festival . 
 In a 2001 article in Newsday titled : " Miles Fisher , ' It ' Boy " , columnist Liz Smith referred to Fisher as " wunderkind " and " the next Tom Cruise " . Smith 's comparison of Fisher to Tom Cruise led to meetings with influential managers and agents , and he signed with the talent agency Endeavor Talent Agency in 2002 . Fisher appeared in the 2003 Civil War film Gods and Generals with Robert Duvall . Director Ron Maxwell picked Fisher to portray a heroic member of the First Regiment of Virginia Volunteers in the film ; Duvall played Robert E. Lee . 
 He parodied actor Tom Cruise in the 2008 film Superhero Movie . Fisher 's role in the film was popularized on the Internet on sites including <unk> , as well as on television on Entertainment Tonight and the CNN program Showbiz Tonight . The clip of Fisher was viewed on the Internet over 10 million times . A critic for The Baltimore Sun commented that Fisher 's appearance in Superhero Movie was the highlight of the film , and wrote : " Actor Miles Fisher replicates Tom Cruise 's ' I am the Way , the Thetan , the Light ' Scientology recruiting video of last year to hilarious effect . " He had a recurring role on A & E Network 's television series The Cleaner , portraying a rookie police officer named Kenneth Herman . 
 = = = 2009 – present = = = 
 Fisher wrote and produced a short film called <unk> in 2009 with Evan Nichols ; the film was selected to be screened at the AFI Dallas International Film Festival . Alan Peppard of The Dallas Morning News reported in March 2009 that Fisher had been cast in the pilot of a television show set in 1983 in Southern California ; a spinoff of Gossip Girl . He portrayed a " sleazy " coke dealer on the television series of the same name . 
 On the third season of the television series Mad Men , Fisher portrayed Geoff Graves , a friend of character Paul Kinsey . Jessica <unk> of the Los Angeles Times described his character as a " preppy drug dealer " . In 2010 , Fisher was cast in the film Final Destination 5 . In an interview with Collider.com , Fisher revealed that the film was set in a workplace environment , and was a 3 @-@ D film . Fisher appeared in Clint Eastwood 's J. Edgar Hoover biopic , J. Edgar , playing Agent Garrison , an FBI employee who interviews Leonardo DiCaprio 's Hoover throughout the film . 
 = = Music career = = 
 In July 2009 , Fisher released an independently produced self @-@ titled EP , Miles Fisher , as well as a music video for his cover of the Talking Heads song " This Must Be The Place . " The video is an homage to the 2000 film American Psycho , with Fisher imitating Christian Bale 's performance as Patrick Bateman . Students from the American Film Institute helped film the video , which was shot in Los Angeles . The video was posted on YouTube and various other web sites , and received 200 @,@ 000 hits on <unk> alone within the first 24 hours . Darrell Hartman of Interview called the usage of the Talking Heads song with the American Psycho theme " a brilliant combo " , and noted that Fisher " created a viral hit " . Fisher released the song " New Romance " in video and MP3 form on iTunes and on his personal website on July 19 , 2011 . The video parodies the Final Destination series and Saved By the Bell . On May 22 , 2013 , a music video for " Finish What We Started " through <unk> on YouTube was posted . The music video featuring Lance Bass has yet to release a single for the song , and a subsequent album has been released , dubbed " Video Music . " The music video has been posted to Fisher 's personal website . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Video Music ( 2013 ) 
 = = = EPs = = = 
 Miles Fisher ( 2009 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " This Must Be the Place ( Naive Melody ) " ( 2009 ) ( cover of the Talking Heads song ) 
 " New Romance " ( 2011 ) 
 " Don 't Let Go " ( 2011 ) 
 " Finish What We Started " ( 2013 ) ( written by Miles Fisher , Robert Schwartzman , Joe Jonas , John Lloyd Taylor ) 
 " Finish What We Started ( Andrew Maury Remix ) " ( feat . Joe Jonas ) ( 2013 ) ( written by Miles Fisher , Robert Schwartzman , Joe Jonas and John Lloyd Taylor ) 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Pilot ( Once Upon a Time ) = 
 " Pilot " is the series premiere of the American Fairy Tale / Drama television series Once Upon a Time . It introduces each of the main characters , as well as establishes the basic premises of the series , which details the beginnings of a curse placed upon the Enchanted Forest and the start of a destiny for its only survivor , a present @-@ day woman who can break the curse . 
 The episode was co @-@ written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , and was directed by Mark Mylod . Kitsis and Horowitz sought to write new perspectives of familiar characters , and featured the themes of hope , family , and motherhood . " Pilot " sets the template for the rest of the series , as it jumps between their curses selves in Storybrooke , Maine and their original lives in the Enchanted Forest . Every actor first approached for the series accepted after being sent a script ; this included Ginnifer Goodwin as Snow White and Jennifer Morrison as Emma Swan . 
 Before it made its debut , ABC allowed viewers in the United States to see the pilot on the Internet Movie Database 's website several days before it aired . It premiered in the United States on ABC on October 23 , 2011 . In Canada , CTV broadcast the series an hour ahead of ABC 's debut , airing it at 7 pm in most regions . The episode received mostly positive reviews and was watched by 12 @.@ 93 million viewers , scoring a 4 @.@ 0 rating / 11 % share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , ranking first in its timeslot . It was ABC 's most watched pilot since the first episode of Ugly Betty . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) rides to the rescue of Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) , who is comatose after eating a poisoned apple that was given to her by the Evil Queen ( Lana Parrilla ) . Doc informs Charming that he is too late , but Charming kisses Snow regardless , breaking the curse . On the wedding day of Snow White and Prince Charming , the Evil Queen arrives and delivers an ominous threat about a powerful curse she intends to release upon them . Some time later , a pregnant Snow White is worried about the curse and visits Rumplestiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) , who issues a prophecy that the Queen 's curse will take them all someplace terrible where there will be no happy endings . He also reveals that Snow White 's unborn daughter , Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) , will return when she is 28 years old to rescue them , thus beginning a crucial battle with the Queen . Following the Blue Fairy 's ( Keegan Connor Tracy ) advice , Geppetto ( Tony Amendola ) and Pinocchio ( Jakob Davies ) fashion a wardrobe from a magical tree which will allow one person to escape the Queen 's curse . On the day Snow White gives birth to her daughter , the Queen 's curse strikes . Prince Charming places their daughter in the magic wardrobe , but is mortally wounded battling the Queen 's henchmen . The Queen stands triumphantly over Snow White and Prince Charming , as the Curse takes them " somewhere horrible . " 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In Present @-@ day Boston , Emma Swan ( Morrison ) lives a lonely existence working as a bail bondsman and bounty hunter . She is approached by a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy , Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) , who identifies himself as her son , whom she had given up for adoption as a teenager . Not wanting a relationship with him , Emma agrees to drive him back to his home in Storybrooke , Maine . Along the way , Henry shows her a large book of fairy tales he has , insisting that all of the stories in it are real . When they arrive in Storybrooke , Henry informs her that everyone in town is in reality a fairy tale character , exiled by the curse and with no memory of their real identities . This includes his therapist Archie Hopper ( Raphael Sbarge ) , who is really Jiminy Cricket , and his teacher Mary Margaret Blanchard ( Goodwin ) , who is really Snow White . Henry claims that time is frozen in Storybrooke and the people are unable to leave , but that the curse will be broken by Emma . A skeptical Emma returns Henry to his adopted mother , the town Mayor , Regina ( Parrilla ) , who is really the Evil Queen . Emma attempts to leave but after having drunk apple cider given to her by the Mayor and nearly hitting a wolf she has a car accident where she is knocked out . She is arrested and taken to Storybrooke Jail . When Henry runs away again , Emma makes a deal with the Mayor and Sheriff Graham ( Jamie Dornan ) : if they release her , she will find him . After exhausting all possibilities she speaks with Mary Margaret , who tells Emma to " Check his castle . " After finding Henry at a wooden jungle gym ( which bears a resemblance to Prince Charming 's castle ) , they talk and Emma decides to stay in Storybrooke temporarily , especially after Regina warns her to leave town . This leads Emma to be suspicious of the mayor 's motives . 
 Shortly after her conversation with Emma , Mary Margaret Blanchard volunteers at Storybrooke Hospital , placing flowers at the bedside of patients . She stops in the ICU where a John Doe ( Dallas ) , Prince Charming , is sleeping in a coma . Mary Margaret is unaware of who he is . Meanwhile , at the Mayor 's home , Regina takes the book from Henry 's room and goes downstairs to look at her mirror , with an expression that seems to acknowledge she is aware of her fairy tale existence . 
 As Emma arrives at Granny 's Bed & Breakfast , she is given a key to her room by the elderly proprietor ( Beverley Elliot ) , who is actually Granny from Little Red Riding Hood . She comes downstairs after yelling at Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) , her granddaughter , followed by a man who came to collect money : Mr. Gold ( Carlyle ) , Rumpelstiltskin who also helped build and owns the entire town . When Emma mentions her name , Mr. Gold pauses as if he knew something about her . Emma 's decision to stay in Storybrooke causes the hands of the town clock , previously frozen at 8 : 15 , to begin moving again . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 On February 1 , 2011 , ABC ordered six new pilots for their 2011 – 2012 television schedule , which included Once Upon a Time . The premiere episode was co @-@ written by series co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , and was directed by Mark Mylod . Mylod , a veteran of the Showtime drama Shameless , signed on to direct in mid @-@ February 2011 . The network picked up Once Upon a Time and six other drama series on May 13 , 2011 . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Eight years previous to the Once Upon a Time pilot ( the two had just completed their work on Felicity , in 2002 ) , Kitsis and Horowitz became inspired to write fairytales out of a love of " mystery and excitement of exploring lots of different worlds . " They presented the premise to networks , but were refused because of its fantastical nature . The two learned from their time on Lost to look at the story in a different way , that " character has to trump mythology " ; they expanded , " as people , you 've got to see what the void in their heart or in their lives is to care about them ... For us , this was as much about the character journeys and seeing what was ripped from them in coming to Storybrooke – going at it that way as opposed to making it the ' break @-@ the @-@ curse show . ' " Despite the comparisons and similarities to Lost , the writers intend them to be very different shows . To them , Lost concerned itself with redemption , while Once Upon a Time is about " hope " . Lost co @-@ creator Damon Lindelof aided in the development of the series as a consultant , but had no official credit for the pilot . 
 To differentiate the storytelling from what the audience already knew , the writing staff decided to begin the pilot with the end of the typical Snow White fairytale . Themes concerning family and motherhood were emphasized , in contrast to the focus on fatherhood in Lost . Kitsis and Horowitz sought to write strong female characters , rather than the classic damsel in distress . Horowitz stated their desire to approach each character the same way , asking themselves , " How do we make these icons real , make them relatable ? " 
 The pilot is meant to be the " template of the series " . Kitsis confirmed that every week will contain flashbacks between both worlds , as they " love the idea of going back and forth and informing what the character is missing in their life . " The writers ' desire to present a " mash up " of many small characters can be seen in a scene of the pilot , in which there is a war council featuring Geppetto , Pinocchio , and Grumpy . Horowitz elaborated , " One of the fun things for us coming up with these stories is thinking of ways these different characters can interact in ways they never have before . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Horowitz stated that everyone they initially wanted cast in the series accepted their offered role after being sent a script . Ginnifer Goodwin was cast as Snow White , who appreciated that she would be playing a strong character that was fleshed out for the audience . The actress had just completed her work on the series Big Love , and was looking for a new project ; she turned to television after film scripts failed to interest her . Having said previously in interviews that she would love to play Snow White , Goodwin called her acceptance of the role " a no @-@ brainer . " Both Kitsis and Horowitz are self @-@ described big fans of Big Love , and wrote the part of Snow White with Goodwin in mind . 
 Joshua Dallas , who plays Prince Charming , was pleased the writers took " some dramatic license " with his character , believing the prince had become more real . He explained , " Prince Charming just happens to be a name . He 's still a man with the same emotions as any other man . He 's a Prince , but he 's a Prince of the people . He gets his hands dirty . He 's got a kingdom to run . He has a family to protect . He has an epic , epic love for Snow White . He 's like everybody else . He 's human . " Jennifer Morrison was hired for the part of Emma Swan . The actress explained her character as someone who " help [ s ] this kid who seems like he 's a little bit emotionally dysfunctional , " but noted that Emma does not yet believe there is a fairytale universe . Ten @-@ year @-@ old Jared Gilmore , known for his work on Mad Men , took the role of her son , Henry . 
 The role of the Evil Queen / Regina went to Lana Parrilla . She explained the character , " There 's always two stories being told when playing Regina . There 's the threat of her knowing she 's an evil queen and then there 's just the pure simple fact that the biological mother has stepped into her world and the threat of losing her son is just enormous . That 's a fear that I think any adopted mother would have . I think that 's going to really help the audience relate to Regina in some level . " The role of Rumpelstiltskin was given to Robert Carlyle ; it was written with Carlyle in mind , though the writers initially thought he would never accept the part . Horowitz recalled Carlyle 's prison sequence , which was the actor 's first day on the set as " mind @-@ blowing ... You could see Ginny actually jump , the first time he did that character . It was fantastic ! " The writers offered the part of the Blue Fairy to recording artist Lady Gaga , but never heard back from her management staff . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Executive producer Steve Pearlman referred to Once Upon a Time as " an effects @-@ heavy show , " but in ways that are not meant to be obvious to viewers . Zoic Studios provided the visual effects seen in the pilot , building virtual sets for the fairy tale sequences and using F / X for action scenes . Production and visual effects staff collaborated under a difficult schedule and limited budget . The studio has used the technology Zoic 's Environmental Unification System ( <unk> ) for real time camera tracking , allowing for creative flexibility among the cast and crew , who work on a green screen stage . Andrew Orloff , Zoic 's Executive Creative Director , commented " Once Upon A Time is an amazing creative opportunity for Zoic . The highly detailed environments and imaginative characters of the series ' fairy tale world have challenged us to expand and fine @-@ tune both our <unk> and animation pipelines for television . " 
 Zoic Studios digitally reproduced the war room and ballroom castle interiors based on concept designs created by Art Director Mark Worthington . For the wedding scene , Zoic staff extended columns , added stained glass windows , and completed the wedding party with additions of digital guests . The effect of the Evil Queen disappearing from Charming 's flying sword cost ABC a reported $ 12 @,@ 000 . Kitsis has commented that because the network has been very supportive , they are not worried about losing the " fantastical feel " of the series ' flashback sequences . He explained , " We can ’ t show this pilot and then have a cheap show after it , so it ’ s our goal to maintain this level of production values throughout . " Zoic visual effects will continue to be used for future episodes . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On October 14 , 2011 – nine days before the national broadcast date – Kitsis and Horowitz presented an early screening of the pilot episode at a New York Comic Con panel and answered questions from fans . Later , viewers were able to stream the entire pilot episode from the Internet Movie Database in advance of its broadcast . 
 The pilot episode aired in October rather than September , which was a month after new fall season shows normally premiered . Pearlman was pleased with the later broadcast date , believing that " it creates a second wave of anticipation for an audience , too . I work in the business and I couldn 't even tell you the names of a third of the new shows this season because we were bombarded with all the messaging . " 
 The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The pilot contained a number of popular culture references noted by viewers and television critics . There were several references to Lost , another series scripted by episode writers Kitsis and Horowitz . The street address of Regina 's home is 108 , the town clock is stuck at 8 : 15 ( the same number as the doomed airline flight in the aforementioned series ) , there is a <unk> Jackson bumper sticker on Emma 's car , the smoke monster engulfing the Enchanted Forest , and Emma 's eye @-@ opening after she wakes up . Kitsis noted of the references , " [ Lost co @-@ creator ] Damon [ Lindelof ] has been a godfather to us . His name is not on the show , but he is in the DNA of it . " Horowitz also stated their intention to continue making Lost references in the future . 
 Snow White and Prince Charming use a powerfully magical wardrobe to transport their new @-@ born baby to a different universe ( our own " real world " ) . In The Lion , The Witch and The Wardrobe , the first volume of C. S. Lewis 's Narnia series , a similarly powerful magical wardrobe transports the main characters between the real world and the magical universe of Narnia . 
 Another cultural reference appeared in a scene when Emma hears Leroy ( who is actually Grumpy ) whistling Whistle While You Work ( the song used in the 1937 film version of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ) , indicating its acknowledged ties to Disney , whose subsidiary ABC Studios also happens to be the production company behind Once Upon a Time , since Disney has allowed them access to their fairy tale characters and properties for use in the series . " They 've given us license , " Kitsis said . " I could be wrong , but I think this is the first time anyone 's shown Snow White with a sword , or pregnant . " Other Disney references include the blue star candle Emma wishes on , nodding to the scene in the 1940 film version of Pinocchio where Pinocchio wishes on a blue star and his wish is granted by the Blue Fairy ( both of whom also make a brief appearance alongside Jiminy Cricket in this episode ) . 
 The Black Keys ' song " Howlin ' for You " is featured in Emma 's introduction scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Premiering out of its 8 : 00 pm timeslot after America 's Funniest Videos , the pilot was viewed by an estimated 12 @.@ 93 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 0 rating / 11 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . As a result , It was the season 's highest rated drama debut among adults 18 @-@ 49 and ABC 's biggest debut in five years . It competed against The World Series Pre @-@ Game on FOX , Football Night In America on NBC and The Amazing Race on CBS . It also competed against some of Sunday Night Football . Including DVR ratings , the episode totaled 15 @.@ 48 million viewers and a 5 @.@ 2 18 @-@ 49 rating . 
 In Canada , CTV debuted the series an hour ahead of ABC 's debut , airing it at 7 pm in all regions except in Saskatchewan and Winnipeg , where it debuted at 10 pm . The pilot was watched by 1 @.@ 764 million viewers , placing 14th for the week . In the UK , the pilot aired on Channel 5 on a 9 pm slot and pulled in 2 @.@ 36 million viewers , the highest throughout the week of April 9 , 2012 for the channel . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Pilot " received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 In a review from Zap2it , Rick Porter gave the pilot praise for bringing together the central theme , saying " No other new show this fall is attempting to tell a bigger story , and we 're hoping the rough patches smooth out and it fulfills the potential that 's there in its very strong cast and premise . " It also cited Jennifer Morrison and Jared Gilmore 's performances when they appear in scenes together : " As such it falls to Morrison to move the story along in this world , and fortunately for the audience she 's able to pull it off . She gives a confident , grounded performance that helps keep the show from feeling too fantastical , and her rapport with Gilmore is a big plus too . " He also notes the writers and producers have put together a great premise and expects they 'll have more as the series progresses : " Given the cast and the people involved behind the scenes ... we 're more optimistic than not that Once Upon a Time will find its way . But if it doesn 't , at least it will go down swinging . " 
 The New York Times writer Mike Hale compared Once Upon a Time with the similarly premised series Grimm , believing that the former has a " richer premise and more interesting characters . " Hale in particular praised Goodwin and Morrison 's performances , but concluded , " Watching the pilot again , though , it became harder to ignore the soap opera underpinnings and the twee sentimentality . " IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe gave the episode an 8 @.@ 0 / 10 rating , praising the casting , acting , and writing . While acknowledging there were " a few cheesy " moments , she expressed hope that the series would remain focused on its story rather than on too many special effects . 
 TV Fanatic 's Christine Orlando gave the episode 4 @.@ 4 out of 5 stars , calling it " a beautiful , stunning , magical journey " and saying that she was " hooked from the opening scene . " She complimented the whole cast , but especially Robert Carlyle , saying that he made " a perfectly creepy Rumpelstiltskin . " She praised the character of Henry , saying , " He 's spunky , intelligent and has just the right amount of persistence , and faith in fantasy to make you want to believe . " She concluded by simply stating that it was " very , very good . " 
 = Paul Butterfield = 
 Paul Vaughn Butterfield ( December 17 , 1942 – May 4 , 1987 ) was an American blues harmonica player and singer . After early training as a classical flautist , he developed an interest in blues harmonica . He explored the blues scene in his native Chicago , where he met Muddy Waters and other blues greats , who provided encouragement and opportunities for him to join in jam sessions . He soon began performing with fellow blues enthusiasts Nick Gravenites and Elvin Bishop . 
 In 1963 , he formed the Paul Butterfield Blues Band , which recorded several successful albums and were popular on the late @-@ 1960s concert and festival circuit , with performances at the Fillmore West , in San Francisco ; the Fillmore East , in New York City ; the Monterey Pop Festival ; and Woodstock . The band was known for combining electric Chicago blues with a rock urgency and for their pioneering jazz fusion performances and recordings . After the breakup of the group in 1971 , Butterfield continued to tour and record with the band Paul Butterfield 's Better Days , with his mentor Muddy Waters , and with members of the roots @-@ rock group the Band . While still recording and performing , Butterfield died in 1987 at age 44 of a heroin overdose . 
 Music critics have acknowledged his development of an original approach that places him among the best @-@ known blues harp players . In 2006 , he was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame . Butterfield and the early members of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2015 . Both panels noted his harmonica skills and his contributions to bringing blues music to a younger and broader audience . 
 = = Career = = 
 Butterfield was born in Chicago and raised in the city 's Hyde Park neighborhood . The son of a lawyer and a painter , he attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools , a private school associated with the University of Chicago . Exposed to music at an early age , he studied classical flute with Walfrid <unk> , of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra . Butterfield was also athletic and was offered a track scholarship to Brown University . However , a knee injury and a growing interest in blues music sent him in a different direction . He developed a love for blues harmonica and a friendship with guitarist and singer @-@ songwriter Nick Gravenites , who shared an interest in authentic blues music . By the late 1950s , they were visiting blues clubs in Chicago , where they met musicians such as Muddy Waters , Howlin ' Wolf , Little Walter , and Otis Rush , who encouraged them and occasionally let them sit in on jam sessions . The pair were soon performing as Nick and Paul in college @-@ area coffee houses . 
 In the early 1960s , Butterfield attended the University of Chicago , where he met aspiring blues guitarist Elvin Bishop . Both began devoting more time to music than studies and soon became full @-@ time musicians . Eventually , Butterfield , who sang and played harmonica , and Bishop , accompanying him on guitar , were offered a regular gig at Big John 's , a folk club in the Old Town district on Chicago 's North Side . With this booking , they persuaded bassist Jerome Arnold and drummer Sam Lay ( both from Howlin ' Wolf 's touring band ) to form a group with them in 1963 . Their engagement at the club was highly successful and brought the group to the attention of record producer Paul A. Rothchild . 
 = = = Butterfield Blues Band with Bloomfield = = = 
 During their engagement at Big John 's , Butterfield met and occasionally sat in with guitarist Mike Bloomfield , who was also playing at the club . By chance , producer Rothchild witnessed one of their performances and was impressed by the chemistry between the two . He persuaded Butterfield to bring Bloomfield into the band , and they were signed to Elektra Records . Their first attempt to record an album , in December 1964 , did not meet Rothchild 's expectations , although an early version of " Born in Chicago " , written by Gravenites , was included on the 1965 Elektra sampler Folksong ' 65 and created interest in the band ( additional early recordings were released on the Elektra compilation What 's Shakin ' in 1966 and The Original Lost Elektra Sessions in 1995 ) . In order to better capture their sound , Rothchild convinced Elektra president Jac Holzman to record a live album . In the spring of 1965 , the Butterfield Blues Band was recorded at the Cafe Au Go Go in New York City . These recordings also failed to satisfy Rothchild , but the group 's appearances at the club brought them to the attention of the East Coast music community . Rothchild persuaded Holzman to agree to a third attempt at recording an album . 
 In these recording sessions , Rothchild had assumed the role of group manager and used his folk contacts to secure the band more and more engagements outside of Chicago . At the last minute , the band was booked to perform at the Newport Folk Festival in July 1965 . They were scheduled as the opening act the first night when the gates opened and again the next afternoon in an urban blues workshop at the festival . Despite limited exposure on the first night and a dismissive introduction the following day by the folklorist and blues researcher Alan Lomax , the band was able to attract an unusually large audience for a workshop performance . Maria Muldaur , with her husband , Geoff , who later toured and recorded with Butterfield , recalled the group 's performance as stunning – it was the first time that many of the mostly folk @-@ music fans had heard a high @-@ powered electric blues combo . Among those who took notice was festival regular Bob Dylan , who invited the band to back him for his first live electric performance . With little rehearsal , Dylan performed a short , four @-@ song set the next day with Bloomfield , Arnold , and Lay ( along with Al Kooper and Barry Goldberg ) . The performance was not well received by some and generated a controversy , but it was a watershed event and brought the band to the attention of a much larger audience . 
 The band added keyboardist Mark Naftalin , and its debut album , The Paul Butterfield Blues Band , was finally successfully recorded in mid @-@ 1965 and released later that year . The opening song , a newer recording of the previously released " Born in Chicago " , is an upbeat blues rocker and set the tone for the album , which included a mix of blues standards , such as " Shake Your Moneymaker " , " Blues with a Feeling " , and " Look Over <unk> Wall " , and compositions by the band . The album , described as a " hard @-@ driving blues album that , in a word , rocked " , reached number 123 in the Billboard 200 album chart in 1966 , but its influence was felt beyond its sales figures . 
 Jazz drummer Billy Davenport was invited to replace Lay , who was ailing . In July 1966 , the sextet recorded their second album , East @-@ West , which was released a month later . The album consists of more varied material , with the band 's interpretations of blues ( Robert Johnson 's " Walkin ' Blues " ) , rock ( Michael Nesmith 's " Mary , Mary " ) , R & B ( Allen Toussaint 's " Get Out of My Life , Woman " ) , and jazz selections ( Nat Adderley 's " Work Song " ) . East @-@ West reached number 65 in the album chart . 
 The thirteen @-@ minute instrumental track " East @-@ West " incorporates Indian raga influences and some of the earliest jazz @-@ fusion and blues rock excursions , with extended solos by Butterfield and guitarists Mike Bloomfield and Elvin Bishop . It has been described as " the first of its kind and ... the root from which the acid rock tradition emerged " . Live versions of the song sometimes lasted nearly an hour , and performances at the San Francisco Fillmore Auditorium " were a huge influence on the city 's jam bands " . Bishop recalled , " Quicksilver , Big Brother , and the Dead – those guys were just chopping chords . They had been folk musicians and weren 't particularly proficient playing electric guitar – [ Bloomfield ] could play all these scales and arpeggios and fast time @-@ signatures ... He just destroyed them . " Several live versions of " East @-@ West " from this period were later released on East @-@ West Live in 1996 . 
 In England in November 1966 , Butterfield recorded several songs with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , who had recently finished the album A Hard Road . Butterfield and Mayall contributed vocals , and Butterfield 's Chicago @-@ style blues harp was featured . Four songs were released in the UK on a 45 @-@ rpm EP , John Mayall 's Bluesbreakers with Paul Butterfield , in January 1967 . 
 = = = Later Butterfield Blues Band = = = 
 In spite of its success , the Butterfield Blues Band soon changed its lineup . Arnold and Davenport left the band , and Bloomfield went on to form his own group , Electric Flag . With Bishop and Naftalin remaining on guitar and keyboards , the band added bassist Bugsy <unk> , drummer Phillip Wilson , and saxophonists David Sanborn and Gene Dinwiddie . This lineup recorded the band 's third album , The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw , in 1967 . The album cut back on extended instrumental jams and went in a more rhythm and blues @-@ influenced horn @-@ driven direction , with songs such as Charles Brown 's " Driftin ' Blues " ( retitled " Driftin ' and Driftin ' " ) , Otis Rush 's " Double Trouble " , and Junior Parker 's " Driving Wheel " . The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw was Butterfield 's highest @-@ charting album , reaching number 52 on the album chart . Most of this lineup performed at the seminal Monterey Pop Festival on June 17 , 1967 . 
 On its next album , In My Own Dream , released in 1968 , the band continued to move away from its roots in Chicago blues towards a more soul @-@ influenced , horn @-@ based sound . With Butterfield singing only three songs , the album featured more band contributions It reached number 79 in the Billboard album chart . By the end of 1968 , both Bishop and Naftalin had left the band . In April 1969 , Butterfield took part in a concert at Chicago 's Auditorium Theater and a subsequent recording session organized by record producer Norman Dayron , featuring Muddy Waters backed by Otis Spann , Mike Bloomfield , Sam Lay , Donald " Duck " Dunn , and Buddy Miles . Such Waters warhorses as " Forty Days and Forty Nights " , " I 'm Ready " , " Baby , Please Don 't Go " , and " Got My Mojo Working " were recorded and later released on the album Fathers and Sons . Waters commented , " We did a lot of the things over we did with Little Walter and Jimmy Rogers and Elgin [ Evans ] on drums [ an early configuration of Waters 's band ] ... It 's about as close as I 've been [ to that feel ] since I first recorded it " . To one reviewer , these recordings represent Paul Butterfield 's best performances . 
 The Butterfield Blues Band was invited to perform at the Woodstock Festival on August 18 , 1969 . The band performed seven songs , and although its performance did not appear in the film Woodstock , one song , " Love March " , was included on the album Woodstock : Music from the Original Soundtrack and More , released in 1970 . In 2009 , Butterfield was included in the expanded 40th Anniversary Edition Woodstock video , and an additional two songs appeared on the box set Woodstock : 40 Years On : Back to <unk> 's Farm . 
 The album Keep On Moving , with only Butterfield remaining from the original lineup , was released in 1969 . It was produced by veteran R & B producer and songwriter Jerry Ragovoy , reportedly brought in by Elektra to turn out a " breakout commercial hit " . The album was not embraced by critics or long @-@ time fans ; however , it reached number 102 in the Billboard album chart . 
 A live double album by the Butterfield Blues Band , Live , was recorded March 21 – 22 , 1970 , at the The Troubadour , in West Hollywood , California . By this time , the band included a four @-@ piece horn section in what has been described as a " big @-@ band Chicago blues with a jazz base " . Live provides perhaps the best showcase for this unique " blues @-@ jazz @-@ rock @-@ R & B hybrid sound " . After the release of another soul @-@ influenced album , Sometimes I Just Feel Like Smilin ' in 1971 , the Paul Butterfield Blues Band disbanded . In 1972 , a retrospective or their career , Golden Butter : The Best of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band , was released by Elektra . 
 = = = Better Days and solo = = = 
 After the breakup of the Butterfield Blues Band and no longer under contract with Elektra , Butterfield retreated to Woodstock , New York , where he eventually formed his next band , Paul Butterfield 's Better Days , with drummer Chris Parker , guitarist Amos Garrett , singer Geoff Muldaur , pianist Ronnie Barron and bassist Billy Rich . In 1972 – 1973 , the group recorded the albums Paul Butterfield 's Better Days and It All Comes Back , released by Albert Grossman 's Bearsville Records . The albums reflected the influence of the participants and explored more <unk> and folk @-@ based styles . Although without an easily defined commercial style , both reached the album chart . The band did not last to record a third studio album , but its album Live at Winterland Ballroom , recorded in 1973 , was released in 1999 . 
 Butterfield next pursued a solo career and appeared as a sideman in several different musical settings . In 1975 , he again joined Muddy Waters to record Waters 's last album for Chess Records , The Muddy Waters Woodstock Album . The album was recorded at Levon Helm 's Woodstock studio with Garth Hudson and members of Waters 's touring band . In 1976 , Butterfield performed at the Band 's final concert , " The Last Waltz " , accompanying the Band on the song " Mystery Train " and backing Muddy Waters on " Mannish Boy " . Butterfield kept up his association with former members of the Band , touring and recording with Levon Helm and the <unk> All Stars in 1977 and touring with Rick Danko in 1979 . A 1984 live performance with Danko and Richard Manuel was recorded and released as Live at the Lonestar in 2011 . 
 As a solo act with backing musicians , Butterfield continued to tour and recorded the misguided and overproduced Put It in Your Ear in 1976 and North South in 1981 , with strings , synthesizers , and pale funk arrangements . In 1986 , he released his final studio album , The Legendary Paul Butterfield Rides Again , which again was a poor attempt at a comeback with an updated rock sound . On April 15 , 1987 , he participated in the concert " B.B. King & Friends " , with Eric Clapton , Etta James , Albert King , Stevie Ray Vaughan , and others . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Aside from " rank [ ing ] among the most influential harp players in the Blues " , Butterfield has also been seen as pointing blues @-@ based music in new , innovative directions . AllMusic critic Steve Huey commented , 
 It 's impossible to overestimate the importance of the doors Butterfield opened : before he came to prominence , white American musicians treated the blues with cautious respect , afraid of coming off as inauthentic . Not only did Butterfield clear the way for white musicians to build upon blues tradition ( instead of merely replicating it ) , but his storming sound was a major catalyst in bringing electric Chicago blues to white audiences who 'd previously considered acoustic Delta blues the only really genuine article . 
 In 2006 , Butterfield was inducted into the Blues Foundation 's Blues Hall of Fame , which noted that " the albums released by the Butterfield Blues Band brought Chicago Blues to a generation of Rock fans during the 1960s and paved the way for late 1960s electric groups like Cream " . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducted the Paul Butterfield Blues Band in 2015 . The induction biography commented that " the Butterfield Band converted the country @-@ blues purists and turned on the Fillmore generation to the pleasures of Muddy Waters , Howlin ' Wolf , Little Walter , Willie Dixon and Elmore James " . 
 = = Harmonica style = = 
 Like many Chicago blues harp players , Butterfield approached the instrument like a horn , preferring single notes to chords , and used it for soloing . His style has been described as " always intense , understated , concise , and serious " , and he was " known for purity and intensity of his tone , his sustained breath control , and his unique ability to bend notes to his will " . In his choice of notes he has been compared to Big Walter Horton , but he was never seen as an imitator of any particular harp player . Rather , he developed " a style original and powerful enough to place him in the pantheon of true blues greats " . 
 Butterfield played Hohner harmonicas ( and endorsed them ) . He preferred the diatonic ten @-@ hole Marine Band model . He wrote a harmonica instruction book , Paul Butterfield Teaches Blues Harmonica Master Class , a few years before his death ( it was not published until 1997 ) . In it , he explains various techniques , demonstrated on an accompanying CD . Butterfield played mainly in cross @-@ harp , or second position . He occasionally used a chromatic harmonica . Reportedly left @-@ handed , he held the harmonica in a manner opposite that of a right @-@ handed player , i.e. , in his right hand , upside down ( with the low notes to the right ) , using his left hand for muting effects . 
 Also like other electric Chicago blues harp players , Butterfield frequently used amplification to achieve his sound . Producer Rothchild noted that Butterfield favored an Altec harp microphone run through an early model Fender tweed amplifier . Beginning with album The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw , he began using an acoustic harmonica style , following his shift to a more R & B @-@ based approach . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 By all accounts , Paul Butterfield was absorbed in his music . According to his brother Peter , 
 He listened to records and went places , but he also spent an awful lot of time , by himself , playing [ harmonica ] . He 'd play outdoors . There 's a place called the Point in Hyde Park [ Chicago ] , a promontory of land that sticks out into Lake Michigan , and I can remember him out there for hours playing . He was just playing all the time ... It was a very solitary effort . It was all internal , like he had a particular sound he wanted to get and he just worked to get it . 
 Producer Norman Dayron recalled the young Butterfield as " very quiet and defensive and hard @-@ edged . He was this tough Irish Catholic , kind of a hard guy . He would walk around in black shirts and sunglasses , dark shades and dark jackets ... Paul was hard to be friends with . " Although they later became close , Michael Bloomfield commented on his first impressions of Butterfield : " He was a bad guy . He carried pistols . He was down there on the South Side , holding his own . I was scared to death of that cat " . Writer and AllMusic founder Michael Erlewine , who knew Butterfield early in his recording career , described him as " always intense , somewhat remote , and even , on occasion , downright unfriendly " . He remembered Butterfield as " not much interested in other people " . 
 Paul married his first wife ( and high school friend of many years ) , Virginia McEwan , at Chicago City Hall on November 16 , 1964 . Together , they had Paul 's first son , Gabriel Butterfield , born September , 1965 . The couple remained married until 1969 . It was also Virginia McEwan who wrote and delivered the eulogy at Paul 's funeral . 
 By 1971 , Butterfield had purchased his first house , in rural Woodstock , New York , and began enjoying family life with his second wife , Kathy , and their infant son , Lee . According to Maria Muldaur , she and her husband were frequent dinner guests , which usually involved sitting around a piano and singing songs . She doubted her abilities , but " it was Butter that first encouraged me to let loose and just sing the blues [ and ] not to worry about singing pretty or hitting all the right notes ... He loosened all the levels of self @-@ consciousness and doubt out of me ... And he 'll forever live in my heart for that and for respecting me as a fellow musician . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Beginning in 1980 , Paul Butterfield underwent several surgical procedures to relieve his peritonitis , a serious and painful inflammation of the intestines . Although he had been opposed to hard drugs as a bandleader , he began using painkillers , including heroin , which led to an addiction . These problems and the drug @-@ related death of his friend and one @-@ time musical partner Mike Bloomfield weighed heavily on him . On May 4 , 1987 at age 44 , Paul Butterfield died at his apartment in the North Hollywood district of Los Angeles . An autopsy by the county coroner concluded that he was the victim of an accidental drug overdose , with " significant levels of morphine ( heroin ) " . 
 By the time of his death , Paul Butterfield was out of the commercial mainstream . Although for some , he was very much the bluesman , Maria Muldaur commented " he had the whole sensibility and musicality and approach down pat ... He just went for it and took it all in , and he embodied the essence of what the blues was all about . Unfortunately , he lived that way a little too much " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 In 1964 , Butterfield began his association with Elektra Records and eventually recorded seven albums for the label . After the breakup of the Butterfield Blues Band in 1971 , he recorded four albums for manager Albert Grossman 's Bearsville Records – two with Paul Butterfield 's Better Days and two solo . His last solo album was released by Amherst Records . 
 After his death in 1987 , his former record companies released a number of live albums and compilations . Except where noted , the following albums are listed as " The Paul Butterfield Blues Band " . 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = = The Butterfield Blues Band = = = = 
 The Paul Butterfield Blues Band ( 1965 ) 
 East @-@ West ( 1966 ) 
 The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw ( 1967 ) 
 In My Own Dream ( 1968 ) 
 Keep On Moving ( 1969 ) 
 Sometimes I Just Feel Like Smilin ' ( 1971 ) 
 = = = = Paul Butterfield = = = = 
 Better Days ( 1973 ) ( by Paul Butterfield 's Better Days ) 
 It All Comes Back ( 1973 ) ( by Paul Butterfield 's Better Days ) 
 Put It in Your Ear ( 1976 ) 
 North @-@ South ( 1981 ) 
 The Legendary Paul Butterfield Rides Again ( 1986 ) 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 Live ( 1970 , reissued 2005 with bonus tracks ) 
 Strawberry Jam ( 1996 , recorded 1966 – 1968 ) 
 East @-@ West Live ( 1996 , recorded 1966 – 1967 ) 
 Live at Unicorn Coffee House ( released with several titles and dates , bootleg recorded 1966 ) 
 Live at Winterland Ballroom , Paul Butterfield 's Better Days ( 1999 , recorded 1973 ) 
 Rockpalast : Blues Rock Legends , Vol . 2 , Paul Butterfield Band ( 2008 , recorded 1978 ) 
 Live at the Lone Star , Rick Danko , Richard Manuel & Paul Butterfield ( 2011 , recorded 1984 ) 
 = = = Butterfield compilation albums = = = 
 Golden Butter : The Best of the Butterfield Blues Band ( 1972 ) 
 The Original Lost Elektra Sessions ( 1995 , recorded 1964 ) 
 An Anthology : The Elektra Years ( 2 CDs , 1997 ) 
 Paul Butterfield 's Better Days : Bearsville Anthology , Paul Butterfield 's Better Days ( 2000 ) 
 Hi @-@ Five : The Paul Butterfield Blues Band ( EP , 2006 ) 
 = = = Compilation albums and videos with various artists = = = 
 Folksongs ' 65 ( 1965 ) 
 What 's Shakin ' ( 1966 ) 
 Festival ( 1967 film , including 1965 appearance with Dylan ) 
 You Are What You Eat ( 1968 film soundtrack ) 
 Woodstock : Music from the Original Soundtrack and More ( 1970 , recorded 1969 ) 
 Woodstock 2 ( 1971 , recorded 1969 ) 
 An Offer You Can 't Refuse ( 1972 , recorded 1963 ) 
 Woodstock ' 79 ( 1991 video , filmed 1979 ) 
 Woodstock : Three Days of Peace and Music ( 1994 , recorded 1969 ) 
 The Monterey International Pop Festival June 16 – 17 – 18 30th Anniversary Box Set ( 1997 , recorded 1967 ) 
 The Complete Monterey Pop Festival ( 2002 video , filmed 1967 ) 
 Woodstock : 40 Years On : Back to <unk> 's Farm ( 2009 , recorded 1969 ) 
 Woodstock : 40th Anniversary Ultimate Collector 's Edition ( 2009 video , filmed 1969 ) 
 = = = As accompanist = = = 
 John Mayall 's Bluesbreakers with Paul Butterfield , John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers ( EP , 1967 ) 
 Blues at Midnight ( released with several titles and dates ) , Jimi Hendrix , B.B. King , and others ( bootleg of jam recorded 1968 ) 
 Fathers and Sons , Muddy Waters ( 1969 , reissued 2001 with bonus tracks ) 
 Give It Up , Bonnie Raitt ( 1972 ) 
 Steelyard Blues , Mike Bloomfield , Nick Gravenites , Maria Muldaur , and others ( 1973 film soundtrack ) 
 That 's Enough for Me , Peter Yarrow ( 1973 ) 
 Woodstock Album , Muddy Waters ( 1975 ) 
 Levon Helm & the <unk> All @-@ Stars ( 1977 ) 
 The Last Waltz , the Band ( 1978 ) 
 Elizabeth Barraclough , Elizabeth Barraclough ( 1978 ) 
 Hi ! , Elizabeth Barraclough ( 1979 ) 
 B.B. King & Friends ( released with various titles and dates ) , <unk> King , Eric Clapton , Stevie Ray Vaughan , and others ( bootleg video of television special filmed 1987 ) 
 Heart Attack , Little Mike & the Tornados ( 1990 , recorded 1986 ) 
 = = = Tribute albums = = = 
 A Tribute to Paul Butterfield ' , Robben Ford and the Ford Blues Band ( 2001 ) 
 The Butterfield / Bloomfield Concert , the Ford Blues Band , with Robben Ford and Chris Cain ( 2006 ) 
 = Timothy Everest = 
 Timothy Everest , MBE ( born 1961 ) is a Welsh bespoke tailor and designer who has , according to Vogue , " dressed some of the world 's most famous people " . Born in Haverfordwest , Wales , he moved to London in his early twenties to work with innovative Savile Row tailor Tommy Nutter , where he learned the art of bespoke . Everest was one of the leaders of the New Bespoke Movement , which brought designer attitudes to the traditional skills of Savile Row tailoring . 
 Everest has been running his own tailoring business in the East End of London since 1989 . Based at his Spitalfields atelier since 1993 , he opened a West End store off Bond Street , near Savile Row , in 2008 . As well as collaborating on projects with designers and brands such as Brooks England , DAKS , Kim Jones , Levi 's , Rapha and Rocawear , as costume designer Everest has dressed the stars of films including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i @-@ 2 ) , Eyes Wide Shut , Atonement and Mamma Mia ! . He has been associated with the British high street retailer Marks and Spencer since 1999 , and has been a contributor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 . Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Everest was born and brought up in Haverfordwest , Pembrokeshire , west Wales ; most of his family remain in the area . His parents were restaurateurs . He had aspired to become a racing driver . But , his ambition unfulfilled , he took a job with his uncle when he was 17 , working as a sales assistant at <unk> , Milford Haven ; a high street tailor that would form the foundation of the Next retail empire . In the early 1980s , he became interested in the club scene , often driving to London , where he mixed with New Romantics such as Boy George at The Blitz ; a trendy London nightclub run by Steve Strange of the group Visage . 
 Determined to become part of the fashion industry , but unable to make a breakthrough , Everest decided to use his knowledge of tailoring . He answered an advertisement placed in the London Evening Standard , in 1982 , by Tommy Nutter ; ' Boy wanted in Savile Row ' . He pestered Nutter for weeks , until he was given the job . Nutter 's client base included rock stars , celebrities , politicians and businessmen ; he famously dressed The Beatles and The Stones . Everest also mixed with future celebrities of the fashion world . John Galliano , who had been studying at the Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design , passed on some design skills to Everest , while on work placement with Nutter . Everest met his future wife Catherine ( now an actress and film producer ) at this time , while she was also working with Nutter . The couple have two daughters . Everest 's time under Nutter , a Savile Row revolutionary in the 1960s , inspired him to experiment with tone and pattern in his own designs . In 1986 , after nearly five years as Nutter 's apprentice , Everest was persuaded to move on to work for Malcolm Levene . He had become disillusioned with Savile Row , particularly with their lack of appreciation for Nutter 's more modern approach . Everest found that working with Levene , a small menswear retailer based away from Savile Row , on Chiltern Street , provided a welcome change . During Everest 's first year there , Levene 's turnover doubled . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Setting out on his own = = = 
 Leaving Levene in the late 1980s to become a freelance stylist in television advertising , MTV and film , Everest began styling bands and pop stars such as George Michael . He recognised a shift in perception of the male fashion industry ; men had become more label conscious . This had coincided with the increased awareness of top @-@ end fashion designers , like Hugo Boss and Armani , highlighted by men 's lifestyle magazines ; such as Arena and The Face . He said , " I thought that if we could demystify bespoke tailoring and make it more accessible , as well as really understanding what was going on in ready @-@ to @-@ wear fashion and being directional with it , there was possibly a market there . " Having decided to create the Timothy Everest brand as an alternative to ' designer ' ready @-@ to @-@ wear , he searched for a suitable location away from " the stuffiness of Savile Row " . Everest opened his first premises in 1989 ; in Princelet Street , Spitalfields , just outside the City of London , in the East End . He said , " We started in one room of a house . We had one rail with four garments on and a telephone , no chairs , no furniture . " To begin with , business was slow . Moving premises in 1993 , he chose a three @-@ storey , early Georgian townhouse ( built in 1724 ) , just north of Old Spitalfields Market in nearby Elder Street – the former home of artist Mark Gertler ( 1891 – 1939 ) – converting it to an atelier over seven weeks . He dressed Tom Cruise for the 1996 film Mission : Impossible . Cruise liked the suits so much that he kept them , and commissioned Everest to make him some more . 
 = = = New Bespoke Movement = = = 
 Everest became one of the " Cool Britannia " tailoring generation of the mid @-@ 1990s , identified by James Sherwood ( author of Savile Row : The Master Tailors of British Bespoke ) as having begun with the publication of Vanity Fair 's " Cool <unk> " issue in 1997 . Sensing a change in consumer attitudes , away from the more traditional styling of Savile Row , he sought to revitalise bespoke suiting , which he believed had been in danger of disappearing . With contemporaries Ozwald Boateng and Richard James , he launched the New Bespoke Movement , which brought a fashion designer approach to Savile Row craftsmanship . He launched the brand 's first ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection in 1999 . His long @-@ standing association with Marks and Spencer began that year . He dressed Tom Cruise again , for his reprised role in the 2000 film Mission : Impossible II , and at the Oscars that year , when he also dressed Robin Williams and Burt Bacharach . By 2000 , he had 3 @,@ 500 bespoke clients . Everest joined DAKS Simpson as design consultant in May 2000 . He was appointed to the board as Group Creative Director in 2002 , leaving in 2003 . One of the lines he designed for DAKS was an affordable suiting range aimed at teenagers , launched in August 2001 ; called DAKS E1 , after the postal district of his atelier . 
 = = = Bespoke casual = = = 
 Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement which , as the name suggests , provides individually tailored casual clothing of Savile Row quality , including : casual shirts ; smart @-@ casual jackets ; T @-@ shirts ; and jeans . In collaboration with Levi 's in 2004 , he designed a tailored @-@ denim suit , sold in Japanese retailer Oki @-@ Ni 's stores . Expanding the bespoke casual concept , he offered a bespoke denim tailoring service dressing celebrities from sports , Hollywood and rock music , such as David Beckham , Kevin Bacon and Ricky Wilson of the Kaiser Chiefs . Everest designed a suit collection in 2004 / 05 in collaboration with Rocawear , the fashion clothing company founded by American hip hop artists Damon Dash and Jay @-@ Z. The advertising campaign was fronted by Dash 's friends Kevin Bacon and Naomi Campbell . He teamed up with British casual and sportswear designer Kim Jones during 2005 and 2006 . The collaboration produced tailoring collections for four seasons that were shown on the catwalk at Paris fashion week . For his next collaboration , in 2006 Everest showed a limited collection of menswear with New York hair salon Bumble and bumble , including a fully bespoke denim line , which retailed at around US $ 1 @,@ 000 . Marketed as a ' destination location ' , the retail space on the store 's 8th floor , in the fashionable Meatpacking District of Manhattan , also featured a barbershop , a café and a teahouse . In autumn 2007 , the Timothy Everest ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection was available in shops for the first time , including <unk> , Liberty and John Lewis . The range included suits , shirts and trousers . He was costume designer for the 2008 film Mamma Mia ! , dressing its stars , including Pierce Brosnan and Colin Firth . He opened a West End store in 2008 , at Bruton Street , Mayfair , off Bond Street ; less than five minutes walk from Savile Row . He has been a creative contributor and <unk> Advisor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 . 
 = = = Bespoke active wear = = = 
 A keen cyclist , in 2009 Everest collaborated with <unk> brand Rapha to develop a bespoke suit that could be worn while cycling ; what he called " bespoke active wear " . Priced at £ 3 @,@ 500 , the three @-@ piece suit was made of blended wool , using nanotechnology to repel water and dirt . It combined the functionality of classic cycling clothing with the elegance of bespoke tailoring . Its features included a high button fastening to keep the jacket closely fitted to the body , a lapel pocket for an MP3 player and pleats at the shoulders and center back to allow extra fabric when the rider was bent over the bicycle . The jacket design was incorporated into Rapha 's ready @-@ to @-@ wear collection in 2010 . In collaboration with bicycle saddle manufacturer Brooks England during 2010 , he developed a cycling jacket ; under Brooks ' John <unk> clothing label . The resulting ' Criterion Mk.1 cycling jacket ' , which used water and sweat @-@ resistant materials , was shown at the Bread and Butter street and urban fashion fair , Berlin , in January 2011 . 
 Everest received an MBE in the 2010 New Year 's Honours list for his " services to the British fashion industry " . Having receiving the award from Queen Elizabeth at Buckingham Palace on Saint David 's Day 2010 , with his wife and two daughters watching , he described the award as a " great honour , not only for me but my business and all who have been involved " . He is quoted as saying that he would like " to be remembered as someone who made people take British clothing seriously " . 
 = = = The brand = = = 
 The Timothy Everest brand has three levels of tailoring . ' Bespoke ' is aimed at young professionals with the means to purchase bespoke tailoring , but not necessarily the desire to visit Savile Row . Each customer is measured for an individual pattern to be hand @-@ cut , from which their chosen cloth is cut and sewn by hand . Although still hand made , ' Made @-@ to @-@ measure ' garments use existing ' house ' patterns , adapted to the customer 's measurements . The ' Ready @-@ to @-@ wear ' collection is sold in @-@ house , at Everest 's Mayfair branch , and in Japan . Emphasising his Savile Row background , Everest said , " We are tailors who design , not designers who discovered tailoring " . 
 = = Marks and Spencer = = 
 UK department store retailer Debenhams ' collaboration with designers , launched in 1993 under their Designers at Debenhams range , was a success . Hoping to recapture some of their lost market share , Marks and Spencer ( M & S ) asked Everest to review their menswear range . As Creative Consultant , he designed the <unk> suiting line for their menswear collection . In October 2000 , he designed the Autograph suiting line . Noting that the M & S range consisted of Italian @-@ style suiting , he aimed to achieve a more ' British ' look from the cut , fit and styling and by using different fabrics and colours . He also has responsibility for their Luxury collection . During M & S advertising campaigns , his designs for the Autograph range have been modelled by several British celebrities , including David Beckham , Bryan Ferry , Jimmy Carr , Martin Freeman , Bob Mortimer and Take That . In 2007 , M & S were selected by The Football Association as ' Official Tailor to the England football team ' and Everest designed the team 's official suits for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa . 
 = = Clientele = = 
 Everest has , according to Vogue , dressed " some of the world 's most famous people " . He has clients worldwide and travels regularly for fittings in New York , Los Angeles and Japan . Closer to home , Everest 's bespoke atelier in Spitalfields has a diverse client base that includes politicians ( including British Prime Ministers past and present ) , and sports and Hollywood personalities . Of his suit worn to the Oscars , Tom Cruise commented : " Of course it fits ; it 's a Timothy Everest " . 
 He has been costume designer on several films , including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i @-@ 2 ) , Tube Tales , Eyes Wide Shut , Appaloosa , Atonement , The Accidental Husband and Mamma Mia ! . Among his celebrity clients are : Kevin Bacon ; David Beckham ; Matthew Broderick ; Gordon Brown ; Pierce Brosnan ; David Cameron ; Jarvis Cocker ; Jeremy Irons ; Jay @-@ Z ; Mick Jagger ; and James McAvoy . 
 = Symphony in White , No. 3 = 
 Symphony in White , No. 3 , is a painting by James Abbott McNeill Whistler . The work shows two women dressed in white , one sitting on a sofa and the other resting on the floor . The model on the sofa is Joanna Heffernan , the artist 's mistress . By calling the painting Symphony in White , No. 3 , Whistler intended to emphasise his artistic philosophy of corresponding arts , inspired by the poet Charles Baudelaire . The presence of a fan on the floor shows the influence of Japonisme , which was a popular artistic trend in European art at the time . Whistler was also greatly influenced by his colleague and friend Albert Joseph Moore , and their works show considerable similarities . 
 Though Whistler started on the painting in 1865 , he was not ready to exhibit it publicly until 1867 , when it went on display at the Royal Academy . His colleagues were impressed by the painting , but not all critics fully understood the connection between the painting and its title . One review in particular questioned the presence of other colours in addition to white , a criticism which prompted Whistler to respond with a scathing and sarcastic letter . Years later , Whistler 's former student Walter Sickert criticized the painting as " the low @-@ water mark of the old manner , before the birth of the new . " 
 = = Background = = 
 James Abbott McNeill Whistler was born in the United States in 1834 , the son of George Washington Whistler , a railway engineer . In 1843 , his father relocated the family to Saint Petersburg , Russia , where James received training in painting . After a stay in England , he returned to America to attend the US Military Academy at West Point in 1851 . In 1855 , he made his way back to Europe , determined to dedicate himself to painting . Here he settled in Paris at first , but in 1859 moved to London , where he would spend most of the remainder of his life . There he met Dante Gabriel Rossetti and other members of the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood , who would have a profound influence on Whistler . 
 It was also in London that Whistler met Joanna Heffernan , the model who would become his lover . By 1865 , Whistler had already used her as a model for other paintings , among these Symphony in White , No. 1 and Symphony in White , No. 2 . Heffernan supposedly had a strong influence over Whistler ; his brother @-@ in @-@ law Francis Seymour Haden refused a dinner invitation in the winter of 1863 – 64 due to her dominant presence in the household . In January 1864 , Whistler 's mother Anna – later depicted in the painting Arrangement in Grey and Black – arrived to stay with her son in London . As a result , Heffernan had to move out of the apartment , and only visited as a model . Still , Heffernan 's presence displeased Whistler 's mother , and his relationship with both women became strained . 
 = = Creation and reception = = 
 Whistler started on Symphony in White , No. 3 perhaps as early as July 1865 . It was the last of his paintings for which Heffernan was a model . He used Milly Jones , the wife of an actor friend , as the second model for the painting . By the middle of August , he had a complete sketch ready , and he continued work on the painting into September . Whistler kept reworking it , however , and it was not until 1867 that he considered it finished . He painted over the final " 5 " in the date , and replaced it with a " 7 " , to mark the changes it had undergone . In March 1867 , William Michael Rossetti wrote of seeing the painting in Whistler 's studio , and mentioned that it was previously called The Two Little White Girls . It then went on display at the Royal Academy . 
 The work was greatly admired by Whistler 's colleagues , including Henri <unk> @-@ Latour , Alfred Stevens , James Tissot and Edgar Degas . For Degas , the painting served as an inspiration for his own portrait of Eugénie <unk> in the ballet La Source . Some critics , however , were confused by the title . Philip Hamerton , writing for the Saturday Review on 1 June 1867 , remarked : 
 In the " Symphony in White No . III . " by Mr. Whistler there are many dainty varieties of tint , but it is not precisely a symphony in white . One lady has a yellowish dress and brown hair and a bit of blue ribbon , the other has a red fan , and there are flowers and green leaves . There is a girl in white on a white sofa , but even this girl has reddish hair ; and of course there is the flesh colour of the complexions . 
 Whistler was always belligerent in his response to critics . He wrote a letter to the editor that the newspaper would not print , but was later reprinted by Whistler himself in his book The Gentle Art of Making Enemies : 
 How pleasing that such profound prattle should inevitably find its place in print ! ... Bon Dieu ! did this wise person expect white hair and chalked faces ? And does he then , in his astounding consequence , believe that a symphony in F contains no other note , but shall be a continued repetition of F , F , F ? . . . Fool ! 
 The painting was originally bought by the wealthy art collector Louis Huth , who later also commissioned Whistler to paint a portrait of his wife . It is currently in the ownership of the Barber Institute of Fine Arts , in Birmingham , England . 
 = = Composition and interpretation = = 
 Symphony in White , No. 3 shows Heffernan reclining on a sofa with her head rested on her hand , while Jones is seated on the floor , leaning against the sofa . There is a fan on the floor , and a plant bearing white flowers on the right . The fan is an oriental element , and an expression of the artistic trend known as Japonisme which was then prevalent in European art . At the time , Whistler was greatly influenced by his friend and colleague Albert Joseph Moore . The painting bears close resemblances to Moore 's roughly contemporary painting A Musician , though at the time the two were working so closely together that it is hard to ascertain exactly who influenced whom . 
 The painter Walter Sickert – a student of Whistler – later described the painting in unflattering terms . In December 1908 , five years after Whistler 's death , he wrote in the Fortnightly Review : 
 In ' Symphony in White , No. 3 , ' we get the <unk> . A bad picture , <unk> le mot , badly composed , badly drawn , badly painted , the low @-@ water mark of the old manner , before the birth of the new . Folds of drapery are expressed by ribbons of paint in the direction of the folds themselves , with hard edges to them . Only painters can quite understand the depth of technical infamy confessed in this last description . It means that the drapery is no longer painted , but intended . 
 To Whistler himself , however , the painting was not old @-@ fashioned , but rather an expression of something new and innovative . By naming it Symphony in White , No. 3 , Whistler highlighted his emphasis on composition , rather than subject matter . The use of a musical title was also an expression of the theory of corresponding arts , which was an idea developed by the French poet Charles Baudelaire . These tendencies became more and more dominant in Whistler 's art over time . His two earlier paintings Symphony in White , No. 1 and Symphony in White , No. 2 had originally been titled The White Girl and The Little White Girl respectively , and later been renamed by the artist . Whistler had originally intended to call this work Two Little White Girls , but the development of his artistic philosophy made him change his mind , and from the time of its first exhibition it has been called by its musical title . 
 = 2 Become 1 = 
 " 2 Become 1 " is a song by the English girl group the Spice Girls . Written by the group members , Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard during the group 's first professional songwriting session , it was produced by Rowe and Stannard for the group 's debut album Spice ( 1996 ) . It was inspired by the special relationship that was developing between Geri Halliwell and Rowe during the writing session . 
 " 2 Become 1 " is a Pop , Pop rock , Soft rock , Easy listening , and Romance ( music ) song that features instrumentation from a guitar , an electronic keyboard , and string instruments . The lyrics focus on the bonding of two lovers , and also address the importance of contraception . Its Big TV ! -directed music video , which features the group performing against time @-@ lapse footage of Times Square in New York City , was completely shot against a green screen at a studio in London . The backdrop was later superimposed . 
 Released as the group 's third single on 16 December 1996 , it was generally well received by music critics and was a commercial success . It topped the UK Singles Chart for three weeks , becoming the group 's third consecutive chart @-@ topper , their second million @-@ selling single , and their first Christmas number @-@ one single in the United Kingdom . In July 1997 , the song was released in the United States , peaking at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and receiving a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It performed similarly internationally , peaking inside the top ten on the majority of the charts that it entered . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1994 , the Spice Girls persuaded their former managers — father @-@ and @-@ son team Bob and Chris Herbert — to set up a showcase in front of industry writers , producers and A & R men at the Nomis Studios in Shepherd 's Bush , London . Producer Richard Stannard was originally at the studio to meet pop star Jason Donovan , but he ended up in the showcase after hearing Melanie Brown , as she went charging across the corridor . Stannard recalls : 
 More than anything , they just made me laugh . I couldn 't believe I 'd walked into this situation . You didn 't care if they were in time with the dance steps or whether one was overweight or one wasn 't as good as the others . It was something more . It just made you feel happy . Like great pop records . 
 Stannard stayed after everyone had left the showcase to talk to the group , he then reported back to his songwriter partner Matt Rowe , that he had found the pop group of their dreams . In January 1995 , Chris Herbert booked the group 's first professional songwriting session with the producers at the Strongroom in Curtain Road , East London . Rowe remember feeling similarly to Stannard when he first met the group , " I love them . Immediately . [ ... ] They were like no one I 'd met before , really . " The session was productive as the duo seemed to get along with the group , together they discussed about the songwriting process and what they wanted to do with the record . In her autobiography , Brown recalled that the duo instinctively understood their point of view and knew how to incorporate " the spirit of five loud girls into great pop music " . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " 2 Become 1 " was co @-@ written by the Spice Girls along with partners Richard Stannard and Matthew Rowe . Stannard and Rowe also co @-@ produced the track . After writing more uptempo dance @-@ based songs , such as " Wannabe " , the group and the two producers decided to write a slow ballad . But as the group were writing the song , they realised that it was a bit too slushy , so it was decided to address the importance of contraception with the lyrics : " Be a little bit wiser baby . Put it on , put it on " . 
 The song was inspired by the special relationship that was developing between Geri Halliwell and Rowe . Brown hinted at this development in her autobiography commenting : " When he [ Rowe ] and Geri started making eyes at each other I knew what was going on , even though they denied it . I knew them both too well for it to be a secret for me . " Stannard commented about the fondness between Halliwell and Rowe : " I don 't want to get into the side of things . They were very close . They clicked . And I think the lyrics in " 2 Become 1 " came from that , especially the first verse , which they wrote together . " 
 = = = Spanish version = = = 
 The group recorded a Spanish version of the song , written by them , Rowe , Stannard , and N. <unk> . The title was " 2 Become 1 " ( Spanish Version ) , although the title is loosely translated in one line of the song , " <unk> Uno Los Dos " . It was released as the eleventh track of their debut album Spice , in Latin America , South Africa , in a special re @-@ edition of the album in Spain , and as one of the tracks of the " 2 Become 1 " maxi @-@ single in the US . A Spanglish edit that traded verses between the English and Spanish versions was created by DJ Mike Rizzo and production director Bill Schultz for New York @-@ based radio WKTU . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " 2 Become 1 " is a pop ballad , written in the key of F ♯ major ; it is set in the time signature of common time and moves at a slow tempo of 72 beats per minute . The song is constructed in a verse @-@ chorus form , and its instrumentation comes from a guitar , an electronic keyboard , and string instruments . The song opens with an instrumental introduction , with a chord progression of E ♭ m add9 – D ♭ / F – G ♭ – A ♭ m7 sus4 , that is also used during the first part of the verses . The last two lines of each verse changes the progression to C ♭ – B ♭ m7 – A ♭ m7 – D ♭ 11 , and changes again during each chorus to G ♭ – D ♭ – C ♭ – D ♭ . It closes with a string outro that uses the chord progression F ♭ – G ♭ – B ♭ ♭ – C ♭ , which is arranged by Scottish composer Craig Armstrong . 
 In 1995 the Spice Girls recorded the demo version of 2 Become 1 . The first three verses sang by Chisholm , Beckham and Bunton respectively . The second three verses were sung by Chisholm , Halliwell and Bunton respectively . The final verse sang by Bunton and the bridges sang by Brown . In the final versions of the song Brown sang the second verse instead of Beckham for unknown reasons . The first and third lines of the chorus are sung by Bunton and Halliwell together and the second and fourth lines are sung by Chisholm and Beckham . After Halliwell 's departure in 1998 , Beckham replaced Halliwell singing the first and third lines of the chorus along with Bunton , while Brown replaced Beckham singing the second and fourth lines of the chorus along with Chisholm . 
 The lyrics focus on how the bonding of two lovers can become so strong that they practically become one entity , through the act of sexual intercourse . Apart from the sexual connotations , there is an aspirational undercurrent to the lyrics , and like many of their subsequent songs , desire is explicitly linked to ambition – " Free your mind of doubt and danger / Be for real don 't be a stranger / We can achieve it / We can achieve it " . 
 Two different versions of the song , each with different lyrics , were recorded : in the album version , the second line of the second verse , " Any deal that we endeavor / Boys and girls go good together " , was changed in the single version to : " Once again if we endeavour / Love will bring us back together " . Victoria Beckham sings on the single version , while Halliwell sings on the album version , after Halliwell confessed that she had a hard time singing on that particular key . The single version appears in the music video , and on stage the girls always performed the single version before and after Halliwell 's departure . 
 = = Release = = 
 " 2 Become 1 " was released in the United Kingdom on 16 December 1996 , in three single versions . The first one , a maxi single that included the single version of the track , an orchestral take , the Junior Vasquez remix of " Wannabe " , and " One of These Girls " , a song written by the group with Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins — the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute . The second version was the special Christmas pack , a standard CD single in a cardboard case that included a signed postcard with a Christmas message from the group . This version contained the single version , the Dave Way remix , and their own version of Leroy Anderson 's " Sleigh Ride " . The third version was a two @-@ track cassette single , featuring the single version and the orchestral take of the song . The same track listing was also used for the release of the European CD single . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The song was generally well received by music critics . In a review of the group 's debut album Spice , Dev Sherlock of Yahoo ! Music Radio called it a " glossy ballad that would do Mariah Carey proud " . Whitney Pastorek of Entertainment Weekly said that the song is " too slow , and the lyrics appear to have been written by a safe @-@ sex @-@ loving unicorn " , adding that " it 's almost impossible to identify the individual Spice Girls by their voices here , so airbrushed are the proceedings " . Larry Flick of Billboard magazine said that " they are surprisingly adept at weaving warm and romantic imagery over a sweet melody " adding that " [ Everyone ] will delight in the track 's arrangement of soft harmonies and delicate acoustic guitar riffs " . Time magazine 's Christopher John Farley called it a " <unk> ballad [ ... ] [ that ] seem [ s ] designed to amuse , titillate , ingratiate " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the song a " perfect adult contemporary confection " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that their first album " is a compendium of slick secondhand urban pop encompassing [ ... ] G @-@ funk synths on ' Say You 'll Be There ' [ ... ] and Babyface 's guitar and strings balladry on ' 2 Become 1 ' " . In a review of the group 's 2007 compilation album Greatest Hits , Talia Kraines of BBC Music called it " shimmering " adding that " only a cold heart could fail to love their first festive # 1 " . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine said that the group 's slower songs were " probably their strongest suit " , and thought that " ' 2 Become 1 ' manages to combine every element of the perfect Christmas ballad – a touch of elegance , a hint of romance , a <unk> of sexiness and a generous sprinkling of sparkle – and still finds time for a coy safe sex message " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " 2 Become 1 " was originally going to be released in the UK on 9 December 1996 , but the release date was delayed to let Dunblane 's " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " — a tribute to the children killed at the Dunblane Primary School in Scotland — to stay at the top of the UK Singles Chart . The single was released the next week , debuting at the top , becoming the group 's third chart @-@ topper and their first Christmas number @-@ one single in the UK . It sold 209 @,@ 000 copies in the first three days of release and 430 @,@ 000 in the first week , becoming the tenth best @-@ selling single of the year . " 2 Become 1 " sold 1 @.@ 12 million copies in total , giving the Spice Girls their second and final million @-@ selling single in the UK . 
 In Ireland , " 2 Become 1 " was the group 's second number @-@ one single , and their first to debut at the top of the Irish Singles Chart . It stayed at the top position for six weeks , and became their first Christmas number @-@ one single in the country . " 2 Become 1 " peaked at No. 3 on the Eurochart Hot 100 , and performed similarly across the rest of Europe , topping the singles chart in Spain , peaking inside the top ten in Austria , Denmark , Finland , France , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland , and inside the top fifteen in Belgium and Germany . It was also commercially successful in Australia and New Zealand , peaking inside the top three on both countries . 
 In July 1997 , " 2 Become 1 " debuted on the Canadian RPM singles chart at No. 87 , peaked at No. 3 on its fifth week , and ended at No. 25 on the year @-@ end chart . On the Adult Contemporary chart it peaked at No. 4 , and ended at No. 27 on the year @-@ end chart . In the United States , the song debuted on 16 August 1997 at No. 6 , reaching a peak of No. 4 in its fourth week , becoming the group 's third consecutive top five in the country . The song peaked at No. 6 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart and at No. 8 on the Hot 100 Singles Sales chart , selling 700 @,@ 000 copies as of December 1997 . It peaked at four on the Mainstream Top 40 , and had crossover success , peaking at four on the Rhythmic Top 40 and at eight on the Adult Contemporary chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " 2 Become 1 " was directed on 22 November 1996 by Big TV ! , in a two @-@ day shoot located at a studio in Old Compton Street , London . Cinematographer Stephen Keith @-@ Roach — who worked in other music videos such as Jamiroquai 's " Virtual Insanity " and U2 's " Discotheque " — was in charge of the photography . The shoot involved the group dressed in winter coats , wandering around the studio against a green screen , interspersed with close @-@ up camera angles , so that the backdrop could be superimposed later . To achieve the effect of the wind blowing slowly through their hairs , the group was required to lip @-@ synch the song in double time while wind machines were on them . 
 The music video features the group in Times Square in New York City with fast moving cars appearing around multi @-@ coloured lights , appearing in various places around the city , either alone , with one other member , or as a quintet . The video is intercut with scenes of lovers experiencing moments of togetherness and closes with a deer wandering the streets . Such a scene , according to the group 's first official book Girl Power ! , gave them a running gag all throughout the shoot — " Whenever anyone made a mistake it was , ' Oh , deer ' . " Sometimes , the closing scene would not be shown on television , due to the song fading out to an instrumental , which lasts for 40 seconds . 
 In the same book , Victoria Beckham wrote about the shoot : " I think ' 2 Become 1 ' is my favorite video . [ ... ] It was really different to the other videos – shot entirely in the studio , with high technology and loads of effects . It was really weird having to sing passionately into the camera , I was feeling a right mug in front of all those people singing ' wanna make love to ya baby ' . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was performed many times on television , including the Bravo Supershow , GMTV , Live & Kicking , Noel 's House Party , and Top of the Pops . In October 1997 , the group performed " 2 Become 1 " as the eighth song of their first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay @-@ per @-@ view event titled Spice Girls In Concert Wild ! , and was later included in the VHS and DVD release Girl Power ! Live in Istanbul . In December 2007 , the group performed the song on the finale of the fifth season of the British television show Strictly Come Dancing . They wore floor @-@ length gowns and used microphones covered in glitter , while professional dancers did a choreography in front of them . 
 The Spice Girls have performed the song on their three tours , the Spiceworld Tour , the Christmas In Spiceworld Tour , and the Return of the Spice Girls . The performance at the Spiceworld Tour 's final concert can be found on the video : Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium , filmed in London , on 20 September 1998 . For the Return of the Spice Girls Tour , the group performed it during the second segment of the show . After the " Too Much " performance , each of the girls emerged from a cocoon of oversized swan wings and danced around a set of barber ’ s poles while singing the song . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " 2 Become 1 " has been covered both in albums and live performances . In 1998 , The Countdown Singers recorded a sound @-@ alike version of the song for their album Today 's Love Songs . Lester Bowie 's Brass Fantasy did an instrumental jazz cover for the 1999 album The Odyssey Of Funk & Popular Music . American guitarist Paul Gilbert covered the song for his fourth album Alligator Farm . Wildside recorded a dance remake for the 1997 album Mega Hits Dance Party , Vol . 1 , and was later included on the 2005 album Let 's Hear It for the 90 's , Vol . 1 . Filipino bossa nova singer , Sitti Navarro , recorded a cover of the song for her second album My Bossa Nova . During her solo career , Emma Bunton has performed live covers of the song on television programmes such as CD : UK and <unk> , and it was also included as part of her setlist for the Pepsi Silver Clef Concert . She performed the song as a duet twice with her former band mate Melanie C on November 9 , 2013 as part of the Oxford Street Lights Switch On and on January 11 , 2014 for Sporty 's Forty at 02 Shepherd 's Bush Empire . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " 2 Become 1 " : 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Published by Windswept Pacific Music Ltd . / PolyGram Music Publishing Ltd . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Crimes Act of 1790 = 
 The Crimes Act of 1790 ( or the Federal Criminal Code of 1790 ) , formally titled An Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes Against the United States , defined some of the first federal crimes in the United States and expanded on the criminal procedure provisions of the Judiciary Act of 1789 . The Crimes Act was a " comprehensive statute defining an impressive variety of federal crimes . " 
 As an enactment of the First Congress , the Crimes Act is often regarded as a quasi @-@ constitutional text . The punishment of treason , piracy , counterfeiting , as well as crimes committed on the high seas or against the law of nations , followed from relatively explicit constitutional authority . The creation of crimes within areas under exclusive federal jurisdiction followed from the plenary power of Congress over the " Seat of the Government , " federal enclaves , and federal territories . The creation of crimes involving the integrity of the judicial process derived from Congress 's authority to establish such courts . 
 The Crimes Act also established a statute of limitations for federal crimes , provided for criminal venue , ensured procedural protections for treason and capital defendants , simplified the pleading requirements for perjury , and broadened the constitutional protection against " corruption of blood . " Further , the act provided for punitive dissection of murderers and codified diplomatic immunity . 
 = = Background = = 
 Even after the passage of the Judiciary Act of 1789 , " the definition of crimes and the establishment of punishments " remained a " missing link of the criminal system . " The Judiciary Act of 1789 divided original jurisdiction for the trial of federal crimes between the district courts and the circuit courts . The district courts were given jurisdiction over all federal crimes " where no other punishment than whipping , not exceeding thirty stripes , a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars , or a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months , is to be inflicted . " The circuit courts were given concurrent jurisdiction over these crimes , and exclusive jurisdiction over all other federal crimes . The circuit courts also exercised appellate jurisdiction over the district courts , but only in civil cases . 
 The Judiciary Act of 1789 also placed the responsibility for prosecuting federal crimes in the United States Attorney for each federal judicial district . The Act provided that " there shall be appointed in each district " a " person learned in the law to act as attorney for the United States in such district , who shall be sworn or affirmed to the faithful execution of his office , whose duty it shall be to prosecute in such district all delinquents for crimes and offences , cognizable under the authority of the United States . " 
 Prior to the Crimes Act , Congress had passed very few federal crimes . Among Congress 's earlier criminal statutes were : 
 The renewal of the Northwest Ordinance , which authorized the executive to adopt state law within the Northwest Territory ; and 
 A prohibition on unloading ships in the dark or without a license , as well as customs bribery and false statements ; and 
 A prohibition on census takers failing to report their findings . 
 = = Drafting = = 
 The Senate passed an act to define a variety of federal crimes on August 31 , 1789 , but the House did not act on that bill . 
 Like the Judiciary Act of 1789 and the Process Act of 1789 , the Crimes Act was primarily authored by Senator ( and future Chief Justice ) Oliver Ellsworth as the chair of the Senate committee . The committee examined the state criminal laws of Massachusetts , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Virginia , and South Carolina at the beginning of the drafting process . The Crimes Act generated " little reported debate " on the floor of Congress . The act was passed on April 30 , 1790 . 
 = = Crimes established = = 
 Due to the seriousness of the authorized sentences , under the Judiciary Act of 1789 , original jurisdiction for the trial of all of the crimes created by the Crimes Act would have rested with the circuit courts ; none of the crimes created could have been tried in the district courts . 
 = = = Treason = = = 
 Article Three provides that : " Treason against the United States , shall consist only in levying War against them , or in adhering to their Enemies , giving them Aid and Comfort . No Person shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two Witnesses to the same overt Act , or on Confession in open Court . The Congress shall have power to declare the Punishment of Treason , but no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood , or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted . " 
 As to misprision of treason , according to David P. Currie , because " [ t ] he Constitution said nothing of this offense , " " the legislators must have interpreted the narrow definition of treason in Article III not to preclude it from creating lesser related offenses that might otherwise fall within federal purview — although nothing in the misprision provision suggested that Congress had yet considered the possible impact of the Treason Clause on its efforts to punish seditious expression . " 
 = = = Piracy and the high seas = = = 
 Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o define and punish <unk> and Felonies committed on the high Seas . " Five sections in the Crimes Act " were devoted to the subject . " Currie notes that the various piracy offenses " take an exceedingly broad view of what constituted piracy , " but that " [ f ] rom a constitutional standpoint no harm was done , since all of the acts punished were felonious and Congress 's power extended to all felonies on the high seas . " 
 " The principal provisions with respect to piracy were incorporated in section 8 . " Section 8 applied not only to the " high Seas , " but also to " any river , haven , basin , or bay , out of the jurisdiction of any particular State . " Currie notes a variety of constitutional theories which Congress might have espoused in order to justify this provision : " Whether Congress thought authority over such places included within the ostensibly narrower term ' high Seas , " necessary and proper to the regulation of commerce or to the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction , or implicit in a central government responsible for external affairs is not clear . " 
 Currie also argues that the phrase " offence , which , if committed within the body of a county , would , by laws of the United States , be punishable with death " is vague . He suggests that it could refer to any federal law , to any state or federal law , or only to federal laws applicable to places under exclusive federal jurisdiction . 
 = = = Counterfeiting = = = 
 Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States . " Currie argues that section 14 's somewhat broad reading of the word " Securities " is fair enough . Currie suggests that " [ n ] othing was said of counterfeiting coins " because the United States Mint had not yet been established . 
 Some members of the House , including Theodore Sedgwick of Massachusetts , spoke against the prescribing death penalty for counterfeiting , viewing it as too harsh . 
 = = = Crimes against the law of nations = = = 
 Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o define and punish . . . Offenses against the Law of Nations . " According to Currie : " No reliance on inherent on implied powers over foreign affairs was necessary to justify " sections 26 and 28 as each " plausibly described " offenses against the law of nations . Congress had also created a civil offense against the law of nations in the Alien Tort Statute of the Judiciary Act of 1789 . 
 = = = Exclusive federal jurisdiction = = = 
 Several offenses were limited to acts committed in places " under the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the United States . " Such regulations would have applied in the " Seat of the Government , " federal enclaves , and federal territories . 
 Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever , over such District ( not exceeding ten Miles square ) as may , by Cession of particular States , and the acceptance of Congress , become the Seat of the Government of the United States , and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be , for the Erection of Forts , Magazines , <unk> , dock @-@ Yards , and other needful Buildings . " And Article Four provides that " Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory . . . . " 
 With reference to the " arms , ordnance , munition , shot , powder , or habiliments of war belonging to the United States " provision of section 16 , Currie argues that it could have been justified under Congress 's Article One power to " raise and support armies " or Congress 's Article Four power to make needful rules respecting " property belonging to the United States . " 
 In United States v. Bevans ( 1818 ) , although the defendant had only been charged under § 8 of the Crimes Act , Chief Justice Marshall proceeded to consider whether the offense would have been cognizable under § 3 . Following the canon of <unk> a <unk> , Marshall interpreted the jurisdictional phrase " any fort , arsenal , dockyard , magazine , or in any other place , or district of country " to be limited to places that are " fixed and territorial " ( i.e. not to include a navy vessel ) . 
 Crimes against persons 
 Crimes against property 
 <unk> 
 = = = Integrity of the judicial process = = = 
 The constitutional authorization of these crimes was less explicit , but Article One does provide that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court . " According to Currie : 
 This is the point at which explicit constitutional authority for the creation of federal crimes runs out . But the statute went on to define additional crimes : theft or falsification of court records , perjury , bribery of federal judges , interference with judicial process , and liberation of federal prisoners . All of these were plainly necessary and proper to the operation of the federal courts ; Marshall was to cite the perjury section as precedent for the existence of implicit powers in M <unk> v. Maryland . 
 According to Stacy and Dayton , these provision are " compelling evidence that the founders did not intend the national role in criminal law to be limited to crimes expressly mentioned in the Constitution . " 
 = = Criminal procedure = = 
 = = = Statute of limitations = = = 
 Section 32 provided for the following statutes of limitations : no statute of limitations for wilfull murder or forgery ; no statute of limitations for fugitives from justice ; three ( 3 ) years for capital offenses ( other than wilfull murder and forgery ) ; two ( 2 ) years for non @-@ capital offenses . In United States v. Cook ( 1872 ) , the Court held that indictments need not plead facts establishing that these limitations periods have not run . 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 Section 8 provided that " the trial of crimes committed on the high seas , or in any place out of the jurisdiction of any particular State , shall be in the district where the offender is apprehended , or into which he may first be brought . " Thus , section 8 was an exercise of Congress 's authority under Article Three to define criminal venue for all crimes " not committed within any State . " But , the Supreme Court did not interpret section 8 as exercising the full extent of Congress 's authority under Article Three . In Ex parte Bollman ( 1807 ) , the Court held that the statutory term " any place out of the jurisdiction of any particular state " applied only to " any river , haven , <unk> or bay , not within the jurisdiction of any particular state , " and only in " those cases there is no court which has particular cognizance of the crime . " 
 = = = Treason and capital cases = = = 
 The Crimes Act prescribed death as the exclusive punishment for the crimes of treason , counterfeiting , wilfull murder , and aiding the escape of a death row prisoner , as well as piracy , murder , and robbery on the high seas . Section 29 provided treason and capital defendants a right to a copy of the indictment , a list of the jury ( and , in treason cases , witnesses ) , appointed counsel , and compulsory process : 
 [ A ] ny person who shall be accused and indicted of treason , shall have a copy of the indictment , and a list of the jury and witnesses , to be produced on the trial for proving the said indictment , mentioning the names and places of abode of such witnesses and jurors , delivered unto him at least three entire days before he shall be tried for the same ; and in other capital offences , shall have such copy of the indictment and list of the jury two entire days at least before the trial : And that every person so accused and indicted for any of the crimes aforesaid , shall also be allowed and admitted to make his full defence by counsel learned in the law ; and the court before whom such person shall be tried , or some judge thereof , shall , and they are hereby authorized and required immediately upon his request to assign to such person such counsel , not exceeding two , as such person shall desire , to whom such counsel shall have free at all reasonable hours ; and every such person or persons accused or indicted of the crimes aforesaid , shall be allowed and admitted in his said defence to make any proof that he or they can produce , by lawful witness or witnesses , and shall have the like process of the court where he or they shall be tried , to compel his or their witnesses to appear at his or their trial , as is usually granted to compel witnesses to appear on the prosecution against them . 
 Most of the provisions of section 29 are plainly similar to those of the Sixth Amendment , namely the Information Clause , the Assistance of Counsel Clause , and the Compulsory Process Clause . The Sixth Amendment ( and the remainder of the Bill of Rights ) had not yet been ratified at the time of the Crimes Act 's passage . 
 Section 30 provided treason and capital defendants with peremptory challenges and provided for a plea of not guilty in the case that the defendant refused to enter a plea : 
 if any person or persons be indicted of treason against the United States , and shall stand mute or refuse to plead , or shall challenge peremptorily above the number of thirty @-@ five of the jury ; or if any person or persons be indicted of other of the offences herein for which the punishment is declared to be death , if he or they shall also stand mute or will not answer to the indictment , or challenge peremptorily above the number of twenty persons of the jury ; the court , in any of the cases aforesaid , shall notwithstanding proceed to the trial of the person or persons so standing mute or challenging , as if he or they had pleaded not guilty , and render judgment thereon accordingly . 
 In United States v. Shackleford ( 1855 ) , the Court held that the section 30 's allocation of peremptory challenges controlled , rather than an 1840 statute that required federal jury selection to generally follow state law ( and , thus , the prosecutor was given no peremptory challenges in such cases ) . Ten years later , Congress abrogated Shackleford , granting prosecutors five peremptory challenges in treason and capital cases ( and two in non @-@ capital felony cases ) ; the 1865 act left the defendant 's number of peremptory challenges unchanged . 
 Section 31 eliminated the benefit of clergy for capital crimes . Section 33 designated the means of execution as " hanging . . . by the neck until dead . " 
 = = = Perjury indictments = = = 
 Section 19 , applicable to perjury prosecutions under section 18 , provided that 
 in every presentment or indictment to be prosecuted against any person for wilful and corrupt perjury , it shall be sufficient to set forth the substance of the offence charged upon the defendant , and by what court , or before whom the oath or affirmation was taken , ( averring such court , or person or persons to have a competent authority to administer the same ) together with the proper <unk> or <unk> to falsify the matter or matters wherein the perjury or <unk> is or are assigned ; without setting forth the bill , answer , information , indictment , declaration , or any part of any record or proceeding , either in law or equity , other than as aforesaid , and without setting forth the commission or authority of the court , or person or persons before whom the perjury was committed . 
 and section 20 provided that 
 in every presentment or indictment for <unk> of perjury , or for corrupt bargaining or contracting with others to commit wilful and corrupt perjury , it shall be sufficient to set forth the substance of the offence charged upon the defendant , without setting forth the bill , answer , information , indictment , declaration , or any part of any record or proceeding , either in law or equity , and without setting forth the <unk> or authority of the court , or person or persons before whom the <unk> was committed , or was agreed or promised to be committed . 
 = = = Sentencing = = = 
 Section 24 provided that " no conviction or judgment of any of the offences aforesaid , shall work corruption of blood , or any forfeiture of estate . " This generalized the guarantee of Article Three that " no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood , or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted . " 
 The Crimes Act made no provision for the creation of federal prisons . Instead , a September 21 , 1789 concurrent resolution asked the state legislatures to authorize their prisons to imprison federal prisoners . The first federal prison was not opened until 1894 at Fort Leavenworth . 
 = = Other provisions = = 
 = = = Dissection = = = 
 Section 4 authorized a court to order the post @-@ execution dissection of the corpse of convicted murderers . According to David P. Currie , this was the " most controversial provision of the entire statute . " Dissection @-@ as @-@ punishment had its roots in a 1789 New York statute and a 1752 English law . Rep. Michael J. Stone of Maryland argued against the inclusion of this provision as cruel . Currie argues that Congress was on a firm constitutional footing in enacting this provision in relation to murders committed in areas under exclusive federal jurisdiction , but perhaps less so for murders committed on the high seas . 
 = = = Diplomatic immunity = = = 
 Section 25 provided : 
 [ I ] f any writ or process shall at any time hereafter be sued forth or prosecuted by any person or persons , in any of the courts of the United States , or in any of the courts of a particular state , or by any judge or justice therein respectively , whereby the person of any ambassador or other public minister of any foreign prince or state , authorized and received as such by the President of the United States , or any domestic or domestic servant of any much ambassador or other public minister , may be arrested or imprisoned , or his or their goods or chattels be <unk> , seized or attached , such writ or process shall be deemed and adjudged to be utterly null and void to all intents , construction and purposes whatsoever . 
 Section 27 provided a limited exception for private debts contracted by ambassadors prior to the passage of the act . 
 = = Prosecutions = = 
 Between 1790 and 1797 , only 147 criminal cases were brought in the circuit courts , and more than half of those cases were brought in the Pennsylvania circuit court concerning the Whiskey Rebellion . And , between 1790 and 1801 , only 426 criminal cases were brought in all federal courts ( the district courts and the circuit courts combined ) . 
 = = Amendments and repeals = = 
 Section 1 was supplemented by an omnibus treason law during the Civil War , which , inter alia , provided for punishments other than death and additional lesser offenses . The offense of treason , and the punishment thereof , were codified in consecutive sections of the Revised Statutes . Both were repealed and replaced by the Criminal Code of 1909 . During the 1948 re @-@ codification of the Criminal Code , the treason offense was amended and moved to 18 U.S.C. § <unk> , where it remains . It was amended in 1994 . 
 Section 2 was codified in the Revised Statutes , and re @-@ codified by the Criminal Code of 1909 , and the 1948 re @-@ codification . It was amended in 1994 . 
 Section 3 was amended by § 4 of the Crimes Act of 1825 and codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 4 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 5 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 6 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 7 was amended in 1857 and 1875 and codified in the Revised States . 
 Section 8 was amended in 1820 , 1835 , and 1846 and codified in five sections of the Revised Statutes . Further , § 8 was supplemented by additional prohibitions in § 5 of an 1819 act and § 3 of an 1820 act . Despite the similarity of the provisions , all three were all separately codified in the Revised Statutes in 1874 . Section 8 was repealed by the Criminal Code of 1909 . Section 8 's venue provision was re @-@ enacted by § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 , with minor changes . 
 Section 9 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 10 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 11 was codified in two sections of the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 12 was amended in 1835 and codified in two sections of the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 13 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 14 was repealed by § 17 of the Crimes Act of 1825 , which broadened the offense of counterfeiting and reduced authorized the punishment from death to 10 years hard labor and a $ 5000 fine . Sections 18 through 21 of the 1825 Act created additional counterfeiting offenses . 
 Section 15 was amended in 1874 and codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 16 was amended in 1842 and codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 17 was amended by § 8 of the Crimes Act of 1825 and codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 18 was amended by § 13 of the Crimes Act of 1825 — which defined the term " perjury " and increased the authorized punishment to 5 years hard labor and a $ 3000 fine — and further amended in 1874 and 1876 . Perjury and <unk> were separately codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 19 was codified in three sections of the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 21 was codified in two sections of the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 22 was amended in 1866 and codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 23 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 24 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Sections 25 through 29 were not codified in Title LXX of the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 30 , with regard to peremptory challenges , was re @-@ enacted and supplemented in 1865 . Section 30 , with regard to a defendant 's failure to enter a plea , was extended from capital to all crimes by § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 . 
 Section 31 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 Section 33 was codified in the Revised Statutes . 
 = = Constitutionality = = 
 According to Taylor : " Like the Judiciary Act of 1789 , the Process Act of 1789 and the Crimes Act of 1790 , having been passed by the First Congress , are perhaps the statutes most informative of an original understanding of Congress 's constitutional power over the federal judiciary . " 
 According to Kurland , " for the most part , Congress enacted statutes that closely tracked the specific constitutional grants of federal criminal authority . However , Congress continued to venture slightly , but significantly , into areas outside the specific constitutional grants . " As examples in the later category , Kurland cites the provisions concerning the integrity of the federal criminal process , bribery , <unk> of treason , and the revenue provisions . 
 Currie notes that the Crimes Act " resolved a number of interesting constitutional questions . " For example , with reference to the punishments of " stripes " and disqualification from office , Currie argues that : " These provisions suggest not only that Congress viewed neither of these punishments as cruel and unusual , but also that they did not understand impeachment to be the sole avenue for the future disqualification of current officeholders . " Taylor goes further in arguing the disqualification provision was not merely prospective : " The Crimes Act of 1790 indicates that , beyond its plenary power over federal court jurisdiction and procedure , the First Congress believed it had the constitutional power to make conviction by a court an alternative means of removing a federal judge , outside the impeachment context , and it sheds light on the First Congress 's understanding of its own powers to discipline federal judges . " 
 Similarly , the Supreme Court and individual justices have cited the Crimes Act 's authorization of the death penalty as evidence that the founders believed it was constitutional . 
 = Witch trials in early modern Scotland = 
 Witch trials in early modern Scotland were the judicial proceedings in Scotland between the early sixteenth century and the mid @-@ eighteenth century concerned with crimes of witchcraft . In the late Middle Ages there were a handful of prosecutions for harm done through witchcraft , but the passing of the Witchcraft Act 1563 made witchcraft , or consulting with witches , capital crimes . The first major series of trials under the new act were the North Berwick witch trials , beginning in 1589 , in which James VI played a major part as " victim " and investigator . He became interested in witchcraft and published a defence of witch @-@ hunting in the Daemonologie in 1597 , but he appears to have become increasingly sceptical and eventually took steps to limit prosecutions . 
 An estimated 4 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 people , mostly from the Scottish Lowlands , were tried for witchcraft in this period ; a much higher rate than for neighbouring England . There were major series of trials in 1590 – 91 , 1597 , 1628 – 31 , 1649 – 50 and 1661 – 62 . Seventy @-@ five per cent of the accused were women . Modern estimates indicate that over 1 @,@ 500 persons were executed . Most of those executed were strangled and then burnt . The hunts subsided under English occupation after the Civil Wars during the period of the Commonwealth led by Oliver Cromwell . In the 1650s and returned after the Restoration in 1660 , causing some alarm and leading to the Privy Council of Scotland limiting arrests , prosecutions and torture . There was also growing scepticism in the later seventeenth century , while some of the factors that may have contributed to the trials , such as economic distress , subsided . Although there were occasional local outbreaks of witch @-@ hunting , the last recorded executions were in 1706 and the last trial in 1727 . The Scottish and English parliaments merged in 1707 , and the unified British parliament repealed the 1563 Act in 1736 . 
 Many causes have been suggested for the hunts , including economic distress , changing attitudes to women , the rise of a " godly state " , the inquisitorial Scottish judicial system , the widespread use of judicial torture , the role of the local kirk , decentralised justice and the prevalence of the idea of the diabolic pact . The proliferation of partial explanations for the witch @-@ hunt has led some historians to proffer the concept of " associated circumstances " , rather than one single significant cause . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Legal origins = = = 
 For late Medieval Scotland there is evidence of occasional prosecutions of individuals for causing harm through witchcraft . High @-@ profile political cases included the action against John Stewart , Earl of Mar for allegedly using sorcery against his brother King James III in 1479 . Evidence of these political cases indicates that they were becoming rarer in the first half of the sixteenth century however . Popular belief in magic was widespread in the Middle Ages , but theologians had been generally sceptical , and lawyers only interested in prosecuting cases in which harm from magic was evident . From the late fifteenth century attitudes began to change , and witches were seen as deriving powers from the Devil , with the result that witchcraft was seen as a form of heresy . These ideas were widely accepted by both Catholics and Protestants in the sixteenth century . In the aftermath of the initial Reformation settlement of 1560 , Parliament passed the Witchcraft Act 1563 , one of a series of laws underpinning Biblical laws and similar to that passed in England a year earlier , which made the practice of witchcraft itself , and consulting with witches , capital crimes . The first witch @-@ hunt under the act was in the east of the country in 1568 – 69 in Angus and the Mearns , where there were unsuccessful attempts to introduce elements of the diabolic pact and the hunt collapsed . 
 = = = Role of James VI = = = 
 James VI 's visit to Denmark in 1589 , where witch @-@ hunts were already common , may have encouraged an interest in the study of witchcraft , and he came to see the storms he encountered on his voyage as the result of magic . After his return to Scotland , he attended the North Berwick witch trials , the first major persecution of witches in Scotland under the 1563 Act and the first known to successfully involve the diabolic pact . Several people , most notably Agnes Sampson and the schoolmaster John <unk> , were convicted of using witchcraft to send storms against James ' ship . James became obsessed with the threat posed by witches . He subsequently believed that a nobleman , Francis Stewart , 5th Earl of Bothwell , was a witch , and after the latter fled in fear of his life , he was outlawed as a traitor . The king subsequently set up royal commissions to hunt down witches in his realm , recommending torture in dealing with suspects . James is known to have personally supervised the torture of women accused of being witches . Inspired by his personal involvement , in 1597 he wrote the Daemonologie , a tract that opposed the practice of witchcraft and which provided background material for Shakespeare 's Tragedy of Macbeth , which contains probably the most famous literary depiction of Scottish witches . James imported continental explanations of witchcraft . His goal was to divert suspicion away from male homosociality among the elite , and focus fear on female communities and large gatherings of women . He thought they threatened his political power so he laid the foundation for witchcraft and occultism policies , especially in Scotland . The point was that a widespread belief in the conspiracy of witches and a witches ' Sabbath with the devil deprived women of political influence . Occult power was supposedly a womanly trait because women were weaker and more susceptible to the devil . However , after the publication of Daemonologie his views became more sceptical , and in the same year he revoked the standing commissions on witchcraft , limiting prosecutions by the central courts . 
 = = Nature of the trials = = 
 Despite the fact that Scotland probably had about one quarter of the population of England , it had three times the number of witchcraft prosecutions , at an estimated 4 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 over the entire period . This was about four times the European average . The overwhelming majority were in the Lowlands , where the Kirk had more control , despite the evidence that basic magical beliefs were very widespread in the Highlands . Large series of trials included those in 1590 – 91 and the Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597 , which took place across Scotland from March to October . At least 400 people were put on trial for various forms of diabolism . The exact number of those executed as a result of these trials is unknown , but is believed to be about 200 . Later major trials included hunts in 1628 – 31 and 1649 – 50 . Probably the most intense witch @-@ hunt was in 1661 – 62 , which involved some 664 named witches in four counties . 
 Most of the accused , some 75 per cent , were women . Modern estimated indicate that over 1 @,@ 500 persons were executed . Most of these were older women , with some younger women and men accused because they were related to an accused witch , usually as daughters and husbands . Some men were accused because they were folk healers , who were felt to have misused their powers , although folk healers as a group were not targeted . Most were not vagrants or beggars , but settled members of their communities . Most had built a reputation for witchcraft over years , which resulted in prosecution when a " victim " suffered ill fortune , particularly after a curse had been issued . The use of curses by some women as a means of acquiring social power may have made this process more likely to occur . 
 Almost all witchcraft prosecutions took place in secular courts under the provisions of the 1563 Act . In 1649 the religiously radical Covenanter regime passed a new witchcraft act that ratified the existing act and extended it to deal with <unk> of " Devils and familiar spirits " , who would now be punished with death . There were three main types of court in which accused witches could be tried . First was the Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh , which took cases from all over Scotland , with a heavy bias to the local region . Next were the circuit courts , presided over by judges from the central courts and held in the various shires of the country . Finally , there were a series of ad hoc local courts , held under commissions by the Privy Council or Parliament and staffed by local landholders and gentlemen to try witches in the places where they were accused . Based on known outcomes , the execution rates for the local courts was much higher than the courts run by professional lawyers , with the local courts executing some 90 per cent of the accused , the Judiciary Court 55 per cent , but the circuit courts only 16 per cent . After the revocation of the standing commissions in 1597 , the pursuit of witchcraft was largely taken over by kirk sessions , disciplinary committees run by the parish elite , and was often used to attack " superstitious " and Catholic practices . The central courts only launched a trial when the Privy Council issued a commission , although the council did not have full control over prosecutions in the Court of Judiciary . 
