 In January 1994 , artist Josef Ng cut off his pubic hair with his back to the audience during a performance protesting the media 's coverage of gay issues . The event was reported by The New Paper , and the resulting public outcry over its perceived obscenity led the National Arts Council ( NAC ) to cease funding unscripted performance art . After that , Tang and other performance artists practised their art mostly abroad , although some performances were presented in Singapore as dance or theatre . Interviewed in August 2001 , T. <unk> , co @-@ director of the Practice Performing Arts School , said that a review of the NAC 's policy was " long overdue " and noted that although Tang had received the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 1999 , " the art form he practises is de facto banned in Singapore " . The NAC eventually reversed its no @-@ funding rule on performance art in September 2003 . 
 In August 1995 , the President of Singapore Ong Teng Cheong visited Singapore Art ' 95 , an exhibition and sale of artworks by Singapore artists . Tang wore a black jacket emblazoned on the back with " Don 't give money to the arts " in yellow and handed a note to the President that read , " I am an artist . I am important . " Although Tang was prevented from speaking to the President by an aide @-@ de @-@ camp , he later told the media he wished to tell the President that artists are important and that public money funded the " wrong kind of art " , art that was too commercial and had no taste . 
 = = = Recent activities = = = 
 Tang was the subject of one episode of artist Ho Tzu <unk> 's documentary television series 4x4 Episodes of Singapore Art , which was broadcast on Arts Central in October 2005 . He was also one of the four artists representing Singapore at the 2007 Venice Biennale . He presented an installation , Untitled , consisting of two beds positioned upright , the trunks of plantain trees , a portable ancestral altar , a handmade album of drawings and photographs , and other found objects . Drawings of people and faces were strapped to the beds and wrapped around the tree trunks . The installation was accompanied by a recording by Tang 's son , Zai Tang , of sounds captured in Venice during a single day . The work was described by the National Arts Council as suggestive of " the restlessness , rootlessness , spiritual wandering and emotional estrangement that mark the travelling life " . In 2007 , a work by Tang consisting of ink paintings around a well , and representing the erosion of village communities by urban development , was acquired by the Queensland Art Gallery for its Gallery of Modern Art . From January to June 2016 , Tang presented Earth Work 1979 at the National Gallery Singapore , a re @-@ staging of his 1979 exhibition , the first recorded instance of Singapore land art . The exhibition includes " Gully Curtains " , where Tang placed large pieces of fabric between gullies and let the rain and sun mark the fabric . His work Tiger 's Whip ( 1991 ) is also displayed at the National Gallery 's DBS Singapore Gallery . 
 Known for his reticence , Tang remains an enigmatic person . In an August 2008 interview with the Straits Times , fellow artist Vincent Leow said of Tang : " He 's a very hands @-@ on person , very improvisational and has good ideas . But he doesn 't really talk much . You can 't really tell who he is . " 
 = = Art = = 
 Tang has expressed concern about environmental and social issues through his art , such as the works They <unk> the Rhino , Chop Off His Horn and Make This Drink ( 1989 ) , Under the Table All Going One Direction ( 1992 ) and Tiger 's Whip . He first presented the latter work , an installation and performance piece , in 1991 in Singapore 's Chinatown . It consisted of ten life @-@ sized tigers made from wire mesh covered with white linen . Tang , wearing a sleeveless white garment , dragged one of the tigers behind him . A modified version of the installation is in the Singapore Art Museum . It features a tiger with its front paws resting on the back of a rocking chair , which is draped with a piece of red cloth and with a phallus painted on it in red . The work highlights how the tiger is being hunted to extinction for its penis , which some Chinese believe has aphrodisiac qualities . In February 1995 , the Museum chose Tiger 's Whip to represent Singapore at the <unk> International Biennale in Johannesburg , South Africa . Another of Tang 's works in the Singapore Art Museum is an untitled sculpture often called Axe ( 1991 ) , which is an axe with a plant growing out of its wooden handle . It is regarded as an early example of found art in Singapore . 
 A focus of Tang 's art is the theme of national and cultural identities , I Was Born Japanese ( 1995 ) being an example . Tang notes that he has had four nationalities . He was issued with a Japanese birth certificate as he was born during the Japanese Occupation of Singapore . He became a British national after World War II , a Malaysian citizen when Singapore joined the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 , and a Singaporean citizen when Singapore gained full independence in 1965 . While living in the UK he was conscious of his Chinese identity , but later on he took the view that he might not be fully Chinese since China had been occupied by the Mongols and <unk> : " I 'm not sure if I 'm 100 % Chinese blood . I 'm sure my ancestor has got mixture of Mongolian and even Thai and Miao people [ sic ] . We are all mixed , and this is true . But I always like to think that there is only one race in the world . We are all one human race . " Another of Tang 's performances , <unk> Pisang – Heart of a Tree , Heart of a People , centres around the banana tree . He was inspired by the fact that the banana is used widely in Southeast Asia as an offering to bring blessings , but is also feared as it is associated with ghosts and spirits . He also sees banana trees as a reminder of the lack of democracy in certain parts of the world : " Democracy in many Asian countries and Third World countries is as shallow as the roots of a banana tree . We need to deepen [ democracy ] . " 
 Tang has participated in numerous community and public art projects , workshops and performances , as he believes in the potential of the individual and collective to effect social changes . He has said : " An artist should introduce to others what he sees and learns of something . His works should provoke thoughts , not to please the eyes or to entertain , much less for decoration . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Tang received a Singapore International Foundation art grant to participate in the International Art Symposium in <unk> , Japan , in October 1994 . In March the following year , he received a trophy and S $ 20 @,@ 000 from the Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry Foundation . For his originality and influence in performance art in Southeast Asia , among other contributions , Tang won the Arts and Culture Prize in 1999 at the 10th Fukuoka Asian Culture Prizes which were established by Fukuoka and <unk> Foundation to honour outstanding work of individuals or organizations to preserve and create the unique and diverse culture of Asia . 
 = = Major exhibitions and performances = = 
 Some of the information in the table above was obtained from [ Tang Da Wu : Artist CV ] , Valentine Willie Fine Art , 2006 , archived from the original on 10 February 2008 , retrieved 18 October 2008 . 
 = = = Articles and websites = = = 
 Masahiro , <unk> , interviewer ( 1999 ) , Fast moving Asian contemporary art : Tang Da Wu and his works ( PDF ) , Asian Month , retrieved 20 October 2008 . 
 Yeo , Alicia Kay Ling ( 7 August 2008 ) , Information on Singapore artist Tang Da Wu , Reference Point Enquiries Bank , National Library , Singapore , retrieved 20 October 2008 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Sabapathy , T.K. ( 1993 ) , " Contemporary Art in Singapore : An Introduction " , in Turner , Caroline , Tradition and Change : Contemporary Art of Asia and the Pacific , Queensland : University of Queensland Press , pp. 83 – 92 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Sabapathy , T.K. , ed . ( 1998 ) , Trimurti and Ten Years After , Singapore : Singapore Art Museum . 
 Singapore Art Museum ( 2007 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Out Now ) : Southeast Asian Contemporary Art Practices during the 1960s to 1980s , Singapore : National Heritage Board , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 05 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> ・ <unk> @-@ <unk> = Tang Da @-@ Wu , Fukuoka : Fukuoka @-@ shi <unk> , 1991 ( in Japanese ) . 
 van <unk> , Joyce , ed . ( 1996 ) , Southeast Asian Art Today , Singapore : Roeder Publications , ISBN 981 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 " Art therapy helps people express their frustrations " , The Straits Times , 16 June 1994 . 
 Leow , Jason ( 14 June 1996 ) , " Art taken for a ride at HDB estates – around your place " , The Straits Times . 
 " Through the artists ' eyes " , Business Times ( Singapore ) , 28 October 2000 . 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 3 January 2002 ) , " Art fest a big hit with Singaporeans : A diverse range of media is employed but the quality of the works on display is mixed " , Bangkok Post . 
 = Mahan @-@ class destroyer = 
 The Mahan @-@ class destroyers of the United States Navy were a series of 18 destroyers of which the first 16 were laid down in 1934 . The last two of the 18 , Dunlap and Fanning ( this pair laid down in 1935 ) , are sometimes considered as a separate ship class . All 18 were commissioned in 1936 and 1937 . Mahan was the lead ship , named for Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan , an influential historian and theorist on sea power . 
 The Mahans featured improvements over previous destroyers , with 12 torpedo tubes , superimposed gun shelters , and generators for emergency use . Standard displacement increased from 1 @,@ 365 tons to 1 @,@ 500 tons . The class introduced a new steam propulsion system that combined increases in pressure and temperature with a new type of lightweight steam turbine , proving simpler and more efficient than the Mahans ' predecessors — so much so that it was used on many subsequent wartime US destroyers . 
 All 18 ships saw action in World War II , entirely in the Pacific Theater , including during the Guadalcanal Campaign , and the battles of the Santa Cruz Islands , Leyte Gulf , and Iwo Jima . Their participation in major and secondary campaigns included the bombardment of beachheads , amphibious landings , task force screening , convoy and patrol duty , and anti @-@ aircraft and submarine warfare . Six ships were lost in combat and two were expended in the postwar Operation Crossroads nuclear tests . The remainder were decommissioned , sold , or scrapped after the war ; none remain today . Collectively , the ships received 111 battle stars for their World War II service . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Mahan @-@ class destroyers emerged as improved versions of the Farragut class , incorporating the most up @-@ to @-@ date machinery available . The Navy 's General Board had been wrestling with proposed design changes , first considering 12 torpedo tubes with one fewer 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 38 caliber gun , and then proposing to retain all five guns with the twelve torpedo tubes , but configuring those guns only for surface targets , not air targets . The Chief of Naval Operations objected , recommending against " subordinating the gun to the torpedo " , and a compromise was struck that included a new engineering plant and a new battery arrangement for the Mahan class and others . In the final design , No. 3 gun was moved to the aft deckhouse ( just ahead of No. 4 ) to make room for the third quadruple torpedo tube ; the two middle torpedo tubes were moved to the sides , releasing the centerline space for extension of the aft deckhouse . All five 5 in / 38s were kept and remained dual purpose guns , able to target aircraft as well as ships , but only No. 1 and No. 2 had gun shields . The traditional destroyer machinery was replaced with a new generation of land @-@ based machinery . This change ushered in a new steam propulsion system that combined increases in pressure and temperature with a new type of lightweight steam turbine , which proved simpler and more efficient to operate . Double reduction gearing also reduced the size of the faster @-@ turning turbines and allowed cruising turbines to be added . These changes led to a ten percent increase in displacement over the Farraguts . 
 The Mahans typically had a tripod foremast with a pole mainmast . To improve the anti @-@ aircraft field of fire , their tripod foremast was constructed without nautical rigging . In silhouette , they were similar to the larger Porter @-@ class destroyers that immediately preceded them . The Mahans were fitted with the first emergency generators , replacing the storage batteries of earlier classes . Gun crew shelters were built for the superimposed weapons , one shelter before the bridge and one atop the shelter deck aft . 
 The Mahans displaced 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 524 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 725 long tons ( 1 @,@ 753 t ) at deep load . The overall length of the class was 341 feet 3 inches ( 104 @.@ 0 m ) , the beam was 35 feet 6 inches ( 10 @.@ 8 m ) , and the draft 10 feet 7 inches ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) . They were powered by General Electric geared steam turbines , driving two shafts that developed a total of 46 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 34 @,@ 000 kW ) for a maximum speed of 37 knots ( 69 km / h ; 43 mph ) . Four Babcock & Wilcox or four Foster Wheeler water @-@ tube boilers generated the superheated steam needed for the turbines . The Mahans carried a maximum of 523 long tons ( 531 t ) of fuel oil , with a range of 6 @,@ 940 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 850 km ; 7 @,@ 990 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Their peacetime complement was 158 officers and enlisted men . The wartime complement increased to approximately 250 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Engineering = = = 
 The Mahans ' propulsion plant was considerably improved over that of the Farraguts . Steam pressure was raised from 400 psi ( 2 @,@ 800 kPa ) to 465 psi ( 3 @,@ 210 kPa ) in some ships , and superheated steam temperature was raised from 648 ° F ( 342 ° C ) to 700 ° F ( 371 ° C ) in all ships . Double reduction gearing replaced single reduction gearing , allowing smaller , faster @-@ turning turbines to be used ; this saved enough space and weight to allow cruising turbines to be fitted , which greatly improved fuel economy at moderate speeds . Boiler economizers , as in previous ships , further improved fuel economy . The ships ' range was extended to 6 @,@ 940 nmi ( 12 @,@ 850 km ; 7 @,@ 990 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , 1 @,@ 000 nmi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) farther than the Farraguts . Design shaft horsepower was increased from 42 @,@ 800 shp ( 31 @,@ 900 kW ) to 48 @,@ 000 shp ( 36 @,@ 000 kW ) in the same space and weight as in the Farraguts . The relatively compact power plant contributed to the Mahans ' ability to carry 12 torpedo tubes instead of eight with only 150 tons extra displacement . The main turbines were manufactured by General Electric and were impulse @-@ type , also called Curtis turbines . Each main turbine was divided into a high @-@ pressure ( HP ) and a low @-@ pressure ( LP ) turbine feeding into a common reduction gear to drive a shaft , in a similar manner to the machinery illustrated at the following reference . Steam from the boilers was supplied to the HP turbine , which exhausted to the LP turbine , which exhausted to a condenser . The cruising turbines were geared to the HP turbines and could be engaged or disengaged as needed ; at low speeds they were operated in series with the HP turbines to improve the efficiency of the overall turbine arrangement , thus improving fuel economy . This general arrangement with double reduction gearing became standard for most subsequent steam @-@ powered surface ships of the US Navy , although not all of these had cruising turbines . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main battery of the Mahan class consisted of five dual purpose 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 38 caliber guns , equipped with the Mark 33 gun fire @-@ control system . The anti @-@ aircraft battery had four water @-@ cooled .50 caliber machine guns ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) . The class was fitted with three quadruple torpedo tube mounts for twelve 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , guided by the Mark 27 torpedo fire control system . The class was initially equipped with the Mark 11 torpedo or Mark 12 torpedo , which were replaced by the Mark 15 torpedo beginning in 1938 . Depth charge roll @-@ off racks were rigged on the stern . 
 In early 1942 , the Mahan @-@ class destroyers began a wartime armament refitting process , but most of the class was not fully refitted until 1944 . The notable refits to the Mahan class included the removal of one 5 @-@ inch / 38 gun , typically replaced with two twin Bofors 40 mm guns ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) and between four and six 20 mm Oerlikon ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) guns to increase the ships ' light anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament . 
 In January 1945 , removal of two quadruple torpedo tubes was authorized to permit substitution of two 40 mm quad mounts . In June , removal of the third centerline tube was authorized to make way for two 40 mm twin mounts abreast of the aft stack . All ships receiving these AA modifications were to have directors installed with their new 40 mm mounts ; these Mark 51s were to be replaced by new blind @-@ firing <unk> Mark 63 installations with radar . 
 = = Dunlap class = = 
 The Dunlap class was a two @-@ ship destroyer class based on the Mahan design , listed as a separate class in some sources . The ships were USS Dunlap ( DD @-@ 384 ) and USS Fanning ( DD @-@ 385 ) , the last two Mahans . Unlike the Mahans , the <unk> had the new Mark 25 enclosed mounts for the two forward 5 @-@ inch / 38 caliber guns , with base rings housing projectile hoists that rotated with each of the guns ; their ammunition was fed from a handling room below each mount . Dunlap and Fanning were the first US destroyers to use enclosed forward gun mounts rather than shields ; their light pole foremast and lack of a mainmast visibly distinguished them from the Mahans . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The building of the first sixteen vessels was all authorised under the NIRA Executive Order on 16 June 1933 ; the last two were authorised under the Vinson @-@ Trammell Act on 27 March 1934 ( as part of a batch of 95 destroyers authorised on that date - covering DD @-@ 380 to DD @-@ 436 and DD @-@ 445 to DD @-@ 482 ) . Contracts for the first six Mahans were awarded to three shipbuilders , but none of the builders had what the US Navy judged as an acceptable in @-@ house design structure . On the strength of their reputation , the New York firm of Gibbs & Cox was named as the design agent . The firm had no experience in the design of warships , but had successfully designed passenger @-@ cargo liners with better propulsion systems than any available to the US Navy . The decision was made to design the Mahan class and future classes around a new generation of machinery , including a cheaper , faster and more efficient propulsion system that combined increases in steam pressure and temperature with a new type of lightweight , fast @-@ running turbine and double reduction gears . 
 = = Ships in class = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Mahan = = = 
 USS Mahan was commissioned on the east coast in September 1936 and served in the Atlantic area until July 1937 . She sailed to the Southern California coast for fleet training before moving on to Pearl Harbor . At sea when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 , Mahan participated in the initial post @-@ attack efforts in search of the strike force . The ship joined Task Force 17 in February 1942 , which conducted raids on several atolls in the Marshall and Gilbert Islands . Late in March , she returned to Pearl Harbor and proceeded to the west coast for overhaul . By August 1942 , Mahan was back operating out of Pearl Harbor . 
 In October 1942 , Mahan was assigned to Task Force 61 and took part in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . The engagement cost the Navy 74 aircraft , the aircraft carrier Hornet , and one destroyer . While en route to Nouméa , New Caledonia , Mahan and the battleship South Dakota collided , causing severe damage to both ships . Temporary repairs were made to Mahan and she steamed to Pearl Harbor for a new bow . She pulled out of Pearl Harbor in January 1943 . In the months to follow , Mahan escorted convoys between New Hebrides and the Fiji Islands , performed patrol assignments off New Caledonia and engaged in operations in Australian waters . Assigned to the amphibious force of Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey , Mahan participated in a succession of wide @-@ ranging amphibious campaigns in New Guinea and New Britain . In February and March 1944 , she saw action with the 7th Fleet in the Admiralty Islands . After that the ship was ordered back to the west coast for an overhaul , leaving the yard in July 1944 for Pearl Harbor . 
 Returning to New Guinea , Mahan began to escort convoys between Hollandia , in Indonesia and Leyte , in the Philippine Islands . By November 1944 , she was doing anti @-@ submarine patrols off Leyte . On 7 December 1944 while patrolling the channel between Leyte and Ponson Island , a group of Japanese suicide aircraft overwhelmed Mahan at Ormoc Bay . She was disabled by the attack , then abandoned and sunk by a US destroyer . Mahan received five battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Cummings = = = 
 USS Cummings served in the Pacific Fleet in the late 1930s , participating in numerous individual and fleet training exercises . In 1940 , she served on security patrols off the west coast . Cummings went on a goodwill visit to several ports in the South Pacific , including Auckland , New Zealand , and Tahiti . The destroyer was hit by fragments while docked in Pearl Harbor during the Japanese attack , and suffered a few casualties . She escorted convoys between Pearl Harbor and the west coast for the first six months of World War II . In June 1942 , she was transferred to convoy escort duties in the South Pacific until August , when she had an overhaul in San Francisco , and then returned to her role as a convoy escort in the South Pacific . 
 In January 1944 , Cummings joined the screen for the Fast Carrier Strike Force while it raided Japanese positions in the Central Pacific . In March , Cummings sailed for Trincomalee , Ceylon , where she rendezvoused with British ships for exercises . In April , the ship joined a British force to screen during air strikes on Sabang , Indonesia . She returned to Ceylon in May and then moved on to Exmouth Gulf , Australia . With a British force , Cummings sortied for air strikes on Soerabaja , Java , before leaving for Pearl Harbor . 
 By July she was back in San Francisco to escort the heavy cruiser Baltimore , the ship that carried President Franklin D. Roosevelt to Pearl Harbor . Cummings joined the US 3rd Fleet for the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 . The next month , she bombarded Iwo Jima in preparation for the amphibious assault on the island . The ship operated off Okinawa during its invasion . After the war , Cummings returned to the United States and was decommissioned in December 1945 and sold for scrap in July 1947 . She received seven battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Drayton = = = 
 USS Drayton made her shakedown cruise to Europe late in 1936 , and finished her final trials in the United States . She left Norfolk , Virginia , in June 1937 for San Diego , California , to join the Scouting Force . In July , Drayton participated in the search for the lost American pilot , Amelia Earhart . For the next two years , she exercised along the west coast , the Hawaiian Islands , and the Caribbean . When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor , Drayton was at sea but able to participate in the post @-@ attack efforts in search of the enemy force . During the succeeding three months , she escorted a convoy to Christmas Island ( Kiritimati ) , screened a carrier in an airstrike on Bougainville Island , and screened a tanker to Suva Harbor , Fiji Islands . In late November 1942 Drayton became part of Task Force 67 , which intercepted a Japanese naval force guarding transports en route to resupply Guadalcanal . The Battle of Tassafaronga followed . 
 Throughout June , July and August 1943 , Drayton escorted Australian troop carriers from Townsville , Australia , to Milne Bay , New Guinea . In early September , the ship supported the amphibious landing at Lae , New Guinea . Later in September , she participated in the amphibious landing at Finschhafen , New Guinea . After escorting troops to Arawe , New Britain , in December 1943 , Drayton participated in the landings there and at Borgen Bay , near Cape Gloucester , New Britain . The destroyer took part in the invasion of Los Negros Island in the Admiralty Islands during February 1944 . She reported to the 7th Fleet in October and performed patrol and escort duty in Leyte Gulf . In December 1944 , while screening a convoy to San Pedro Bay in the Philippines , a Japanese bomber attacked the ship , killing two men and wounding seven . The next day , she fought off enemy fighters ; one crashed into a 5 " / 38 caliber gun mount , killing six men and wounding twelve . By August 1945 she was on her way to New York , arriving in September . Drayton was decommissioned in October 1945 and sold for scrap in December 1946 . She received 11 battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Lamson = = = 
 USS Lamson shipped out of Norfolk , Virginia , in June 1937 for San Diego , California , less than a year after her naval service began . She engaged in exercises and tactical training until sailing for Pearl Harbor in October 1939 . For the next two years , Lamson continued training from her base in Hawaii . Following the attack on Pearl Harbor , she joined the post @-@ attack efforts to search for the Japanese strike force . In February 1942 she became part of the newly formed ANZAC Squadron , consisting of Australian , New Zealand , and American warships in Suva , Fiji Islands . In March , she operated with the squadron as a cover group southeast of Papua New Guinea . In late November 1942 , Lamson was assigned to Task Force 67 and took part in the Battle of Tassafaronga . 
 For the next eight months , Lamson screened convoys en route to Guadalcanal . By August 1943 , she had moved on to Milne Bay , New Guinea , and participated in the September amphibious landings at Lae and Finschhafen . In December , the ship engaged in the pre @-@ invasion bombardment of Arawe and landings at Cape Gloucester , New Britain . After an overhaul and training at Pearl Harbor , Lamson joined the 7th Fleet in October 1944 . In early December 1944 , she took part in the amphibious landing at Ormoc Bay , Leyte , Philippine Islands . There she was struck by a kamikaze that set fire to the ship , killing 21 men and injuring 50 . The fires were extinguished by a rescue tug and Lamson was saved . After extensive repairs in the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard , she returned to the Pacific and operated off Iwo Jima , then sailed to the United States in November 1945 . In May 1946 , she participated in the Able nuclear test of Operation Crossroads ; she was sunk in the Baker test in July 1946 . Lamson received five battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Flusser = = = 
 USS Flusser steamed her way to San Diego , California , in July 1937 , after spending the first months of her naval service in the Atlantic and Mediterranean . She was based in San Diego until 1939 , then reassigned to Pearl Harbor . Flusser was at sea when the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor , but took part in the post @-@ attack search . For the next six months , she carried out convoy duty between Pearl Harbor and the west coast , and engaged in escort and patrol duty out of southwest Pacific ports . From July 1942 to February 1943 , Flusser was in overhaul status at Pearl Harbor . She returned to escort and training operations in the Solomon Islands and was later based at Milne Bay , New Guinea . During September , Flusser was part of the amphibious landing forces at Lae and Finschhafen , New Guinea . In December 1943 , the destroyer participated in the bombardment and landings at Arawe and Cape Gloucester , New Britain . While attached to the 7th Fleet in February , she supported the landing of troops at Los Negros Island in the Admiralty Islands . Between April and June 1944 , the ship was in the Mare Island Naval Shipyard for overhaul . 
 After her overhaul , Flusser returned to Pearl Harbor . In August , she escorted a convoy to Eniwetok and moved on to Majuro in the Marshall Islands , where she patrolled bypassed Japanese @-@ held atolls . On a patrol off Wotje Atoll , the ship was fired on by a shore battery that left nine of her crew members wounded . In October , she sailed north to San Pedro Bay for duty in the Leyte Gulf and Surigao Strait . By early December 1944 , Flusser had escorted convoys from Hollandia Jayapura to Leyte and taken part in the amphibious landing at Ormoc Bay . In March 1945 , Flusser provided escort support for the landing near Cebu in the Philippines . During July she participated in the Balikpapan campaign in Borneo , escorting ships and covering the landing . After occupation duty in Okinawa during September and October , she sailed to San Diego , California , arriving in November 1945 . During 1946 , Flusser took part in the atomic weapons tests in the Marshall Islands . From there , she steamed to Pearl Harbor , then to Norfolk , Virginia . The destroyer was decommissioned there in December 1946 and sold in January 1948 . Flusser received eight battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Reid = = = 
 USS Reid came into naval service in November 1936 . From 1937 until 1941 , she participated in training and fleet maneuvers in the Atlantic and Pacific . Reid was berthed at Pearl Harbor when the Japanese attacked , but escaped without damage while her gunners fired at the enemy attackers . After the attack , Reid did patrol duty in the Hawaiian waters , and later escorted convoys to San Francisco , California . Late in May 1942 , Reid steamed north from Pearl Harbor to bombard the Japanese positions in Kiska and supported landings at Adak , Alaska . While conducting an anti @-@ submarine patrol in August , she brought a Japanese submarine to the surface with a heavy depth charge barrage , and opened fire on it until it capsized and sank . Five of the submarine 's crew survived and were rescued by Reid . By October , she was patrolling the waters near New Caledonia , Samoa , and the Fiji Islands . In January 1943 , the ship bombarded several Japanese locations on Guadalcanal . 
 During September 1943 , Reid provided support for the landings at Lae and Finschhafen , New Guinea . In December , Reid escorted troop transports for the landings at Arawe , New Britain , and participated in the landings at Cape Gloucester , New Britain . In the following months she supported landings at Los Negros Island in the Admiralty Islands , Hollandia Jayapura , Wakde Island , Biak , and Noemfoor , New Guinea . Reid supported air strikes against Wake Island , and in November 1944 did patrol duty off Leyte in the Philippines . 
 On 11 December 1944 , Reid was operating with a convoy bound for Ormoc Bay , Leyte , to resupply land forces . Late that afternoon , a group of Japanese planes descended on the convoy and penetrated the defenses , taking aim at Reid and another destroyer . The destroyers put up an anti @-@ aircraft barrage that splashed some of the planes and damaged others , but Reid was hit by five suicide planes , causing powerful explosions . Within minutes , she went to the bottom , and over a hundred men perished . Reid received seven battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Case = = = 
 USS Case began active duty in September 1936 and was assigned to the Pacific Fleet . In April 1940 , Pearl Harbor became her home base . The following year , she participated in fleet exercises to Midway Island , Johnston Island , Palmyra Atoll , Samoa , and Auckland . Case was berthed at Pearl Harbor when the Japanese struck , but sustained no damage . After the attack , she escorted convoys between the west coast and Pearl Harbor until late May 1942 . Case went north to support the pre @-@ invasion bombardment of Kiska and do patrol duty off Adak , Alaska . In October , the ship escorted a convoy to Pearl Harbor and then headed to the states for repair , returning to Pearl Harbor in November . In January 1943 , she sailed to Espiritu Santo for training and remained there until September . After overhaul in San Francisco , California , Case returned to Pearl Harbor in December 1943 . She proceeded to the Marshall Islands , taking part in attacks on Wotje Atoll and Maloelap Atoll in late January and Eniwetok in early February 1944 . 
 In April 1944 , Case took part in air raids on Hollandia , Truk ( Chuuk Lagoon ) , Satawan , and Ponape Island . Her next assignment was with Task Group 58 @.@ 4 , participating in strikes on Japanese airfields in the Bonin Islands . During June 1944 , Case engaged in raids on the Mariana Islands and Vulcan Islands . Following repair work at Eniwetok , the ship resumed operations with the task group , screening for air strikes in July and for attacks on the Bonin Islands in August and September . She took part in the bombardment of Marcus Island before joining Task Group 38 @.@ 1 for strikes on Luzon . While screening US cruisers bound for Saipan , Case rammed and sank a Japanese midget submarine . Undamaged , she sailed to Saipan for offshore patrol duty until early December 1944 . Afterward , Case became involved in a raid on Iwo Jima airfields and helped sink two Japanese ships . Following repairs at Saipan , she patrolled between there and Iwo Jima until the end of the war . She then left Iwo Jima for Norfolk , Virginia , where she was decommissioned in December 1945 and sold in December 1947 . Case received seven battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Conyngham = = = 
 USS Conyngham made her maiden voyage to northern Europe in early 1937 , shortly after being commissioned . Following an overhaul in Boston , she sailed to San Diego , California . From October 1937 until April 1940 , Conyngham operated along the west coast , the Hawaiian Islands and the Caribbean , then made her way to Pearl Harbor . In March 1941 , Conyngham left Pearl Harbor on a goodwill tour to Samoa , Sydney and Brisbane in Australia , and Suva in Fiji , returning in April 1941 . Undamaged by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , she put to sea on patrol duty that continued through December . After a brief overhaul at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard , Conyngham performed escort duty between the west coast and New Hebrides . Her escort assignment was interrupted to screen carriers in the Battle of Midway Island in June 1942 . 
 During October 1942 , Conyngham participated in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands and supported the attack at the Matanikau River , Guadalcanal . In June 1943 she joined an amphibious force that later carried out landings at Lae and Finschhafen , New Guinea . In December , she took part in the landings at Arawe and Cape Gloucester , New Britain . The next month , Conyngham participated in the landing at Saidor , New Guinea , and sailed to San Francisco for overhaul . Returning to duty in May 1944 , she screened battleships in the Mariana Islands and remained there until August . Conyngham then joined a convoy screening ships to the Philippines Islands , arriving at Leyte Gulf in early November 1944 . There , a floatplane ( a type of seaplane ) strafed her , wounding 17 men yet causing slight damage to the ship . By early December , she had covered landings at Ormoc Bay and helped with reinforcements . <unk> left the Philippines late in December for Manus Island , New Guinea , to replenish supplies . Later on , she helped screen a convoy to Leyte for the landings at Lingayen Gulf . The ship participated in bombardments at Lingayen Gulf and remained on patrol there after the landings in January 1945 . <unk> sailed to Subic Bay for overhaul in late July 1945 , and remained there until the end of the war . Decommissioned in December 1946 , Conyngham was used in the atomic weapons test at Bikini in 1946 , and was scuttled in July 1948 . She received 14 battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Cassin = = = 
 USS Cassin began naval service in August 1936 , but alterations kept her from sea duty until March 1937 . The next year , she joined the forces at Pearl Harbor for annual fleet exercises . In April 1940 , Cassin was assigned to a Hawaiian unit . When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor , Cassin was in dry @-@ dock with the battleship Pennsylvania and the destroyer Downes . Both destroyers were at the southern end of the dock when an incendiary bomb struck Downes , starting unstoppable fires on both destroyers . Cassin slipped off her blocks and rolled over onto the burning Downes . She was salvaged and towed to the Mare Island Navy Yard and decommissioned . 
 Cassin was rebuilt and commissioned again in February 1944 . She reported to Pearl Harbor in April and pulled escort duty until August . In October , the ship took part in the shelling of Marcus Island to destroy enemy installations . After participating in the bombardment of Iwo Jima in November 1944 and January 1945 , she escorted an ammunition ship to the newly invaded Iwo Jima . There , Cassin did radar picket and air @-@ sea rescue duty . 
 With the war over , she took part in guarding the air evacuation of released prisoners of war from Japan . In November 1945 , the ship deployed to Norfolk , Virginia , and decommissioned there in December 1945 . She was sold for scrap in November 1947 . Cassin received six battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Shaw = = = 
 USS Shaw crossed the Atlantic on her shakedown cruise in April 1937 , and returned to the Philadelphia Navy Yard in June . There , she began a year of yard work before completing acceptance trials . For the remainder of the year , the ship conducted training exercises in the Atlantic . Sailing to the west coast , she was at the Mare Island Navy Yard from January to April 1939 . By April 1940 , Shaw moved on to Hawaiian waters , then back to the west coast in November for overhaul . She returned to Hawaii in February 1941 , and later entered the Pearl Harbor Navy Yard for repairs . Shaw was still in dry dock when the Japanese attacked , with most of the ship 's crew ashore . She was hit by three bombs and severely damaged when her forward magazine exploded . Temporary repairs were made at Pearl Harbor , and in February 1942 the ship sailed to the west coast to complete them . 
 With repairs completed , Shaw returned to Pearl Harbor in August 1942 . She was then assigned to Task Force 61 , and took part in the Battle of Santa Cruz Islands in mid @-@ October . Reassigned to a unit of the 7th Amphibious Force , Shaw escorted reinforcements to Lae and Finschhafen , New Guinea , for the remainder of October and part of November . In late December , she escorted units engaged in the assault on Cape Gloucester , New Britain , and sustained casualties and damage . Thirty @-@ six men were injured ; three later died of their wounds . Temporary repairs were made at Milne Bay , New Guinea , and permanent repairs were completed at San Francisco in May 1944 . Shaw then returned to Pearl Harbor . 
 With Task Force 52 , she participated in the offensive to gain possession of the Japanese @-@ held Mariana Islands . In January 1945 , with the San Fabian Attack Force , Shaw saw action at Manila Bay in the Philippine Islands . She returned to the United States in April , stopping first at San Francisco for repairs , then routed to New York via Philadelphia for deactivation . The ship was decommissioned in October 1945 and sold for scrap in July 1946 . Shaw received 11 battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Tucker = = = 
 USS Tucker was commissioned in July 1936 . After her shakedown cruise , she joined the destroyer forces attached to the US Battle Fleet based in San Diego , California . In February 1939 the ship took part in a naval exercise in the Caribbean , personally observed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt from the cruiser Houston . After exercises in Hawaiian waters in early 1940 , Tucker operated between the west coast and Hawaii until the end of the year . By February 1941 , she was back in Pearl Harbor . Tucker went on a goodwill tour that included Auckland , during March , before returning to Pearl Harbor . There , she participated in exercises at sea before sailing on to San Diego . By November 1941 , Tucker was once again in Pearl Harbor . When the Japanese attacked , the ship was berthed at East Loch undergoing tender overhaul . She was undamaged , and returned fire on the Japanese forces . 
 After the hostilities , Tucker patrolled off Pearl Harbor , then spent the next five months escorting convoys between the west coast and Hawaii . She later escorted the tender Wright to Tutuila in American Samoa , Suva in the Fiji Islands , and Nouméa in New Caledonia . The ship then escorted Wright back to Suva , arriving there in June 1942 . From Suva , she escorted the cargo ship Nira Luckenbach to Espiritu Santo , New Hebrides , in August . The ship entered the harbor by the western entrance and struck at least one mine . The crew abandoned ship and was rescued by nearby vessels . Efforts to save her were in vain ; she eventually jack @-@ knifed and went to the bottom . Tucker had steamed into a minefield placed by US forces , but she was never informed of its existence . Three men were killed and three more were listed as missing . She was removed from the Navy list in December 1944 . Tucker received one battle star for her World War II service . 
 = = = Downes = = = 
 USS Downes entered service in January 1937 . The following November , she sailed from Norfolk , Virginia , to San Diego , California . While based there , Downes participated in exercises along the west coast , in the Caribbean and in Hawaiian waters until April 1940 . Pearl Harbor then became her homeport . In early 1941 , Downes joined a cruise to Samoa , the Fiji Islands , and Australia , then visited the west coast later in the year . When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor , Downes was in dry @-@ dock with the battleship Pennsylvania and the destroyer Cassin . Both destroyers were at the southern end of the dock when an incendiary bomb struck Downes , setting unstoppable fires on both ships . Cassin slipped her blocks and rolled over onto the burning Downes , and Downes was later decommissioned . 
 Downes was rebuilt and recommissioned in November 1943 . During March of 1944 , she escorted a convoy to Pearl Harbor and on to Majuro in the Marshall Islands . By July , Downes began escort duty from Eniwetok to Saipan in support of the invasion of the Mariana Islands . Then she patrolled off Tinian during its invasion , and gave fire support during mop @-@ up operations there . Afterward , Downes took part in the bombardment of Marcus Island to create a diversion and destroy Japanese installations , an action that Admiral Halsey later commended . During the Battle of Leyte Gulf , the ship screened the Fast Carrier Task Force during the air strikes on Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa 's Northern Force . Downes served in Iwo Jima from June 1944 until the end of the war , when the ship was ordered to return to the United States , arriving at Norfolk in November 1945 . She was decommissioned in December 1945 and sold in November 1947 . Downes received four battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Cushing = = = 
 USS Cushing reported to the Pacific Fleet in August 1936 , soon after her Navy service began . She joined the unsuccessful search for the missing Earhart during the month of July 1937 . She moved on to San Diego for training exercises , continuing to operate along the west coast for the next several years . Cushing was under overhaul at the Mare Island Navy Yard when the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor . Following the attack , she did convoy duty between the west coast and Pearl Harbor , and later operated off Midway Island on anti @-@ submarine patrol . In August 1942 , Cushing sailed to Pearl Harbor for training exercises and later joined operations around Guadalcanal . 
 With Task Force 61 , Cushing took part in the bitterly contested Battle of Santa Cruz in October 1942 . Outnumbered , the force stalled the Japanese from their advance toward Guadalcanal . At the Battle of Guadalcanal , Cushing was perhaps the first US ship to strike the enemy on that November day in 1942 . In the fighting that followed , she sustained several hits amidships and slowly began to lose power , but was able to fire six torpedoes by local control at the Japanese battleship Hiei . In his book , Destroyer Operations in World War II ( 1953 ) , Theodore Roscoe said , “ Three of the “ fish ” seemed to hit the bulls @-@ eye ; if they did , it was with tack @-@ hammer thumps . They may have exploded prematurely . But Hiei 's lookouts must have seen them coming , for the big ship swung her bow to the left and lumbered westward , disappearing into the smoke @-@ haze . ” By this time , Cushing was dead in the water , an easy target for repeated enemy shelling . The results were disastrous and the order was given to abandon ship . Six officers and 53 men were lost . Of the survivors rescued , 56 had been wounded and ten of them suffered fatal injuries . The abandoned ship remained afloat until her magazines blew up . Cushing received three battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Perkins = = = 
 USS Perkins was commissioned in September 1936 and San Diego , California , became her homeport . She operated in the eastern Pacific prior to World War II , and was at the Mare Island Navy Yard when the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor . In mid @-@ December , she escorted a convoy to Pearl Harbor , returned to Mare Island for new radar gear , and sailed back to Pearl Harbor the latter part of January 1942 . The following month , Perkins departed Pearl Harbor and joined Australian , New Zealand , and other US ships in the ANZAC Squadron , charged with protecting the eastern approaches to Australia and New Zealand . She continued operations with ANZAC until April . In May 1942 , Perkins participated in the Battle of the Coral Sea . After that , propeller problems took her to New Zealand and to Pearl Harbor , where repairs were completed . While at Pearl Harbor , additional radar gear and 40 mm guns were installed . 
 By November 1942 Perkins was with Task Force 67 , led by Rear Admiral Carleton H. Wright . In the nighttime Battle of Tassafaronga , the force intercepted the Japanese to stop them from supplying Guadalcanal . Undamaged in the encounter , Perkins headed for Tulagi where she bombarded the Guadalcanal coast and served on escort assignments until January 1943 . She joined Task Force 76 , an amphibious group , in March . In September 1943 , Perkins bombarded Lae , New Guinea , and supported the landings there . She took part in the successful landings at Finschhafen , New Guinea . Late in November , the ship was bound from Milne Bay to Buna , steaming independently , when Duntroon , an Australian troopship , accidentally collided with her . Perkins broke in two and quickly sank ; nine of the crew went down with her . Perkins received four battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Smith = = = 
 USS Smith began her US naval service in September 1936 , and operated along the west coast of the United States for the next five years . From the start of World War II until April 1942 , she was based in San Francisco , California , attached to a destroyer squadron . In June , Smith was in Pearl Harbor , engaged in training exercises , then escorted a convoy back to San Francisco . After overhaul and sea trials in the bay area , Smith returned to Pearl Harbor in August . By October she was part of Task Force 61 , participating in the Battle of Santa Cruz . In the course of the battle , a Japanese torpedo plane crashed into her ; the explosion ignited the forward part of the ship . The crew eventually extinguished the fires , and Smith was able to retain her position in the screen . When the air cleared , 28 were dead and 23 wounded . She was patched up enough in New Caledonia to make her way to Pearl Harbor , where she was under overhaul until February 1943 . The next few months , Smith performed anti @-@ submarine patrols , did convoy duty , and participated in Navy exercises . In September and October , she was part of the amphibious landings at Lae and Finschhafen , New Guinea . In late December 1943 Smith was attached to Task Force 76 , and took part in landing the 1st Marine Division at Cape Gloucester , New Britain . 
 In January 1944 , Smith participated in the amphibious landing near Saidor , New Guinea , led by Barbey . In February , she bombarded designated targets in preparation for the landing at Los Negros in the Admiralty Islands . By the middle of March , Smith sailed to the west coast for overhaul . Completed in June , she returned to Pearl Harbor for training exercises and gunnery practice . Attached to the 7th Fleet in October , Smith sailed to Leyte Gulf in the Philippine Islands . There , she was positioned northeast of Ponson Island as a fighter director ship for the landing at Ormoc Bay in December 1944 . During January 1945 , Smith supported the landings in Lingayen Gulf , Philippine Islands . In late June , she bombarded Balikpapan , Borneo , in preparation for the landing by an Australian force . Smith departed the Philippines on 15 August 1945 for Buckner Bay , remaining there until steaming to Nagasaki Harbor , Kyushu , Japan , on 15 September , arriving there just 37 days after the nuclear bombing of Nagasaki on 9 August 1945 by US forces . There the ship boarded 80 US military ex @-@ prisoners of war , taking them to Okinawa for transfer to the United States . On 21 September Smith returned to Nagasaki and picked up 90 Allied prisoners of war , taking them to <unk> Bay . She arrived in Sasebo , Nagasaki , on 28 September and departed two days later for San Diego via Pearl Harbor . Docking at San Diego on 19 November , she remained there until ordered to Pearl Harbor on 28 December , arriving there on 3 January 1946 and assumed an inactive status . The ship was decommissioned on 28 June 1946 and struck from the Navy list on 25 February 1947 . Smith received six battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Preston = = = 
 USS Preston was in service from October 1936 until November 1942 . Following shakedown , she served briefly under the Chief of Naval Operations , then joined the US Fleet . Preston did peacetime training exercises into the month of December 1941 , and performed patrol and escort duties along the west coast until June 1942 . After that , she screened the carrier Saratoga to Hawaii , followed by four months of patrol and escort work in Hawaiian waters . 
 In October she became part of Task Force 61 and participated in the Battle of Santa Cruz . In mid @-@ November 1942 , Preston sailed to the western end of Guadalcanal to intercept another run by the Japanese to bombard Henderson Field . In the ensuing skirmish , Preston was hit by a salvo from a Japanese cruiser that put both fire rooms out of commission and toppled the aft stack . Her fires made an easy target ; as they spread , the order was given to abandon ship . The ship rolled onto her side and sank , taking 116 of her crew with her . Preston received two battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Dunlap = = = 
 USS Dunlap became part of the US Navy in June 1937 . A year later , she served as an escort at Philadelphia for the steamer SS <unk> , which carried Gustaf Adolf , the Crown Prince of Sweden . By April 1940 , Pearl Harbor was Dunlap 's homeport . When the Japanese attacked , Dunlap was at sea bound for Pearl Harbor ; she entered port the following day . In January , she sortied for air strikes on the Marshall Islands , and in February she took part in a raid on Wake Island . Afterward , Dunlap patrolled Hawaiian waters , escorted convoys between various ports on the west coast , and returned to Pearl Harbor in October 1942 . In December , the destroyer moved on to Noumea , New Caledonia , and operated from there until July 1943 . Dunlap saw action at Vella Gulf in the Solomon Islands in a nighttime torpedo clash . In United States Destroyer Operations in World War II ( 1953 ) , Theodore Roscoe wrote : " In the Battle of Vella Gulf , as this engagement was called , the enemy had not laid a hand on the American ships . " 
 After overhaul in San Diego , Dunlap performed patrol duty out of Adak , Alaska , in November and December 1943 and sailed to Pearl Harbor . From January until March 1944 , she screened carriers in strikes on the Marshall Islands with the 5th Fleet . After that , Dunlap took part in strikes on the Soerabaja area of Java in May and returned to Pearl Harbor in June . In July , she sailed to San Francisco to join the screen for the heavy cruiser Baltimore , which carried Roosevelt for conferences and inspections with top Pacific commanders of Pearl Harbor and Alaskan bases . In early September 1944 , Dunlap participated in the shelling of Wake Island . In October 1944 , she lent a hand in the bombardment of Marcus Island . By January 1945 , the ship was involved in the shelling of Iwo Jima , Haha @-@ jima , and Chichi @-@ jima . On 3 September 1945 , Commodore John H. Magruder accepted the surrender of the Bonin Islands by Lt. General Yoshio Tachibana on board the destroyer . Dunlap sailed to Norfolk , Virginia , in November 1945 , where she was decommissioned in December 1945 and sold in December 1947 . She received six battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Fanning = = = 
 USS Fanning was occupied with sea trials and minor repairs for the first six months of her naval service . In April 1938 , she escorted the light cruiser Philadelphia from Annapolis , Maryland , to the Caribbean with Roosevelt aboard . Fanning sailed to New York for overhaul the following month ; in September she moved on to her new base in San Diego , California . Over the next three years , her duties took her to the east coast and eventually to Hawaii . The ship was at sea when the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor ; she returned the following day . Underway for Tutuila in January 1942 , Fanning encountered a blinding rainstorm and collided with Gridley . Both destroyers suffered bow damage and were forced to return to Pearl Harbor . In April 1942 Fanning became part of Task Force 16 , which supported the Doolittle Raid on the air strike against Tokyo . After the mission , she returned to Pearl Harbor . 
 For the first nine months of 1943 , Fanning deployed against the Japanese on Guadalcanal , supported an occupation force on the Russell Islands , participated in patrol duty , and assisted in the protection of troops occupying Munda , Solomon Islands . In September , she had an overhaul on the west coast , then finished the year operating off the Aleutian Islands . By January 1944 , Fanning was operating with Task Group 58 @.@ 4 in the Marshall Islands . In March she reported to the Eastern Fleet ( British units , reinforced with Australian , Dutch and French warships ) , participating in strikes against Sabang , Indonesia , the next month . Detached from the Eastern Fleet in May , Fanning sailed to the west coast . In July she left San Diego , escorting the heavy cruiser Baltimore to Alaska with Roosevelt on board . Her next assignment was with Task Group 30 @.@ 2 , shelling Marcus Island in October 1944 to create a diversion and destroy enemy installations . During January 1945 , Fanning took part in the shelling of Iwo Jima , Haha @-@ jima , and Chichi @-@ Jima . For the remainder of the war , she was occupied with patrol and escort activities . In September 1945 , she sailed for the United States , and was decommissioned at Norfolk , Virginia , in December 1945 ; she was sold for scrap in 1948 . Fanning received four battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = United States v. Ramsey ( 1926 ) = 
 United States v. Ramsey , 271 U.S. 467 ( 1926 ) , was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the government had the authority to prosecute crimes against Native Americans ( Indians ) on reservation land that was still designated Indian Country by federal law . The Osage Indian Tribe held mineral rights that were worth millions of dollars . A white rancher , William K. Hale , devised a plot to kill tribal members to allow his nephew , who was married to a tribal member , to inherit the mineral rights . The tribe requested the assistance of the federal government , which sent Bureau of Investigation agents to solve the murders . Hale and several others were arrested and tried for the murders , but they claimed that the federal government did not have jurisdiction . The district court quashed the indictments , but on appeal , the Supreme Court reversed , holding that the Osage lands were Indian Country and that the federal government therefore had jurisdiction . This put an end to the Osage Indian murders . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Federal law = = = 
 In 1834 , Congress passed the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act to regulate trade with the Indians and to provide the United States with criminal jurisdiction for crimes committed by or against Indians . This law provided for trial in a federal court for crimes committed by an Indian against a non @-@ Indian or vice versa . At the time of passage , federal jurisdiction over the Indian Territory was given to the U.S. court in Arkansas and , in 1851 , this was clarified as the western district court in Arkansas . In 1890 , this law was amended to create the Oklahoma Territory and to give the federal courts in western Arkansas , southern Kansas , and eastern Texas jurisdiction over the Indian Territory . 
 = = = Territory , statehood and allotment = = = 
 In 1870 , the federal government purchased the Kansas reservation from the Osage Nation . The tribe then purchased 1 @,@ 470 @,@ 559 acres of land in the Indian Territory from the Cherokee Nation . The land was not suited for farming , but had abundant game . In 1890 when Congress passed the Oklahoma Organic Act forming both the Oklahoma and Indian territories , the Osage Indian Reservation was part of the Oklahoma Territory . In 1887 , Congress passed the Dawes Act , which served to break up reservations and allot the land to tribal members . The act did not apply to the Five Civilized Tribes or other tribes in the Indian territory nor to the Osage tribe in the Oklahoma territory . In 1898 the Curtis Act applied allotment to the Five Civilized Tribes , leaving the Osage tribe as the only tribe with a reservation in Oklahoma . 
 Under the provisions that Congress had established , Oklahoma could not become a state until all reservations were eliminated . The Osage tribe , seeing the disastrous effects of allotment , resisted it until 1906 when they negotiated an allotment different in two major respects . First , no Osage land would be opened up for white settlement as surplus land because the tribe had purchased it , and second , mineral rights were retained by the tribe , and not in a trust status through the federal government . Even though the Osage reservation remained , this allotment was deemed sufficient and Oklahoma became a state in 1907 . 
 = = = Reign of terror = = = 
 This ownership of the land and mineral rights had another consequence . In 1896 , Edwin B. Foster signed an oil lease for the entire Osage reservation . By 1902 he was shipping 37 @,@ 000 barrels of oil and by 1906 his companies were producing over 5 million barrels annually . The Osage tribe was one of the wealthiest in the United States , but with the mineral rights transferring to the land owners in 1926 , their murder rates also became the highest in the United States . By 1925 , Osage families were earning about $ 65 @,@ 000 per year , compared to white families that were averaging $ 1 @,@ 000 . Congress also passed a law providing that an Osage Indian who was less than half blood , as determined by the Secretary of the Interior , did not have to wait to sell his or her land . 
 In the early 1920s , Osage Indians who owned headrights , or land where they would obtain mineral rights , began to be murdered — the first two were Charles Whitehorn and Anna Brown , both Osage Indians but killed separately . In February 1923 , Henry Roan , another Osage , was found in his car , shot once in the back of the head with a .45 caliber pistol . Less than a month later , an explosion in an Osage home killed Reta Smith , an Osage , her white husband W.E. Smith , and their white maid . Reta Smith was Brown 's sister and the daughter of Lizzie Q. Kyle ( also known as Lizzie Que ) , who had died and was thought to have been poisoned . Roan was Reta Smith 's cousin . Que had three headrights and both daughters had a full headright and a fractional headright , worth a considerable amount of money . These would be inherited by a third daughter , Molly Burkhart , who was married to a white man , Ernie Burkhart . Ernie Burkhart was the nephew of a wealthy Texas rancher , William K. Hale , who had moved to the Osage area . 
 = = = Federal investigation = = = 
 Following these deaths and several others , the Osage Tribal Council requested federal assistance since local authorities were apparently making no effort to solve the crimes . The U.S. Bureau of Investigation ( BOI ) , which later became the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , was assigned to conduct the investigation . The BOI responded by sending in undercover agents disguised as cattle buyers and <unk> and , through their investigation , determined that the murders had been planned and executed at the direction of Hale . Hale was implicated in the murder of Brown when <unk> Morrison confessed in court . The BOI also discovered that Hale held a $ 25 @,@ 000 insurance policy on Roan and noted that his nephew 's wife had inherited all of the Kyle headrights . Hale and John Ramsey were charged in federal court with the murder of Roan ; Ernie Burkhart was charged in state court with arranging the Smith bombing . 
 = = = The trials = = = 
 Ernie Burkhart was tried first . Two weeks into the trial , realizing that he could not win , he changed his plea to guilty and became a witness for the state in exchange for a life sentence . Burkhart testified that Hale was behind the scheme , that Asa " Ace " Kirby was the bomber , and that Henry Grammer was the go @-@ between . 
 Hale and Ramsey were transferred to Guthrie , Oklahoma in 1926 , where they stood trial in state court for the murder of Roan . The trial resulted in a hung jury and a mistrial . The United States Attorney then transferred the case to Oklahoma City and indicted Hale and Ramsey for murder on federal land for the death of Roan . On being indicted , both <unk> on the grounds that the federal government did not have jurisdiction . The U.S. District Court sustained the defendants ' motion and the government made a direct appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 = = Opinion of the court = = 
 Justice George Sutherland delivered the opinion of the court . He noted that the indictment was drawn under Revised Statute § 2145 , which provides for federal jurisdiction of crimes committed in " Indian Country " . This section was no longer applicable to general crimes in Oklahoma after statehood . Crimes committed by or against Indians could still be prosecuted under § 2145 if the crime occurred in Indian Country . The question before the court was whether allotted land , with a restriction on sale by the Indian it was allotted to , was still Indian Country . Since the government controlled whether the land could be sold or otherwise alienated , it was no different from land held in trust and was therefore still Indian Country . The judgment of the district court was in error and was reversed . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Trial in U.S. District Court = = = 
 Following the decision of the Supreme Court , Hale , Burkhart , and Ramsey were tried in federal court . Ernie Burkhart testified that Hale hired Ramsey to kill Roan . Burkhart also testified to Hale 's involvement in the Smith bombing , while Hale testified that he was in Fort Worth , Texas at the time of the killings . All three defendants were convicted and sentenced to life in prison ; within days , both Hale and Ramsey appealed . 
 = = = Appeal = = = 
 Hale 's appeal was heard first in 1928 . It was based on improper procedure in admitting Burkhart 's testimony as to the Smith bombing and again on the contention that the federal government did not have jurisdiction to try the case . The Eighth Circuit Court denied the plea to the jurisdiction , noting that the Supreme Court had ruled on that very issue earlier in the case . The court did find that the testimony as to the Smith bombing was not relevant to the Roan murder , was prejudicial against Hale , and required that the case be remanded for retrial . Ramsey 's appeal was likewise successful on the same grounds in 1929 . 
 = = = Retrial = = = 
 In 1929 , both Hale and Ramsey were retried for the murder . Ramsey testified in court and explained how Hale hired him to kill Roan , but later changed his story to claim another person killed Roan . Hale again testified that he had nothing to do with the crime . Both were convicted and again sentenced to 99 years in prison . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Hale entered the Fort Leavenworth Federal Prison on May 30 , 1929 , and , over the protests of the Osage tribe , was paroled on July 31 , 1947 . Ramsey was paroled four months later . Burkhart was released in October 1959 . Morrison was sentenced to life in prison in 1926 for Brown 's murder . In 1965 , Governor Henry Bellmon granted Burkhart a full pardon . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans = 
 As the center of Hurricane Katrina passed southeast of New Orleans on August 29 , 2005 , winds downtown were in the Category 1 range with frequent intense gusts and tidal surge . Hurricane @-@ force winds were experienced throughout the city , although the most severe portion of Katrina missed the city , hitting nearby St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes . Hurricane Katrina made its final landfall in eastern St. Tammany Parish . The western eye wall passed directly over St. Tammany Parish , Louisiana as a Category 3 hurricane at about 9 : 45 am CST , August 29 , 2005 . The communities of Slidell , Avery Estates , Lakeshore Estates , Oak Harbor , Eden Isles and Northshore Beach were inundated by the storm surge that extended over six miles inland . The storm surge affected all 57 miles ( 92 km ) of St. Tammany Parish ’ s coastline , including Lacombe , Mandeville and Madisonville . The storm surge in the area of the Rigolets Pass was estimated to be 16 feet , not including wave action , declining to 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) at Madisonville . The surge had a second peak in eastern St. Tammany as the westerly winds from the southern eye wall pushed the surge to the east , backing up at the bottleneck of the Rigolets Pass . 
 In the City of New Orleans , the storm surge caused approximately 23 breaches in drainage canal and navigational canal levees and floodwalls . The failures of structures are considered by experts to be the worst engineering disaster in the history of the United States . By August 31 , 2005 , 80 % of New Orleans was flooded , with some parts under 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of water . The famous French Quarter and Garden District escaped flooding because those areas are above sea level . Responsibility for the performance of the city 's levees belongs to the United States Army Corps of Engineers . The major breaches included the 17th Street Canal levee , the Industrial Canal levee , and the London Avenue Canal floodwall . These breaches caused the majority of the flooding , according to a June 2007 report by the American Society of Civil <unk> flood disaster halted oil production and refining which increased oil prices worldwide . 
 Between 80 and 90 percent of the residents of New Orleans were evacuated before the hurricane struck , testifying to some of the success of the evacuation measures . Despite this , many remained in the city , mainly those who did not have access to personal vehicles or who were isolated from the dissemination of news from the local governments . The Louisiana Superdome was used to house and support some of those who were unable to evacuate . Television shots frequently focused on the Superdome as a symbol of the flooding occurring in New Orleans . 
 The disaster had major implications for a large segment of the population , economy , and politics of the entire United States . It has prompted a Congressional review of the Army Corps of Engineers and the failure of portions of the federally built flood protection system which experts agree should have protected the city 's inhabitants from Katrina 's surge . Katrina has also stimulated significant research in the academic community into urban planning , real estate finance , and economic issues in the wake of a natural disaster . 
 = = Background = = 
 New Orleans was settled on a natural high ground along the Mississippi River . Later developments that eventually extended to nearby Lake Pontchartrain were built on fill to bring them above the average lake level . Navigable commercial waterways extended from the lake into the interior of the city to promote waterborne commerce . After the construction of the Inner Harbor Navigation Canal in 1940 , the state closed these waterways causing the town 's water table to lower drastically . 
 In 1965 , heavy flooding caused by Hurricane Betsy brought concerns regarding flooding from hurricanes to the forefront . That year Congress passed the Flood Control Act of 1965 which , among other issues , gave authority for design and construction of the flood protection in the New Orleans metropolitan area to the United States Army Corps of Engineers subject to cost sharing principles , some of which were waived by later legislation . The local municipalities were charged with maintenance once the projects were completed . After 1965 , the corps built a levee system around a much larger geographic footprint that included previous marshland and swamp . Many new subdivisions were developed to cater to those who preferred a more suburban lifestyle but were open to remaining within the city limits of New Orleans . Historians question why the area farthest east was developed , since it was viable wetlands and because ringing this region with levees did nothing significant toward protecting the city . What expansion accomplished was to increase the amount of land that could be developed , and it was a reason for the Army Corps to expand the size of its project . In addition the structures caused subsidence of up to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in some areas due to the consolidation of the underlying organic soils . 
 A 1999 – 2001 study Richard <unk> , Tulane School of Architecture , using LIDAR technology found that 51 % of the terrestrial surface of the contiguous urbanized portions of Orleans , Jefferson , and St. Bernard parishes lie at or above sea level , with the highest neighborhoods at 10 – 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 7 m ) above mean sea level . Forty nine percent lies below sea level , in places to equivalent depths . 
 When authorized , the flood control design and construction were projected to take 13 years to complete . When Katrina made landfall in 2005 , the project was between 60 – 90 % complete with a projected date of completion estimated for 2015 , nearly 50 years after authorization . Moreover , another major hurricane flooding had long been predicted , and while the close call of Hurricane Georges in September 1998 galvanized some scientists , engineers and politicians into collective planning , as at October 2001 , Scientific American declared that " New Orleans is a disaster waiting to happen " . However , even the most insistent calls to evacuate before Katrina , did not warn that the levees could breach . 
 On August 29 , 2005 , flood walls and levees catastrophically failed throughout the metro area . Many collapsed well below design thresholds ( 17th Street and London Canals ) . Others collapsed after a brief period of overtopping ( Industrial Canal ) caused “ scouring ” or erosion of the earthen levee walls . In eastern New Orleans , levees along the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway failed in several places because they were built with sand and erodible materials instead of clay , an obvious construction flaw . 
 = = Pre @-@ Katrina preparations = = 
 The eye of Hurricane Katrina was forecast to pass through the city of New Orleans . In that event , the wind was predicted to come from the north as the storm passed , forcing large volumes of water from Lake Pontchartrain against the levees and possibly into the city . It was also forecast that the storm surge in Lake Pontchartrain would reach 14 – 18 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 5 m ) , with waves reaching 7 feet ( 2 m ) above the storm surge . 
 On August 28 , at 10 : 00 a.m. CDT , the National Weather Service ( NWS ) field office in New Orleans issued a bulletin predicting catastrophic damage to New Orleans and the surrounding region . Anticipated effects included , at the very least , the partial destruction of half of the well @-@ constructed houses in the city , severe damage to most industrial buildings , rendering them inoperable , the " total destruction " of all wood @-@ framed low @-@ rise apartment buildings , all windows blowing out in high @-@ rise office buildings , and the creation of a huge debris field of trees , telephone poles , cars , and collapsed buildings . Lack of clean water was predicted to " make human suffering incredible by modern standards . " 
 It was also predicted that the standing water caused by the storm surge would render most of the city uninhabitable for weeks and that the destruction of oil and petrochemical refineries in the surrounding area would spill waste into the flooding . The resulting mess would coat every surface , converting the city into a toxic marsh until water could be drained . Some experts said that it could take six months or longer to pump all the water out of the city . 
 = = = Evacuation order = = = 
 On Saturday night , Max Mayfield , director of the National Hurricane Center , did something he had done only once before . He called the governors of Alabama , Louisiana , and Mississippi to warn them of the severity of the coming storm . He issued a special warning to Mayor Ray Nagin , telling him that some levees in the greater New Orleans area could be overtopped . Later , Mr. Mayfield would tell Brian Williams with NBC Nightly News that he went to bed that night believing he had done what he could . On Sunday , he made a video call to U.S. President George W. Bush at his farm in Crawford , Texas about the severity of the storm . 
 Many New Orleans residents took precautions to secure their homes and prepare for possible evacuation on Friday the 26th and Saturday the 27th . On August 27 the state of Louisiana was declared an emergency area by the Federal Government , and by mid morning of that day , many local gas stations which were not yet out of gas had long lines . Nagin first called for a voluntary evacuation of the city at 5 : 00 p.m. on August 27 and subsequently ordered a citywide mandatory evacuation at 9 : 30 a.m. on August 28 , the first such order in the city 's history . In a live news conference , Mayor Nagin predicted that , " the storm surge most likely will topple our levee system " , and warned that oil production in the Gulf of Mexico would be shut down . 
 Many neighboring areas and parishes also called for evacuations . By mid @-@ afternoon , officials in Plaquemines , St. Bernard , St. Charles , Lafourche , Terrebonne , Jefferson , St. Tammany , and Washington parishes had called for voluntary or mandatory evacuations . " 
 Although Mayor Ray Nagin ordered a mandatory evacuation of the city , many people refused to leave or were unable to do so . In Plaquemines Parish , an official described those remaining behind as " gambling with their own lives . " Reasons were numerous , including a belief that their homes or the buildings in which they planned to stay offered sufficient protection , lack of financial resources or access to transportation , or a feeling of obligation to protect their property . These reasons were complicated by the fact that an evacuation the previous year for Hurricane Ivan had resulted in gridlocked traffic for six to ten hours . The fact that Katrina occurred at the end of the month , before pay checks were in the hands of many was also significant . A " refuge of last resort " was designated at the Louisiana Superdome . Beginning at noon on August 28 and running for several hours , city buses were redeployed to shuttle local residents from 12 pickup points throughout the city to the " shelters of last resort . " 
 By the time Hurricane Katrina came ashore early the next morning , Mayor Nagin estimated that approximately one million people had fled the city and its surrounding suburbs . By the evening of August 28 , over 100 @,@ 000 people remained in the city , with 20 @,@ 000 taking shelter at the Louisiana Superdome , along with 300 National Guard troops . The Superdome had been used as a shelter in the past , such as during 1998 's Hurricane Georges , because it was estimated to be able to withstand winds of up to 200 miles per hour ( 320 km / h ) and water levels of 35 feet ( 11 m ) . While supplies of MREs ( Meals ready to eat ) and bottled water were available at the Superdome , Nagin told survivors to bring blankets and enough food for several days , warning that it would be a very uncomfortable place . 
 = = Direct Effects = = 
 Hurricane Katrina made its second and third landfalls in the Gulf Coast region on August 29 , 2005 as a Category 3 hurricane . 
 On Monday August 29 area affiliates of local television station WDSU reported New Orleans was experiencing widespread flooding due to several Army Corps @-@ built levee breaches , was without power , and that there were several instances of catastrophic damage in residential and business areas . Entire neighborhoods on the south shore of Lake Pontchartrain were flooded . 
 The extensive flooding stranded many residents , who remained so long after Hurricane Katrina had passed . Stranded survivors dotted the tops of houses citywide . Some were trapped inside attics , unable to escape . Many people chopped their way onto their roofs with hatchets and sledge hammers , which Mayor Nagin had residents urged to store in their attics in case of such events . Clean water was unavailable , and power outages were expected to last for weeks . 
 By 11 : 00 p.m. August 29 , Mayor Nagin described the loss of life as " significant " with reports of bodies floating on the water throughout the city , though primarily in the eastern portions . Some hotels and hospitals reported diesel fuel shortages . The National Guard began setting up temporary morgues in select locations . 
 = = = Communications failures = = = 
 Coordination of rescue efforts August 29 and August 30 were made difficult by disruption of the communications infrastructure . Many telephones , including most cell phones , and Internet access were not working because of line breaks , destruction of base stations , or power failures , even though some base stations had their own back @-@ up generators . In a number of cases , reporters were asked to brief public officials on the conditions in areas where information was not reaching them any other way . 
 All local television stations were disrupted . Local television stations , and newspapers , moved quickly to sister locations in nearby cities . New Orleans CBS @-@ affiliate WWL @-@ TV was the only local station to remain on the air during and after the storm , broadcasting from Baton Rouge . Broadcasting and publishing on the Internet became an important means of distributing information to evacuees and the rest of the world , with news networks citing blogs like <unk> and <unk> for reports of what was happening in the city . Amateur radio provided tactical and emergency communications and handled health @-@ and @-@ welfare enquiries . By September 4 , a temporary communications hub was set up at the Hyatt Hotel in downtown New Orleans . 
 The first television pictures out of New Orleans shown on national TV were from Houston 's ABC owned and operated KTRK which flew its helicopter to New Orleans in the days after the storm . 
 = = = Damage to buildings and roads = = = 
 Most of the city 's major roads were damaged . The only route out of the city was east to the east bank of New Orleans on the Crescent City Connection bridge . The I @-@ 10 Twin Span Bridge traveling east towards Slidell , suffered severe damage ; 473 spans were separated from their supports and 64 spans dropped into the lake . The 24 @-@ mile ( 39 km ) long Lake Pontchartrain Causeway escaped unscathed but was only carrying emergency traffic . On August 29 , at 7 : 40 a.m. CDT , it was reported that most of the windows on the north side of the Hyatt Regency New Orleans had been blown out , and many other high rise buildings had extensive window damage . The Hyatt was the most severely damaged hotel in the city , with beds reported to be flying out of the windows . Insulation tubes were exposed as the hotel 's glass exterior was completely sheared off . 
 Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport was closed before the storm but reported no flooding in airplane movement areas or inside of the building itself . By August 30 , it was reopened to humanitarian and rescue operations . Commercial cargo flights resumed on September 10 , and commercial passenger service resumed on September 13 . 
 The Superdome sustained significant damage , including two sections of the roof when waterproof membrane had essentially been peeled off by wind . On August 30 , Louisiana governor Kathleen Blanco ordered the complete evacuation of the remaining people that sought shelter in the Superdome . They were then transported to the Astrodome in Houston , Texas . 
 = = = Levee failures = = = 
 As of mid @-@ day Monday , August 29 , the eye of Hurricane Katrina passed east of the City subjecting it to hurricane wind conditions , but sparing New Orleans the worst impact . The City seemed to have escaped most of the catastrophic wind damage and heavy rain that had been predicted . Most buildings came through well structurally . 
 However , the city 's levee and flood walls designed and built by the US Army Corps of Engineers breached in over fifty locations . Storm surge breached the levees of the Mississippi River @-@ Gulf Outlet Canal ( " MR @-@ GO " ) in approximately 20 places and flooded all of Saint Bernard Parish , the east bank of Plaquemines Parish and the historic Lower Ninth Ward . The major levee breaches in the city included breaches at the 17th Street Canal levee , the London Avenue Canal , and the wide , navigable Inner Harbor Navigation Canal , which left approximately 80 % of New Orleans flooded . There were three major breaches at the Industrial Canal ; one on the upper side near the junction with MR @-@ GO , and two on the lower side along the Lower Ninth Ward , between Florida Avenue and Claiborne Avenue . The 17th Street Canal levee was breached on the lower ( New Orleans West End ) side inland from the Old Hammond Highway Bridge , and the London Avenue Canal breached in two places , on the upper side just back from Robert E. Lee Boulevard , and on the lower side a block in from the Mirabeau Avenue Bridge . Flooding from the breaches put the majority of the city under water for days , in many places for weeks . Many roads and buildings were damaged by Hurricane Katrina . 
 In a June 2006 report on the disaster , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers admitted that faulty design specifications , incomplete sections , and substandard construction of levee segments , contributed to the damage done to New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina . A report released by the American Society of Civil Engineers in June 2007 concluded that two @-@ thirds of the flooding in the city could have been avoided if the levees had held . 
 The failure of the Hurricane Protection Project of New Orleans has prompted many government officials to call for many congressional committee hearings and investigations . The group <unk> led by Sandy Rosenthal called for 8 / 29 Commission to investigate both the engineering and decision @-@ making behind the collapse of a flood protection system that should have held against Katrina 's storm surge . 
 = = = Loss of life = = = 
 Final reports indicate that the official death toll , according to the Louisiana Department of Health , was 1 @,@ 464 people . The first deaths were reported shortly before midnight on August 28 , 2005 , as three nursing home patients died during an evacuation to Baton Rouge . On September 4 , Mayor Nagin speculated that the death toll could rise as high as ten thousand after the clean @-@ up was completed . Some survivors and evacuees reported seeing bodies lying in city streets and floating in still @-@ flooded sections , especially in the east of the city . The advanced state of decomposition of many corpses , some of which were left in the water or sun for days before being collected , hindered efforts by coroners to identify many of the dead . 
 There were six deaths confirmed at the Superdome . Four of these were from natural causes , one was the result of a drug overdose , and one was a suicide . At the Convention Center , four bodies were recovered . One of these four is believed to be the result of a homicide . Body collection throughout the city began on approximately September 9 . Prior to that date , the locations of corpses were recorded , but most were not retrieved . 
 Later studies determined that most of New Orleans ' Katrina dead were elderly persons living near levee breaches in the Lower Ninth Ward and Lakeview neighborhoods of New Orleans . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Civil disturbances = = = 
 The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was characterized by extensive reporting of looting , violence , shooting against rescuers , murder and rape . While some criminal acts did occur , such as the emptying of an entire Walmart , many reports were also exaggerated , inflated , or simply fabricated . Several news organizations went on to issue retractions . 
 There were reports of snipers taking potshots at rescue helicopters ; these were false . Reports of gangs roving the city shooting police officers and survivors were also false , as only one policeman was shot in the aftermath of Katrina and no indictments were brought forward against the supposed gang members . 
 While looting was indeed widespread , many reported instances of " looting " were in fact stranded survivors scavenging necessary supplies such as food , water , clothing , and shelter . Some instances of looting were later found out to have been carried out by a small number of NOPD officers . 
 Rebecca <unk> , writing in The Nation , reported that “ Several weeks after Hurricane Katrina , community organizer and former Black Panther Malik Rahim had told Amy Goodman on her nationally syndicated program <unk> ! , " During the aftermath , directly after the flooding , in New Orleans hunting season began on young African American men . In Algiers , I believe , approximately around 18 African American males were killed . No one really know [ s ] what 's the overall count . " ” 
 These investigations led to at least one indictment by the Department of Justice . 
 Civil disturbances in post @-@ Hurricane Katrina were consistent with all existing research on disaster sociology , which concludes that “ [ post @-@ disaster ] widespread looting [ is ] a myth ” , and were vastly overstated by the media , ultimately fueling a climate of suspicion and paranoia which greatly hampered rescue efforts and further worsened the conditions of the survivors . 
 Some initial reports of mass chaos , particularly in stories about the Superdome , were later found to be exaggerated or rumor . In the Superdome for example , the New Orleans sex crimes unit investigated every report of rape or atrocity and found only two verifiable incidents , both of sexual assault . The department head told reporters , " I think it was urban myth . Any time you put 25 @,@ 000 people under one roof , with no running water , no electricity and no information , stories get told . " Based on these reports , government officials expected hundreds of dead to be found in the Superdome , but instead found only 6 dead ( of which there were 4 natural deaths , one drug overdose and one suicide ) . In a case of reported sniper fire , the " sniper " turned out to be the relief valve of a gas tank popping every few minutes . 
 Additional acts of unrest occurred following the storm , particularly with the New Orleans Police Department . In the aftermath , a tourist asked a police officer for assistance , and got the response , " Go to hell , it 's every man for himself . " Also , one @-@ third of New Orleans police officers deserted the city in the days before the storm , many of them escaping in their department @-@ owned patrol cars . This added to the chaos by stretching law enforcement thin . Additionally , several NOPD officers were arrested weeks after Katrina for suspicion of vehicle theft . 
 = = = Gretna controversy = = = 
 The City of Gretna on the West Bank of the Mississippi River received considerable press coverage when , in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina ( late August 2005 ) , displaced and dehydrated survivors who attempted to escape from New Orleans by walking over the Crescent City Connection bridge over the Mississippi River were turned back at gunpoint by City of Gretna Police , along with Crescent City Connection Police and Jefferson Parish Sheriff 's deputies , who set up a roadblock on the bridge in the days following the hurricane . 
 = = = Re @-@ establishing governance = = = 
 On August 31 , New Orleans 's 1 @,@ 500 @-@ member police force was ordered to abandon search and rescue missions and turn its attention toward controlling the widespread looting . The city also ordered a mandatory curfew . Mayor Nagin called for increased federal assistance in a " desperate S.O.S. " , following the city 's inability to control looting . He was often misquoted as declaring " martial law " in the city , despite there being no such term in Louisiana state law ( a declaration of a state of emergency was instead made ) . On the same day , Governor Kathleen Blanco announced the arrival of a military presence , stating that " they have M @-@ 16s and are locked and loaded . These troops know how to shoot and kill and I expect they will . " Despite the increased law enforcement presence , crime continued to be a problem . 
 Relief efforts were constantly disrupted by violence , and there were reports of groups of armed men running rampant through the streets , looting and pillaging unattended buildings and stores . Charity Hospital , one of several facilities attempting to evacuate patients , was forced to halt the effort after coming under gunfire . By September 1 , 6 @,@ 500 National Guard troops had arrived in New Orleans , and on September 2 Blanco requested a total of 40 @,@ 000 for assistance in evacuation and security efforts in Louisiana . In addition , the Louisiana State Guard and state defense forces from several states were activated to aid the National Guard in sheltering the large number of refugees leaving Louisiana and assist in other disaster recovery operations . 
 Some concern over the availability and readiness of the Louisiana National Guard to help stabilize the security situation was raised . Guardsman Lieutenant Colonel Pete had commented that " dozens of high water vehicles , <unk> , <unk> , and generators were abroad . " At the time of the hurricane , approximately 3 @,@ 000 members of the Guard were serving a tour of duty in Iraq . With total personnel strength of 11 @,@ 000 , this meant that 27 % of the Louisiana National Guard was abroad . However , both the White House and the Pentagon argued that the depletion of personnel and equipment did not impact the ability of the Guard to perform its mission — rather , impassable roads and flooded areas were the major factors impeding the Guardsmen from securing the situation in New Orleans . 
 Before Hurricane Katrina , the murder rate in New Orleans was ten times higher than the U.S. average . After the situation in New Orleans was brought under control , criminal activity in New Orleans dropped significantly . 
 In response to the increase in criminal activity in New Orleans , makeshift prisons were constructed to house prisoners for short periods of time . Camp Greyhound was a temporary prison that housed more than 200 suspected looters in New Orleans until they could be transferred to other institutions . With room for 700 prisoners , the facility was guarded by officers from one of the United States ' toughest prisons , the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola . The station 's bus terminals were converted into chain @-@ link prison cells that could hold up to fifteen prisoners each . These prisoners were kept in conditions that included a portable toilet and military issued meals , but excluded a mattress or cot . 
 This camp demonstrated the reaction time and resourcefulness of the law enforcement of Louisiana . Several prisons were uninhabitable due to flooding , and the officers were forced to be flexible and work with the tools available to them . Law enforcement constructed the necessary offices of a police station in the general areas of the bus station , which included the offices of the District Attorney and the Justice Department . Camp Greyhound did have several issues with police records due to flooding , and prisoners who had committed minor infractions were kept in the same areas as those with more serious allegations . The facility was run on backup generators and outdated fingerprinting methods were used , which added to the confusion of the facility . 
 = = = The Superdome = = = 
 As one of the largest structures in the city , evacuees were brought to the Superdome to wait out the storm or to await further evacuation . Many others made their way to the Superdome on their own , hoping to find food , water , shelter , or transport out of town . On August 29 , Katrina passed over New Orleans with such force that it ripped two holes in the Superdome roof . On the evening of August 30 , Maj. Gen. Bennett C. <unk> , of the Louisiana National Guard , said that the number of people taking shelter in the Superdome had risen to around 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 as search and rescue teams brought more people to the Superdome from areas hard @-@ hit by the flooding . As conditions worsened and flood waters continued to rise , on August 31 , Governor Blanco ordered that all of New Orleans , including the Superdome , be evacuated . The area outside the Superdome was flooded to a depth of 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) , with a possibility of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) if the area equalized with Lake Pontchartrain . Governor Blanco had the state send in 68 school buses on Monday to begin evacuating people . 
 Despite increasingly squalid conditions , the population inside continued to grow . The situation inside the building was described as chaotic ; reports of rampant drug use , fights , rape , and filthy living conditions were widespread . At the time , as many as 100 were reported to have died in the Superdome , with most deaths resulting from heat exhaustion , but other reported incidents included an accused rapist who was beaten to death by a crowd and an apparent suicide . Despite these reports , though , the final official death toll was significantly less : six people inside ( 4 of natural causes , one overdose , and an apparent suicide ) and a few more in the general area outside the stadium . 
 FEMA had announced that , in conjunction with Greyhound , the National Guard , and Houston Metro , the 25 @,@ 000 people at the Superdome would be relocated across state lines to the Houston Astrodome . Roughly 475 buses were promised by FEMA to ferry evacuees with the entire evacuation expected to take two days . By September 4 , the Superdome had been completely evacuated . 
 Although the Superdome suffered damage by water and wind to the overall interior and exterior structures , as well as interior damage from human waste and trash , the facility was repaired at a cost of US $ 140 million and was ready for games by the autumn of 2006 . 
 = = = New Orleans Convention Center = = = 
 Because of Hurricane Katrina , the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center suffered a loss of water pressure and electricity , and one of its convention halls had a large hole in its ceiling . The center was otherwise only lightly damaged . 
 On August 29 , as people were being turned away at the Superdome and rescues continued , rescuers began dropping people off at the Convention Center , which , at 8 feet ( 2 m ) above sea level , easily escaped the flood . Captain M.A. Pfeiffer of the NOPD was quoted as saying , " It was supposed to be a bus stop where they dropped people off for transportation . The problem was , the transportation never came . " By the afternoon of the 29th , the crowd had grown to about 1 @,@ 000 people . The convention center 's president ( who was there with a small group of convention center employees at this time ) addressed the crowd near dark , informing them that there was no food , water , medical care , or other services . By late on the evening of the 29th , the convention center had been broken into , and evacuees began occupying the inside of the convention center . 
 A contingent of 250 National Guard engineering units occupied one part of the convention center beginning August 30 and remained there until September 1 , at times barricaded in their location . The units were never given orders to control the crowd , and were not expected to be prepared for such a task , as engineering units . The number of people at the convention center continued to grow over the next three days by some estimates to as many as 20 @,@ 000 people . Reasons for arriving included being sent to the convention center from the overwhelmed Superdome , being dropped off there by rescuers , or hearing about the convention center as a shelter via word of mouth . No checking for weapons was done among the crowd as was done at the Superdome , and a large store of alcohol kept at the Convention Center was looted . Reports of robberies , murder , and rape began to surface . In general , those who died , regardless of cause of death , were not moved or removed and were left to decompose . 
 By September 1 , the facility , like the Superdome , was completely overwhelmed and declared unsafe and unsanitary . However , even though there were thousands of people who were evacuating at the center , along with network newscasters , pleading desperately for help on CNN , FOX , and other broadcast outlets , FEMA head Michael Brown and Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff both claimed to have no knowledge of the use of the Convention Center as a shelter until the afternoon of September 1 . 
 A sizable contingent of National Guard arrived on September 2 to establish order and provide essential provisions , and on September 3 , buses began arriving at the convention center to pick up the refugees there . The Convention Center was completely evacuated by September 4 . 
 = = = Evacuation efforts = = = 
 On August 31 , a public health emergency was declared for the entire Gulf Coast , and Louisiana Governor Kathleen Blanco ordered a mandatory evacuation of all those remaining in New Orleans . Relief organizations scrambled to locate suitable areas for relocating evacuees on a large scale . Many of the survivors in the Superdome were bussed to the Reliant Astrodome in Houston , Texas . Houston agreed to shelter an additional 25 @,@ 000 evacuees beyond those admitted to the Astrodome , including one " renegade bus " that was commandeered by private citizen Jabbar Gibson , who had been released on bond from the Orleans Parish Prison just days before the storm hit , and had a previous criminal conviction . By September 1 , the Astrodome was declared full and could not accept any more evacuees . The George R. Brown Convention Center nearby was opened to house additional evacuees . San Antonio , Texas also agreed to house 25 @,@ 000 refugees , beginning relocation efforts in vacant office buildings on the grounds of <unk> , a former air force base , and Reunion Arena in Dallas , Texas was mobilized to house incoming evacuees , and smaller shelters were established in towns across Texas and Oklahoma . Arkansas also opened various shelters and state parks throughout the state for evacuees . 
 Expected to last only two days , the evacuation of remaining evacuees proved more difficult than rescue organizations anticipated as transportation convoys struggled with damaged infrastructure and a growing number of evacuees . By the morning of September 1 , Governor Blanco reported that the number of evacuees in the Superdome was down to 2 @,@ 500 . However , by evening , eleven hours after evacuation efforts began , the Superdome held 10 @,@ 000 more people than it did at dawn . Evacuees from across the city swelled the crowd to about 30 @,@ 000 , believing the arena was the best place to get a ride out of town . 
 Evacuation efforts were hastened on September 2 by the wider dispersal of evacuees among newly opened shelters . Louis Armstrong International Airport was reopened to allow flights related to relief efforts , and began to load evacuees onto planes as well . 
 Elements of the 82nd Airborne Division arrived in New Orleans September 3 . The flooding was a challenge for the paratroopers when they first arrived . The division had just four boats at the time , however , the division quickly started getting Coast Guard , Navy and Marine assets placed under their control . Army Maj. Gen. William B. Caldwell IV , the 82nd 's commanding general , noted : " We eventually became the 82nd ' Waterborne ' Division , " the general said , " and that really was our forte " during search @-@ and @-@ rescue and security missions in flooded sections of the city . 
 Task Force Katrina Commander Army Lt. Gen. Russel Honore also charged the paratroopers to straighten out the evacuation situations at Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport , the New Orleans Convention Center and the Superdome . In all , 3 @,@ 600 of the division 's paratroopers were deployed to New Orleans to participate in Task Force All @-@ American . The unit worked in tandem with state , local and other federal authorities to feed , process and transport evacuees to other accommodations ; the division 's soldiers helped evacuate 6 @,@ 000 New Orleans residents . By September 18 , the 82nd Division medical personnel had treated 1 @,@ 352 people and given 2 @,@ 047 immunizations , according to unit documents . By September 19 , 82nd Division military engineers had cleared 185 city blocks of debris , cleared 113 streets , and removed 218 trees , according to unit documents . 
 On September 3 , some 42 @,@ 000 evacuees were evacuated from New Orleans , including those remaining in the Superdome and Convention Center . Efforts turned to the hundreds of people still trapped in area hotels , hospitals , schools and private homes . 
 On September 6 , Mayor Ray Nagin ordered a forced evacuation of everyone from the city who was not involved in clean up work , citing safety and health concerns . The order was given not only as an attempt to restore law and order , but also out of concern about the hazardous living conditions in the city . Eviction efforts escalated three days later , when door @-@ to @-@ door searches were conducted to advise remaining residents to leave the city . Despite this , a number of residents defied the eviction order . While initially lax in enforcing evictions , National Guard troops eventually began to remove residents by force . 
 = = = Health effects = = = 
 There was a concern that the prolonged flooding would lead to an outbreak of health problems for those who remained in the city . In addition to dehydration and food poisoning , there was also potential for the spread of hepatitis A , cholera , tuberculosis , and typhoid fever , all related to the growing contamination of food and drinking water supplies in the city compounded by the city 's characteristic heat and stifling humidity . Survivors could also face long @-@ term health risks due to prolonged exposure to the petrochemical tainted flood waters and mosquito @-@ borne diseases such as yellow fever , malaria and West Nile Virus . 
 On September 2 , an emergency triage center was set up at the airport . A steady stream of helicopters and ambulances brought in the elderly , sick , and injured . Baggage equipment was used as <unk> to transport people from the flight line to the hospital , which was set up in the airport terminal . The scene could be described as , " organized chaos " , but efficient . By September 3 , the situation started to stabilize . Up to 5 @,@ 000 people had been triaged and fewer than 200 remained at the medical unit . 
 Hospital evacuations continued from other area hospitals that were flooded or damaged . Reports from the Methodist Hospital indicated that people were dying of dehydration and exhaustion while the staff worked <unk> in horrendous conditions . The first floor of the hospital flooded and the dead were stacked in a second floor operating room . Patients requiring ventilators were kept alive with hand @-@ powered resuscitation bags . 
 Among the many hospitals shut down by damage related to the hurricane was the public hospital serving New Orleans , Charity Hospital , which was also the only trauma center serving that region . The destruction of the hospital 's structure has forced the continued closure as funding for a new building is sought out . 
 On September 6 , E. coli was detected in the water supply . According to the CDC , five people died from bacterial infections caused by the toxic waters . The deaths appear to have been caused by Vibrio <unk> bacteria , of the Cholera family . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Before Katrina ’ s landfall in 2005 , the economy of New Orleans relied heavily on its usefulness and income derived from being a port city . The population grew and the economy peaked in the late 19th century . However , in the recent years , after rapid industrialization and the development of faster methods of transporting goods , the economy of New Orleans has been in a steady decline . As a result , New Orleans came to rely on three major industries for economic revenue : transportation , entertainment , and public services . However , after Katrina ’ s landfall , these sectors , including the overall economy , were reduced and heavily affected by the natural disaster . 
 After the hurricane , the labor force diminished and wages decreased by staggering amounts . In July 2005 , 9 @,@ 592 people applied for unemployment services and the payroll of metropolitan firms declined by 13 @.@ 6 % between July 2005 and July 2007 , indicating an estimated loss of 70 @,@ 000 jobs . The sectors most affected were service @-@ related industries , fluctuating with the population . The only sector to truly thrive after landfall was construction , which was in high demand to make needed repairs and rebuild destroyed homes . 
 In the first initial months following Katrina , the labor force reduced faster than the demand and unemployment rates skyrocketed . However , as of September 2006 , the unemployment rates have never fallen below national average , indicating improvement . In the second quarters of both 2005 and 2007 , the firms ' wages were increased by 21 % , twice more than national increases , indicating even further improvement , although the gains were varied across the sectors . 
 There have been some suggestions concerning the usage of natural capital to further aid New Orleans ’ s economy . One such is that , as opposed to rebuilding on flooded lands , restoring acres of wetlands to profit from the economic wealth . The Mississippi delta provides the United States with one of the largest fisheries and the most important flyway terminus , enabling New Orleans to profit from these ecological industries . Furthermore , by increasing the wetlands , it would help create a natural barrier that could aid New Orleans in future storms . It is estimated that if New Orleans were to restore 1 @,@ 700 square miles ( 4 @,@ 400 km2 ) of wetland lost before 2005 , the natural capital would be worth an estimated $ 6 billion / year , or $ 200 billion at the present value . While New Orleans has made numerous efforts in rebuilding their economy , and has been successful with tourist @-@ attracting events such as Mardi Gras , the natural capital provided could further assist the city in returning to its pre @-@ Katrina wealth and economy . 
 = = Claims of differential racial effects = = 
 Following Katrina there were widespread claims that the effect of the hurricane was much greater on black and less economically advanced people , and that it had relatively less impact on predominantly white , and wealthier people . " The city ’ s remarkable recovery has , to a troubling degree , left behind the African @-@ Americans who still make up the majority of its population , " according to FiveThirtyEight . This claim is based on statistics showing that black residents of New Orleans are more likely to be unemployed than when the storm hit , and more likely to be living in poverty . Household incomes of blacks have also fallen , and the wage gap between black and whites has grown . All these changes are attributed in some way to Katrina . 
 About 175 @,@ 000 black residents departed New Orleans over the year following the storm , while only 100 @,@ 000 returned , pushing the African American population to 59 percent , from 66 percent previously . The biggest impact has been on the middle @-@ class blacks , given that most black professionals are older and more advanced in their careers , and the majority of the affluent and middle class are white . 
 These setbacks to the black population in New Orleans corresponded with a large number of educated white arrivals , contributing to a high rate of business formation in the city . These newcomers have had the effect of driving up housing prices , making rent less affordable for the majority black residents . 
 The influence of blacks in the city receded politically , too : in 2010 New Orleans elected its first white mayor in 32 years , a white majority ( 5 @-@ 2 ) took control of the City Council , which had previously been black , and a white police chief and district attorney were elected . Lance Hill of Tulane University said : " The perception among most African @-@ Americans is that they are living politically as a defeated group in their own city . " 
 = Cornelius Gallagher ( Canadian politician ) = 
 Cornelius Gallagher ( December 31 , 1854 – October 27 , 1932 ) was a meat merchant and politician in Alberta , Canada . He served as a municipal councillor and briefly as the third mayor of Edmonton . 
 Gallagher was born in New Brunswick in 1854 , the son of an Irish immigrant father . After attending the schools of his birthplace , he moved west to Winnipeg with his family , and became involved in the family meat packing business , established by his father . He would soon move west again to what would later become the province of Saskatchewan , where he would continue his business , providing his product to the local police establishments and soldiers during the North @-@ West Rebellion . After his contracts expired there , Gallagher would move again further west , to Edmonton , where he would permanently settle . 
 In Edmonton he established the developing town 's largest meat packing business , upon land atop the banks of the North Saskatchewan River , overlooking the river valley . He would also get involved with the city 's local politics , sitting on the Edmonton Town Council in the 1890s and early 1900s . In 1896 , after the incumbent mayor had resigned , the town council selected Gallagher to briefly be the interim mayor until an election was held later that year . He served one more aldermanic term , but retired after defeat in the 1903 and 1907 elections . In 1911 , he would also retire from his meat business . In retirement , Gallagher lived on a lavish estate on land he owned atop the Edmonton River Valley until his death in 1932 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Gallagher was born on December 31 , 1854 in Saint John , New Brunswick to Patrick and Katherine ( née Maher ) Gallagher . His father , Patrick came to Canada from Ireland at the age of 14 , and worked in the meat industry , being a wholesale meat merchant and meat packer . His mother was a native of Saint John . Cornelius Gallagher would attend schooling during the 1870s in his hometown ; later joining his father in his meat business . When his father relocated to Winnipeg in 1877 , he established a wholesale and retail meat distribution business , P. Gallagher and Son , which Cornelius and his brother , Edward would work in . Cornelius Gallagher in 1888 moved to Battleford , North @-@ West Territory ( today in Saskatchewan ) in 1888 , where he bought out his father 's firm 's interests . There , he was on a contract to supply troops stationed in the aftermath of the suppression of the North @-@ West Rebellion . In 1889 , he moved south to Regina , where his business , Childs & Gallagher , supplied meat to the North @-@ West Mounted Police . He remained there for two years , until 1891 , when his contract with the Mounties expired . 
 = = Career in Edmonton = = 
 In 1891 , Gallagher relocated , this time to Edmonton , also located in the then @-@ Northwest Territories . He had been intrigued with the fact that majority of the territory 's wheat and vegetable crops came from the Edmonton area , and scenting a business opportunity , decided to settle there . Purchasing a lot for his business less than 24 hours after arriving in Edmonton , Gallagher established with Calgary based businessman , William Roper Hull , the Gallagher @-@ Hull Meat Company , a wholesale and retail butcher . Incorporated on January 6 , 1900 , the establishment was a two @-@ storey brick building located on the banks of the North Saskatchewan River , from which the establishment relied on for its freshwater supply . It contained rooms for slaughtering the animals , storage , butchering and preparation of the meat . Offering a variety of different proteins , such as veal , beef , lamb , turkey , chicken , goose , and pork , the business rose to become the largest of its kind in the developing city of Edmonton , producing over 200 @,@ 000 pounds ( 91 @,@ 000 kg ) of meat per year by the turn of the century . He would operate the establishment until his retirement in 1911 . He also had interests in the brick industry , founding and serving as president of a local brick company . 
 = = = Civic politics = = = 
 Gallagher first sought public office in 1893 , when he was elected to Edmonton Town Council . In an aldermanic race in which the top six candidates were elected , he gained the final spot . On his first term on council he sat on the Licensing , and Health & Relief committees . He was re @-@ elected in 1894 , again placing sixth of nine candidates . Once this term expired in 1896 , Gallagher stayed out of politics for several months until mayor Herbert Charles Wilson resigned over a dispute involving town funds . It fell to the council to fill the mayor 's position . Gallagher was nominated by John Cameron and John Kelly ; as there were no rival candidates , he won by acclamation . He was the first mayor of Edmonton never to be elected to that position ; ( Frederick John Mitchell and Terry Cavanagh would later join him in that distinction ) . He was sworn in at the town council meeting on October 27 , 1896 . 
 During his brief term as mayor , Gallagher oversaw the town during a time when many prospectors headed to the Klondike Gold Rush saw Edmonton as a stopover point . He also become the inaugural president of the Edmonton Hockey Club when it was founded on November 20 , 1896 . 
 In the ensuing election , Gallagher chose to run for alderman rather than seeking a full term as mayor . This remains the only time in the city 's history that a sitting mayor has run for alderman . He was elected , placing fifth of nine candidates . During this term he sat on committees involved in issues relating to finance , police and utilities ( fire , water and light ) . He did not seek re @-@ election in the election in December 1897 . In December 1898 Gallagher ran for mayor , but was defeated by William S. Edmiston . He stayed out of politics until 1901 , when he was elected to a two @-@ year term as alderman . He was defeated in his re @-@ election bid in 1903 , placing fifth of nine candidates ( the staggered two year aldermanic terms meant that only three of the council 's six aldermen were elected each election ) . His last bid for office took place during the 1907 election , when he placed eleventh of twelve candidates in the aldermanic race . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In Edmonton , Gallagher resided in a " grand house " at 9902 111 Street , overlooking Edmonton 's river valley . He also owned land referred to as Gallagher 's Flats , later renamed Cloverdale . In 1888 , he married <unk> <unk> , and with her adopted two children , Mary and Marie . <unk> involved in community affairs , Gallagher was a member and president of both the Edmonton Board of Trade ( 1898 ) and Edmonton Exhibition Association . He was a member of the Conservative Party of Alberta and president of the Liberal @-@ Conservative Association of Strathcona , and was of the Roman Catholic faith . He was also a member of the Swine Breeders ' Association , Edmonton Club , and Old Timers ' Association . Upon his retirement from his meat business , he embarked on a 6 @-@ month trip to South America with his wife . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Gallagher died at Edmonton on October 27 , 1932 . He was 77 years old , and was buried at the Edmonton Roman Catholic Cemetery after his funeral at St. Joachim 's Church , where he was a parishioner . He was survived by his wife , one daughter and seven siblings . 
 Known as one of the most prominent men in Western Canada , Gallagher was widely praised for his successful business career . The 1912 publication , History of the province of Alberta , states the following : 
 In view of success to which Cornelius Gallagher has attained , it is but just to enter somewhat in detail concerning the plans and methods he has followed and the characteristics which he has manifested in an industrial and commercial career marked by consecutive progress . His business connections from the beginning continually broadened in their scope and importance and force of character and well developed talents have made in a power in the field of commercial , industrial and financial activity . In business affairs he is energetic , prompt , and notably reliable , while his social qualities have rendered him very popular . Tireless energy , keen perception , honesty of purpose , a genius for devising and executing the right thing at the right time , joined every @-@ day common sense , are his chief characteristics . 
 Gallagher Park ( formerly named Grassy Hill ) , in the Cloverdale area in Edmonton is named in his honour . The park is known for hosting the annual Edmonton Folk Music Festival . 
 = Bigeye sand tiger = 
 The bigeye sand tiger ( Odontaspis noronhai ) is an extremely rare species of mackerel shark in the family Odontaspididae , with a possible worldwide distribution . A large , bulky species reaching at least 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) in length , the bigeye sand tiger has a long bulbous snout , large orange eyes without nictitating membranes , and a capacious mouth with the narrow teeth prominently exposed . It can be distinguished from the similar smalltooth sand tiger ( O. ferox ) by its teeth , which have only one lateral cusplet on each side , and by its uniformly dark brown color . 
 Inhabiting continental margins and oceanic waters at depths of 60 – 1 @,@ 000 m ( 200 – 3 @,@ 280 ft ) , the bigeye sand tiger may make vertical and horizontal migratory movements . It feeds on bony fishes and squid , and its sizable eyes and dark coloration suggest that it may spend most of its time in the mesopelagic zone . Reproduction is probably viviparous with oophagous embryos like in other mackerel shark species . This shark is caught incidentally by commercial fisheries , though so infrequently that the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) cannot yet determine its conservation status . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first known bigeye sand tiger was a female 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) long caught off Madeira in April 1941 , on a longline set for black scabbardfish ( <unk> carbo ) . The specimen was mounted and later formed the basis for a scientific description authored by German ichthyologist Günther Maul in a 1955 article for <unk> Naturae . He named the species noronhai in honor of Adolfo César de Noronha , the late Director of the Funchal Museum . Maul assigned his new species to the genus Carcharias , which at the time was used for all members of the sand tiger shark family . When the Odontaspis came to be recognized as a valid genus separate from Carcharias , the bigeye sand tiger was reassigned as well given its resemblance to the smalltooth sand tiger ( O. ferox ) . Until more specimens were examined in the 1980s , some authors speculated that this species represented an extreme variant of the smalltooth sand tiger . Other names for this shark include black sand tiger , oceanic sand tiger , and bigeye ragged @-@ tooth shark . 
 Whether the bigeye and smalltooth sand tigers belong in the same family as the superficially similar sand tiger shark ( C. taurus ) has been debated among systematists , with morphological and <unk> studies giving inconsistent results . A 2012 molecular phylogenetic analysis , based on mitochondrial DNA , supported a sister species relationship between O. noronhai and O. ferox but not a clade consisting of Odontaspis and Carcharias . Instead , Odontaspis was found to be closer to the crocodile shark ( Pseudocarcharias kamoharai ) , suggesting that it and Carcharias should be placed in separate families . 
 = = Description = = 
 With its heavyset body , conical bulbous snout , and large mouth filled with protruding teeth , the bigeye sand tiger looks much like the better @-@ known sand tiger shark . The large eyes lack nictitating membranes , and behind them are small spiracles . The corner of the mouth extends to behind the level of the eyes , and the jaws are highly protrusible . There are 34 – 43 upper and 37 – 46 lower tooth rows ; these include zero to two rows of small teeth at the upper symphysis ( jaw midpoint ) and two to four more rows at the lower symphysis . In each half of the upper jaw , the teeth in the first and second rows are large , those in the third and sometimes fourth rows are small , and those in the rows after are large again . Each tooth has a narrow , awl @-@ like central cusp flanked by one smaller cusplet on each side ; this contrasts with the smalltooth sand tiger , which has two or three lateral cusplets on each side . There are five pairs of gill slits . 
 The pectoral fins are medium @-@ sized and broad with rounded tips . The large first dorsal fin has a rounded apex and is positioned closer to the pectoral than the pelvic fins . The second dorsal fin is about half the size of the first and originates over the rear tips of the pelvic fins . The pelvic fins are almost as large as the first dorsal fin . The anal fin is smaller than the second dorsal fin and positioned behind it . The caudal peduncle has a crescent @-@ shaped notch at the dorsal origin of the caudal fin . The lower lobe of the caudal fin is short but distinct , while the upper lobe is long and has a deep notch in the trailing margin near the tip . The skin is covered by overlapping dermal denticles , each with three horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth . This species is plain dark reddish brown to chocolate brown , sometimes with black trailing margins on the fins or a white @-@ tipped first dorsal fin . The eyes are dark orange with vertically oval , green @-@ tinted pupils . There are several black patches inside the mouth , such as around the jaws , on the floor of the mouth , and on the gill arches . The largest male and female specimens measured 3 @.@ 6 and 3 @.@ 3 m ( 12 and 11 ft ) long respectively . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Though extremely rare , the bigeye sand tiger has been reported from scattered locations around the world , suggesting a wide and possibly disjunct global distribution in tropical and warm @-@ temperate oceanic waters . Most known specimens have come from the Atlantic , where it has been found off Madeira , southern Brazil , Texas , eastern Florida , and the Mid @-@ Atlantic Ridge . The only evidence for its presence in the Indian Ocean is a set of jaws that may have originated from the Seychelles , though the South China Sea is another possibility . The existence of this species in the Pacific Ocean was first suspected in 1970 from teeth recovered from bottom sediments , which was confirmed over a decade later by captures from the Marshall Islands and Hawaii . 
 The bigeye sand tiger has been caught between the depths of 60 and 1 @,@ 000 m ( 200 and 3 @,@ 280 ft ) . Some were recorded over continental and insular shelves , both from near the sea floor and in mid @-@ water . Others were fished from parts of the open ocean that were 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 3 km ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 3 mi ) deep , where they were swimming in the upper levels of the water column . Nighttime captures from relatively shallow depths suggest that this species may make a diel vertical migration , rising from the mesopelagic zone to the epipelagic zone at night to feed . In Brazilian waters , bigeye sand tigers are only captured in spring , hinting at some type of seasonal migratory movement . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 One account of a bigeye sand tiger that had been caught alive noted that it behaved very aggressively , thrashing and snapping violently in and out of the water . Its large eyes and uniformly dark coloration are characteristic traits of a mesopelagic fish . The bigeye sand tiger feeds on bony fishes and squid . Its reproduction is little @-@ known but probably similar to that of other mackerel sharks , which are viviparous with embryos that feed on unfertilized eggs during gestation ( oophagy ) . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . Males mature sexually at somewhere between 2 @.@ 2 and 3 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 and 10 @.@ 5 ft ) long , while females mature at around 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 ft ) long . No information is available on growth or aging . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Because the bigeye sand tiger is encountered so infrequently , it has no commercial importance . It is caught incidentally on longlines and in gillnets and purse seines , though the paucity of captures suggest that it mostly lives in waters too deep for commercial fisheries . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Data Deficient , citing a lack of biological and population data . Since 1997 , the National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) has prohibited the taking of this species in United States waters . 
 = Hurricane Liza ( 1976 ) = 
 Hurricane Liza is considered the worst natural disaster in the history of Baja California Sur . The seventeenth tropical cyclone , thirteenth named storm , and eighth hurricane of the 1976 Pacific hurricane season , Liza developed from an area of disturbed weather southwest of the Mexican coast on September 25 . Slowly intensifying , the system attained tropical storm strength the following day . In favorable conditions , Liza continued to intensify , reaching hurricane strength on September 28 after developing an eye . The hurricane peaked in intensity as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale on September 30 , with winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 948 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 00 inHg ) . Liza weakened as it moved northward into the Gulf of California . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane made its second landfall north of Los Mochis , Sinaloa with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , making it one of 13 storms to make landfall as major hurricanes in the basin . Inland , the hurricane rapidly weakened and dissipated on October 2 . 
 Prior to the arrival of Liza , residents along the Gulf of California coastline were evacuated , although some refused to leave their homes . Radio stations warned all nearby ships to remain at harbor . Liza brought heavy rainfall to the area , which caused significant flash flooding . Following a dam burst by the El <unk> Creek along the outskirts of La Paz , hundreds of people were swept away by flood waters . In La Paz , the capital of the state , 412 people died and 20 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Nearly one @-@ third of the homes in the town were destroyed . Throughout the state , a variety of death tolls were reported , but officials estimated that 1 @,@ 000 people had perished . In the states of Sinaloa and Sonora , Liza caused moderate damage and left 30 @,@ 000 to 54 @,@ 000 homeless . Along the Gulf of California , 108 people were presumed dead after 12 boats were lost . The remnants of the storm later affected the United States , bringing moderate rainfall 
 In the aftermath of the storm , rescue workers spent days digging through mud to find victims of the hurricane until the search was disbanded on October 6 . The government received criticism for the tragedy , citing that the dam that broke had been poorly built . Overall , at least 1 @,@ 108 fatalities and $ 100 million ( 1976 USD ) in damage are attributed to the hurricane , making it one of the deadliest tropical cyclones on record in the eastern Pacific , as well as one of the few Pacific hurricanes to kill more than 1 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Liza originated from a very large area of intense thunderstorms that developed about 400 mi ( 645 km ) southwest of the Mexican coast on September 25 . Later that day , satellite imagery indicated that the system had developed a cyclonic circulation . It is estimated that a tropical depression developed at 1800 UTC on September 25 , centered about 485 mi ( 780 km ) east @-@ northeast of Zihuatanejo , Guerrero . The depression gradually intensified as it tracked west @-@ northwestward , and became Tropical Storm Liza at 1800 UTC on the following day . Thereafter , Liza turned to the north at 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) and began to strengthen while moving through sea surface temperatures of 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) . Within 48 hours of the storm 's formation , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) reported winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , and Liza intensified into a hurricane early on September 28 . Around this time , the hurricane had developed an eye that was 17 mi ( 27 km ) in diameter , though it was initially not visible on satellite imagery . Operationally , however , Liza was not upgraded to a hurricane until 18 hours later . 
 During the afternoon hours of September 28 , a Hurricane Hunters aircraft made its first flight into Liza , recording a minimum barometric pressure of 971 mbar ( 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) ; despite the low pressure , maximum sustained winds of just 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) were reported . Hours later , a second flight into the hurricane revealed winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and slightly lower pressures . Liza continued to intensify , attaining winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) by early September 29 . Later that morning , the hurricane reached Category 2 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . By midday , Hurricane Hunters recorded a pressure of 948 mb ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) as the eye became visible on infrared satellite imagery , prompting the EPHC to upgrade Liza to a major hurricane , a Category 3 or higher on the SSHWS . 
 Liza continued to rapidly intensify and attained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) late on September 29 , making it a mid @-@ level Category 4 hurricane . Though Liza encountered warm sea surface temperatures of 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) , it did not strengthen further the following day . Late on September 30 , Liza brushed the Baja California Peninsula , passing about 65 mi ( 105 km ) east of Cabo San Lucas while still at peak intensity . Early on October 1 , Liza entered the Gulf of California exactly 52 mi ( 84 km ) east of La Paz , Baja California Sur . By 1300 UTC that day , Liza made landfall about 50 mi ( 80 km ) north of Los Mochis , Sinaloa with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , still a Category 3 storm . Operationally , however , Hurricane Liza was estimated to have made landfall with winds of 100 mph ( 185 km / h ) and gusts up to 150 mph ( 230 km / h ) . The storm continued quickly inland while weakening , dissipating the following day . The remnants of Hurricane Liza later entered the United States near El Paso , Texas . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Prior to the arrival of the hurricane , many residents in shanty towns failed to hear tropical cyclone warnings and watches . Some did hear the warnings , but they did not believe them as the same warning had been issued several weeks before and nothing had happened . In addition , city officials warned the residents living near the dam to take shelter in public buildings though most refused to leave . The government ignored all requests to shore up an earthen dam , as they did not believe Liza would pose a significant threat of damage to the Baja California Peninsula . Along the Gulf Coast , troops evacuated residents , and radio stations warned all nearby ships to remain at harbor . During the afternoon hours of September 29 , the education department suspended classes as it began to rain . 
 As the remnants of Liza moved across the western United States , National Weather Service posted flash flood watches for much of deserts of California , southern Utah , and a portion of Colorado . For the higher areas of Colorado , a snow watch was in effect . In addition , motorists were warned of very hazards driving conditions within 100 mi ( 160 km ) of the border . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In all , Liza brought a total of $ 100 million in damage in Baja California Sur , which receives catastrophic flooding from hurricanes every 50 years or so . The hurricane was considered the worst natural disaster in the history of the peninsula , which at the time held 130 @,@ 000 occupants . Furthermore , Liza was at that time considered the worst hurricane to affect the entire country in the 20th century . 
 = = = Baja California Sur = = = 
 Hurricane Liza caused extensive damage and loss of life in the Mexican state of Baja California Sur . Although the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ( HPC ) suggests that Liza brought only light to moderate rains to the area , peaking at around 1 in ( 25 mm ) , newspaper accounts claim that 11 @.@ 8 in ( 300 mm ) fell ( more than a year 's worth of rainfall ) in some areas in a mere 3 hours . Moreover , 22 in ( 559 mm ) was measured in El Triunfo and San Antonio , along the southern portion of the peninsula . In La Paz , Baja California , a storm surge of 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) was reported . 
 The El <unk> Creek along the extreme southeast portion of the state grew into a raging torrent . During night of October 1 , waters burst a three @-@ year @-@ old and 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) dike . A 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) wall of water spilled over a small shanty town of 10 @,@ 000 , thousands of which lived in cardboard shacks . Some shacks were swept 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away from their initial location . The ensuing mudslide is regarded as the worst in the History of Mexico . Most of the deaths from the hurricane were due to the dam failure ; streets also received flooding from the dam burst . 
 Initially , government officials denied that the dam was poorly built ; many politicians and an engineer for the nation 's water company blamed the dam 's poor construction as the source of the extreme death toll . Prior to the arrival of the storm , many residents had repeatedly requested that a stone wall be built to protect their homes . After the storm , they said that the deaths could have be prevented . According to one account , two master planned communities were situated in the middle of the drainage and were thus deluged by the storm . The water department head took the blame for the construction , but also said that the disaster was a natural phenomenon . 
 " Dozens " of people were also swept away into the Gulf of California when Hurricane Liza destroyed a 600 ft ( 185 m ) sea wall , which , ironically , had been built to prevent flooding from such storms . Nine children got swept under mud . The highway that connected Baja California with California was also destroyed in many places , more than originally anticipated . In fact , there were holes in the asphalt pavement . Bridges up to 600 ft ( 185 m ) long were twisted . 
 Due to flooding , troops evacuated dozens of communities along the Gulf coast . Many desert communities throughout the state were left without any telephone or electrical service ; wood , tarpaper , and cardboard were all scattered . Dozens of scores of huts were destroyed . Many humans were swept into the gulf . Sixteen people died inside the remains of a building . Moreover , the <unk> river overflowed its banks , killing many people and resulting in considerable damage . Elsewhere , destruction was reported in San Jose del Cabo , Cabo San Lucas , San Lucas , and Puntas Arena ; <unk> also received moderate damage . However , there are no known reports of any casualties in all four of those places . Hurricane Liza was also one of six hurricane to directly impact Los Cabos . 
 South of La Paz , communications and telephone services were cut off to 13 smaller communities . A highway that extends as far south as Cabo San Lucas was blocked . Further north , a highway that links La Paz to places along the northern part of the peninsula such as Mexicali were badly damaged in four places . Offshore , officials reported that 75 boats including nine owned by Americans had sunk during the hurricane . Most notably , the ship Salvatierra ' s cabin and most of its upper deck were ripped off while its hull rolled over . Multiple trucks smashed the ship ; however , they were later salvaged . In addition , a 88 ft ( 27 m ) vessel sunk during the storm , in which the owner had to pay for the damage , but later earned $ 50 @,@ 000 settlement . Overall , several ports along the coast were destroyed by the storm . 
 In La Paz , a town that at that time had a population of around 85 @,@ 000 , 20 @,@ 000 were left homeless ( nearly one third of the towns population ) , and an additional 4 @,@ 000 were injured . It is estimated that one out of five homes were destroyed in the city . Widespread flooding was reported throughout the city with mud filling up the first floor of many houses . This flash flooding led to many homes and automobiles being destroyed . Several roofs fell off of homes and landed deep in the mud . Many roads were blocked due to fallen trees while numerous homes were pushed off their foundation ; some cars were also abandoned when Hurricane Liza struck . Some cars were reportedly piled against damaged building and debris . Nine people died when a car was swept away in the floodwaters . 
 Also , electrical lines and drinking water supplies were cut in La Paz . Also , communication lines were extensively damaged . The La Paz airport received damage during the hurricane ; however , by the afternoon of October 1 , the airport re @-@ opened , thus allowing the military to provide much @-@ needed aid to victims . Wood , tarpaper , and cardboard were all scattered throughout La Paz . By October 2 , rescue teams had covered 38 sq mi ( 100 sq km ) to configure the damage . Throughout the city , a total of 412 people had been killed , 150 were missing people within the resort city , five of which were later presumed dead . Overall , nearly a third of the houses in La Paz were leveled . 
 A wide variety of death tolls were reported by many different sources . Then @-@ Mexico president Luis <unk> as well as the HPC and EPHC claimed that 435 people died during the hurricane . It was initially stated that 630 people had died during the storm ; however , this total does not include victims discovered by the Mexican army . During the afternoon of October 2 , the local government had placed the confirmed death toll at 397 . Two days later , the Bangor Daily News reported that the number of bodies found dead ranged from 400 to 750 . By late October 3 , Mexican officials and a Red Cross spokesperson reported that 650 bodies had been found . Meanwhile , a military search operation claimed that the death toll of the hurricane was 1 @,@ 050 . By October 6 , local officials had abandoned efforts to retrieve additional bodies , citing safety reasons . Even though 650 people were confirmed to have died during Hurricane Liza , officials estimated that at least 1 @,@ 000 people died . Within a week after Hurricane Liza , some feared 10 @,@ 000 people perished . In addition , some modern estimates suggest that the toll could have been as high as 7 @,@ 000 . 
 The Red Cross estimated that 75 % of the deaths from the storm were children under 12 . At first , most of the bodies found by the army were buried normally though due to the high death toll , some were just buried under debris . Some dead bodies were later burned to prevent disease . According to preliminary estimates by officials , 40 @,@ 000 people were made homeless and an addition 20 @,@ 000 were injured , 126 of which were considered significant . Within another day , the homeless total rose to 70 @,@ 000 . Total damage from the hurricane was estimated at $ 100 million ( 1976 USD ) . 
 = = = Sinaloa = = = 
 In the state of Sinaloa , heavy rainfall was recorded along the northern portion of the state near the Sonoran border . A peak total of 4 @.@ 61 in ( 0 @.@ 117 m ) was measured in both <unk> and Choix . Upon making landfall in the state , Liza became one of six tropical system to making landfall in the state at tropical storm intensity during the 1968 @-@ 1995 time frame . Offshore Topolobampo , 12 ship boats were reported missing , and the 108 crewman were feared dead . On the mainland , some damage was reported . Some flooding was recorded and at least 1 @,@ 000 homes were evacuated . Along the southern portion of the state , in <unk> , 155 people died , mostly adults . Roughly 80 % of the town was flooded ; it would take three years for the town to recover fully . In Los Mochis alone , 4 @,@ 000 people were left without a home . Damage in the city totaled $ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Sonora = = = 
 Across Sonora , many homes were wrecked due to flooding . Light rainfall up to 1 in ( 25 mm ) was recorded along the southeastern region of the state which led to reports of damage . In Navojoa , heavy damage was reported . Numerous faculty homes , as well as the school barn and dining hall lost their homes at the College of Pacific . Damage totaled to $ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 About 30 @,@ 000 people were left homeless statewide though other authorities estimated that 24 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in both Sonora and Sinaloa combined . Throughout the mainland , 12 communities sustained heavy damage . In all , all , there are no reports of major damage in the mainland . 
 = = = Southwestern United States = = = 
 During its demise , Liza brought heavy rains and flooding to much of the Southwestern United States . In Arizona , the tropical system brought light to moderate rain throughout the state , with maximum being 1 @.@ 48 inches ( 38 mm ) at Willow Beach , Arizona . Further east , Liza 's remnants dropped light rainfall in New Mexico ( peaking at 0 @.@ 47 in ( 12 mm ) in White Sands National Monument ) , as well as in southwestern Texas . Across Death Valley , flooding was recorded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the aftermath of the storm , rescue workers searched the La Paz harbor , but had little hope in finding any victims . Other rescue workers endured 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) heat while frantically searching for bodies floating on the ocean or sunk under mud . Six bulldozers worked all day and night to extract cars , some of which were upside down while others were submerged into the flood waters . Officials estimated that it would take eight days to repair down power lines in La Paz and completely restore electrical services ; within 72 hours following the passage of Liza , there was no electricity or fresh water access to survivors . Emergency facilitates were used to provide the city with drinking water . Food was rationed at hotels and restaurants . Drinking water was supplied , but water supplies rapidly went short . 
 Some survivors of Hurricane Liza complained that they had only received one ration of food and water within 3 days of the passage of Liza . Subsequently , armed troops guarded gangs of looters that damaged additional homes . An effort was made to cure people who were suffering from sickness , but by midday on October 3 , after treating more than 5 @,@ 000 persons , the effort had been halted due to a lack of sterile cotton vital for administrating the shots . Medical workers attempted to vaccinate all survivors for typhoid fever and tetanus , but the supply of syringes ran short . A large memorial service was held on October 2 in a nearby church . 
 Supplies had been brought in through the air and via the Mexican navy containing food , blankets , and medicine early on October 2 . However , additional bad weather initially prevented further supplies from coming in . Around that time , President <unk> ordered emergency aid to be sent La Paz , Los Mochis , and Ciudad Obregon , as well as three coastal Sonoran ports . In addition , officials set up tents to house 40 @,@ 000 homeless persons . Meanwhile , city officials appealed for additional food , medicine , and construction materials . Gerald Ford , who was then the U.S. president , agreed to provide aid for victims of Hurricane Liza ; the first of which arrived late on October 2 , containing food and construction materials . The next day , power had been restored to hospitals , government centers , and gas stations . The government said that it was rushing in 100 @,@ 000 meals as well as 40 @,@ 000 temporary shelters the first of which started to arrive on October 5 @.@ within a week after the storm , however , one survivor of the storm noted that plenty of food had arrived from many places . 
 Baja California Sur governor , <unk> Mendoza <unk> , ordered a permanent evacuation of all low @-@ lying residents to prevent more destruction during future floods , saying " I never want to see this city menaced in this way again " . He also believed that it would take two years to completely re @-@ build La Paz . Mexican officials arranged a meeting on October 3 to make a plan to reconstruct the devastated area . The nation 's president ordered a plan to prevent a recurrence of Hurricane Liza , saying that La Paz would be built a different way . In February 1977 , houses were donated to the needy in La Paz . Many residents were upset at their government for failing to protect the dam . In the mainland , $ 50 @,@ 000 of relief materials as well as $ 20 @,@ 000 of cash was supplied to the Los Mochis area . 
 Months after the hurricane , the Mexican government launched an investigation into the dam failure . In the end , La Paz recovered , though the town had to be almost entirely re @-@ built . In 1997 , Hurricane Pauline struck southern Mexico , becoming the deadliest tropical cyclone to hit the country since Liza . As of 2006 , no hurricane in Baja California Sur has been as bad as Liza . 
 = Arsenal F.C. in European football = 
 Arsenal Football Club is an English professional football club based in Holloway , North London . The club 's first European football match was played against Copenhagen XI on 25 September 1963 , and it has since participated in European club competitions on several occasions , most of which organised by the Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) . Arsenal has won two European honours : the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup in 1970 and the Cup Winners ' Cup in 1994 – the latter title recognised by the European confederation . The club played the 1994 European Super Cup and repeated its presence in the following year 's Cup Winners ' Cup final . Arsenal also reached the final of the UEFA Cup in 2000 , and became the first London team to appear in a UEFA Champions League final , in 2006 . 
 Qualification for European club competitions is determined by a team 's position in its domestic league , as well as how successfully a team fares in domestic cup competitions in the previous season . Following the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985 , UEFA placed an indefinite ban on all English teams from competing in Europe ; the ban was lifted in the 1991 – 92 season , giving Arsenal the opportunity to play in the European Cup . Between 1998 – 99 and 2016 – 17 , Arsenal qualified in nineteen successive UEFA Champions League seasons , an English football record , and is only surpassed in Europe by Real Madrid . 
 French striker Thierry Henry holds the club record for most appearances with 89 , and is the club 's record goalscorer in European competitions with 42 goals . Arsenal 's biggest winning margin in Europe is a 7 – 0 scoreline , a feat achieved twice : firstly away at Standard Liège , during their successful Cup Winners ' Cup campaign , and secondly at home against Slavia Prague , for the 2007 – 08 UEFA Champions League . Arsenal hold the European club competition record for the most consecutive clean sheets with ten , set between September 2005 and May 2006 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Club competitions between teams from different European countries can trace their origins as far back as 1897 , when the Challenge Cup was created for clubs in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , who did not meet under normal circumstances . The Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy , named after entrepreneur and sportsman Thomas Lipton , was established in 1909 and was contested between clubs from Italy , Great Britain , Germany and Switzerland ; the competition lasted for two years . The earliest attempt to create a cup for national champion clubs of Europe was made by Swiss club FC Servette . Founded in 1930 , the Coupe des Nations featured clubs of ten major European football leagues and was deemed a success . Due to financial reasons , the competition was abandoned . 
 In December 1954 , French sports magazine L 'Equipe published an article by journalist and former professional footballer Gabriel Hanot , who proposed the introduction of a European club competition . He initially suggested that each country should nominate a club to play in a mid @-@ week European league ; many clubs favoured a cup competition , which required less matches to play . A year later , L 'Equipe sent out invitations to 18 clubs , selected by Hanot , Jacques Ferran and Jacques Goddet , with UEFA agreeing to administrate the competition named as the European Champion Clubs ' Cup . The European Cup Winners ' Cup , later retitled the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , was founded in 1960 and involved the winning clubs of national cup competitions in Europe . Arsenal , in the First Division at the time , were ineligible for both competitions , given that the club did not win a league championship or domestic cup for almost two decades . They however were invited to participate in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , an annual European club competition which was set up to promote international trade fairs ; where a club finished in their domestic league had no relevance to qualification as teams were selected from cities holding trade fairs . The Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup was regarded as the predecessor to the UEFA Cup , rebranded as the UEFA Europa League in 2008 . Each competition round was staged over a two @-@ legged tie , with the winner determined by the aggregate score . The away goals rule is activated if the aggregate score is equal . 
 To reinvigorate the European Champion Clubs ' Cup , the competition was expanded and rebranded as the UEFA Champions League in 1992 . From the 1997 – 98 season , it was further expanded to include eight domestic league runners @-@ up selected by a UEFA coefficient and preliminary spots the following season were awarded to the third placed team ; in some leagues fourth from 2002 – 03 . The expansion and constant growth of the competition led to the decline of the Cup Winners ' Cup , abolished in 1999 and by which point instigated proposals for a European Super League . Arsène Wenger has , on numerous occasions predicted the latter , arguing the pressure of television companies will force it to happen : " It 's all about money . More games equal more money through TV revenue and I think the next few years will see not just two , but three or four teams from the top countries competing against each other . It 's what television wants – big teams in big matches . That is why the Champions ' League was introduced . " Although Arsenal qualified for a fifteenth successive season of Champions League football in May 2012 , this coincided with the club not winning a domestic honour since 2005 , which led to open criticism over the competition 's present format . Wenger however has gone on to defend the club policy , stating a trophy for Arsenal is winning the Premier League or the Champions League ; " Would you like to finish tenth in the league but win the League Cup and say you have won a trophy ? Certainly not . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years : 1963 – 1978 = = = 
 Arsenal first participated in European football during the 1963 – 64 season , via the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup . The competition was set up to promote international trade fairs in European cities , featuring clubs from cities playing in matches that hosted trade fairs . As London 's representative , Arsenal was paired with Copenhagen team Copenhagen XI in the first round , played over two matches . The first match ended in a 7 – 1 victory for Arsenal , with Geoff Strong and Joe Baker both scoring hat @-@ tricks . Copenhagen XI won the second match 3 – 2 , but lost 9 – 4 on aggregate . Arsenal faced Royal Football Club de Liège in the second round ; the Belgian club won 4 – 2 on aggregate to progress into the quarter @-@ finals . 
 In the 1969 – 70 season , Arsenal again participated in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , after a six @-@ year absence . Having beaten Glentoran of Northern Ireland , Portugal 's Sporting Lisbon and Rouen of France , Arsenal played Romanian club Dinamo Bacău in the quarter @-@ finals . A 1 – 9 victory on aggregate saw the club progress into the last four , where they faced Ajax of Amsterdam . The pairing of both clubs pleased Arsenal manager Bertie Mee , who wanted to play Ajax in the semi @-@ finals to set up a possibility of meeting Internazionale in the final . At Highbury in the first leg , Arsenal won 3 – 0 and restricted Ajax to a 1 – 0 win at the <unk> Stadion to reach the final of the Fairs Cup . It was the fourth successive year the final featured an English club and the first for a London club . Arsenal played Belgian opposition Anderlecht in the 1970 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup Final , played in the space of a week . Anderlecht won the first leg 3 – 1 , with Arsenal midfielder Ray Kennedy scoring a crucial away goal , seven minutes from the final whistle . An early goal scored by Eddie Kelly helped Arsenal to what earlier looked to be an improbable victory ; John Radford and Jon <unk> overturned Anderlecht 's advantage to win 3 – 0 on the night and 4 – 3 on aggregate . The result ended Arsenal 's 17 @-@ year wait for a trophy and ensured the club became the third successive English club to win the honour . 
 Arsenal entered the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup the following season as holders of the competition , but did not progress further than the semi @-@ finals , losing on away goals to 1 . FC Köln of Germany . The club did however win the league championship for the first time in 18 years , ensuring qualification for the European Champions Clubs ' Cup in the 1971 – 72 season . Arsenal reached the quarter @-@ finals , where the team lost to holders Ajax , who went on to retain the trophy . In subsequent seasons , the departure of Mee and lack of domestic honours meant that the club did not contest in European football . 
 = = = Cup Winners ' Cup finalists , winners : 1978 – 1995 = = = 
 Mee was succeeded by Terry Neill in July 1976 . Arsenal returned to European club football in the 1978 – 79 season , having finished fifth in the previous league campaign . The club contested in the UEFA Cup for the first time and won their opening leg 3 – 0 against 1 . FC Lokomotive Leipzig ; a commanding performance away from home in the second leg allowed Arsenal to win 1 – 4 at the Bruno @-@ <unk> @-@ Stadion and 7 – 1 on aggregate . Arsenal progressed past the third round , winning on aggregate against Hajduk Split but were eliminated by Red Star Belgrade in the third round after striker Dušan Savić scored an away goal , two minutes from the end of the match . 
 As winners of the 1979 FA Cup Final , Arsenal entered the European Cup Winners ' Cup in the 1979 – 80 season . The club defeated Fenerbahçe , 1 . FC Magdeburg and IFK Göteborg , before facing Juventus in the semi @-@ finals . After conceding an early penalty scored by Antonio Cabrini , Arsenal defender David O 'Leary was injured and substituted in the 20th minute , when Juventus striker Roberto Bettega tackled him . Marco Tardelli was later sent off for a foul on Liam Brady and in the 85th minute , Arsenal managed to score an equaliser through a mix @-@ up between Frank Stapleton and Bettega ; the Italian put the ball into his goal net . Neill in his post @-@ match comments expressed his anger over Bettega 's tackle after the game : " I was shocked by a most vicious foul . I was shocked because I have always had the greatest admiration for him . " A headed goal by substitute Paul <unk> two minutes from the end , in the second leg was enough to take Arsenal into the 1980 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final , where they faced Valencia in Brussels . A goalless draw after normal and extra time meant the final was to be decided on a penalty shootout , with Valencia winning 5 – 4 . 
 Arsenal competed in the UEFA Cup in the 1981 – 82 and 1982 – 83 seasons and departed in the first and second round to FC <unk> and Spartak Moscow respectively . The Heysel Stadium disaster of May 1985 , during the 1985 European Cup Final between Liverpool and Juventus resulted in UEFA , and later FIFA , imposing a ' worldwide ' ban on English teams from participating in European club competitions , initially for an indefinite period . Under George Graham , Arsenal returned to the European Cup in the 1991 – 92 season , having won the league championship a season earlier . They went out in the second round to Portuguese team Benfica in November 1991 . The ban arising from the Heysel disaster had prevented Arsenal from competing in the European Cup when they won the league title two years previously , as well as preventing them from competing in the UEFA Cup on two occasions . 
 In the 1993 – 94 season , Arsenal contested in the European Cup Winners ' Cup , having won the 1993 FA Cup Final . The club beat Odense BK and Standard Liège to reach the quarter @-@ finals , with the latter described as a " breathtaking performance " by Graham , after winning 7 – 0 at the Stade Maurice Dufrasne . Arsenal defeated Torino of Italy and French representative Paris Saint @-@ Germain to reach the 1994 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final alongside Parma , staged at Copenhagen . Without top goalscorer Ian Wright and markers John Jensen and Martin Keown , Arsenal went into the final as outsiders . Although Parma began the match the strongest of both teams , Arsenal opened the scoring through a well taken volley by striker Alan Smith . Defending in numbers , the team held on to record an improbable victory and win the club 's second European trophy , after a 24 @-@ year wait . After the match Graham praised his team 's performance and defended his pragmatic approach ; " Sometimes we could go forward a little bit more and entertain a bit more , but we play to our strengths , like we did in this match . There 's nothing wrong with having a very , very good defence , believe me . We 've proved it , and it 's a big plus . " 
 As holders of the competition , Arsenal was admitted into the Cup Winners ' Cup for the 1994 – 95 season . They moreover contested in the 1994 European Super Cup , losing to Milan 2 – 0 on aggregate . In February 1995 , Graham was sacked by Arsenal after it emerged he accepted an illegal £ 425 @,@ 000 payment from Norwegian agent Rune Hauge for two of his clients : Jensen and Pål Lydersen . He was replaced by caretaker manager Stewart Houston ( Bruce Rioch in the close season ) , who managed to take Arsenal into the 1995 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup Final after beating Sampdoria on penalties in the semi @-@ finals . They however , did not retain the trophy after Real Zaragoza midfielder <unk> scored an extra @-@ time goal , lobbing Arsenal goalkeeper David Seaman . 
 = = = Arrival of Wenger : 1996 – 2005 = = = 
 In August 1996 , Rioch was dismissed by Arsenal . He was replaced by Arsène Wenger , who became the club 's first manager born outside the British Isles . Wenger had creditable experience in UEFA club competitions ; at Monaco he reached the final of the Cup Winners ' Cup in 1992 , losing 2 – 0 to Werder Bremen and took the club into the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup in 1993 – 94 . Wenger wanted Arsenal to become one of the biggest clubs in Europe , emphasising on buying talent from all over the world and patience shown by the club 's board and supporters . His first involvement in a European match for Arsenal was against Borussia Mönchengladbach on 26 September 1996 in the UEFA Cup ; Arsenal lost 6 – 4 on aggregate . Having watched the game from the stands in the first half , he assumed control in the second , suggesting the formation should accommodate four defenders instead of five . 
 Arsenal finished third in the 1996 – 97 league season , missing out on qualification for the UEFA Champions League by goal difference . They , however qualified for the UEFA Cup first round , but lost to PAOK Salonika of Greece over two legs in September 1997 . Arsenal completed the double in the 1997 – 98 season , and winning the league ensured the club participated in the Champions League for the first time since its rebranding in 1992 . To benefit from increased revenue and higher attendances , Arsenal was granted permission from the Football Association and UEFA to host their home Champions League matches at Wembley Stadium . 
 The club faced French champions Lens , Ukraine 's Dynamo Kiev and Panathinaikos of Greece in the group stages of the competition . Although they began the campaign in good stead , with two draws and a win , Arsenal lost 3 – 1 to Dynamo Kiev and at home to Lens – watched by a record crowd of 73 @,@ 707 , meaning the club could not reach higher than third place , failing to make the quarter @-@ finals . Arsenal ended the 1998 – 99 league season as runners @-@ up , qualifying for the group stages of the Champions League for the second successive year . Again , Arsenal finished in third spot in their group , this time behind Barcelona and Fiorentina . The team , however advanced into the UEFA Cup third round and Arsenal chose to revert to playing their home matches at Highbury , on the advice of the players . Arsenal beat Nantes and Deportivo de La Coruña over two legs and defeated Werder Bremen in the quarter @-@ final ; midfielder Ray Parlour scored a hat @-@ trick in the second leg . In the semi @-@ final against Lens , Arsenal secured a 3 – 1 aggregate win to face Turkish opposition Galatasaray in the final , who beat Leeds United . 
 At Copenhagen , the venue for the 2000 UEFA Cup Final , both Arsenal and Galatasaray played out to a goalless draw in normal and in extra time . Arsenal lost 4 – 1 in a penalty shootout , with striker Davor Šuker and midfielder Patrick Vieira hitting the post and underside of the crossbar respectively . Wenger reflected on the defeat by saying , " We did not play well in the first half , but we were much better afterwards . It is very disappointing . " The final was overshadowed by events at the city centre , where Arsenal supporter Paul Dineen was stabbed in the back . Referred to as the " Battle of Copenhagen " , the incident escalated into a riot between English and Turkish fans , forcing the Danish police to use tear gas in order to restore calm . 
 Arsenal qualified for the group stages of the Champions League in the 2000 – 01 season , having ended the previous league season in second . The club won their first three matches in Group B , against Sparta Prague , Shakhtar Donetsk and Lazio . A draw away to Lazio at the Stadio Olimpico ensured qualification into the second group stage , where they were partnered with Bayern Munich , Lyon and Spartak Moscow . In spite of defender Sylvinho scoring an early goal in their opening game against Spartak Moscow , Arsenal plummeted to a 4 – 1 defeat , leaving Wenger to assess that " as a team , we didn 't look as solid as we are used to . " Wins at Lyon and at home to Spartak Moscow helped Arsenal to qualify for the quarter @-@ finals as the French club failed to capitalise on Arsenal 's defeat at Bayern Munich . They faced Spanish club Valencia , winning 2 – 1 at Highbury but the team were beaten 1 – 0 at the Estadio Mestalla , knocked @-@ out on aggregate . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , Arsenal played in the Champions League . The club qualified for the second group stage on goal difference but did not reach the quarter @-@ finals , losing their final two matches against Deportivo La Coruña and Juventus . Having won the domestic league for the first time in four years , Wenger revealed the club 's and his own intent to win the Champions League , telling French newspaper L 'Equipe " I can 't imagine finishing my life without winning the European Cup " . Arsenal began the following season impressively , winning 0 – 4 at PSV Eindhoven . The match set a new club record , as midfielder Gilberto Silva scored the fastest goal , in 20 @.@ 07 seconds . Although Arsenal lost their last two matches against Borussia Dortmund and Auxerre , coinciding with a blip in form domestically , they qualified for the second group stage for the third consecutive season . Striker Thierry Henry scored his first hat @-@ trick in Europe for Arsenal against Roma on 27 November 2002 with the player stating ; " It 's wonderful to score a hat @-@ trick but it 's even more important that I did so in a game we 've won . " Arsenal failed to replicate their form at Roma , drawing their next four matches and losing to Valencia in the final match to finish third in their group and thus , out of the competition . 
 Arsenal entered the Champions League group stage in the 2003 – 04 season and faced Dynamo Kiev , Internazionale and Lokomotiv Moscow . Without a win in their first three matches , Arsenal faced an early exit from the competition but managed a victory against Dynamo Kiev , after defender Ashley Cole scored via a header . At the San Siro , Arsenal beat Internazionale 1 – 5 , in a performance described as " one of the greatest results in [ the club 's ] history " . A win in their final group game against Lokomotiv Moscow was enough for Arsenal to top their group and play an unseeded team in the last 16 . Arsenal eliminated Celta Vigo and faced fellow English club Chelsea at the quarter @-@ final stage . Going into the first leg , Arsenal were favourites , having played their London rivals three times during the course the season , winning each occasion . Former Dutch international Johan Cruyff backed Arsenal to win the competition , saying " If Arsenal win it playing football the way only they know how then Europe would be proud to have such champions " . In spite of Robert Pirès scoring a vital away goal at Stamford Bridge , Chelsea beat Arsenal 1 – 2 at Highbury to progress into the semi @-@ finals . A year later , Arsenal exited the Champions League after losing 2 – 3 to Bayern Munich on aggregate , in the last 16 stage . 
 = = = Regular qualification : 2005 to present = = = 
 Arsenal qualified for the group stages of the Champions League in the 2005 – 06 season , finishing first in a group containing Ajax , Sparta Prague and Thun . The club faced Real Madrid in the last 16 ; a solo goal by Henry at the Estadio Santiago Bernabéu in the first leg inflicted the home team 's first defeat in 18 Champions League matches . Arsenal produced a disciplined display at home a fortnight after to reach the quarter @-@ finals and become the sole English representative left in the competition . At home to Juventus , Arsenal won 2 – 0 , and a goalless draw at the Stadio delle Alpi meant the club progressed into the semi @-@ finals against Villarreal . In the club 's final European match at <unk> , Kolo Touré scored a first @-@ half winner to give Arsenal a 1 – 0 win . A late penalty save by goalkeeper Jens Lehmann in the second leg sent Arsenal into the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final , staged at the Stade de France , Paris . The result , another goalless draw , was Arsenal 's tenth clean sheet in a row – a new competition record . Defender Sol Campbell , returning from injury praised the team performance in his post @-@ match interview : " It 's brilliant for us . It 's also great for the manager Arsène Wenger to get to the final in France – I 'm sure he will get a great reception . " 
 In the final against Barcelona , Lehmann was sent off in 18th minute for a professional foul on striker Samuel Eto 'o . Wenger reacted by substituting Robert Pirès for goalkeeper Manuel Almunia , thus altering the formation . In spite of the disadvantage , Arsenal took the lead in the 37th minute , after Henry 's free kick was headed in by Campbell . Henry missed a chance in the second half to give Arsenal a two @-@ nil lead before Eto 'o equalised with 14 minutes left . Substitute Henrik Larsson set up Juliano Belletti to score the winner for Barcelona . Wenger criticised referee Terje Hauge for sending off Lehmann , a view shared by club captain Henry and FIFA president Sepp Blatter . 
 As Arsenal finished fourth in the league , in the following season the club needed to play a third qualifying round , against Dinamo Zagreb in order to participate in the Champions League group stages . The team won 1 – 5 on aggregate , including a 3 – 0 victory in the first European match at the Emirates Stadium . Arsenal was eliminated in the Round of 16 stage , losing on the away goal ruling to PSV Eindhoven . In the 2007 – 08 season , Arsenal equalled their biggest home win in European football , scoring seven against Slavia Prague . The club beat holders Milan in the subsequent round , earning critical acclaim for their style of football , not least from Marcello Lippi : " It would be good for football if Arsenal could win . They play on the ground , they manoeuvre the ball , very , very well . It 's very fast and very technical . " At the quarter @-@ final stage , Liverpool defeated Arsenal 5 – 3 on aggregate to set up a semi @-@ final tie against Chelsea . 
 Arsenal progressed past the group stages of the 2008 – 09 Champions League season and beat Roma and Villarreal to face Manchester United in the semi @-@ finals . A 1 – 0 defeat at Old Trafford meant Arsenal needed to win by two clear goals to progress , but goals from Park Ji @-@ Sung and Cristiano Ronaldo in the first eleven minutes ended the club 's chances of reaching the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final . Wenger in his post @-@ match press conference described the match as " the most disappointing night of my career " , adding " I felt the fans were really up for a big night and to disappoint people who stand behind the team so much hurts . " Arsenal lost to holders Barcelona 5 – 3 on aggregate in the quarter @-@ finals the following season , and in spite of beating the Spanish club 2 – 1 at the Emirates Stadium in 2010 – 11 , Arsenal again were eliminated , this time at the Round of 16 . Arsenal exited at the same stage of the competition for the second consecutive season , against Milan . Having lost the away leg 4 – 0 , the team gave a valiant performance in the second leg at home , winning 3 – 0 on the night , but unable to find the final goal that would have taken the game to extra time . 
 In the 2012 – 13 season , Arsenal fell at the last 16 stage for the third time in three years , losing 3 – 1 to Bayern Munich at home , but managing to win 2 – 0 in the return leg , meaning they went out on the away goals rule . They were once again eliminated by Bayern Munich in the 2013 @-@ 14 season after losing 2 @-@ 0 at home , and drawing 1 @-@ 1 away at Munich . Monaco eliminated it in Round of 16 in the 2014 @-@ 15 season , and again by Barcelona in 2015 @-@ 16 . 
 = = Records = = 
 Arsenal was the first British side to defeat Real Madrid and Juventus away from home . The club was also the first to win against both Milanese teams : Internazionale and Milan at the San Siro . Goalkeeper Jens Lehmann kept ten consecutive clean sheets in the run @-@ in to the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final ; the defence went 995 minutes until conceding a goal . Against Hamburg in the UEFA Champions League group stage on 13 September 2006 , Arsenal became the first team in the competition 's history to field a first eleven of different nationalities . 
 Most appearances in European competition : Thierry Henry , 78 
 Most goals in European competition : Thierry Henry , 41 
 First European match : Copenhagen XI 1 – 7 Arsenal , Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , first round , 25 September 1963 
 First goal scored in Europe : Johnny MacLeod , against Copenhagen XI 
 Biggest win : 
 Standard Liège 0 @-@ 7 Arsenal , in the Cup Winners Cup , 2 November 1993 
 Arsenal 7 – 0 Slavia Prague , in the UEFA Champions League , 23 October 2007 
 Biggest defeat : FC Bayern Munich 5 – 1 Arsenal , in the UEFA Champions League , 4 November 2015 
 Highest European home attendance : 73 @,@ 707 , against Lens in the UEFA Champions League 
 = = = By season = = = 
 Information correct as of 16 March 2016 . 
 Key 
 = = = By competition = = = 
 Information correct as of 16 March 2016 . 
 = = = By country = = = 
 Information correct as of 20 March 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = Frank McNamara ( VC ) = 
 Air Vice Marshal Francis Hubert ( Frank ) McNamara , VC , CB , CBE ( 4 April 1894 – 2 November 1961 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for valour in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to a member of the British and Commonwealth forces . Serving with the Australian Flying Corps , he was honoured for his actions on 20 March 1917 , when he rescued a fellow pilot who had been forced down behind enemy lines . McNamara was the first Australian aviator — and the only one in World War I — to receive the Victoria Cross . He later became a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . 
 Born and educated in Victoria , McNamara was a teacher when he joined the militia prior to World War I. In 1915 , he was selected for pilot training at Central Flying School , Point Cook , and transferred to the Australian Flying Corps the following year . He was based in the Middle Eastern Theatre with No. 1 Squadron when he earned the Victoria Cross . In 1921 , McNamara enlisted as a flying officer in the newly formed RAAF , rising to the rank of air vice marshal by 1942 . He held senior posts in England and Aden during World War II . Retiring from the Air Force in 1946 , McNamara continued to live in Britain until his death from heart failure in 1961 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Rushworth , Victoria , McNamara was the first of eight children to William Francis McNamara , a State Lands Department officer , and his wife Rosanna . He began his schooling in Rushworth , and completed his secondary education at Shepparton Agricultural High School , which he had entered via a scholarship . The family moved to Melbourne in 1910 . 
 McNamara joined the school cadets in 1911 , and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 49th Battalion ( Brighton Rifles ) , a militia unit , in July 1913 . He became a teacher after graduating from Melbourne Teachers ' Training College in 1914 , and taught at various schools in Victoria . He also enrolled in the University of Melbourne , but his studies were interrupted by the outbreak of World War I. 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Militia to Australian Flying Corps = = = 
 As a militia officer , McNamara was mobilised for service in Australia when war was declared in August 1914 . After serving briefly at bases in Queenscliff and Point Nepean , Victoria , McNamara passed through Officers Training School at Broadmeadows in December . He began instructing at the Australian Imperial Force Training Depot , Broadmeadows , in February 1915 . Promoted to lieutenant in July , he immediately volunteered for a military aeronautics course at the Central Flying School , Point Cook . 
 Selected for flying training at Point Cook in August 1915 , McNamara made his first solo flight in a Bristol Boxkite on 18 September , and graduated as a pilot in October . On 6 January 1916 , he was assigned as adjutant to No. 1 Squadron , Australian Flying Corps ( also known until 1918 as No. 67 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ) . In March , McNamara departed Melbourne for Egypt aboard HMAT Orsova , arriving in Suez the following month . He was seconded to No. 42 Squadron RFC in May to attend the Central Flying School at Upavon , England ; his secondment to the RFC was gazetted on 5 July 1916 . 
 Completing his course at Upavon , McNamara was posted back to Egypt in August , but was hospitalised on 8 September with <unk> . Discharged on 6 October , he served briefly as a flying instructor with No. 22 Squadron RFC , before returning to No. 1 Squadron . McNamara flew with C Flight , commanded by Captain ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Richard Williams . On his first sortie , a reconnaissance mission over Sinai , McNamara was unaware that his plane had been hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire ; he returned to base with his engine 's oil supply almost exhausted . Flying B.E.2s and Martinsydes , he undertook further scouting and bombing missions in the ensuing months . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 On 20 March 1917 , McNamara , flying a Martinsyde , was one of four No. 1 Squadron pilots taking part in a raid against a Turkish railway junction near Gaza . Owing to a shortage of bombs , the aircraft were each armed with six specially modified 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzer shells . McNamara had successfully dropped three of his shells when the fourth exploded prematurely , badly wounded him in the leg with shrapnel , an effect he likened to being " hit with a sledgehammer " . Having turned to head back to base , he spotted a fellow squadron member from the same mission , Captain David Rutherford , on the ground beside his crashlanded <unk> Allied airmen had been hacked to death by enemy troops in similar situations , and McNamara saw that a company of Turkish cavalry was fast approaching Rutherford 's position . Despite the rough terrain and the gash in his leg , McNamara landed near Rutherford in an attempt to rescue him . 
 As there was no spare cockpit in the single @-@ seat Martinsyde , the downed pilot jumped onto McNamara 's wing and held the struts . McNamara crashed while attempting to take off because of the effects of his leg wound and Rutherford 's weight overbalancing the aircraft . The two men , who had escaped further injury in the accident , set fire to the Martinsyde and dashed back to Rutherford 's <unk> Rutherford repaired the engine while McNamara used his revolver against the attacking cavalry , who had opened fire on them . Two other No. 1 Squadron pilots overhead , Lieutenant ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Roy " Peter " Drummond and Lieutenant Alfred Ellis , also began strafing the enemy troops . McNamara managed to start the B.E.2 's engine and take off , with Rutherford in the observer 's cockpit . In severe pain and close to blacking out from loss of blood , McNamara flew the damaged aircraft 70 miles ( 110 km ) back to base at El Arish . 
 Having effected what was described in the Australian official history of the war as " a brilliant escape in the very nick of time and under hot fire " , McNamara " could only emit exhausted expletives " before he lost consciousness shortly after landing . Evacuated to hospital , he almost died following an allergic reaction to a routine tetanus injection . McNamara had to be given artificial respiration and stimulants to keep him alive , but recovered quickly . A contemporary news report declared that he was " soon sitting up , eating chicken and drinking champagne " . On 26 March , McNamara was recommended for the Victoria Cross by Brigadier General Geoffrey Salmond , General Officer Commanding Middle East Brigade , RFC . Drummond , Ellis , and Rutherford all wrote statements on 3 – 4 April attesting to their comrade 's actions , Rutherford declaring that " the risk of Lieut . MacNamara being killed or captured was so great that even had he not been wounded he would have been justified in not attempting my rescue – the fact of his already being wounded makes his action one of outstanding gallantry – his determination and resource and utter disregard of danger throughout the operation was worthy of the highest praise " . The first and only VC awarded to an Australian airman in World War I , McNamara 's decoration was promulgated in the London Gazette on 8 June 1917 : 
 Lt. Frank Hubert McNamara , Aus . Forces , R.F.C. 
 For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during an aerial bomb attack upon a hostile construction train , when one of our pilots was forced to land behind the enemy 's lines . 
 Lt. McNamara , observing this pilot 's predicament and the fact that hostile cavalry were approaching , descended to his rescue . He did this under heavy rifle fire and in spite of the fact that he himself had been severely wounded in the thigh . 
 He landed about 200 yards from the damaged machine , the pilot of which climbed onto Lt. McNamara 's machine , and an attempt was made to rise . Owing , however , to his disabled leg , Lt. McNamara was unable to keep his machine straight , and it turned over . The two officers , having extricated themselves , immediately set fire to the machine and made their way across to the damaged machine , which they succeeded in starting . 
 Finally Lt. McNamara , although weak from loss of blood , flew this machine back to the aerodrome , a distance of seventy miles , and thus completed his comrade 's rescue . 
 Promoted to captain on 10 April 1917 , McNamara became a flight commander in No. 4 Squadron AFC ( also known until 1918 as No. 71 Squadron RFC ) , but was unable to continue flying due to the leg wound he suffered on 20 March . He was invalided back to Australia in August aboard HT <unk> , and given a hero 's welcome on arrival in Melbourne . Found to be medically unfit for active service , McNamara was discharged from the Australian Flying Corps on 31 January 1918 . Panic caused by the intrusion into Australian waters of the German raider Wolf resulted in him being recalled to the AFC and put in charge of an aerial reconnaissance unit based in South Gippsland , Victoria , flying a Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> and later a Maurice Farman Shorthorn . In September 1918 , he was posted as a flying instructor to Point Cook , where he saw out the remainder of the war . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Following the disbandment of the AFC , McNamara transferred to the Australian Air Corps ( AAC ) in April 1920 . He was not offered an appointment in the AAC initially , however , and secured one only after Captain Roy King protested the situation by giving up his own place in the new service in favour of McNamara , whom he described as " this very good and gallant officer " . McNamara was invested with his Victoria Cross by the Prince of Wales at Government House , Melbourne , on 26 May . He enlisted in the newly established Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in 1921 . Ranked flying officer ( honorary flight lieutenant ) , he was one of the original twenty @-@ one officers on the Air Force 's strength at its formation that March . Posted to RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne as Staff Officer Operations and Intelligence , McNamara was given command of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) at Point Cook in July 1922 . He was promoted squadron leader in March 1924 and the following month married Hélène Bluntschli , a Belgian national he had met in Cairo during the war , at St Patrick 's Cathedral ; his best man was fellow officer Frank Lukis . 
 McNamara travelled to England in 1925 for two years exchange with the Royal Air Force , serving at No. 5 Flying Training School , RAF Sealand , and the Directorate of Training at the Air Ministry , London . Returning to Australia in November 1927 , he was appointed Second @-@ in @-@ Command No. 1 FTS . In 1928 , McNamara resumed his studies at the University of Melbourne , having earlier failed to pass the necessary exams to enter the RAF Staff College , Andover . A part @-@ time student at the university , he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in International Relations ( second @-@ class honours ) in 1933 . McNamara became Commanding Officer No. 1 FTS in October 1930 , and was promoted to wing commander one year later . He was placed in charge of RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , including No. 1 Aircraft Depot , in February 1933 . McNamara was raised to group captain in 1936 , and attended the Imperial Defence College , London , the following year . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 1938 New Year Honours . 
 = = World War II = = 
 When World War II broke out in September 1939 , McNamara was serving as Air Liaison Officer at Australia House in London , a position he had held since January 1938 . Shortly before being promoted air commodore in December , he advocated establishing a reception base to act as a headquarters for the RAAF in England and " generally to watch the interests of Australian personnel " who were stationed there . By November 1940 he had reversed his position , in favour of an Air Ministry proposal to process personnel of all nationalities in one RAF base camp . In the event , RAAF Overseas Headquarters was formed on 1 December 1941 , with Air Marshal Richard Williams appointed Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) , and McNamara Deputy AOC . McNamara became acting air vice marshal and acting AOC of RAAF Overseas Headquarters when Williams returned to Australia in January 1942 for what was expected to be a temporary visit ; Williams was subsequently posted to Washington , D.C. and McNamara retained command of the headquarters until the end of the year . 
 McNamara was appointed AOC British Forces Aden in late 1942 , and arrived to take up the posting on 9 January 1943 . Described in the official history of Australia in the war as a " backwater " , British Forces Aden 's main functions were conducting anti @-@ submarine patrols and escorting convoys . McNamara flew on these missions whenever he could , generally as an observer , but enemy contact was rare . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the 1945 New Year Honours , and returned to London in March . That month McNamara was deeply affected by the loss of his close friend Peter Drummond , who had helped keep attacking cavalry at bay during his Victoria Cross action in 1917 . Drummond 's Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator disappeared near the Azores en route to Canada and all aboard were presumed killed ; McNamara had to break the news to his widow , Isabel . McNamara 's health had also suffered from exposure to the desert dust in Aden , and he was unable to take up his next position as the RAAF 's representative at the Ministry of Defence until September . His entire war was spent outside Australia . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 McNamara was summarily retired from the RAAF in 1946 , along with several other senior commanders and veterans of World War I , officially to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . In any case , his role overseas had become redundant . He was discharged from the Air Force on 11 July . In May 1946 , the British government offered McNamara the position of Senior Education Control Officer in Westphalia , Germany , under the auspices of the Allied Control Commission . He later became Deputy Director of Education for the British Zone of Occupation . McNamara continued to live in England after completing his work with the Commission in October 1947 , and served on the National Coal Board in London from 1947 to 1959 . He died of hypertensive heart failure on 2 November 1961 , aged 67 , after suffering a fall at his home in Buckinghamshire . Survived by his wife and two children , he was buried at St Joseph 's Priory , Austin Wood , <unk> Cross , following a large funeral . 
 Embittered by his dismissal from the RAAF and the meagre severance he received from the Australian Government , McNamara insisted that his Victoria Cross not be returned to Australia after his death ; his family donated it to the RAF Museum , London . A fellow No. 1 Squadron pilot , Lieutenant ( later Air Vice Marshal ) Adrian Cole , described McNamara as " quiet , scholarly , loyal and beloved by all ... the last Officer for whom that high honour would have been predicted " . He was one of the few Victoria Cross recipients to subsequently attain senior rank in the armed services , though RAAF historian Alan Stephens considered that his appointments were " in the main routine " and that his one great deed led to " a degree of fame that he perhaps found burdensome " . Biographer Chris Coulthard @-@ Clark summed up McNamara 's " dilemma " as that of " an essentially ordinary man " thrust into the limelight by one " truly amazing episode " . His name is borne by Frank McNamara Park in Shepparton , Victoria , and the Frank McNamara VC Club at Oakey Army Aviation Centre , Queensland . 
 = 89th Military Police Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 89th Military Police Brigade is a military police brigade of the United States Army based at Fort Hood , Texas . It is a subordinate unit of III Corps . 
 Activated in Vietnam in the midst of the Vietnam War , the unit provided military police services for two corp @-@ sized forces operating in the region . It played a supporting role throughout the entire conflict , staying in theater for the entire war and earning fifteen campaign streamers . 
 Since then , the brigade has seen duty in numerous areas of operation throughout the world and performed numerous duties including disaster relief for Hurricane Hugo as well as service in Guantanamo Bay . It also played a supporting role in the Gulf War . Recently the brigade served two tours of duty in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The brigade is subordinate to III Corps . It is headquartered at Fort Hood , Texas . Almost 1 @,@ 000 soldiers of the brigade are stationed there . 
 The Brigade contains five subordinate battalions of military police : 
 <unk> Military Police Battalion , at Fort Bliss 
 720th Military Police Battalion , at Fort Hood 
 97th Military Police Battalion ( Formerly <unk> ) , at Fort Riley 
 759th Military Police Battalion , at Fort Carson 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 The 89th Military Police Brigade was originally activated as a " group " , roughly the size of a modern regiment . The 89th Military Police Group was constituted in the Regular Army on 19 February 1966 and activated on 15 March of that year in the Republic of Vietnam . The mission of the 89th Military Police Group was to provide general military police support for the III Corps and IV Corps Tactical Zones . The group stayed in Vietnam in support of the two corps ' areas of operation . As the group was a supporting unit , it never saw front line combat . However , it did receive all 15 campaign streamers that could be earned for Vietnam service . With the removal of US forces from Vietnam , the organization was inactivated on 21 December 1971 . 
 On 13 September 1972 the unit was activated at Fort Lewis , Washington . The 89th Military Police Group was designed to command and control the operations of three to five military police battalions and other assigned or attached units . Additionally , it provided a Provost Marshal staff section to the corps headquarters while assigned as their senior military police organization . 
 The 89th Military Police Group remained at Fort Lewis until 21 February 1976 when the colors were transferred to Fort Hood , Texas . On 16 July 1981 the 89th Military Police Group was reorganized as the 89th Military Police Brigade . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 The 89th Military Police Brigade was originally activated as a " group " , roughly the size of a modern regiment . The 89th Military Police Group was constituted in the Regular Army on 19 February 1966 and activated on 15 March of that year in the Republic of Vietnam . The mission of the 89th Military Police Group was to provide general military police support for the III Corps and IV Corps Tactical Zones . The group stayed in Vietnam in support of the two corps ' areas of operation . As the group was a supporting unit , it never saw front line combat . However , it did receive all 15 campaign streamers that could be earned for Vietnam service . With the removal of US forces from Vietnam , the organization was inactivated on 21 December 1971 . 
 On 13 September 1972 the unit was activated at Fort Lewis , Washington . The 89th Military Police Group was designed to command and control the operations of three to five military police battalions and other assigned or attached units . Additionally , it provided a Provost Marshal staff section to the corps headquarters while assigned as their senior military police organization . 
 The 89th Military Police Group remained at Fort Lewis until 21 February 1976 when the colors were transferred to Fort Hood , Texas . On 16 July 1981 the 89th Military Police Group was reorganized as the 89th Military Police Brigade . 1973 & 1974 special members of the 89th PM Group were covertly assigned to Yakima base in Eastern Washington , for special assignments on CID Trafficking via the ASA / NSA center located under ground . PFC Scott Barnes was one member working under orders from MG Gard of Ft . Lewis and Captain Colbert of the MP unit to investigate narcotics trafficking . Source Cited US Congressional Hearings 1986 thru 1989 . Classified Hearing as well as in the Book <unk> 1987 by Scott Barnes and Kiss the Boy 's Goodbye by Monika Jensen 2014 
 = = = Operation Iraqi Freedom = = = 
 The 89th Military Police Brigade deployed to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom early 2004 , where it took over the mission previously tasked to the 18th Military Police Brigade on 31 January 2004 . At that time the brigade assumed responsibility for the Iraqi Police training mission as well as the majority of all the Military Police Units in Iraq at that time . The unit returned to Fort Hood in December 2004 . 
 The 89th Military Police Brigade deployed for a second tour in August 2006 to the Iraqi theater of operation in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom 2006 – 2008 . During the deployment , it was composed of over 5 @,@ 000 military police soldiers in the theater . Brigade responsibilities included corrections and security operations . It deployed K @-@ 9 units during some operations . The brigade 's primary responsibility , though , was the training of Iraqi police units . The brigade focused on local police units throughout the country , as another MP brigade handled the national police . The brigade commander would brief US Department of Defense officials in The Pentagon on the current situation , live from Iraq . It suffered several casualties , including a soldier killed by sniper fire , a soldier killed by a suicide car bomb , and two soldiers who died of non @-@ combat related causes . The brigade returned home in October 2007 , replaced again by the 18th Military Police Brigade . After this , the brigade resumed its policing roles at Fort Hood . 
 During its second deployment , one of the unit commanders , William H. Steele , became infamous for being accused of breaching military law by aiding the enemy . He was acquitted of the charges , though he was convicted of other charges and subsequently dismissed from the military . 
 = = = Operation Enduring Freedom = = = 
 The 410th Military Police Company deployed to Afghanistan in May 2009 and returned in May 2010 . The 116th Military Police Company , 97th MP BN , <unk> MP BDE deployed to FOB <unk> , <unk> Province , Afghanistan from May 2010 to May 2011 . The <unk> and 64th Military Police Companies deployed to Afghanistan in May 2010 and returned in April of 2011 . The 411th Military Police Company deployed to Kandahar Province in May 2011 and returned to Fort Hood in May 2012 . HHD , 720th Military Police Battalion deployed in December 2011 and returned in December 2012 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = 253 Mathilde = 
 253 Mathilde / <unk> / is a main @-@ belt asteroid about 50 km in diameter that was discovered by Johann Palisa in 1885 . It has a relatively elliptical orbit that requires more than four years to circle the Sun . This asteroid has an unusually slow rate of rotation , requiring 17 @.@ 4 days to complete a 360 ° revolution about its axis . It is a primitive C @-@ type asteroid , which means the surface has a high proportion of carbon ; giving it a dark surface that reflects only 4 % of the light that falls on it . 
 This asteroid was visited by the NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft during June 1997 , on its way to asteroid 433 Eros . During the flyby , the spacecraft imaged a hemisphere of the asteroid , revealing many large craters that have gouged out depressions in the surface . It was the first C @-@ type asteroid to be explored and , until 21 Lutetia was visited in 2010 , it was the largest asteroid to be visited by a spacecraft . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 In 1880 , Johann Palisa , the director of the Austrian Naval Observatory , was offered a position as an assistant at the newly completed Vienna Observatory . Although the job represented a demotion for Johann , it gave him access to the new 27 @-@ inch ( 690 mm ) refractor , the largest telescope in the world at that time . By this point Johann had already discovered 27 asteroids , and he would employ the Vienna 27 @-@ inch ( 690 mm ) and 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) instruments to find an additional 94 asteroids before he retired . 
 Among his discoveries was the asteroid 253 Mathilde , found on November 12 , 1885 . The initial orbital elements of the asteroid were then computed by V. A. <unk> , another Austrian astronomer working at the observatory . The name of the asteroid was suggested by <unk> , after Mathilde , the wife of Moritz <unk> — who was the vice director of the Paris Observatory . 
 In 1995 , ground @-@ based observations determined that 253 Mathilde is a C @-@ type asteroid . It was also found to have an unusually long period of rotation . 
 On June 27 , 1997 , the NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft passed within 1 @,@ 212 km of 253 Mathilde while moving at a velocity of 9 @.@ 93 km / s . This close approach allowed the spacecraft to capture over 500 images of the surface , and provided data for more accurate determinations of the asteroid 's dimensions and mass ( based on gravitational perturbation of the spacecraft ) . However , only one hemisphere of 253 Mathilde was imaged during the fly @-@ by . This was only the third asteroid to be imaged from a nearby distance , following 951 Gaspra and 243 Ida . 
 = = Description = = 
 253 Mathilde is very dark , with an albedo comparable to fresh asphalt , and is thought to share the same composition as <unk> or <unk> carbonaceous chondrite meteorites , with a surface dominated by phyllosilicate minerals . The asteroid has a number of extremely large craters , with the individual craters being named for coal fields and basins around the world . The two largest craters , <unk> ( 29 @.@ 3 km ) and Karoo ( 33 @.@ 4 km ) , are as wide as the asteroid 's average radius . The impacts appear to have spalled large volumes off the asteroid , as suggested by the angular edges of the craters . No differences in brightness or colour were visible in the craters and there was no appearance of layering , so the asteroid 's interior must be very homogeneous . There are indications of material movement along the downslope direction . 
 The density measured by NEAR Shoemaker , 1 @,@ 300 kg / m ³ , is less than half that of a typical carbonaceous chondrite ; this may indicate that the asteroid is very loosely packed rubble pile . The same is true of several C @-@ type asteroids studied by ground @-@ based telescopes equipped with adaptive optics systems ( 45 Eugenia , 90 Antiope , 87 Sylvia and 121 Hermione ) . Up to 50 % of the interior volume of 253 Mathilde consists of open space . However , the existence of a 20 @-@ km @-@ long scarp may indicate that the asteroid does have some structural strength , so it could contain some large internal components . The low interior density is an inefficient transmitter of impact shock through the asteroid , which also helps to preserve the surface features to a high degree . 
 Mathilde 's orbit is eccentric , taking it to the outer reaches of the main belt . Nonetheless , the orbit lies entirely between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter ; it does not cross the planetary orbits . It also has one of the slowest rotation periods of the known asteroids — most asteroids have a rotation period in the range of 2 – 24 hours . Because of the slow rotation rate , NEAR Shoemaker was only able to photograph 60 % of the asteroid 's surface . The slow rate of rotation may be accounted for by a satellite orbiting the asteroid , but a search of the NEAR images revealed none larger than 10 km in diameter out to 20 times the radius of 253 Mathilde . 
 = Gary Johnson = 
 Gary Earl Johnson ( born January 1 , 1953 ) is an American businessman , politician and the Libertarian Party nominee for President of the United States in the 2016 election . He served as the 29th Governor of New Mexico from 1995 to 2003 as a member of the Republican Party . He was the Libertarian Party 's nominee for President of the United States in the 2012 election . 
 Johnson announced his candidacy for president on April 21 , 2011 , as a Republican , on a libertarian platform emphasizing the United States public debt and a balanced budget through a 43 % reduction of all federal government spending , protection of civil liberties , an immediate end to the War in Afghanistan and his advocacy of the FairTax . 
 On December 28 , 2011 , after being excluded from the majority of the Republican Party 's presidential debates and failing to gain traction while campaigning for the New Hampshire primary , he withdrew his candidacy for the Republican nomination and announced that he would continue his presidential campaign as a candidate for the nomination of the Libertarian Party . He won the Libertarian Party nomination on May 5 , 2012 . His chosen running mate Judge James P. Gray of California won the vice @-@ presidential nomination . The Johnson / Gray ticket received 0 @.@ 99 % of the popular vote , amounting to 1 @.@ 27 million votes , more than all other minor candidates combined . It was the best showing in the Libertarian Party 's history by vote count . 
 On January 6 , 2016 , Johnson announced his candidacy for the Libertarian nomination once again in 2016 , and in May he selected former Republican Governor of Massachusetts William Weld as his running mate . On May 29 , 2016 , Johnson won the Libertarian nomination on the second ballot with 55 @.@ 8 % of the delegates . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Johnson was born on January 1 , 1953 , in Minot , North Dakota , the son of Lorraine B. ( née <unk> ) , who worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs , and Earl W. Johnson , a public school teacher . Johnson graduated from Sandia High School in Albuquerque in 1971 , where he was on the school track team . He attended the University of New Mexico from 1971 to 1975 and graduated with a Bachelor of Science in political science . While at <unk> , he joined the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity . It was there that he met his future wife , Denise " Dee " Simms . While in college , Johnson earned money as a door @-@ to @-@ door handyman . His success in that industry encouraged him to start his own business , Big J Enterprises , in 1976 . When he started the business , which focused on mechanical contracting , Johnson was its only employee . His major break with the firm was receiving a large contract from Intel 's expansion in Rio Rancho , which increased Big J 's revenue to $ 38 million . Over @-@ burdened by his success , Johnson enrolled in a time management course at night school , which he credits with making him heavily goal @-@ driven . He eventually grew Big J into a multimillion @-@ dollar corporation with over 1 @,@ 000 employees . By the time he sold the company in 1999 , it was one of New Mexico 's leading construction companies . 
 He entered politics for the first time by running for Governor of New Mexico in 1994 on a fiscally conservative , low @-@ tax and anti @-@ crime platform . Johnson won the Republican Party of New Mexico 's gubernatorial nomination , and defeated incumbent Democratic governor Bruce King . During his tenure as governor , Johnson became known for his low @-@ tax libertarian views , adhering to policies of tax and bureaucracy reduction supported by a cost – benefit analysis rationale . He cut the 10 % annual growth in the budget : in part , due to his use of the gubernatorial veto 200 times during his first six months in office . Johnson set state and national records for his use of veto and line @-@ item veto powers : estimated to have been more than the other 49 contemporary governors combined , which gained him the nicknames " Veto Johnson " and " Governor Veto " . 
 Johnson successfully sought re @-@ election in 1998 . In his second term , he concentrated on the issue of school voucher reforms , as well as campaigning for marijuana decriminalization and legalization , and opposition to the War on Drugs . Term limited , Johnson could not run for re @-@ election at the end of his second term . After leaving office , Johnson founded the non @-@ profit Our America Initiative in 2009 , a political advocacy committee seeking to promote policies such as free enterprise , foreign non @-@ interventionism , limited government and privatization . He endorsed the Republican presidential candidacy of Congressman Ron Paul in the 2008 election . 
 = = Governor of New Mexico = = 
 = = = First term = = = 
 Johnson entered politics in 1994 , with the intention of running for governor and was advised by " Republican Elders " to run for the State Legislature instead . Despite their advice , Johnson spent $ 500 @,@ 000 of his own money and entered the race with the intent of bringing a " common sense business approach " to the office . Johnson 's campaign slogan was " People before Politics " . His platform emphasized tax cuts , job creation , state government spending growth restraint , and law and order . He won the Republican nomination , defeating state legislator Richard P. Cheney by 34 % to 33 % , with John <unk> and former governor David F. Cargo in third and fourth . Johnson subsequently won the general election , defeating the incumbent Democratic Governor Bruce King by 50 % to 40 % . Johnson was elected in a nationally Republican year , although party registration in the state of New Mexico at the time was 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 Democratic . 
 As governor , Johnson followed a strict small government approach . According to former New Mexico Republican National Committee member Mickey D. Barnett , " Any time someone approached him about legislation for some purpose , his first response always was to ask if government should be involved in that to begin with . " He vetoed 200 of 424 bills in his first six months in office — a national record of 47 % of all legislation — and used the line @-@ item veto on most remaining bills . In office , Johnson fulfilled his campaign promise to reduce the 10 % annual growth of the state budget . In his first budget , Johnson proposed a wide range of tax cuts , including a repeal of the prescription drug tax , a $ 47 million income tax cut , and a 6 cents per gallon gasoline tax cut . However , of these , only the gasoline tax cut was passed . During the November 1995 federal government shutdown , he joined 20 other Republican governors who called on the Republican leadership in Congress to stand firm in negotiations against the Clinton administration in budget negotiations ; in the article reporting on the letter and concomitant news conference he was quoted as calling for eliminating the budget deficit through proportional cuts across the budget . Although Johnson worked to reduce overall state spending , in his first term , he raised education spending by nearly a third . When drop @-@ out rates and test scores showed little improvement , Johnson changed his tactics and began advocating for school vouchers — a key issue in budget battles of his second term as governor . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 In 1998 , Johnson ran for re @-@ election as governor against Democratic Albuquerque Mayor Martin Chavez . In his campaign , Johnson promised to continue the policies of his first term : improving schools ; cutting state spending , taxes , and bureaucracy ; and frequent use of his veto and line @-@ item veto power . Fielding a strong Hispanic candidate in a 40 % Hispanic state , the Democrats were expected to oust Johnson , but Johnson won by a 55 % -to @-@ 45 % margin : making him the first Governor of New Mexico to serve two successive four @-@ year terms after term limits were expanded to two terms in 1991 . Johnson made the promotion of a school voucher system a " hallmark issue " of his second term . In 1999 , he proposed the first statewide voucher system in America , which would have enrolled 100 @,@ 000 students in its first year . That year , he vetoed two budgets that failed to include a voucher program and a government shutdown was threatened , but ultimately yielded to Democratic majorities in both houses of the New Mexico Legislature , who opposed the plan . Johnson signed the budget , but line @-@ item vetoed a further $ <unk> , or 0 @.@ 5 % , from the legislative plan . In 1999 , Johnson became one of the highest @-@ ranking elected officials in the US to advocate the legalization of marijuana . Saying the War on Drugs was " an expensive bust " , he advocated the decriminalization of marijuana use and concentration on harm @-@ reduction measures for all other illegal drugs . " He compared attempts to enforce the nation 's drug laws with the failed attempt at alcohol prohibition . Half of what government spends on police , courts and prisons is to deal with drug offenders . " He suggested that drug abuse be treated as a health issue , not as a criminal issue . His approach to the issue garnered supportive notice from conservative icon William F. Buckley , as well as the Cato Institute and Rolling Stone . 
 In 2000 , Johnson proposed a more ambitious voucher program than he had proposed the year before , under which each parent would receive $ 3 @,@ 500 per child for education at any private or parochial school . The Democrats sought $ 90m extra school funding without school vouchers , and questioned Johnson 's request for more funding for state @-@ run prisons , having opposed his opening of two private prisons . Negotiations between the governor and the legislature were contentious , again nearly leading to a government shutdown . In 2000 , New Mexico was devastated by the Cerro Grande Fire . Johnson 's handling of the disaster earned him accolades from The Denver Post , which observed that : 
 Johnson ..... was all over the Cerro Grande Fire last week . He helped reporters understand where the fire was headed when low @-@ level Forest Service officials couldn 't , ran herd over the bureaucratic process of getting state and federal agencies and the National Guard involved , and even helped put out some of the fire with his feet . On a tour of Los Alamos last Wednesday , when he saw small flames spreading across a lawn , he had his driver stop his car . He jumped out and stomped on the flames , as did his wife and some of his staffers . 
 Johnson 's leadership during the fire was praised by Democratic Congressman Tom Udall , who said : " I think the real test of leadership is when you have circumstances like this . He 's called on his reserves of energy and has just been a really excellent leader under very difficult circumstances here . " Johnson rebuffed efforts by the Libertarian Party to draft him in the 2000 presidential election , stating himself to be a Republican with no interest in running for president . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Commentator Andrew Sullivan quoted a claim that Johnson " is highly regarded in the state for his outstanding leadership during two terms as governor . He slashed the size of state government during his term and left the state with a large budget surplus . " In an interview in Reason magazine in January 2001 , Johnson 's accomplishments in office were described as follows : " no tax increases in six years , a major road building program , shifting Medicaid to managed care , constructing two new private prisons , canning 1 @,@ 200 state employees , and vetoing a record number of bills " . According to one New Mexico paper , " Johnson left the state fiscally solid " , and was " arguably the most popular governor of the decade … leaving the state with a $ 1 billion budget surplus . " The Washington Times reported that when Johnson left office , " the size of state government had been substantially reduced and New Mexico was enjoying a large budget surplus . " 
 According to a profile of Johnson in the National Review , " During his tenure , he vetoed more bills than the other 49 governors combined — 750 in total , one third of which had been introduced by Republican legislators . Johnson also used his line @-@ item @-@ veto power thousands of times . He credits his heavy veto pen for eliminating New Mexico 's budget deficit and cutting the growth rate of New Mexico 's government in half . " According to the Myrtle Beach Sun News , Johnson " said his numerous vetoes , only two of which were overridden , stemmed from his philosophy of looking at all things for their cost – benefit ratio and his axe fell on Republicans as well as Democrats " . 
 While in office , Johnson was criticized for opposing funding for an independent study of private prisons after a series of riots and killings at the facilities . Martin Chavez , his opponent in the 1998 New Mexico gubernatorial race , criticized Johnson for his frequent vetoing of programs , suggesting that it resulted in New Mexico 's low economic and social standing nationally . Journalist Mark Ames described Johnson as " a hard @-@ core conservative " who " ruled the state like a right @-@ wing authoritarian " and only embraced marijuana legalization in his second term for populist gain . This was mainly in reference to a commercial from Johnson 's reelection campaign , featuring Johnson saying that a felon in New Mexico would serve " every lousy second " of their prison sentence . Johnson insisted however that the commercial was directed at " the guy who 's got his gun out " rather than non @-@ violent drug offenders . 
 = = = Post governorship = = = 
 Johnson was term limited and could not run for a third consecutive term as governor in 2002 . In the 2008 presidential election campaign , Johnson endorsed Ron Paul for the Republican nomination , " because of his commitment to less government , greater liberty , and lasting prosperity for America . " Johnson spoke at Paul 's " Rally for the Republic " on September 2 , 2008 . 
 Johnson serves on the Advisory Council of Students for Sensible Drug Policy , a student nonprofit organization which advocates for drug policy reform . 
 As of April 2011 , he serves on the board of directors of Students For Liberty , a nonprofit libertarian organization . His first book , Seven Principles of Good Government , was published on August 1 , 2012 . 
 = = 2012 presidential campaign = = 
 In the 2012 United States presidential election , Johnson received 0 @.@ 99 % of the popular vote , a total of 1 @,@ 275 @,@ 971 votes . This was the best result in the Libertarian Party 's history by raw vote number , though under the 1 @.@ 1 percentage of the vote won by Ed Clark in 1980 . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 2009 , Johnson began indicating interest in running for president in the 2012 election . In the April 20 , 2009 edition of The American Conservative magazine , Bill Kauffman told readers to " keep an eye out " for a Johnson presidential campaign in 2012 , reporting that Johnson had told him that " he was keeping his options open for 2012 " and that " he may take a shot at the Republican presidential nomination in 2012 as an antiwar , anti @-@ Fed , pro @-@ personal liberties , slash @-@ government @-@ spending candidate — in other words , a Ron Paul libertarian " . During a June 24 , 2009 appearance on Fox News 's Freedom Watch , host Judge Andrew Napolitano asked Johnson if he would run for president in 2012 , to which Johnson responded that he thought it would be inappropriate to openly express his desires before President Obama is given the opportunity to prove himself , but he followed up that statement by saying " it appears personal freedoms are being shoveled out the window more and more . " 
 In an October 26 , 2009 interview with the Santa Fe New Mexican 's Steve Terrell , Johnson announced his decision to form an advocacy committee called the Our America Initiative to help him raise funds and promote small government ideas . In December 2009 , Johnson asked strategist Ron Nielson of <unk> Opinion Strategy , who has worked with Johnson since 1993 when he ran his successful gubernatorial campaign , to organize the Our American Initiative as a 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) committee . Nielson serves as a senior advisor to Our America Initiative . The stated focus of the organization is to " speak out on issues regarding topics such as government efficiency , lowering taxes , ending the war on drugs , protecting civil liberties , revitalizing the economy and promoting entrepreneurship and privatization " . The move prompted speculation among media pundits and Johnson 's supporters that he might be laying the groundwork for a 2012 presidential run . Throughout 2010 , Johnson repeatedly deflected questions about a 2012 presidential bid by saying his 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) status prevented him from expressing a desire to run for federal office on politics . However , he was outspoken about the issues affecting the country , particularly " the size and cost of government " and the " deficits and debt that truly threaten to consume the U.S. economy , and which represent the single greatest threat to our national security . " 
 In February 2011 , Johnson was a featured speaker at both the Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) and the Republican Liberty Caucus . At CPAC , " the crowd liked him — even as he pushed some of his more controversial points . " Johnson tied with New Jersey Governor Chris Christie for third in the CPAC Straw Poll , trailing only Ron Paul and Mitt Romney ( and ahead of such notables as former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich , former Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty , Indiana Governor Mitch Daniels and former Alaska Governor and 2008 vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin ) . David Weigel of Slate called Johnson the second @-@ biggest winner of the conference , writing that his " third @-@ place showing in the straw poll gave Johnson his first real media hook … He met tons of reporters , commanded a small scrum after the vote , and is a slightly lighter shade of dark horse now . " 
 = = = Republican presidential candidacy = = = 
 On April 21 , 2011 Johnson announced via Twitter , " I am running for president . " He followed this announcement with a speech at the New Hampshire State House in Concord , New Hampshire . He was the first of an eventually large field to announce his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination . Johnson again chose Ron Nielson of <unk> Opinion Strategy a director for both of his New Mexico gubernatorial campaigns , as his presidential campaign manager and senior advisor . The campaign was headquartered in Salt Lake City , Utah where Nielson 's offices are located . Johnson 's economics advisor was Harvard economics professor Jeffrey Miron . Initially , Johnson hoped Ron Paul would not run for president so that Johnson could galvanize Paul 's network of libertarian @-@ minded voters , and he even traveled to Houston to tell Paul of his decision to run in person , but Paul announced his candidacy on May 13 , 2011 . 
 Johnson participated in the first of the Republican presidential debates , hosted by Fox News in South Carolina on May 5 , 2011 , appearing on stage with Herman Cain , Ron Paul , Tim Pawlenty , and Rick Santorum . Mitt Romney and Michele Bachmann both declined to debate . Johnson was excluded from the next three debates on June 13 ( hosted by CNN in New Hampshire ) , August 11 ( hosted by Fox News in Iowa ) , and September 7 ( hosted by CNN in California ) . After the first exclusion , Johnson made a 43 @-@ minute video responding to each of the debate questions , which he posted on YouTube . The first exclusion , which was widely publicized , gave Johnson " a little bump " in name recognition and produced " a small uptick " in donations . But " the long term consequences were dismal . " For the financial quarter ending June 30 , Johnson raised a mere $ 180 @,@ 000 . Fox News decided that because Johnson polled at least 2 % in five recent polls , he could participate in a September 22 debate in Florida , which it co @-@ hosted with the Florida Republican Party ( the party objected to Johnson 's inclusion ) . Johnson participated , appearing on stage with Michele Bachmann , Herman Cain , Newt Gingrich , Jon Huntsman , Ron Paul , Rick Perry , Mitt Romney , and Rick Santorum . During the debate , Johnson delivered what many media outlets , including the Los Angeles Times , and Time , called the best line of the night : " My next @-@ door neighbor 's two dogs have created more shovel ready jobs than this administration . " Entertainment Weekly opined that Johnson had won the debate . 
 = = = Libertarian presidential nomination and campaign = = = 
 Although Johnson had focused the majority of his campaign activities on the New Hampshire primary , he announced on November 29 , 2011 that he would no longer campaign there due to his inability to gain traction with less than a month until the primary . There was speculation in the media that he might run as a Libertarian Party candidate instead . Johnson acknowledged that he was considering such a move . In December , Politico reported that Johnson would quit the Republican primaries and announce his intention to seek the Libertarian Party nomination at a December 28 press conference . He also encouraged his supporters to vote for Ron Paul in 2012 Republican presidential primaries . 
 On December 28 , 2011 , Johnson formally withdrew his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination , and declared his candidacy for the 2012 presidential nomination of the Libertarian Party in Santa Fe , New Mexico . On May 5 , 2012 , at the 2012 Libertarian National Convention , Johnson received the Libertarian Party 's official nomination for president in the 2012 election , by a vote of 419 votes to 152 votes for second @-@ place candidate R. Lee Wrights . In his acceptance speech , Johnson asked the convention 's delegates to nominate as his running mate Judge Jim Gray of California . Gray subsequently received the party 's vice @-@ presidential nomination on the first ballot . 
 Johnson spent the early months of his campaign making media appearances on television programs such as The Daily Show with Jon Stewart and Red Eye w / Greg Gutfeld . Starting in September 2012 , Johnson embarked on a three @-@ week tour of college campuses throughout the US . On October 23 , 2012 , Gary Johnson participated in a third party debate that was aired on C @-@ SPAN , RT America , and Al Jazeera English . A post @-@ debate online election allowed people to choose two candidates from the debate they thought had won to face each other head to head in a run @-@ off debate . Gary Johnson and Jill Stein won the poll . They debated in Washington , D.C. , on November 5 , 2012 . 
 Johnson stated that his goal was to win at least 5 percent of the vote , as winning 5 percent would allow Libertarian Party candidates equal ballot access and federal funding during the next election cycle . In a national Gallup poll of likely registered voters conducted June 7 through June 10 , 2012 , Johnson took 3 % of the vote , while a Gallup poll conducted September 6 through September 9 , 2012 , showed Johnson taking 1 % of likely voters . A Zogby poll released July 13 , 2012 , revealed Johnson took 5 @.@ 3 % of likely voters , while a Zogby poll released September 23 , 2012 , showed Johnson taking 2 % of likely voters . The final results showed Johnson polling nearly 1 @.@ 3 million votes and 1 @.@ 0 % of the popular vote . This established a Libertarian Party record for total votes won in a presidential election and the second @-@ highest Libertarian percentage ever , behind Ed Clark 's 1 @.@ 1 % in 1980 . Despite falling short of his stated goal of 5 % , Johnson stated , " Ours is a mission accomplished " . In regards to a future presidential bid , he said " it is too soon to be talking about 2016 " . 
 = = Post @-@ 2012 elections = = 
 Since the 2012 elections , Johnson has continued to criticize the Obama administration on various issues . In an article for The Guardian , Johnson called on United States Attorney General Eric Holder to let individual states legalize marijuana . In a Google Hangout hosted by Johnson in June 2013 , he criticized the US government 's lack of transparency and due process in regards to the NSA 's domestic surveillance programs . He also said that he would not rule out running as a Republican again in the future . 
 = = = Our America Initiative PAC = = = 
 In December 2013 , Johnson announced the founding of his own Super PAC , Our America Initiative PAC . The Super PAC is intended to support libertarian @-@ minded causes . “ From the realities of government @-@ run healthcare setting in to the continuing disclosures of the breadth of NSA ’ s domestic spying , more Americans than ever are ready to take a serious look at candidates who offer real alternatives to business @-@ as @-@ usual , ” the release announcing the PAC said . 
 = = = CEO of Cannabis Sativa Inc . = = = 
 In July 2014 , Johnson was named president and CEO of Cannabis Sativa Inc . , a Nevada @-@ based company that aims primarily to sell medical cannabis products in states where medicinal and / or recreational cannabis is legal . 
 = = 2016 presidential campaign = = 
 In an April 2014 , Reddit " Ask Me Anything " session , Johnson stated that he hoped to run for president again in 2016 . On whether he would run as a Libertarian or a Republican , he stated that " I would love running as a Libertarian because I would have the least amount of explaining to do . " 
 In November 2014 , Johnson affirmed his intention to run for the 2016 Libertarian nomination . In July 2015 , Johnson reiterated his intentions for a presidential campaign but stated he was not announcing anything imminently : " I just think there are more downsides than <unk> to announcing at this point , and , look , I don ’ t have any delusions about the process . In retrospect , 90 percent of the time I spent [ trying to become president ] ended up to be wasted time . " 
 In January 2016 , Johnson resigned from his post as CEO of Cannabis Sativa , Inc . , to pursue political opportunities , hinting to a 2016 presidential run . 
 On January 6 , 2016 , Johnson declared that he would seek the Libertarian nomination for the presidency . On May 18 , Johnson named former Massachusetts Governor William Weld as his running mate . 
 On May 29 , 2016 , Johnson received the Libertarian nomination on the second ballot . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Johnson 's views have been described as fiscally conservative and socially liberal with a philosophy of limited government and military non @-@ interventionism . He has identified as a classical liberal . Johnson has said he favors simplifying and reducing taxes . During his governorship , Johnson cut taxes fourteen times and never increased them . Due to his stance on taxes , political pundit David Weigel described him as " the original Tea Party candidate . " Johnson has advocated for the FairTax , a proposal which would abolish all federal income , corporate and capital gains taxes , and replace them with a 23 % tax on consumption of all non @-@ essential goods , while providing a regressive rebate to households according to income level . He has argued that this would assure transparency in the tax system and incentivize the private sector to create " tens of millions of jobs . " In June 2016 , Johnson said that he supported the Trans @-@ Pacific Partnership . 
 Johnson has said that he supports balancing the federal budget immediately . He has stated he supports " slashing government spending " , including Medicare , Medicaid , and Social Security , which would involve cutting Medicare and Medicaid by 43 percent and turning them into block grant programs , with control of spending in the hands of the states to create , in his words , " fifty laboratories of innovation . " He has advocated passing a law allowing for state bankruptcy and expressly ruling out a federal bailout of any states . Johnson has expressed opposition to the Federal Reserve System , which he has cited as massively devaluing the strength of the U.S. dollar , and would sign legislation to eliminate it . He has also supported an audit of the central bank , and urged Members of Congress in July 2012 to vote in favor of Ron Paul 's Federal Reserve Transparency Act . 
 In his campaign for the Libertarian Party nomination , he stated he opposed foreign wars and pledged to cut the military budget by 43 percent in his first term as president . He would cut the military 's overseas bases , uniformed and civilian personnel , research and development , intelligence , and nuclear weapons programs . He has stated his opposition to US involvement in the War in Afghanistan and opposed the US involvement in the Libyan Civil War . He has stated that he does not believe Iran is a military threat , would use his presidential power to prevent Israel from attacking Iran , and would not follow Israel , or any other ally , into a war that it had initiated . 
 Johnson is a strong supporter of civil liberties and received the highest score of any candidate from the American Civil Liberties Union for supporting drug decriminalization while opposing censorship and regulation of the Internet , the Patriot Act , enhanced airport screenings , and the indefinite detention of prisoners . He has spoken in favor of the separation of church and state , and has said that he does not " seek the counsel of God " when determining his political agenda . Johnson endorsed same @-@ sex marriage in 2011 ; he has since called for a constitutional amendment protecting equal marriage rights , and criticized Obama 's position on the issue as having " thrown this question back to the states . " On the other hand , Johnson opposes Roe v. Wade , believing states should decide the matter . He has been a longtime advocate of legalizing marijuana and has said that if he were president , he would remove it from Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act as well as issue an executive order pardoning non @-@ violent marijuana offenders . 
 Johnson has stated his opposition to gun control and has said , " I 'm a firm believer in the Second Amendment and so I would not have signed legislation banning assault weapons or automatic weapons . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnson was married to Dee Johnson ( née Simms ; 1952 – 2006 ) from 1977 to 2005 . As First Lady of New Mexico , she engaged in campaigns against smoking and breast cancer , and oversaw the expansion of the Governor 's Mansion . He initiated a separation in May 2005 and four months later he announced that they would divorce . At the age of 54 , Dee Johnson died unexpectedly on December 22 , 2006 , her cause of death later attributed to hypertensive heart disease . Johnson became engaged to Santa Fe real estate agent Kate <unk> in 2009 a year after meeting her at a bike race in Sante Fe . <unk> has stated that the reason they have not yet married is because " My fiance ’ s always on the road . " 
 Johnson lives in Taos , New Mexico , in a home that he built himself . He is an avid triathlete who bikes extensively . During his term in office , he competed in several triathlons , marathons and bike races . He competed three times ( 1993 , 1997 , 1999 ) as a celebrity invitee at the Ironman World Championship in Hawaii , registering his best time for the 2 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) swim , 112 @-@ mile ( 180 km ) bike ride , and 26 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 42 @.@ 2 km ) marathon run in 1999 with 10 hours , 39 minutes , and 16 seconds . He once ran 100 miles ( 160 km ) in 30 consecutive hours in the Rocky Mountains . On May 30 , 2003 , he reached the summit of Mount Everest " despite toes blackened with frostbite . " He has climbed all seven of the Seven Summits : Mount Everest , Mount Elbrus , Denali , Mount Kilimanjaro , Aconcagua , Mount Vinson , and Carstensz Pyramid — the tallest peaks in Asia , Europe , North America , Africa , South America , Antarctica , and Oceania respectively . He completed the Bataan Memorial Death March at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico , in which participants traverse a 26 @.@ 2 mile course through the desert , many of them in combat boots and wearing 35 @-@ pound packs . 
 On October 12 , 2005 , Johnson was involved in a near @-@ fatal paragliding accident when his wing caught in a tree and he fell approximately 50 feet to the ground . Johnson suffered multiple bone fractures , including a burst fracture to his twelfth thoracic vertebra , a broken rib , and a broken knee ; this accident left him 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 cm ) shorter . He used medicinal marijuana for pain control from 2005 @-@ 08 . 
 Johnson is a Lutheran and has stated that his belief in God has given him " a very fundamental belief that we should do unto others as we would have others do unto us . " 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Books = = 
 Seven Principles of Good Government : Gary Johnson on liberty , people and politics . 2012 . Aberdeen , WA : Silver Lake Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . OCLC <unk> 
 = Stage Struck ( 1911 film ) = 
 Stage Struck is an American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on a country girl who joins a traveling production after the company performs in her home town . She runs away from her home to join them and is hired , but the hard life soon takes it toll and she is unable to continue on with them . A traveling sales man buys her a ticket home and she goes home to her father . Several weeks later she receives a letter offering her a position in a New York theater production and a letter requesting her marriage from the salesman . She decides to accept his offer and become his wife . The film was released on March 3 , 1911 and was met with good reviews , but the film 's intended daydream sequence was not understood by critics . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The official summary synopsis of the film was published in The Moving Picture World . It states , " A country girl becomes hopelessly stage struck when a company of barnstorming actors , presenting Shakespearean plays , appears in her home town . She applies for an engagement to the star of the organization and is finally offered a small part . Forbidden by her father to follow the career of her choice , she runs away and joins the company . Disillusionment soon follows . The stars dissatisfied with her attempts at acting , and the hard work and bad hotels soon tax her strength . While playing a one @-@ night stand in a little town , the company is treated to a square meal by a prosperous young drummer [ Slang : for a traveling salesman ] who is greatly attracted by the country girl 's youth and beauty . The company get into financial straits , and have their baggage seized . Entirely without funds they start to walk to the next town . ' Walking the ties ' is as new form of exercise for our heroine , and halfway on the journey she begs the company to go on without her , as she is too weary and sick to continue . Sitting alone and weeping bitterly on the steps of a forlorn little railway station , the girl is surprised to see , getting off the train , her new acquaintance , the drummer . He insists upon buying her a ticket for home and starting her off at once . The girl is welcomed back home by her father and when a few weeks later she receives together an offer of a New York engagement and an offer of marriage from the young drummer - she decides to accept the latter , and to appear in the future as - just a wife . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The only credit in the production is that of Marie Eline in an unknown role . A review of the film in The Moving Picture World would state the representation of the standard theatrical company was extremely good . This was not by chance , for many key persons at the Thanhouser company , including Edwin Thanhouser himself , had experience on the stage . Edwin Thanhouser knew the stage represented a great pool of acting talent , but many actors were regular citizenry , yet anonymity was the rule until towards 1912 and so on until the " star system " would come to force around 1914 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on March 3 , 1911 . The Billboard 's reviewer gave a positive review and asserted , " Any motion picture in which the views of ' back on the stage ' are shown possesses a certain degree of interest . The ever @-@ curious public is fascinated by the alluring stories of the stage world , and any peep it is given into this realm is welcomed . Because of this , Stage Struck derives the interest it has . As far as the story is concerned there is no special recommendation for it . ... The theatre settings are about as faithful depictions of stage scenes as are found in motion pictures . The player portraying the role of the leading actor very much exaggerates in makeup . The photography is very good . " Both the The Morning Telegraph and The New York Dramatic Mirror thought the conclusion was impossible turn of events . The Telegraph 's reviewer wrote , " An excellent opportunity was sadly missed for the exposition of a strong lesson to the uninitiated girl or boy who dreams of a career before the footlights . How any author or producer could permit such an impossible ending is a wonder . Can any sensible person imagine a New York manager offering an inexperienced amateur a leading part in a Broadway production ? Yet this is what occurs in this tale of a stage @-@ struck miss who joins a repertoire company , is stranded , gets home through the generosity of a traveling salesman and then , with no lapse of time or experience noted , receives a letter with such an offer ! Most of the play was well put on and ably acted . The ' star ' of the theatrical company wore an abominable wig , which could be distinguished as false . More care and thought would have made this an admirable offering . " The Mirror ' reviewer stated , " The production leaves the impression of being exceedingly well done , but to the average actor the New York engagement , after forsaking her barnstorming company of players , seems somewhat of a dream . It was also startling to see her playing Ophelia after such a flat failure at the previous rehearsal where another took her place . " According to the synopsis , it is likely that this New York production in which she foresees herself on stage as Ophelia is a dream because it is prompted by the two letters she received at home . 
 The film is presumed lost because the film is not known to be held in any archive or by any collector . 
 = Why Don 't You Love Me ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . It was written by Knowles , Angela Beyincé , Solange Knowles and the Bama Boyz and produced by the Bama Boyz and Knowles . " Why Don 't You Love Me " is an R & B and dance @-@ pop song that is set in a retro style . According to its lyrics , Knowles questions her love interest about why he does not value her fabulousness . Its 1950s @-@ styled music video was directed by Melina Matsoukas and Knowles under the alias Bee @-@ Z , and it stars the latter as " B.B. Homemaker " . Knowles pays homage to Bettie Page in the video , which critics universally commended for its 1950 's style sets and costumes . They also complimented Knowles for her acting skills . 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " was well received by critics . It topped the United States Hot Dance Club Songs chart for one week in February 2010 , a little over one year after the original release of I Am ... Sasha Fierce . On August 27 , 2010 , the song was released as a single in the United Kingdom . It eventually charted at number 51 on the UK Singles Chart and at number 14 on its R & B Singles Chart . Although not being released elsewhere , " Why Don 't You Love Me " garnered some attention in Australia , where it charted at number 73 ; it bubbled under the main charts of Belgium and reached number 44 on Slovakia Airplay Chart . In the US , it emerged as the nineteenth most played track in dance clubs in 2010 . " Why Don 't You Love Me " was a part of Knowles ' set list for the 2011 Glastonbury Festival , the Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue and the Mrs Carter Show World Tour . 
 = = Development and production = = 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " was written by Beyoncé Knowles , Solange Knowles , Angie Beyincé and produced as well as co @-@ written by The Bama Boyz . Jonathan Wells of Bama Boyz said that they decided to try something different from what they usually do , by mixing several genres for " Why Don 't You Love Me " . The song 's inspiration came from the time they spent in London at the end of Beyoncé Knowles ' The Beyoncé Experience tour in promotion of her second studio album B 'Day ( 2006 ) . The writing and production of the song began in London and was finished stateside in early 2008 . They admitted that the song 's structure was unusual , however they were happy that it ended up in the Knowles ' hands . After The Bama Boyz produced two tracks on Solange Knowles ' second studio album Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams ( 2008 ) , she asked them to put instrumentals together for her to write for her sister Beyoncé . 
 The Bama Boyz almost intentionally left the instrumental for " Why Don 't You Love Me " out , since they thought that the song did not sound like the tracks Beyoncé was recording for her upcoming album , at that particular time . However , Jesse <unk> explained that they later decided to put the instrumental for " Why Don 't You Love Me " in the email because they knew that Solange likes weird records , but , they made sure to send it last . Out of all the mainstream @-@ inspired attempts The Bama Boyz sent to Solange , she eventually chose that last and most unexpected track and penned " Why Don 't You Love Me " . Jonathan Wells commented : " When they heard Solange 's demo , we were excited because that track was more our true sound than any of the others [ sent ] , but we still kinda didn 't believe Beyoncé would cut it ... but we hoped ! " 
 Beyoncé came to Houston 's Music World Studios for a recording session a few months after Solange had cut the demo . Knowles invited The Bama Boyz into her session at the Houston 's Music World Studios to listen to the early versions of I Am ... Sasha Fierce . Unexpectedly , after Beyoncé played " Halo " , " Why Don 't You Love Me " came blasting through the speakers with Knowles singing the song . The Bama Boyz were thrilled that she recorded it and loved the song . According to " Anti @-@ Music " , the song was nearly discarded twice ; the first time was when EMI Music prepared a demo of the song to send to other artists without knowing that Knowles had already recorded the song , and the second came during the track selection of I Am ... Sasha Fierce 's track listing , where executives felt that the song did not fit in with the other records . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " is different from Knowles ' previous dance @-@ pop songs as it makes use of a retro style . It is an upbeat track that draws from the genre of R & B. The song also contains elements of up @-@ tempo disco and funk music . It consists of energetic tribal beats , a drum loop , funky guitars and a bassline that was designed to make it a groovy and dance song . According to the lyrics of " Why Don 't You Love Me " , Knowles impersonates a woman who questions her love interest about the reason for which he does not value her fabulousness , convincing him she 's the best thing for him as she sings : " Why don 't you love me ... when I make me so damn easy to love ? ... I got beauty ... I got class ... I got style and I got ass ... " . The singer further tells her love interest that the decision not to choose her is " entirely foolish " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Originally released as a pre @-@ order bonus track on the deluxe edition of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , the song was later released as a new song on the platinum edition of the album , and finally as a bonus track along with " Poison " and a remixed version of " Video Phone " featuring pop singer Lady Gaga on a digital EP titled I Am ... Sasha Fierce – The Bonus Tracks . On July 2 , 2010 , " Why Don 't You Love Me " was digitally released in Germany while its music video was included on a separate digital EP that went on sale the same date . Two remixes of the song were later made available for download in the United Kingdom on August 29 , 2009 . 
 Chris Ryan of MTV called " Why Don 't You Love Me " a " dirty , disco @-@ funk track . " Maura Johnston of The Village Voice called " Why Do You Love Me " " the <unk> tour de force bonus track from I Am ... Sasha Fierce in which Beyoncé reminds a dude that she 's pretty much the greatest thing around and his choice to not be with her is an entirely foolish one . " She further praised the song , writing , " It 's one of the best songs in her catalog , being as it is a four @-@ minute summation of why she 's one of pop 's premier stylists right now ; her vocals are equal parts pleading and snarling , the twitchy disco @-@ funk beat gets hips shaking , and the declarations of confused self @-@ love throughout can cause the listener to both root for her and realize that they 've been in similar situations . " On The Village Voice ' 2010 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Why Don 't You Love Me " was ranked at number 549 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Although " Why Don 't You Love Me " was not released as a formal single , it managed to top the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart for the week of February 13 , 2010 . It became Knowles ' twelfth number @-@ one hit on that chart and it was also the fifth consecutive song from I Am ... Sasha Fierce to reach number one on the same chart . On June 11 , 2010 , " Why Don 't You Love Me " debuted at number 73 on the Australian Singles Chart . However the following week , the song fell down to the position number 91 , before dropping out of the chart the following week . " Why Don 't You Love Me " stayed under the main charts in Belgium , reaching number 10 on the Flemish Ultratip chart . 
 On August 14 , 2010 , " Why Don 't You Love Me " debuted at number 142 on the UK Singles chart , and it moved from number seventy @-@ one to number 40 on the R & B chart . After the digital release of remixes , the song rose to number 71 on the UK Singles chart , becoming the ninth consecutive single off I Am ... Sasha Fierce to peak within the top 75 . It also moved from number 44 to number 25 on its R & B chart on September 11 , 2010 . The following week , on September 18 , 2010 , " Why Don 't You Love Me " moved up twenty places on the UK Singles to land at number 51 and ascended to number 14 on its R & B chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Filming and concept = = = 
 The music video for the song was directed by long @-@ time collaborator Melina Matsoukas and Knowles under the alias Bee @-@ Z. The video took two @-@ three weeks of preparation and one day to film in Los Angeles on Mount Olympus . The main set of the video was a house owned by a wealthy 95 @-@ year @-@ old man who allowed Knowles and Matsoukas to use his house and collectible cars for the video shoot . During an interview with USA Today on January 28 , 2010 , Knowles announced that she would be taking a break from her music career saying " to live life , to be inspired by things again " . She was then inspired to shoot a music video for the bonus track . In an interview with People magazine in August 2010 , Knowles explained : " I came up with the concept for that video because lately I decided to take a break , and I ’ ve been home , being a wife . I figured it could be nice to give a little wink toward the things that I ’ ve been doing , so that ’ s why I ’ m a housewife in the video . " However , she explained that the video is " an exaggerated , over @-@ the @-@ top version " of what she was doing right then , just living her life , being a woman at home , relaxing and trying to enjoy her life other than performing and creating music . For instance , dusting off her Grammys and getting under the hood of a car while wearing six @-@ inch heels are not regular occurrences for Knowles . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " is the ninth video to be lifted from Knowles ' I Am ... Sasha Fierce era . On May 1 , 2010 , a forty @-@ second clip starring Knowles as B.B. Homemaker , was posted on Vimeo . In the sneak peek , she is seen wearing an unbuttoned blue shirt with a pair of short denim shorts and a red handkerchief on her <unk> while trying to fix a broken @-@ car . The complete video premiered on May 4 , 2010 , and it is nearly five minutes long . The music video was officially released to iTunes Stores in the United States on May 18 , 2010 , two weeks after its original premiere . In May 2010 , the media reported that Knowles ' decision to release one more video from her album I Am ... Sasha Fierce just before Kelly Rowland released " Commander " was unfair on Rowland . These claims would be denied by Rowland who said that despite the clip for " Why Don 't You Love Me " airing several days before " Commander " , the media was " making too much of a big deal of release schedules and trying to create a feud where it doesn 't exist . " She also told Hip Hop Hollywood : 
 " We all came out at the same time and it really doesn 't matter ... I think there 's room for everybody ... There 's B [ eyoncé ] , there 's Ciara putting something out and [ Lady ] GaGa putting something out , but , because we started out together , people are going to say things like that . But I really don 't care , I love her [ un ] til our dying days and that 's all that counts . 
 = = = Synopsis and analysis = = = 
 The video begins with a tribute and sample of the opening credits of Leave It to Beaver which is overdubbed to introduce Knowles as " B.B. Homemaker " in a Daisy Dukes style outfit . The song begins once she goes inside a house and brings along a board saying " Why Don 't You Love Me " . Throughout the video , Knowles is seen crying , with mascara running down her cheeks while talking on the phone to her love interest , drinking a dry martini and smoking a cigarette . This projects an image of Beyoncé paying homage to Bettie Page just as she did in the music videos for " Telephone " and " Video Phone " , where she collaborated with Lady Gaga . In this scene , Knowles impersonates Betty Draper . According to Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard magazine , Knowles contends to her deadbeat lover while sipping a cocktail and French @-@ inhaling a cigarette in the music video . The fantasy @-@ laden imagery hardly ends there though , as it is followed by shots of sequences of Beyoncé gardening , washing dishes , scrubbing floors , and baking cookies . Rap @-@ Up commented on what happens in the video , saying that she is also reading during some scenes , in which she sings " Keep my head in them books , I 'm sharp ... " In the middle of the video , Knowles dusts off her mantlepiece , which is covered by her 16 Grammy awards she earned when she was with Destiny 's Child and after the debut of her solo career . The video closes on her falling to the floor after hanging up the phone and finishing her martini , and says the final word " ... dumb ! " in a scene in which she is dressed in a dominatrix @-@ type outfit while holding a whip . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music video received general acclaim from critics . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described the video as one of Knowles ' best and most vivid . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly described Knowles as " one hot housewife in the [ Why Don 't You Love Me ] video " . This was echoed by Tray Hova of Vibe magazine who stated that " Beyoncé makes a mighty fine housewife " . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News said that she did her best impersonation of Betty Draper . The Music Network complimented the production of the video while simultaneously making reference to Christina Aguilera and criticising the latter for her new video for her single " Not Myself Tonight " , writing : " ... housework has never looked so good ... Proving you don 't have to wear bondage gear and a ball @-@ gag to be sexy ( hello Christina ! ) , the [ 19 ] 50s @-@ style video sees the R & B queen [ Knowles ] getting dirty in a different way : dusting her Grammys , watering the plants and scrubbing the shower in vintage lingerie ... She can come over to our house anytime . " Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard magazine commented on Knowles ' " dominatrix costume " at the end to Rihanna 's Rated R era . She finally complimented the music video by saying that " Beyoncé 's shamelessly campy performance — complete with boatloads of running mascara — is generously refreshing . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy noted that the video was " kind of a tour de force " and compared it with the one for " Telephone " ( 2010 ) . He also noted that it showed " Beyoncé on the edge of a nervous breakdown . " 
 Amy Odell of New York magazine praised the video and noted that " the crazy twitchy behavior she exhibited in ' Telephone ' returns to much delight , but with a wardrobe that 's pure housewife instead of cold @-@ blooded drag @-@ queen murderer . " Odell also praised the <unk> in the video , which according to here were " a classier , more mature version of ' <unk> . " In another review , Odell concluded " It would be easy to credit the look of Beyoncé 's new video to Lady Gaga 's influence . " Francesca Stabile of The Village Voice gave a positive review for the video , writing , " The retro @-@ glam outfits , the oversized martini glass , the rolling around on the bed sobbing with eye makeup running down her face ... this is our favorite Bey [ oncé ] video ever . No one else can make doing household chores ( dusting Grammys ! ) simultaneously look this good and this sad . " Gordon Smart of The Sun praised Knowles ' " strong look " completed by lumberjack shirt , bandana and denim hotpants in the video further comparing it with Amy Winehouse 's . Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone magazine described the video as a " Douglas <unk> film through the eyes of David LaChapelle " and noted that several scenes looked like Knowles was being photographed for Vogue magazine on the set of The Brady Bunch . He concluded that " If Beyoncé was lobbying for a temptress role on Mad Men , ' Why Don 't You Love Me , ' ... would make the perfect audition reel . " 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Becky Bain of Idolator described Knowles as " adorable and funny " in the nostalgic , 60s @-@ inspired video for " Why Don 't You Love Me " . She also said that her retro @-@ style is " <unk> " and charming . On August 3 , 2010 , Bain claimed that " Why Don 't You Love Me " is one of the videos that should have been nominated for Video of the Year at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , and she later said on September 8 , 2010 , that the clip for " Why Don 't You Love Me " should have been nominated instead that of " Video Phone " , in the category for Best Female Video at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . " Why Don 't You Love Me " also made number nine in Rap @-@ Up 's Best Videos of 2010 . In February 2012 , Kat George of VH1 placed the video at number one on her list of " The 6 Best Sets of Devastated Raccoon Eyes in Music Video History " , writing , " Beyoncé wins best panda eyes on the strength of melodrama ... and because she looks really hot in vintage style lingerie . Clearly tortured , Beyoncé 's panda eyes are paired with martinis , cigarettes , and just the right amount of crazy to make the whole thing unbearably sexy . " In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number three on their list of Knowles ' ten best music videos , writing , " It 's like a trip back in time . Except with sexier outfits , which were definitely missing from the ' 60s . So good call , Beyoncé ! You can even upgrade history ! " . In January 2010 , the video garnered a nomination in the category of Outstanding Music Video at the 42nd NAACP Image Award . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 Philip Markowitz , a neighbor of the man on whose property the video was filmed , filed a lawsuit on May 28 , 2010 , in Los Angeles seeking $ 25 @,@ 000 . He sued Knowles , the companies " <unk> & Company " and " Bags and Boards " , and Dina <unk> , for the video shoot for " Why Don 't You Love Me " . Markowitz complained that during the morning , every time he tried leaving his house , the crew was blocking his driveway . Markowitz claims that he " missed several business calls while arguing calmly in his driveway " . According to him : " [ He ] demanded compensation for the trespass on his property and the inconvenience and delay he had already suffered . " The case was later dismissed by a superior court judge in September . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed " Why Don 't You Love Me " live for the first time the 2011 Glastonbury Festival on June 26 , 2011 . During the performance she danced with her male backup dancers and the official video of the song was played on a screen behind them . Later , in May 2012 , Beyoncé performed a funky version of the song as a part of her revue show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in Atlantic City , New Jersey at Revel . While reviewing the show , Ben Ratliff of The New York Times wrote : " Then she makes some of the most thorough and gold @-@ plated declarations of self @-@ worth ever rendered in pop . ' There ’ s nothing not to love about me , ' she sang ... without needing to make a joke out of it . " Maura Johnston of The Village Voice was also positive about the performance of the song , saying , " Live , she threw herself into the track , from tsk @-@ tsk @-@ tsk opening to impassioned ending ; after that , the song 's frenetic beat got transformed into an extended outro that showcased her band 's prowess in such a convincing way , she took off her shoes to dance along with it . " " Why Don 't You Love Me " was included in the set list of Beyoncé 's The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 @-@ 2014 ) . 
 The song was performed during Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . Throughout the performance of the song , Beyoncé stopped performing several times watching the crowd while fans were blowing her hair . Rebecca Thomas of the MTV News felt that the performance of the song " seemed to reopen old wounds " . Kat Bein from the Miami New Times described the performance as one of the most dramatic moments of the concert further hailing it as " one of the rawest things we 've ever seen at a stadium show " . 
 = = Use in visual media and Grace Potter 's cover = = 
 In her second commercial for HDTV manufacturer <unk> , Knowles is shown battling herself for a guy 's attention . The mini video was set to " Why Don 't You Love Me " and it was directed by Jake Nava , who previously directed music videos for Knowles ' " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) and " Single Ladies " ( 2008 ) amongst others . Knowles explained the concept of the commercial to Rap @-@ Up , " The concept today is basically someone 's watching the television and I 've decided to step in their living room and perform especially for them . The TV looks so wonderful , they 're ignoring me so I 'm stepping it up and I 'm trying to perform harder and it doesn 't matter , the TV is better . " The spot premiered on Thanksgiving Day on November 24 , 2010 . A writer of Rap @-@ Up commented that Knowles " [ brought ] her alter ego Sasha Fierce back from the dead " , and that she faces her " toughest competition yet — herself . " 
 In late April 2011 , Grace Potter from the American rock band Grace Potter and the <unk> sang a rootsy acoustic rendition of " Why Don 't You Love Me " along with strategic handclaps and drummer Matthew Burr 's backbeat . Potter said that choosing to cover " Why Don 't You Love Me " was easy because she is " big @-@ voiced " . She elaborated : " As I was watching the video , I was watching for the visual candy . Then I slowly began falling in love with the song . " Jessica Letkemann of Billboard magazine complimented the cover , writing : " [ the band ] may usually rock with a 60s feel while Texas @-@ born Beyoncé is a queen of R & B , but one thing the two women undoubtedly have in common is an amazing set of pipes . " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 German Digital Single 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " – 3 : 37 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( Jump Smokers Club Remix ) – 3 : 57 
 German Digital EP 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " – 3 : 37 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( Jump Smokers Club Remix ) – 3 : 57 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( Video ) – 4 : 50 
 UK Digital Remixes 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( MK Ultras Remix – Radio Edit ) – 3 : 34 
 " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( Starsmith Remix – Radio Edit ) – 3 : 33 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from I Am ... Sasha Fierce 's liner notes . 
 Vocals – Beyoncé Knowles 
 Producers and recorded by – Bama Boyz , Beyoncé Knowles 
 Vocal production – Beyoncé Knowles 
 Writers – Beyoncé Knowles , Solange Knowles , Angela Beyince , Eddie Smith III , Jesse <unk> and Jonathan Wells 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Aage Bohr = 
 Aage Niels Bohr ( Danish : [ <unk> ̯ ə <unk> <unk> ̯ ˀ ] ; 19 June 1922 – 9 September 2009 ) was a Danish nuclear physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1975 with Ben Mottelson and James Rainwater " for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection " . Starting from Rainwater 's concept of an irregular @-@ shaped liquid drop model of the nucleus , Bohr and Mottelson developed a detailed theory that was in close agreement with experiments . Since his father , Niels Bohr , had won the prize in 1922 , he and his father were one of the six pairs of fathers and sons who have both won the Nobel Prize and one of the four pairs who have both won the Nobel Prize in Physics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Aage Niels Bohr was born in Copenhagen on 19 June 1922 , the fourth of six sons of the physicist Niels Bohr and his wife Margrethe Bohr ( née Nørlund ) . His oldest brother , Christian , died in a boating accident in 1934 , and his youngest , Harald , from childhood meningitis . Of the others , Hans became a physician ; Erik , a chemical engineer ; and Ernest , a lawyer and an Olympic athlete who played field hockey for Denmark at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London . The family lived at the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen , now known as the Niels Bohr Institute , where he grew up surrounded by physicists who were working with his father , such as Hans Kramers , Oskar Klein , Yoshio Nishina , Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg . In 1932 , the family moved to the Carlsberg <unk> , a mansion donated by Carl Jacobsen , the heir to Carlsberg breweries , to be used as an honorary residence by the Dane who had made the most prominent contribution to science , literature or the arts . 
 Bohr went to high school at <unk> Gymnasium in Copenhagen . In 1940 , shortly after the German occupation of Denmark in April , he entered the University of Copenhagen , where he studied physics . He assisted his father , helping draft correspondence and articles related to epistemology and physics . In September 1943 , word reached his family that the Nazis considered them to be Jewish , because Aage 's grandmother , Ellen Adler Bohr , had been Jewish , and that they therefore were in danger of being arrested . The Danish resistance helped the family escape by sea to Sweden . Bohr arrived there in October 1943 , and then flew to Britain on a de Havilland Mosquito operated by British Overseas Airways Corporation . The Mosquitoes were unarmed high @-@ speed bomber aircraft that had been converted to carry small , valuable cargoes or important passengers . By flying at high speed and high altitude , they could cross German @-@ occupied Norway , and yet avoid German fighters . Bohr , equipped with parachute , flying suit and oxygen mask , spent the three @-@ hour flight lying on a mattress in the aircraft 's bomb bay . 
 On arrival in London , Bohr rejoined his father , who had flown to Britain the week before . He officially became a junior researcher at the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , but actually served as personal assistant and secretary to his father . The two worked on Tube Alloys , the British atomic bomb project . On 30 December 1943 , they made the first of a number of visits to the United States , where his father was a consultant to the Manhattan Project . Due to his father 's fame , they were given false names ; Bohr became James Baker , and his father , Nicholas Baker . In 1945 , the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , Robert Oppenheimer , asked them to review the design of the modulated neutron initiator . They reported that it would work . That they had reached this conclusion put Enrico Fermi 's concerns about the viability of the design to rest . The initiators performed flawlessly in the bombs used in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 . 
 = = Physics = = 
 In August 1945 , with the war ended , Bohr returned to Denmark , where he resumed his university education , graduating with a master 's degree in 1946 , with a thesis concerned with some aspects of atomic stopping power problems . In early 1948 , Bohr became a member of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey . While paying a visit to Columbia University , he met Isidor Isaac Rabi , who sparked an interest in recent discoveries related to the hyperfine structure of deuterium . This led to Bohr becoming a visiting fellow at Columbia from January 1949 to August 1950 . While in the United States , Bohr married Marietta Soffer on 11 March 1950 . They had three children : Vilhelm , Tomas and Margrethe . 
 By the late 1940s it was known that the properties of atomic nuclei could not be explained by the then @-@ current models such as the liquid drop model developed by Niels Bohr amongst others . The shell model , developed in 1949 by Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer and others , allowed some additional features to be explained , in particular the so @-@ called magic numbers . However , there were also properties that could not be explained , including the non @-@ spherical distribution of charge in certain nuclei . In a 1950 paper , James Rainwater of Columbia University suggested a variant of the drop model of the nucleus that could explain a non @-@ spherical charge distribution . Rainwater 's model postulated a nucleus like a balloon with balls inside that distort the surface as they move about . He discussed the idea with Bohr , who was visiting Columbia at the time , and had independently conceived the same idea , and had , about a month after Rainwater 's submission , submitted for publication a paper that discussed the same problem , but along more general lines . Bohr imagined a rotating , irregular @-@ shaped nucleus with a form of surface tension . Bohr developed the idea further , in 1951 publishing a paper that comprehensively treated the relationship between oscillations of the surface of the nucleus and the movement of the individual nucleons . 
 Upon his return to Copenhagen in 1950 , Bohr began working with Ben Mottelson to compare the theoretical work with experimental data . In three papers , that were published in 1952 and 1953 , Bohr and Mottelson demonstrated close agreement between theory and experiment ; for example , showing that the energy levels of certain nuclei could be described by a rotation spectrum . They were thereby able to reconcile the shell model with Rainwater 's concept . This work stimulated many new theoretical and experimental studies . Bohr , Mottelson and Rainwater were jointly awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physics " for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection " . Because his father had been awarded the prize in 1922 , Bohr became one of only four pairs of fathers and sons to win the Nobel Prize in Physics . He married Marietta Soffer in 1950 . They had two sons , Vilhelm and Tomas , and a daughter , Margrethe . 
 Only after doing his Nobel Prize @-@ winning research did Bohr receive his doctorate from the University of Copenhagen , in 1954 , writing his thesis on " Rotational States of Atomic Nuclei " . Bohr became a professor at the University of Copenhagen in 1956 , and , following his father 's death in 1962 , succeeded him as director of the Niels Bohr Institute , a position he held until 1970 . He remained active there until he retired in 1992 . He was also a member of the board of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics ( <unk> ) from its inception in 1957 , and was its director from 1975 to 1981 . In addition to the Nobel Prize , he won the Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics in 1960 , the Atoms for Peace Award in 1969 , H.C. Ørsted Medal in 1970 , Rutherford Medal and Prize in 1972 , John Price Wetherill Medal in 1974 , and the Ole Rømer medal in 1976 . Bohr and Mottelson continued to work together , publishing a two @-@ volume monograph , Nuclear Structure . The first volume , Single @-@ Particle Motion , appeared in 1969 ; the second , Nuclear <unk> , in 1975 . 
 In 1972 he was awarded an honorary degree , doctor <unk> honoris causa , at the Norwegian Institute of Technology , later part of Norwegian University of Science and Technology . 
 His wife Marietta died on 2 October 1978 . In 1981 , he married Bente Scharff Meyer . His son , Tomas Bohr , is a Professor of Physics at the Technical University of Denmark , working in the area of fluid dynamics . Aage Bohr died in Copenhagen on 9 September 2009 . He was survived by his second wife and children . 
 = Running ( No Doubt song ) = 
 " Running " is a song written by Tony Kanal and Gwen Stefani for No Doubt 's fifth studio album Rock Steady ( 2001 ) and was released worldwide as the album 's fourth and final single on July 1 , 2003 . The song was also used on the last episode of the TV series Sabrina , the Teenage Witch in 2003 . 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics and was compared to Depeche Mode @-@ style songs . The song only charted on the official charts of the United States , where it became the band 's lowest charting single , and in Germany , where it had longest charting period . The song was accompanied by a music video which was directed by Chris Hafner , which featured many old and new pictures as well as clippings of the band members . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was written by Stefani and bassist Tony Kanal in Kanal 's living room . They used an old Yamaha keyboard that Kanal 's father had purchased for him when he was in eighth grade and developed the song 's harmony first and then wrote the lyrics . The band worked on the track to give it a " spacier sound " but were displeased with the result so they took the song to producer Nellee Hooper , who stripped Running down to the <unk> song was then produced by him , with whom Stefani collaborated again for her solo project two years later . Whatever the intent , the result was a track that resonated with catchy " Mario Bros. " background instrumentation throughout the entire song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Running received mixed reviews from music critics . Blender characterized the song as " twenty @-@ first @-@ century Blondie " and compared its synthesizers and restrained vocal to the work of Depeche Mode . Rolling Stone also made the comparison to Depeche Mode and compared the song 's " two @-@ finger synth riff " to the work of Yazoo and Erasure . PopMatters , however , stated that the song fell short and was more appropriate for " some Britney clone " . Stylus Magazine agreed , calling Running sophomoric , and commented that " this is the kind of song that makes Gwen so popular with the pre @-@ teen girlies . " Slant Magazine described the song as a " super @-@ polished Saturn leftover " , and Entertainment Weekly portrayed the song as a paean in which No Doubt performed inside a music box , remarking that " it could be a contender for the coolest wedding song ever . " 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Running was commercially unsuccessful in the United States , while the previous singles from the album reached the top 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 , The song debuted at number 62 and stayed there for two weeks and was unable to reach a higher position , becoming the band 's lowest charting single on the chart . It dropped off the chart after six weeks . The single was more successful in mainstream and adult contemporary markets , reaching number 20 on the Adult Top 40 and Top 40 Mainstream charts . It followed a similar charting pattern on the German Singles Chart where it debuted as well , peaking at number 55 before falling off the chart after seven weeks . " Running " was played heavily on the final episode of Sabrina the Teenage Witch . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song was accompanied by a music video which was directed by Chris Hafner . The video opens with a scene of the band members walking on the beach in which Stefani is seen wearing a polka @-@ dot gown and the other members are seen in casual clothes . The scene is interrupted by various pictures of the band members in their early years with old pictures of Stefani in which she has her original brunette hair . The scene then again shifts to the beach where the band members are shown playing frisbee and are shown having fun while burying <unk> Adrian Young in the beach sand . Later Stefani is shown sitting on a rock by the sea and singing to the camera . There are many other pictures of the band holding platinum and gold records and Adrian shown playing the guitar nude . There are also several clippings of the band making music in the recording studio and performing on stage during the Rock Steady Live Tour . The video ends with the band members running into the sea water . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of Running . 
 German / U.S. CD single 
 " Running " ( album version ) – 4 : 02 
 " Hella Good " ( live ) – 5 : 41 
 " Underneath It All " ( live ) – 4 : 40 
 " Hey Baby " ( live ) – 3 : 44 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Coffin ray = 
 Hypnos monopterygius also known as the Coffin ray is a species of electric ray endemic to Australia , where it is common in inshore waters shallower than 80 m ( 260 ft ) . It is the sole member of its family <unk> . This small species typically reaches 40 cm ( 16 in ) in length . Greatly enlarged pectoral fins and an extremely short tail , coupled with diminutive dorsal and caudal fins all concentrated towards the rear , give the coffin ray a distinctive pear @-@ like shape . It is a varying shade of brown in color above , and has tiny eyes and a large , highly distensible mouth . 
 The sluggish and nocturnal coffin ray frequents sandy or muddy habitats , where it can bury itself during daytime . It can produce a powerful electric shock reaching 200 volts for attack and defense . This species is a voracious predator that feeds mainly on benthic bony fishes , often tackling fish approaching or exceeding itself in size . On occasion , it may also consume invertebrates and even small penguins and rats . Reproduction is aplacental viviparous , in which the developing embryos are nourished by yolk and maternally produced histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . The female gives birth to 4 – 8 pups during summer . The coffin ray can deliver a severe , albeit non @-@ fatal , shock to a human . Not valued commercially , it is very hardy and can usually survive being captured and discarded . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species under Least Concern , as its population does not seem threatened by human activity . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first scientific reference to the coffin ray was written by English zoologist and botanist George Shaw to accompany Frederick Polydore <unk> 's illustrations of a beached fish , published in their 1795 work The Naturalist 's Miscellany . Shaw interpreted the specimen as a <unk> , calling it the " single @-@ finned Lophius " or Lophius monopterygius in Latin . Independently , French zoologist Auguste Duméril described a new electric ray in an 1852 volume of the journal Revue et Magasin de Zoologie , based on two specimens collected off New South Wales . He named it Hypnos <unk> ; the genus name is derived from the Greek word for " sleep " , referring to the ray 's ability to induce numbness . Eventually , Gilbert Percy Whitley recognized that <unk> had illustrated the same species that Duméril had described , and thus the proper binomial name became Hypnos monopterygius . In 1902 , Edgar Ravenswood Waite proposed <unk> as a replacement name for Hypnos , which he believed was preoccupied by the butterfly genus <unk> . However , the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) does not seem to require the change , and thus <unk> is regarded as a junior synonym . 
 The common name " coffin ray " comes from the coffin @-@ like shape of beached specimens , which become bloated after death . This species may also be referred to as crampfish , electric ray , numbfish , <unk> , short @-@ tail electric ray , or torpedo . Phylogenetic studies , based on morphology , have found that Hypnos is most closely related to the genus Torpedo . Hence , some taxonomists classify it with Torpedo in the family Torpedinidae ( in its own subfamily , <unk> ) . On the other hand , there are also taxonomists who believe Hypnos to be distinctive enough to merit its own separate family , <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The coffin ray has a wide but disjunct distribution in tropical and warm @-@ temperate Australian waters . The western part of its range extends from Gulf St Vincent in South Australia to Broome in Western Australia , and the eastern part from Eden in New South Wales to Heron Island in Queensland . It does not occur off Victoria or Tasmania . This common , bottom @-@ dwelling species is typically found close to shore , no deeper than 80 m ( 260 ft ) , though it has been recorded from as deep as 240 m ( 790 ft ) . It favors habitats with sandy or muddy bottoms , including beaches , estuaries , and bays , and can also be found over seagrass as well as on and around rocky and coral reefs . 
 = = Description = = 
 The unusual pear @-@ like shape of the coffin ray distinguishes it from all other rays . Its body is flabby , with two large , kidney @-@ shaped electric organs visible on both sides of the head . The pectoral fins form a greatly enlarged disc about as wide as long , that is thick at the center and thin at the margins . The leading margin of the disc is straight to gently concave . The eyes are minute and can be elevated on short stalks . Close behind the eyes and slightly larger are the spiracles , which are rimmed by small papillae in some individuals . The nostrils are located just ahead of the mouth , and are connected to it by a pair of broad grooves . Between the nostrils is a short curtain of skin that overlaps the mouth . The capacious mouth forms a very long , wide arch ; the slender jaws can be distended dramatically , though are not particularly protrusible . Adults have over 60 rows of small teeth in either jaw ; each tooth has three long cusps . The five pairs of gill slits are small and placed beneath the disc . 
 The pelvic fins are relatively large and merged with the pectoral fin disc at the front to form a roughly circular secondary disc . The two dorsal fins are shaped like rounded lobes and are located very close to the caudal fin , which is of similar size with a nearly symmetrical , rounded margin . The tail is extremely short , such as that the caudal fin barely extends past the pelvic fin disc . The skin is entirely devoid of dermal denticles , and may be creased in areas . The dorsal coloration ranges from dark to reddish brown , to grayish , pinkish , or yellowish , and may be plain or sparsely patterned with irregular darker and lighter markings . The underside is pale , as are the spiracle papillae . This species grows to a length of 70 cm ( 28 in ) , or possibly even 92 cm ( 36 in ) , though most are only around 40 cm ( 16 in ) long . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The coffin ray is a slow and weak swimmer that moves forward with a jerky , fluttery motion . It is nocturnal and spends most of the day buried in sediment with only its spiracles showing . When disturbed , it has been observed performing a possible defense behavior , wherein it erupts from the bottom and swims in a loop with its mouth agape . This species is sometimes stranded on land by the ebbing tide , but can survive out of water for hours . Like in other electric rays , the coffin ray 's electric organs are derived from muscle tissue and consist of numerous vertical columns , each formed from a stack of jelly @-@ filled " electric plates " that essentially acts as a battery . It is capable of generating up to 200 volts of electricity and delivering 50 shocks over span of ten minutes , with each successive shock weakening . The coffin ray employs electricity both to subdue prey and deter predators . 
 The diet of the coffin ray consists mostly of benthic bony fishes , but also includes cephalopods and on occasion crustaceans and polychaete worms . Penguins and rats have also been recorded from the stomachs of this species . The coffin ray ambushes prey from the substrate , and swallows them whole head @-@ first before re @-@ burying . It often takes extremely large prey relative to its size ; one observed individual 60 cm ( 24 in ) long had swallowed a flathead ( <unk> sp . ) 70 cm ( 28 in ) long , and the tail of the prey fish was still protruding from its mouth . Dead specimens have been recovered that had apparently choked trying to swallow too @-@ large prey . The coffin ray is aplacental viviparous , in which the developing embryos are nourished by yolk , later supplemented by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) secreted by the mother . Females give birth to litters of 4 – 8 pups in summer ; the newborns measure approximately 8 – 11 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) long . Males and females both attain sexual maturity around 40 – 48 cm ( 16 – 19 in ) long . This species is known to be parasitized by the tapeworms Acanthobothrium angelae and Lacistorhynchus dollfusi , and the nematode Echinocephalus overstreeti . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 When approached , the coffin ray tends to keep still in its place of concealment on the sea floor . As a result , many divers , swimmers , and bathers have been shocked after accidentally contacting it . While not life @-@ threatening , the shock can be quite severe . The shock can still be perceived by a person pouring a stream of seawater on the ray . The coffin ray has no economic value . In 1883 , Edward Pierson Ramsay noted that it was the only ray native to Port Jackson that was inedible . It is caught incidentally by commercial trawlers , but is hardy enough to usually be returned to the water alive . It is also caught in lobster traps and infrequently taken by spear fishers . As it remains common and widespread , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Least Concern . It has been kept in public aquariums , but requires moving food . 
 = The Fame = 
 The Fame is the debut studio album by American singer Lady Gaga . It was released on August 19 , 2008 through Interscope Records . After joining Kon Live Distribution and Cherrytree Records in 2008 , Gaga began working on the album with different producers , primarily RedOne , Martin Kierszenbaum and Rob Fusari . Musically , The Fame is a synthpop and dance @-@ pop album that has influences of pop music from the 1980s . Lyrically , the album visualizes Gaga 's love of fame in general while also dealing with subjects such as love , sex , money , drugs and sexual identity . Promotion was primarily through The Fame Ball Tour and multiple television appearances . The Fame was included as a bonus disc on the deluxe edition of the extended play , The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . 
 The album received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who commended the album 's lyrical content and Gaga 's musicianship and vocal ability . The album was a commercial success , topping the charts in different countries worldwide , including the United Kingdom , Canada , Germany , Ireland , Poland and Switzerland . In the United States , it peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 , while topping the Dance / Electronic Albums chart for 106 non @-@ consecutive weeks . The Fame became the fifth best @-@ selling album of 2009 . It has sold 4 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States as of April 2016 and is the seventh best @-@ selling digital album in history . The album sold 15 million copies worldwide as of November 2010 . 
 The first two singles from The Fame — " Just Dance " and " Poker Face " — gained international success , topping the charts in several countries worldwide , including the United States , United Kingdom and Australia . Subsequent single " LoveGame " and " Paparazzi " , were commercial successes as well , charting within the top ten of more than ten countries worldwide . " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " had a limited release , while " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " was a promotional single . 
 The Fame has won multiple awards since its release . It was nominated for a total of five Grammy Awards at the 52nd Grammy Awards , including the Grammy Award for Album of the Year . It won the Grammy Award for Best Electronic / Dance Album and the Best Dance Recording for the single " Poker Face " . It also won Best International Album at the 2010 BRIT Awards . In 2013 , Rolling Stone named The Fame as one of the " 100 Greatest Debut Albums of All @-@ Time " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 While establishing herself as an artist and working her way up through the New York underground club scene , Gaga released her debut studio album , The Fame . Speaking about the title and concept of the album , Gaga explained : " The Fame is about how anyone can feel famous . [ ... ] Pop culture is art . It doesn 't make you cool to hate pop culture , so I embraced it and you hear it all over The Fame . But , it 's a <unk> fame . I want to invite you all to the party . I want people to feel a part of this lifestyle . " Gaga stated in an interview with MTV UK that she had been working on the album for two and a half years and completed half of it during the first week of January 2008 . As well as writing the lyrics , Gaga worked on the melodies and synth work of the album , with record producer RedOne . According to Gaga , the first track " Just Dance " is a joyous , heart @-@ themed song , which appeals to people going through tough times in their life . " LoveGame " , the second track , was inspired by Gaga 's sexual crush on a stranger in a night club to whom she said , " I wanna ride on your disco stick " . It was written in four minutes based on the disco stick hook . " Paparazzi " has been interpreted with different meanings . However Gaga explained in an interview with About.com , that the song was inspired by her struggles and hunger for fame and love . Essentially a love song , " Paparazzi " dealt with enticing the media and asked the question , whether one can have both fame and love . 
 " Poker Face " was inspired by Gaga 's boyfriends who enjoyed gambling , and also dealt with her personal experience of bisexuality ; her fantasies about women while having sex with men , thus representing her ' poker face ' . " " Boys , Boys , Boys " was inspired by the similarly titled Mötley Crüe song " Girls , Girls , Girls " . Gaga explained that she wanted a female version of the song that rockers would like too . " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " summed up her time of self @-@ discovery , living in the Lower East Side and dabbling in drugs and the party scene . " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " was about breaking up with a boyfriend and finding someone new . " Brown Eyes " was inspired by the British rock band Queen and , according to Gaga , is the most vulnerable song on the album . 
 Gaga further clarified the ideas behind The Fame , and her inspirations and visions for the album . She believed that the most important thing missing from contemporary pop music was the combination of the visual imagery of the artist with the music . Gaga incorporated theatrics in her live performances of the songs from the album . Hence she hoped that people would take notice of the performance art , which she was trying to bring back with the album and its music ; according to her , the music put the lifestyle in front of it . 
 " I just feel like this record is really <unk> you [ ' ] ve got club bangers to more 70s glam to more singer @-@ songwriter records to rock music . [ ... ] The Fame is not about who you are — it 's about how everybody wants to know who you are ! Buy it and listen to it before you go out or in the car . [ ... ] I think you 've really got to allow artists ' creativity to marinate . It took me a while but really delving into myself I finally got it . I couldn 't be more proud of it . It 's not just a record [ , ] it 's a whole pop art movement [ . ] It 's not just about one song . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , the album drew influences from late 1970s glam rock musicians such as David Bowie and Queen . Gaga incorporated their glam @-@ rock sound while devising catchy pop melodies and hooks to create what she has dubbed , " theatrical pop " . Songs like " Poker Face " , " Just Dance " and " LoveGame " are uptempo dance songs , with " Poker Face " carrying a dark sound with clear vocals on the chorus and a pop hook . " Just Dance " is synth @-@ based while " LoveGame " has a more dance @-@ oriented beat , and " Money Honey " has a moderate techno groove . All of them combined synths of clipped marching beats , sawing electronics and contained mild R & B @-@ infused beats . " Paparazzi " carried a sultry beat while " Summerboy " had influences of the music of Blondie . " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " is credited as a ballad compared to the rest of the dance @-@ fueled tracks from The Fame . The song has a 1980s synthpop feeling in it , while incorporating the " Eh , Eh " hook from Rihanna 's single " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) . 
 Lyrically , the songs on The Fame talk about being famous and achieving popularity ; " Poker Face " is about sexual innuendo and teasing . Gaga explained in an interview with the Daily Star that the lyrics carry a bit of an undertone of confusion about love and sex . According to the BBC , the " Mum @-@ mum @-@ mum @-@ mah " hook used in the song is copied from Boney M 's 1977 hit " Ma Baker " . " Just Dance " talks about being intoxicated in a party , with lyrics like " What 's going on on the floor ? / I love this record , baby but I can 't see straight anymore " . " LoveGame " portrays a message about love , fame and sexuality which is akin to the central theme of album . " Paparazzi " portrays a stalker who is following somebody being his or her biggest fan . The lyrics also portray the desire of capturing the attention of the camera as well as achieving fame . Gaga explained that , 
 " This idea of The Fame runs through and through . Basically , if you have nothing — no money , no fame — you can still feel beautiful and dirty rich . It 's about making choices , and having references — things you pull from your life that you believe in . It 's about self @-@ discovery and being creative . The record is slightly focused , but it 's also eclectic . [ ... ] The music is intended to inspire people to feel a certain way about themselves , so they 'll be able to encompass , in their own lives , a sense of inner fame that they can project to the world , and the carefree nature of the album is a reflection of that aura . I like to funnel interesting ideas to the rest of the world through a pop lens . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Fame received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 71 , based on 13 reviews . Matthew Chisling from Allmusic called the album " a well @-@ crafted sampling of feisty anti @-@ pop in high quality " , and wrote that it " fails to come up short on funky sounds to amuse fans of this dance genre . " Nicole Powers of URB complimented its " irony @-@ laden lyrics , delivered in a style that owes a little something to Gwen Stefani , " as well as the album 's " deluxe ditties " . Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly called it " remarkably ( and exhaustingly ) pure in its vision of a world in which nothing trumps being beautiful , dirty , and rich . In this economy , though , her high @-@ times escapism has its charms " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian found it " packing an immensely addictive melody or an inescapable hook , virtually everything sounds like another hit single " , and predicted that it " certainly sounds like it could be big . " Daniel Brockman from The Phoenix wrote that " Gaga ups the ante in terms of catchy songwriting and sheer high @-@ in @-@ the @-@ club @-@ banging @-@ to @-@ the @-@ beat abandon . " Ben Hogwood of musicOMH praised Gaga 's " blend of sassy attitude , metallic beats and sharp , incisive songwriting " , elements which he felt are integral to " creating pop music " . 
