 Although he panned " Eh Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " , " Paper Gangsta " , and " Brown Eyes " , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters called The Fame " a solid dance album " and wrote that " much of the album ’ s success can be attributed to rising club producer RedOne . " Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle felt that although the songs present in the album are not innovative , Gaga deserved credit for bringing real dance music to the mass . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club felt that the " whole point " of the album is " glitter @-@ laced , dance @-@ inciting energy that bodes well for extended club play " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani viewed that Gaga 's lyrics veer between " cheap " and " nonsensical drivel " , while her singing is " uneven at best " . He added that the highlights such as " Poker Face " , " Starstruck " , " Paper Gangsta " , and " Summerboy " rely " almost solely on their snappy production and sing @-@ along hooks . " Freedom du Lac from The Washington Post criticized the album for lacking originality . MSN Music 's Robert Christgau gave the album an " honorable mention " and quippedly referred to it as " shallowness at its most principled . " The Fame garnered five Grammy nominations at the 52nd Grammy Awards on December 2 , 2009 . The album itself was nominated for Album of the Year and won Best Electronic / Dance Album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , The Fame debuted at number seventeen on the Billboard 200 with sales of 24 @,@ 000 on the issue dated November 15 , 2008 . After fluctuating down the charts , the album reached number ten on the issue dated March 7 , 2009 . It then reached a peak of number two on the chart . The album also topped Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Albums chart ; it stayed at the number @-@ one spot for 106 non @-@ consecutive weeks . In March 2010 , the album was certified three @-@ times platinum for shipments of three million copies , by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . With the release of The Fame Monster , which was also combined with The Fame as a deluxe edition , the album jumped from 34 to 6 on the Billboard 200 with sales of 151 @,@ 000 . It reached its highest sales week on the issue dated January 9 , 2010 with 169 @,@ 000 copies sold . On the issue dated January 16 , 2010 , The Fame moved to a new peak of two on the Billboard 200 after being on the charts for 62 weeks . By the end of 2009 , The Fame became the fifth best @-@ selling album of the year . The Fame has sold 4 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States as of April 2016 and is the seventh best @-@ selling digital album , selling 1 @.@ 086 million digital copies . 
 In Canada , the album reached number @-@ one , and has been certified seven times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipment of 560 @,@ 000 copies , and sold 476 @,@ 000 copies as of March 2011 . The album debuted at number six , and peaked at number two in New Zealand as well as being certified double platinum . In Australia , the album debuted at number twelve and peaked at number three . The album has been certified three times platinum in Australia , by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 210 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The Fame debuted in the United Kingdom at number three with first week sales of 25 @,@ 228 copies . After spending ten weeks in the top ten , it replaced Ronan Keating 's Songs for My Mother at the top position . Since then , the album spent four consecutive weeks at the number @-@ one spot . It has since been certified nine @-@ times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , and has sold 2 @,@ 896 @,@ 724 copies as of September 2014 . It has also become the first album to reach the platinum certification based on digital sales after selling 300 @,@ 000 units in the UK . The album is the ninth best @-@ selling album in the UK of the 21st century . 
 In France , The Fame debuted at number @-@ seventy @-@ three and reached a peak at number @-@ two for five weeks . It has been certified diamond status by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique and , as of February 2012 , has sold 630 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , the album entered the charts at number @-@ eight , and in its fifth week climbed to number @-@ one for two consecutive weeks . In mainland Europe , the album peaked at number one on the European Top 100 Albums , the Austrian Albums Chart and the German Album Chart . In Germany , it became the fourth most downloaded album ever . It also reached the top twenty in Mexico , Belgium , the Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , Greece , Hungary , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Russia , and Switzerland and the album has sold more than 15 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album , Gaga did several performances worldwide . Her first televised appearance was on Logo 's NewNowNext Awards on June 7 , 2008 . She also performed on Michalsky <unk> at Berlin Fashion Week , So You Think You Can Dance , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , as well as in Vietnam for the 57th Miss Universe beauty pageant during the swimsuit competition . On January 31 , 2009 , she performed on television in Ireland on RTÉ One 's show Tubridy Tonight . Three songs from The Fame were used in the second season of The CW 's series Gossip Girl : " Paparazzi " in the episode " Summer , Kind of Wonderful " , " Poker Face " in " The Serena Also Rises " , and " Money Honey " in " Remains of the J " . Gaga also performed " Poker Face " on American Idol on April 1 , 2009 . To celebrate the launch of the show Dirty Sexy Money , ABC created a music video of Gaga 's song " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " , directed by Melina Matsoukas . It was initially announced as Gaga 's second single , but " Poker Face " was chosen instead . There were two videos released for the song – the first was composed of clips from Dirty Sexy Money , and the second was the actual music video . The song charted on the UK Singles Chart due to digital downloads and peaked at number eighty @-@ three . 
 The album received further promotion from her first headlining concert tour The Fame Ball Tour , which started on March 12 , 2009 in San Diego , California . It was Gaga 's first concert tour with North American shows in March , followed by dates in Oceania and a solo trek through Europe . Dates in Asia soon followed , as well as two performances at England 's V Festival and two shows in North America that had been postponed from April . Gaga described the tour as a traveling museum show incorporating artist Andy Warhol 's pop @-@ performance art concept . Tickets were distributed for charity also . Alternate versions of the show with minimal variations were planned by Gaga to accommodate different venues . 
 The show consisted of four segments , with each segment being followed by a video interlude to the next segment , and it ended with an encore . The set list consisted of songs from The Fame only . Gaga appeared on the stage in new costumes including an innovative dress made entirely of bubbles and premiered an unreleased song called " Future Love " . An alternate set list with minor changes was performed for European dates . The show received positive critical appreciation with critics complimenting her vocal clarity and fashion sense as well as her ability to pull off theatrics like a professional artist . Gaga 's second headlining tour , The Monster Ball Tour was also heavily consistent with songs from The Fame album , besides tracks from the follow @-@ up EP , The Fame Monster . Her 3rd concert tour , " The Born This Way Ball " had 4 songs off The Fame as well . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Just Dance " was released as the album 's lead single commercially worldwide on June 17 , 2008 , through digital distribution . The song was critically acclaimed with reviewers complimenting its club anthem @-@ like nature and the synthpop associated with it . It achieved commercial success by topping charts in the United States , Australia , Canada , the Republic of Ireland , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , as well as reaching the top ten in sixteen other countries . The song received a Grammy nomination in the Best Dance Recording category but lost to electronic duo Daft Punk for their song " Harder , Better , Faster , Stronger " . 
 " Poker Face " was released as the second single from the album . It was also well received by the critics , most of whom have praised the robotic hook and the chorus . The single achieved greater success than " Just Dance " by topping the charts in almost all the countries it was released to . " Poker Face " became Gaga 's second consecutive number one on the Hot 100 . On December 2 , 2009 , " Poker Face " received three Grammy nominations in the categories of Song of the Year , Record of the Year , and won for Best Dance Recording . 
 " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " was the album 's third single in Australia , New Zealand , Sweden and Denmark and fourth in France . The song received mixed reviews . Some critics compared it to nineties Europop while the others criticized it for bringing the party @-@ like nature of the album to a halt and thus being an embarrassment to the album . It failed to match the success of the previous singles in Australia and New Zealand by reaching fifteen and nine respectively . It peaked at two in Sweden and at seven in France . 
 " LoveGame " was released as the third single in the United States , Canada and some European nations . It was the fourth single in Australia , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . The song was critically appreciated for its catchy tune and the " I wanna take a ride on your disco stick " hook . The song has reached the top ten in countries such as the United States , Australia and Canada and the top twenty in others . 
 " Paparazzi " was announced as the third single in the United Kingdom and Ireland with a release date of July 6 , 2009 , the fourth single in the United States , and the fifth single overall . The song has reached the top five in Australia , Canada , Ireland and the United Kingdom . It has also reached the top ten in the United States . The song has received critical acclaim for its fun @-@ filled , club @-@ friendly nature and is deemed the most memorable and telling song from the album . The associated music video for the song was shot as a mini @-@ movie with Gaga starring as a doomed starlet who is almost killed by her boyfriend , but in the end takes her revenge and reclaims her fame and popularity . 
 = = The Fame Monster = = 
 Originally intended to be a re @-@ release of The Fame with eight additional tracks , The Fame Monster was announced by Gaga and her record label as a standalone album containing the eight new songs . The deluxe edition of the album contains The Fame in its entirety along with The Fame Monster . The album deals with the darker side of fame , as experienced by Gaga over the course of 2008 – 09 while travelling around the world , and are expressed through a monster metaphor . Gaga compared the feel of her debut album and The Fame Monster with the Yin and yang concept . Cover artwork was done by Hedi Slimane and has a gothic look which Gaga had to convince her record company to allow her to shoot . The composition takes its inspiration from Gothic music and fashion shows . Contemporary critics gave a positive review of the album , with the majority of them complimenting the songs " Bad Romance " , " Telephone " , and " Dance in the Dark " . In some countries the album charted together with The Fame while in others like the United States , Canada and Japan , it charted as a separate album . It has reached top ten in most of the major markets . She announced The Monster Ball Tour supporting the album , which started on November 27 , 2009 , and continued through until Spring 2011 . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional co @-@ producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Record Plant and Chalice Recording Studios , Los Angeles ; Cherrytree Recording Studios , Santa Monica ; 150 Studios , Parsippany ; Poe Boy Studios , Miami ; 333 Studios and Dojo Studios , New York ; New Road Studios 
 Personnel 
 Credits and personnel adapted from The Fame liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Pittsburgh Town = 
 " Pittsburgh Town " , sometimes titled as " Pittsburgh " or " Pittsburgh is a Great Old Town " , is a folk song written by Woody Guthrie and originally recorded by Pete Seeger . The song was written during a Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania stop on an Almanac Singers ' tour ; both Seeger and <unk> were members of the band at this time . The song speaks of the labor and environmental problems that the city was facing in 1941 , when the song was written . In the time since , environmental legislation has reduced the pollution problem that plagued Pittsburgh ; because of this , the song 's mentions of pollution in Pittsburgh have been sometimes been replaced with verses extolling the city . 
 = = Creation = = 
 There are several stories behind the origin of the song . Several historians trace " Pittsburgh Town " to the Almanac Singers ' 1941 national tour . According to the liner notes of Pete Seeger 's American Industrial Ballads , originally released in 1956 , on July 7 , 1941 , the group recorded fourteen songs for a small record label in New Jersey . The $ 250 that they were paid was used to purchase a 1932 Buick in which they traveled on their subsequent tour . While stopped in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , the group decided to play for steel workers who were in the process of <unk> . They played two nights of concerts a steel patch , sleeping in between in a cockroach @-@ infested hotel . During the second concert , Woody Guthrie impulsively started to improvise lyrics to the tune of the folk song " <unk> Hole " . The song 's entire body came out of this jam session . Millard <unk> continued improving and created the second verse of the song from that point . 
 The liner notes of Seeger 's Songs of Struggle and Protest , 1930 – 50 tell a different story of the song 's creation ; they state that Guthrie wrote the song while airborne on a flight into Pittsburgh . While looking out the window at the smoky skies , he quickly jotted down the lyrics . 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 The song 's verses alternate between ones that speak of the environmental problems of Pittsburgh and ones that speak of its labor problems . 
 The first verse refers to Pittsburgh as a " smoky ol ' town " , and the third complains that the speaker does nothing more than " cough and choke " because of the steel industry 's output . The smoke was an ever @-@ present part of life in Pittsburgh at the time of the song 's writing ; steel mills on the banks of the city 's three rivers made the sky glow red and continually released smoke . Modern environmentalist reviewers of the song believe that the pollution @-@ oriented verses show that the song was written to protest the environmental conditions in which workers were forced to live . 
 The second and fourth verses focus on the labor disputes that the city was experiencing at the time . The second verse uses a pun on the name of Jones and Laughlin Steel to ask what the company stole from its workers ( " What did Jones and Laughlin steal ? " ) , while the fourth and final verse ends with the statement that all of the mill workers are " joining up with the CIO . " 
 = = Recordings and adaptations = = 
 The song has been covered by several artists and community groups . Pete Seeger Released a studio version on his 1956 album American Industrial Ballads and a live version of the song on his 1964 album Songs of Struggle and Protest , 1930 – 50 . Both versions by Seeger feature him singing and playing the banjo without any additional accompaniment . In the live version , the crowd 's clapping and singing along can be heard . Folk bands in the Pittsburgh area , such as the <unk> , have both recorded and performed Seeger 's version of the song . 
 In 1959 , Vivien Richman released an adaptation of the song on her album Vivien Richman Sings Folk Songs of West Pennsylvania ; her version of the song includes several additional verses about the landscape and geography of the region . The song has also been covered by students at Pittsburgh Public Schools , using verses that are less political than the original Guthrie composition and closer to the Richman version than the Seeger version . <unk> in verses was partly because by the middle of the 1950s , enforcement of the Smoke Control Ordinance of 1941 cleaned up the air . Lyrics about the smokiness of the town were replaced with the line " Pittsburgh town is a great old town . " 
 = = Links = = 
 = 2015 Belgian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Belgian Grand Prix ( formally the 2015 Formula 1 Shell Belgian Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 23 August 2015 at the Circuit de Spa @-@ Francorchamps in Spa , Belgium . It was the eleventh round of the 2015 Formula One season , and the 71st Belgian Grand Prix . 
 Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes entered the event as the overall Drivers ' Championship leader , 21 points ahead of his teammate Nico Rosberg and 42 points ahead of Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel . Mercedes led the Constructors ' Championship by 147 points over Ferrari , while Williams entered the event in third , a further 85 points adrift . Having won the 2014 edition , Daniel Ricciardo was the defending race winner . 
 Lewis Hamilton won the race for Mercedes , extending his championship lead over Rosberg , who finished second , to 28 points . Romain Grosjean and Lotus secured a podium finish for the first time since the 2013 United States Grand Prix , benefitting from a controversial tyre failure on Sebastian Vettel 's Ferrari late in the race . 
 The race marked Scuderia Ferrari 's 900th Grand Prix entry , while McLaren was handed a record 105 @-@ place grid penalty for a multitude of changes to their Honda power units . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Pirelli , Formula One 's sole tyre supplier since 2011 , supplied the ten teams with four compounds of tyres for the event . The two dry selections were the white @-@ banded medium compound as the " prime " tyre , while the yellow @-@ banded soft compound was provided as the softer " option " choice . The green @-@ banded intermediate weather tyre and the blue @-@ banded full wet compounds were brought to all events . As a consequence of Konstantin Tereshchenko 's crash in a GP3 Series race in 2014 , new asphalt was laid down on the inside of the final corner , replacing the patch of grass that was there before . In addition , a new kerb was added at the exit of the famous Eau Rouge corner , on the apex of turn four . The kerb was however removed on Saturday after the FIA discussed the matter with the drivers . At turn one , the La Source hairpin , the exit kerb was shortened to make it easier to rejoin the track in the event of a driver running wide . 
 The race marked the 900th Grand Prix entered by Scuderia Ferrari . Driving for the Scuderia was Kimi Räikkönen , the most successful active driver at Spa , who extended his contract with the team for an additional year in the week prior to the race . Mercedes introduced a new low @-@ downforce rear wing for Spa , featuring a spoon @-@ shaped design , similar to that of the McLaren MP4 @-@ 21 in 2006 . The aim was to find a balance between low @-@ downforce for the long straights on the Spa circuit while at the same time retaining enough downforce for the more twisting second sector of the track . Red Bull on the other hand tested two different rear wings during Friday 's free practice sessions . While Daniel Ricciardo ran with a very low @-@ downforce wing , Daniil Kvyat tested a " more Spa @-@ specific set @-@ up " , which was ultimately used by both drivers in qualifying and the race to prevent tyre degradation . McLaren came to Spa with a new specification power unit , aiming to reach the level of Ferrari 's unit with the introduced changes . However , the team 's racing director Éric Boullier warned that it might take until Singapore until the gains could be visible and expected a " difficult " Belgian Grand Prix . In suit with the new power unit the team introduced a new engine cover . Further updates to the McLaren MP4 @-@ 30 included an " unprecedented " tray design for the front of the floor , as well as lower sidepods and a new position for the radiator that cools the electronic recovery system . 
 Going into the weekend , Lewis Hamilton led the Drivers ' Championship with 202 points , 21 ahead of second placed Nico Rosberg . Sebastian Vettel for Ferrari was a further 21 points behind Rosberg , having closed the gap by winning the previous round in Hungary . In the Constructors ' Championship , Mercedes with 383 points were leading Ferrari by 147 points , while third placed Williams were a further 85 points behind . 
 = = = = Regulation changes = = = = 
 In an attempt to limit the influence of pit walls on their drivers during race starts , new regulations were introduced for the start procedure from the Belgian Grand Prix onwards . Drivers were now only allowed to adjust one clutch level after leaving the pit garage for the starting grid . The response from drivers was mixed , with Nico Rosberg commenting that the new start procedures would be challenging , while Fernando Alonso opined that the changes were not significant , and Daniel Ricciardo hoped the new procedure might help his team . 
 = = = = Lotus legal troubles = = = = 
 The Lotus team experienced legal difficulties over the Spa weekend , as a legal battle with former test driver Charles Pic , concerning the time the team had granted Pic at the wheel of their 2014 car . With the case in arbitration court , Lotus faced the threat of their cars being impounded and unable to move following the conclusion of the Grand Prix weekend . The bailiffs returned the cars to Lotus and the team was eventually able to travel to Italy , after Bernie Ecclestone , chief executive of the Formula One Group , " stepped in to ensure staff were paid " , while their financial problems continued to question the team 's future . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held , two 90 @-@ minute sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . In the first practice session on Friday morning , Nico Rosberg was fastest after initial trouble with his power unit , a quarter of a second ahead of his Mercedes teammate Lewis Hamilton . Daniel Ricciardo ( Red Bull ) was third , just five hundredths of a second slower than Hamilton , with Kimi Räikkönen another tenth down in fourth . Fifty minutes into the session , a red flag came out when Pastor Maldonado lost traction at the rear end of his Lotus E23 Hybrid at the exit of Les Combes corner and crashed into the tyre barriers , damaging the front @-@ right of his car . The session was stopped for ten minutes for the track marshals to repair the barriers . Speaking about his accident , Maldonado said : " It was very unlucky because I nearly saved the car . But anyway , it happened . This track is always very difficult when you have a moment or whatever , especially at that point where the second sector is quite narrow . But this can happen . Now we can 't change that . We need to look forward . " In the second Lotus , Romain Grosjean was again replaced by Jolyon Palmer , who finished practice 17th . 
 Another accident marred the second practice session on Friday afternoon , when a rear tyre on Nico Rosberg 's Mercedes blew , causing him to spin in the run @-@ up to Blanchimont corner . Rosberg was able to avoid hitting the tyre barriers , but the session was nevertheless red @-@ flagged in order to clear the track of the car . Prior to this incident , Rosberg had set the fastest time of the session with 1 : 49 @.@ 687 , three @-@ tenths of a second faster than teammate Hamilton , in second . Ricciardo was again third , a further 0 @.@ 4 seconds adrift , ahead of fellow Red Bull driver Daniil Kvyat , one second behind Rosberg . The Williams cars of Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa were 14th and 16th respectively , ahead of the two McLarens , who were faster only than the two Manor Marussias . Rosberg 's tyre failure was later deemed the result of an " external cut " , excluding the possibility of " any structural integrity issues " . Rosberg however remained worried about the reliability of the tyres for Sunday 's race , saying : " The problem is that we don 't really understand it . There are theories but there is no real evidence , so that 's a bit worrying for sure . " 
 World champion Lewis Hamilton bounced back in the third session on Saturday morning , being quickest , almost half a second faster than Rosberg . In " an uneventful session " , the two Ferraris were third and fourth , with Vettel leading Räikkönen . Meanwhile , the Force India drivers Sergio Pérez and Nico Hülkenberg ended the session in fifth and eighth respectively , separated by the Red Bull drivers . The only nuisance in third practice occurred when Romain Grosjean almost spun having to go around Kimi Räikkönen in turn 16 , complaining to his team about a " very , very dangerous " manoeuvre . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . Valtteri Bottas was first and last out on track during the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , starting the lap that saved him from elimination in the very last moments of the session . Excluded from further participation were both Manor Marussias , both McLarens and Sauber 's Felipe Nasr . Max Verstappen succeeded in progressing into Q2 despite complaining about a loss of power on his car . 
 The second part of qualifying saw Kimi Räikkönen come to a halt on track due to a loss of oil pressure . The session was briefly red @-@ flagged to clear the track and when it resumed , both Mercedes drivers decided not to head out again , since their first times where sufficient to advance to Q3 . Max Verstappen did not compete in Q2 at all due to the problems on his car , leaving him in provisional 14th ( bar his penalty ) and Räikkönen in 15th on the grid . The other three drivers to be eliminated were Marcus Ericsson for Sauber , Daniil Kvyat and Nico Hülkenberg . Hülkenberg 's time was just three @-@ tenths of a second slower than that of Sebastian Vettel in tenth and he became the only driver of a Mercedes @-@ powered car not to compete for pole position . 
 Lewis Hamilton was the first Mercedes driver to set a timed lap in Q3 , being almost half a second faster than Rosberg in Q2 . While Rosberg succeeded in bettering his times as well , he nevertheless ended up 0 @.@ 458 seconds behind his teammate and second on the grid . This handed Lewis Hamilton his tenth pole position in eleven races , meaning that he secured the FIA Pole Position Trophy at this early stage of the season . The next fastest car , Valtteri Bottas for Williams was 1 @.@ 3 seconds off Hamilton 's time of 1 : 47 @.@ 197 . Fourth fastest was Grosjean , who delivered what the BBC called a " stunningly impressive " lap . Sergio Pérez put in a surprising effort as well , finishing fifth for Force India . Meanwhile , Sebastian Vettel , who had won the previous race in Hungary , managed only ninth fastest after a mistake at the final chicane . 
 After qualifying , Hamilton stated his performance was mainly due to improvements he made in the middle sector of the lap , saying : " Sector two has been probably in the past a bit of a weak point . I knew the lines but could never really put the corners together . Definitely on those last two laps that was a very , very strong area for me . " Indeed , he gained most of his time on Rosberg in this sector , containing the majority of the circuit 's corners . He became the first driver since Michael Schumacher – who achieved the feat in 2000 – 2001 – to secure six consecutive pole positions , while the last driver to score six consecutive poles in one season was Mika Häkkinen in 1999 . Following their poor qualifying performance and grid penalties , Jenson Button expected a " lonely race " for McLaren , saying : " I actually enjoyed driving the car , and when you cross the finishing line and you see the time you think ' That 's not bad ' . But then when you see where you are , a second off the guy in front of you , it 's a massive margin , it hurts . " 
 = = = Penalties = = = 
 McLaren , who were expected to benefit from the start changes , were set to start the race from the back of the grid . After they had already been allowed to use one additional power unit in the 2015 season , the team had used their sixth power unit for the Hungarian Grand Prix , and now equipped both cars with a seventh , heavily revised version of their power unit for Belgium on Friday . McLaren made another power unit change on Saturday , since a mid @-@ season change in regulations meant that penalties could no longer result in in @-@ race time penalties . The cumulated 105 @-@ place grid penalty set a new record in Formula One . 
 Max Verstappen received a ten @-@ place grid penalty after he equipped his sixth power unit on Friday . After Lotus changed the gearbox on Romain Grosjean 's car on Saturday , Grosjean was handed a five @-@ place grid penalty , moving him from fourth to ninth on the grid . For the same reason , Kimi Räikkönen received a five @-@ place grid penalty , which only set him back two places due to penalties of other drivers . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Prior to the race start , Nico Hülkenberg returned to the pit garage after reporting a loss of power on his Force India , but he eventually made it to the grid . His problem returned during the formation lap and when his car stalled on the starting grid , the starting procedure was aborted and another formation lap commenced . Carlos Sainz , Jr. experienced a similar problem during the second formation lap and was called into the pits . He was eventually sent out after the race started . The race distance was therefore shortened to 43 laps . 
 At the start , Nico Rosberg did not get away well , falling back to fifth behind Pérez , Ricciardo and Bottas , but overtook the latter for fourth by the end of the lap . Fernando Alonso did also start well for McLaren , moving up to twelfth , while Lewis Hamilton retained his lead , pulling clear of Pérez 's Force India early on . On lap two , Pastor Maldonado became the second retirement of the race when he stopped his car due to a power failure . On lap six , Daniil Kvyat took eighth place from Felipe Massa , while Romain Grosjean had quick first laps as well , overtaking the second Williams of Bottas for sixth on lap eight . 
 An early pit stop by Ricciardo on lap eight forced the hand of Force India , who brought in Pérez one lap later , but Pérez still came out behind the Red Bull . Several more drivers came in over the next couple of laps , including Bottas and Grosjean , with the Williams taking back his position during the stops only to be overtaken again on lap ten . Bottas was also set for a penalty , as his team had simultaneously equipped him with two different types of tyre compounds . He would later serve a drive through penalty . Lap eleven saw a risky overtaking manoeuvre by Max Verstappen , who went around the outside of Nasr at Blanchimont to take eleventh place . Following these first stops , the order at the front was Hamilton , Rosberg , Vettel , Räikkönen and Ricciardo , with the first four yet to stop . Rosberg was the first to do so on lap 13 , coming out slightly ahead of Pérez , who had overtaken Ricciardo a lap earlier . Pérez carried his momentum into Eau Rouge and up to turn seven , but ultimately failed to get the better of the Mercedes . Hamilton and Vettel pitted for new tyres on laps 14 and 15 respectively . 
 Over the next laps , Rosberg steadily closed on Hamilton in front without being able to catch his teammate . Lap 18 saw Romain Grosjean gain another position at Ricciardo 's expense , moving into fourth . Just two laps later , a DRS aided move on Pérez handed him third place . On lap 21 , Daniel Ricciardo 's Red Bull came to a sudden stop at the exit of the ' Bus Stop ' chicane , leading to a Virtual Safety Car period , during which many drivers pitted for new tyres , among them Grosjean , Massa and Verstappen . By lap 29 , Kvyat had pitted for new soft tyres , being able to go fast until the end of the race , while Vettel decided to try and finish the race without pitting for new tyres a second time . Kvyat 's newer tyres allowed him to overtake Bottas , Räikkönen , Massa and Pérez to eventually finish fourth . Sainz , Jr. eventually retired from the race on lap 34 . Vettel 's strategy however did not work out . By lap 42 , less than two laps from the finish , his right rear tyre exploded while on the Kemmel straight , handing Grosjean the final podium position . Vettel ended his race in the pits , but was classified down in twelfth place . Unchallenged by his teammate in second , Lewis Hamilton finished the race to take his 39th Grand Prix victory . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interviews , conducted by former Formula One driver David Coulthard , Lewis Hamilton said that he felt " fairly relaxed at the front " , naming looking after the tyre wear as his only concern during the race . Nico Rosberg conceded that he " just completely messed up the start " and added that Hamilton " did a great job , so deserved to win " . Romain Grosjean was delighted with his tenth career podium , speaking of " an incredible weekend " and claimed that the podium " has the feel of a race win " . Asked about his title aspirations , Hamilton insisted that it was " definitely way too early " to speak about winning the world title . During the post @-@ race press conference , Grosjean described the moment of Vettel 's tyre failure as " a bit of a scary moment " , saying that it was " very unfortunate he had that puncture " . 
 Following the race , Sebastian Vettel voiced harsh criticism of tyre supplier Pirelli , concerning not only his own but also Nico Rosberg 's tyre failure on Friday . He was quoted saying : " I think it is a sort of thing that keeps going around and no @-@ one mentions . It it is unacceptable . If Nico tells us he did not go off the track , he didn 't go off the track , why should he lie to us ? It is the same with me , I didn 't go off the track – it is out of the blue the tyre exploded [ ... ] . " He saw the safety of the drivers at risks , asserting that " [ i ] f it happens 200 metres earlier , I am not standing here now . " Pirelli 's Motorsport Director Paul <unk> reacted to Vettel 's accusations by saying : " I am not going to criticise Sebastian . It is a hot moment and I don 't want to enter into a war of words over that – it is pointless for everybody . We were concerned when we saw the number of laps that were going to be done . Nobody really suggested they were going to do a one @-@ stop race and it was a bit of a surprise – if anything people were talking about doing three stops rather than two . " Nico Rosberg however backed up his compatriot Vettel , telling the press : " The exploding tyres is poor . It shouldn 't happen . That it keeps on happening in other categories as well and with me on Friday . Both of us were so lucky . If it had happened a couple of metres later or earlier , we would have one of the biggest shunts ever . They need to figure out something to make it safer . " He also called for immediate action considering the Italian Grand Prix – the race following Spa @-@ Francorchamps – due to its nature as the fastest race of the year . Pirelli reacted by demanding a maximum stint length for their tyres , a suggestion the company had already put in at the end of 2013 . The day after the race , Pirelli announced that they had found cuts on other tyres from other teams , mainly on the rear tyres , and that they were still searching for the cause of the damages . However , the company reasserted their stance that while Rosberg 's failure was caused by external damage , Vettel 's was due to " pure wear " . Vettel received additional support from Coulthard , who wrote that Vettel was " right to tackle Pirelli " over the issue of tyres , as well as Coulthard 's former teammate Mika Häkkinen . Vettel once again defended the team 's decision to try a one @-@ stop race on the Tuesday after the race , saying : " Our strategy was never risky , at any point . The team is not to blame . " When the tyre supplier released the findings of their own investigation into the matter , the company needed to overturn their claim that the failure was caused by wear , since the report proved that the damage to Vettel 's tyre was caused by debris . 
 Max Verstappen received particular praise for his overtake on Felipe Nasr through Blanchimont . Former driver Allan McNish wrote : " This is the first time in my life I have seen someone go around the outside of someone at Blanchimont . That was big [ . ] " At the FIA Prize Giving ceremony on 4 December 2015 , Verstappen received an award for Action of the Year , acknowledging his manoeuvre . Jenson Button on the other hand called McLaren 's race an " embarrassment " , after he had suffered from a lack of battery power throughout the race , finishing only ahead of the two Manor Marussia drivers . Lotus disclosed that Maldonado 's retirement was in part caused by " heavy contact with the kerbs " , with the intensity of impact being as high as 17 g0 ( 170 m / s2 ) . Technical director Nick Chester felt it was " a big shame " that Maldonado , who had been running ahead of eventual third placed Grosjean when he retired , was unable to contribute to a " strong result " for the team . Lotus later revealed that the retirement was caused by damage to the clutch control system sustained when he went off the track at Eau Rouge . At the same time , the team applauded Grosjean for a " faultless " drive . Additional praise for Grosjean came from motorsport journalist Mark Hughes , who felt that Grosjean was " still seriously under @-@ rated " in Formula One . Williams launched an internal investigation into the tyre mix @-@ up at Valtteri Bottas 's first pit stop , feeling that it might have cost him a podium position . 
 As a result of the race , Lewis Hamilton extended his championship lead over Rosberg to 28 points , the biggest margin it had been all season up to that point . Vettel 's tyre failure cost him points as he was now 67 points off the lead in the standings . In the Constructors ' Championship , Mercedes extended their lead over Ferrari to 184 points , while Lotus moved into fifth place at the expense of Force India . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Romain Grosjean received a five @-@ place grid penalty for a gearbox change . ^ 2 – Kimi Räikkönen received a five @-@ place grid penalty for a gearbox change . ^ 3 – Max Verstappen received a ten @-@ place grid penalty for using his sixth power unit during the season . ^ 4 – Jenson Button received a fifty @-@ place grid penalty for a variety of changes made to his power unit . ^ 5 – Fernando Alonso received a fifty @-@ five @-@ place grid penalty for a variety of changes made to his power unit . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Sebastian Vettel was classified because he completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé = 
 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé was the second residency show by American recording artist Beyoncé . Held during four non @-@ consecutive nights in August 2011 at the Roseland Ballroom in New York City , the concerts were part of Beyoncé 's campaign in support of her fourth studio album 4 ( 2011 ) . All the songs on the standard version of the album , excluding " Start Over " , were performed by her to a standing room @-@ only audience of 3 @,@ 200 . Beyoncé also sang some of her previous hits from her three prior studio albums as well as songs she recorded with former girl group Destiny 's Child in the 1990s and early 2000s . Wearing a <unk> gold sparkling mini @-@ dress , she was backed by four female dancers and a 20 @-@ piece female band including a horn and orchestra section . 
 Tickets to the four concerts sold out in one minute . The first show , on August 14 , 2011 , received critical acclaim ; Beyoncé 's ability to perform under the circumstances of a smaller stage and a larger band was commended by contemporary music critics . A DVD of the show titled Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 , which features performances from the concert , and never before seen personal footage from Beyoncé , including her times with Destiny 's Child , traveling and partying with family , Beyoncé 's rehearsal of " 1 + 1 " backstage at American Idol , other live performances and a sneak peek at her wedding dress , was released on November 21 , 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On August 5 , 2011 , Beyoncé 's official website announced that she would be performing at New York City 's Roseland Ballroom for four nights in the third week of August . The set on each night would be the entire collection of her fourth studio album , 4 . Tickets for all four shows were available on August 10 on Ticketmaster . The first date went on sale to the general public at 1 p.m. EST , followed by the second show at 2 p.m. EST , third at 3 p.m. EST , and the final concert at 4 p.m. EST . Citi card @-@ members were able to order tickets early with a pre @-@ sale beginning at noon EST on August 10 , 2011 through the Citi Private Pass Program . When tickets went on sale to the general public on August 10 , 2011 for the first show of 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé on August 14 , 2011 , the date sold out in 22 seconds . Within the minute following the first sold out date , Columbia Records reported via Twitter that all four shows had sold out , stating " It 's official @ Beyonce ’ s 4th & final show at Roseland Ballroom is <unk> OUT ! Thats a total of 4 sold out shows next week ! " . 
 In a radio interview with Philadelphia 's Power <unk> , Beyoncé 's husband Jay @-@ Z spoke in depth about the upcoming intimate shows and compared her to Michael Jackson stating , " I know that 's blasphemy to compare the two because Mike was such an innovator , but I think she 's like the second coming . You know , the hard work and dedication that she puts into her shows . It just makes you want to work harder at your own craft . She 's like a machine . " 
 = = Development = = 
 On August 19 , 2011 , the first part of a concert 's behind the scenes video was released . In the behind the scenes special , lead guitarist Bibi stated " She ’ s listening to her inner voice right now and doing what she wants to do . I think she took risks . I think she 's being more authentic and doing what she wants to do instead of doing what people expect , which is good . " Kim , the show 's musical director described the idea of the intimate concert , " This project is the most mature project for Beyoncé , because to be able to be in an intimate setting like this like the Roseland , which is a historic place , it 's an amazing thing . I think the challenge of it is to be able to present your whole album as its own concept , as its own piece and it 's a great way to educate the people about what this album means to her ; It 's for her , it 's for the fans , it 's for anybody . " 
 The second part to the show 's behind the scenes look was released on August 30 , 2011 . In the second part of the behind the scenes special , Beyoncé is shown calling the shots and rehearsing with her band , leading up to the sold @-@ out shows and clips of fans waiting in line show appreciation and dedication for Beyoncé . The third part to the behind the scenes look was revealed on September 10 , 2011 . The behind the scenes third part showed the orchestra and back up dancers preparing for the performance as the instrumental to " I Was Here " plays in the background . Before Beyoncé takes to the stage , a clip of her praying with everyone involved in the concert is shown . On her way to the stage , Beyoncé describes in depth what she hopes to achieve during these 4 Intimate Nights stating , " I just want to give them everything I have . I 'm so excited about performing the album , and it 's just such a beautiful vibe inside people are just ready to dance and enjoy the music . — It 's all good . " The third part to the behind the scenes look ends with Beyoncé taking to the stage addressing the crowd with " Hello Roseland ! " The fourth , and final , behind the scenes look into the intimate show was released exclusively through Citibank 's Facebook page on September 14 , 2011 . The final part of the behind the scenes look was the commercial for the concerts ' DVD release . 
 = = About the show = = 
 = = = Fashion and stage = = = 
 During the show , Beyoncé performed in a gold lamé mini @-@ dress courtesy of her mother , Tina , and shoes by Stuart Weitzman . She wore the slinky gold sparkling mini @-@ dress throughout the entire show . Beyoncé was assisted on stage by four female dancers clad in shimmering black leotards . Marcus Barnes of Daily Mail described Beyoncé 's fashion choice as " fab " as she strutted on stage . Georgette Cline of AOL 's The Boombox stated that the metallic dress showed off her curves during the concert . 
 While on stage , Beyoncé was backed by a 20 @-@ piece all @-@ female band and orchestra . The band consisted of a drummer , <unk> , and guitarist and for the first time in Beyoncé 's touring history , a horn section and an orchestra . The band additionally included , among others , two saxophonists , a guitar player , a seven @-@ piece string section , a pianist and a conductor . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times noted that the all @-@ female band plays an important spectacle to Beyoncé 's performance , as she is both a part and in charge of the " army " . Usually known for performing in arenas that hold 20 @,@ 000 or more people , Beyoncé performed in standing @-@ room @-@ only Roseland , which holds a maximum capacity of 3 @,@ 200 people . 
 During a behind the scenes look into the show , lighting designer Nick stated that the big moments of the album will be accompanied by big lighting from behind Beyoncé for the " epic big scenes " , as opposed to performances such as " 1 + 1 " , where Beyoncé is bathed in a single spotlight above a piano . In the second part of a behind the scenes look of 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé , it is revealed that Beyoncé was in charge of the orchestra 's design and stage set @-@ up , stating that a three level stage would be needed , allowing the back @-@ up singers to be at the top and the orchestra to be on the same level as Beyoncé herself , as to allow viewers to see them . 
 = = = Concert synopsis = = = 
 The show begins with Beyoncé taking the stage stating " This is going to be a little different , y 'all . It 'll be more intimate " before she begins revealing multiple stories from her musical history including before — auditions with Destiny 's Child starting at age nine , her father 's early and frequent involvement managing his daughter 's career and getting dropped by Elektra . After delving into her musical history , Beyoncé states " I just want to have a good time with y 'all " before she begins the concert with her rendition of Michael Jackson 's " I Wanna Be Where You Are " . Following her rendition of " I Wanna Be Where You Are " , Beyoncé begins a medley of past Destiny 's Child songs , stopping each track to discuss her life and mindset during each stage of her career . During her performance of " Independent Women " she reveals how her father , Mathew Knowles , submitted the track to the Charlie 's Angels ( 2000 ) soundtrack without permission , reveals that she wants to write a song " that celebrates a woman 's curves " inspired by Stevie Nicks ' guitar riff in " Edge of Seventeen " ( 1982 ) for " Bootylicious " and states " With a lot of success comes a lot of negativity ... they were being nasty but it inspired me " before performing " Survivor " . 
 After " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , the final song in the medley , Beyoncé began to tell the story of how her first album came to be , stating " [ The label ] told me I didn ’ t have one hit song on my album . I guess they were kinda right . I had five ! " . Beyoncé then continued with a slowed @-@ down , jazzier version of " Crazy in Love " allowing the orchestra to augment rather than transform the tracks . During the Ne @-@ Yo penned " Irreplaceable , " Beyoncé has the crowd assist her in her performance . After stating " On April 4 , 2008 , somebody put a ring on it , " Beyoncé has the audience , which contained both men and women <unk> their hands to " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . 
 Beyoncé than begins to perform virtually all of 4 , beginning with " 1 + 1 " , where she is found kneeling atop a piano wrapped up in smoke and red hued lights , reminiscent to her performance on the American Idol finale . Beyoncé then continues down the original track listing of 4 , following " 1 + 1 " with a rendition of " I Care " where she whipped her hair to the " brooding " brass and " ominous " beat of the song , while " bringing the song to life with an immaculate vocals " . " I Miss You " begins with Beyoncé performing while seated , only to later be brought to her feet while altering the song 's ending with additional vocals and instrumentation . " Best Thing I Never Had " follows afterwards , with a slight alteration in its melody . Beyoncé then sang " Party " as the crowd swayed their arms back and forth and stretched out the " y " to every other verse . Beyoncé than began harmonizing with the back @-@ up singers for " Rather Die Young " , before performing an up @-@ tempo version of " Love on Top " . Beyoncé would begin the countdown of " Countdown " later allowing the audience to finish the countdown from nine @-@ to @-@ one . " End of Time " and " Run the World ( Girls ) " had Beyoncé utilizing flamboyant light displays bringing elaborate routines to a smaller stage . The show ends with the last song — the self @-@ empowering ballad " I Was Here " — with Beyoncé rephrasing the song 's final chorus to say " Roseland , we were here . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Jason Newman of Rap @-@ Up began his review , " For a singer long accustomed to stadiums , Sunday 's show was the most intimate performance most fans would see from the ubiquitous superstar . " He highlighted how she " split the difference between hushed torch singer and stadium belter " , and favored her ability to display both " stamina and vigor , which make for a stadium @-@ perfect show " . Newman concluded , " The medley combined the quick blasts of a Las Vegas revue with the emotional candor of a singer @-@ songwriter performing to a near @-@ empty room . It was an odd , yet effective juxtaposition ; a global superstar who could effortlessly shuffle between slick , bombastic R & B and awkwardly honest confessions of a tumultuous career . By the end of the set though , humility , as one expects from a singer with 16 Grammy awards and more than 75 million records sold worldwide , turned to sly confidence . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times was impressed by the show , complimenting Beyoncé 's performances of " underdog tracks " such as " Party " and " Love on Top " . He wrote : 
 In her performance it 's always clear that a finely tuned engine is at work , but what was refreshing here was that it was in service of a surprisingly casual manner . She made funny , exaggerated faces ; twirled her hair ( when it was not floating ) ; and spoke to the crowd like a knowing buddy . She was working off a teleprompter for her between @-@ song patter , but improvising frequently , and for the better ... Beyoncé persevere [ s ] , with a voice that skips up octaves and still gains power , with words that are as compelling as they are straightforward , with legs that treat the stage floor like an enemy in need of a thorough stomping . Even in moments of uncertainty , these are her constants . They survive her missteps . 
 Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine wrote , " There aren 't many artists in the world that can pull off a 90 @-@ minute set in Stuart Weitzman heels and leave a beyond packed audience satisfied to the point of not needing an encore . But that 's Beyoncé . " Daily Mail 's Marcus Barnes noted that Beyoncé " dazzles " , " looked fab " , and " sparkled " , later agreeing with Jay @-@ Z 's affirmation that Beyoncé is the " second coming of Michael Jackson " . Nekesa Mumbi Moody of ABC News wrote that though Beyoncé has nothing to prove at this point in her career , " even queens need to show what it means to be royalty " , making reference to her performances on 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé . He added that the show was a " dazzling rebuttal " to all negative chatter revolving 4 . Moody concluded , " She put her track record up for display along with her new material with a subtle but undeniable message that she is not to be doubted , or counted against . " Mike Wass of Idolator began his review by writing that " Beyonce never fails to amaze . " He continued to praise her for " raising the bar for live entertainment with a flawless display " , further writing , " The worldly pop icon ’ s ability to bring new depth and texture to quality material is almost as impressive as her uncanny knack for connecting with the audience on an emotional level " . Wass finished his review by making reference to Beyoncé performance of " I Was Here " - which lyrically revolves around leaving a mark on the world - by writing , " But the pop veteran can sleep easy . Mission well and truly accomplished . " 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Brad Wete wrote that the concerts proved that " Beyoncé 's bigger than any ballroom . " He continued , " [ Beyoncé 's ] excellence is undeniable . Her quaking vocals beat her contemporaries and competes with legends ’ , as does her dancing " , and concluded , " I ’ m looking forward to seeing her in a bigger venue , where there ’ s more space for her voice to soar , elbow room for her band to play , and room for her wild @-@ child fans to dance . " Dan Aquilante of the New York Post stated that after the Beyoncé 's performances of the songs on 4 at the concerts , the album was to be rated a 10 out of 10 . He further wrote , " Where tunes felt lackluster and flabby on the recording , Beyoncé injected a vibrancy in the new songs that boosted the material to be almost the equal to some of her best and biggest radio hits . " Yolanda Sangweni of Essence magazine viewed the concert as a chance for Beyoncé to remind people that her " vocal chops " are what got her where she stands today as an artist , and concluded that Michael Jackson and Diana Ross would be very proud of Beyoncé 's accomplishments and performances on 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé . 
 Jocelyn Vena of MTV News praised Beyoncé for her " never @-@ miss @-@ a @-@ note voice " and " razzle @-@ dazzle dance moves " , and for matching the crowd 's energy with her enthusiasm during live performances . Jozen Cummings of The Wall Street Journal described the show as Beyoncé 's " most intimate work to date " , adding that it was an intimate night between " Beyoncé and her fans , one in which there need not be a specific stand @-@ out moment " . Gavin DeGraw of VH1 noted that " there ’ s no doubting Beyoncé ’ s talent as a performer ; her undeniable vocal ability , show ( wo ) <unk> , and charm " which infused the room the entire evening . " By contrast , Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone gave the show a mixed review , writing " a Beyoncé concert is a big , <unk> affair , a bit like a Las Vegas floor show crossed with a typhoon . ' Intimate ' is not the adjective that leaps to mind " . However , he described Beyoncé as " a woman who can make a club feel like a coliseum " . Rosen coined the live performance of " I Was Here " as " a hollow exercise in self @-@ mythologizing " . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice placed 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé on her list of The 10 Best Live Shows of 2011 . In a review of the show , she commented " The serenity at her core is borne from a supreme amount of confidence ; that it comes off as something generously given is a testament to her prodigious talents as a performer on every level . Plus , I mean , have you heard her sing ? Nobody has pipes like her right now . Not a single person out there . At the very least , we can all learn breath control from her . " 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 To promote the show , photographer Myrna Suarez photographed Beyoncé on stage during the first and second nights of the concert . The photos were then published and used in reviews by Rap @-@ Up , The Wall Street Journal , Daily Mail , Entertainment Weekly , Rolling Stone , and Billboard magazine . 
 A DVD of the show titled , Live at Roseland , was released exclusively to Walmart in the United States on November 21 , 2011 , and a two @-@ disc DVD deluxe package re @-@ titled , Live at Roseland : Elements Of 4 , was released worldwide on November 29 , 2011 worldwide . The collection features the full concert , bonus offstage personal footage by Beyoncé , a 20 @-@ page booklet and a video anthology that includes seven music videos from 4 . The DVD was directed by Beyoncé , Ed Burke and Anthony Green , and was executively produced by Beyoncé . It features performances from the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé concert . The album was commercially successful , debuting at number two on the Billboard Top Music Videos chart in the US on November 27 , 2011 which also became its peak position . The standard edition of the album was certified gold while the deluxe edition was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It became the second best @-@ selling DVD of 2011 in the US . It was also the second best @-@ selling DVD worldwide in 2011 . 
 In September 2011 , Beyoncé posted several previews of the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the concert online . The live performances for " End of Time " and " I Was Here " , which were added on the DVD , premiered online on November 16 , 2011 . The performances for " I Miss You " and " Independent Women " , premiered online the next day via <unk> The complete concert film premiered exclusively on Vevo on November 20 at 5 : 00 p.m. The live performance of " I Care " from the DVD was posted online on December 21 , 2011 . As part of the promotion , the concert was also aired on network televisions , being broadcast on December 25 , 2011 on British television channel 4Music and on December 30 on Channel 4 . The video for " Love on Top " premiered online in January 2012 and was released on the iTunes Store on January 11 , 2012 . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " I Wanna Be Where You Are " 
 Destiny 's Child Medley : 
 " No , No , No ( Part 1 ) " 
 " No , No , No ( Part 2 ) " 
 " Bug a Boo " 
 " Bills , Bills , Bills " 
 " Say My Name " 
 " Jumpin ' , Jumpin ' " 
 " Independent Women " 
 " Bootylicious " 
 " Survivor " 
 " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " 
 " Crazy in Love " 
 " Dreamgirls " 
 " Irreplaceable " 
 " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " 
 " 1 + 1 " 
 " I Care " 
 " I Miss You " 
 " Best Thing I Never Had " 
 " Party " 
 " Rather Die Young " 
 " Love on Top " 
 " Countdown " 
 " End of Time " 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " 
 " I Was Here " 
 Source ( s ) : 
 Additional notes 
 Although set to showcase Beyoncé 's fourth album 4 , " Start Over " was missing from the show 's set list . 
 " Bug a Boo " was added to the " Destiny 's Child Medley " after the second concert on August 16 . 
 = Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge = 
 The Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge was a battle of the American Revolutionary War fought near Wilmington in present @-@ day Pender County , North Carolina on February 27 , 1776 . The victory of North Carolina Revolutionary forces over Southern Loyalists helped build political support for the revolution and increased recruitment of additional soldiers into their forces . 
 Loyalist recruitment efforts in the interior of North Carolina began in earnest with news of the Battles of Lexington and Concord , and Patriots in the province also began organizing Continental Army and militia units . When word arrived in January 1776 of a planned British Army expedition to the area , Josiah Martin , the royal governor , ordered the Loyalist militia to muster in anticipation of their arrival . Revolutionary militia and Continental units mobilized to prevent the junction , blockading several routes until the poorly armed Loyalists were forced to confront them at Moore 's Creek Bridge , about 18 miles ( 29 km ) north of Wilmington . 
 In a brief early @-@ morning engagement , a charge across the bridge by sword @-@ wielding Loyalist Scotsmen was met by a barrage of musket fire . One Loyalist leader was killed , another captured , and the whole force was scattered . In the following days , many Loyalists were arrested , putting a damper on further recruiting efforts . North Carolina was not militarily threatened again until 1780 , and memories of the battle and its aftermath negated efforts by Charles Cornwallis to recruit Loyalists in the area in 1781 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = British recruiting = = = 
 In early 1775 , with political and military tensions rising in the Thirteen Colonies , North Carolina 's royal governor , Josiah Martin , hoped to combine the recruiting of Scots settlers in the North Carolina interior with that of sympathetic former Regulators ( a group originally opposed to corrupt colonial administration ) and disaffected Loyalists in the coastal areas to build a large Loyalist force to counteract Patriot sympathies in the province . His petition to London to recruit 1 @,@ 000 men had been rejected , but he continued efforts to rally Loyalist support . 
 At about the same time , Scotsman Allan Maclean successfully lobbied King George III for permission to recruit Loyalist Scots throughout North America . In April , he received royal permission to raise a regiment known as the Royal Highland Emigrants by recruiting retired Scottish soldiers living in North America . One battalion was to be recruited in the northern provinces , including New York , Quebec and Nova Scotia , while a second battalion was to be raised in North Carolina and other southern provinces , where a large number of these soldiers had been given land . After receiving his commissions from General Thomas Gage in June , Maclean sent Donald MacLeod and Donald MacDonald , two veterans of the June 17 Battle of Bunker Hill , south to lead the recruitment drive there . These recruiters were also aware that Allan MacDonald , husband of the famous Jacobite heroine Flora MacDonald was already actively recruiting in North Carolina . Their arrival at New Bern was cause for suspicion by members of North Carolina 's Committee of Safety , but they were not arrested . 
 On January 3 , 1776 , Martin learned that an expedition of more than 2 @,@ 000 troops under the command of General Henry Clinton was planned for the southern colonies and that their arrival was expected in mid @-@ February . He sent word to the recruiters that he expected them to deliver recruits to the coast by February 15 , and dispatched Alexander Maclean to Cross Creek ( present @-@ day Fayetteville ) to coordinate activities in that area . Mclean optimistically reported to Martin that he would raise and equip 5 @,@ 000 Regulators and 1 @,@ 000 Scots . Martin is reported to have said " This is the moment when this country may be delivered from anarchy " , expecting a North Carolina Loyalist victory . 
 In a meeting of Scots and Regulator leaders at Cross Creek on February 5 , there was disagreement on how to proceed . The Scots wanted to wait until the British troops had actually arrived before mustering , while the Regulators wanted to move immediately . The views of the latter prevailed since they claimed to be able to raise 5 @,@ 000 men , while the Scots expected to raise only 700 to 800 . When the forces mustered on February 15 , there were about 3 @,@ 500 men , but the number rapidly dwindled over the next few days . Many men had expected to be met and escorted by British troops and did not relish the possibility of having to fight their way to the coast . When they marched three days later , Brigadier General Donald MacDonald led between 1 @,@ 400 and 1 @,@ 600 men , predominantly Scots . This number was further reduced over the coming days as more men deserted the column . 
 = = = Revolutionary reaction = = = 
 With the reaction of the revolutionary war , word of the Cross Creek meeting reached members of the Revolutionary North Carolina Provincial Congress a few days after it happened . The colonies were broadly prosperous on the eve of the American Revolution . Pursuant to resolutions of the Second Continental Congress , the provincial congress had raised the 1st North Carolina Regiment of the Continental Army in fall 1775 , and given command to Colonel James Moore . Local committees of safety in Wilmington and New Bern also had active militia organizations , led by Alexander Lillington and Richard Caswell respectively . On February 15 the Patriot forces began to mobilize . 
 Moore led 650 Continentals out of Wilmington with the objective of preventing the Loyalists from reaching the coast . They camped on the southern shore of Rockfish Creek on February 15 , about 7 miles ( 11 km ) from the Loyalist camp . General MacDonald learned of their arrival , and sent Moore a copy of a proclamation issued by Governor Martin and a letter calling on the rebels to lay down their arms . Moore responded with his own call that the Loyalists lay down their arms and support the cause of Congress . In the meantime , Caswell led 800 New Bern militiamen toward the area . 
 = = = Loyalist march = = = 
 Macdonald , his preferred road blocked by Moore , chose an alternate route that would eventually bring his force to the Widow Moore 's Creek Bridge , about 18 miles ( 29 km ) from Wilmington . On February 20 he crossed the Cape Fear River at Cross Creek and destroyed the boats in order to deny Moore their use . His forces then crossed the South River , heading for Corbett 's Ferry , a crossing of the Black River . On orders from Moore , Caswell reached the ferry first , and set up a blockade there . Moore , as a precaution against Caswell being defeated or circumvented , detached Lillington with 150 Wilmington militia and 100 men under Colonel John Ashe from the New Hanover Volunteer Company of Rangers to take up a position at the Widow Moore 's Creek Bridge . These men , moving by forced marches , traveled down the southern bank of the Cape Fear River to Elizabethtown , where they crossed to the north bank . From there they marched down to the confluence of the Black River and Moore 's Creek , and began entrenching on the east bank of the creek . Moore detached other militia companies to occupy Cross Creek , and followed Lillington and Ashe with the slower Continentals . They followed the same route , but did not arrive until after the battle . 
 When MacDonald and his force reached Corbett 's Ferry , they found the crossing blocked by Caswell and his men . MacDonald prepared for battle , but was informed by a local slave that there was a second crossing a few miles up the Black River that they could use . On February 26 , he ordered his rearguard to make a demonstration as if they were planning to cross while he led his main body up to this second crossing and headed for the bridge at Moore 's Creek . Caswell , once he realized that MacDonald had given him the slip , hurried his men the 10 miles ( 16 km ) to Moore 's Creek , and beat MacDonald there by only a few hours . MacDonald sent one of his men into the Patriot camp under a flag of truce to demand their surrender , and to examine the defenses . Caswell refused , and the envoy returned with a detailed plan of the Patriot fortifications . 
 Caswell had thrown up some entrenchments on the west side of the bridge , but these were not located to Patriot advantage . Their position required the Patriots to defend a position whose only line of retreat was across the narrow bridge , a distinct disadvantage that MacDonald recognized when he saw the plans . In a council held that night , the Loyalists decided to attack , since the alternative of finding another crossing might give Moore time to reach the area . During the night , Caswell decided to abandon that position and instead take up a position on the far side of the creek . To further complicate the Loyalists ' use of the bridge , the militia took up its planking and greased the support rails . 
 = = Battle = = 
 By the time of their arrival at Moore 's Creek , the Loyalist contingent had shrunk to between 700 and 800 men . About 600 of these were Scots and the remainder were Regulators . Furthermore , the marching had taken its toll on the elderly MacDonald ; he fell ill and turned command over to Lieutenant Colonel Donald MacLeod . The Loyalists broke camp at 1 am on February 27 and marched the few miles from their camp to the bridge . Arriving shortly before dawn , they found the defenses on the west side of the bridge unoccupied . MacLeod ordered his men to adopt a defensive line behind nearby trees when a Revolutionary sentry across the river fired his musket to warn Caswell of the Loyalist arrival . Hearing this , MacLeod immediately ordered the attack . 
 In the pre @-@ dawn mist , a company of Scots approached the bridge . In response to a call for identification shouted across the creek , Captain Alexander Mclean identified himself as a friend of the King , and responded with his own challenge in Gaelic . Hearing no answer , he ordered his company to open fire , beginning an exchange of gunfire with the Patriot sentries . Colonel MacLeod and Captain John Campbell then led a picked company of swordsmen on a charge across the bridge . 
 During the night , Caswell and his men had established a semicircular earthworks around the bridge end , and armed them with two small pieces of field artillery . When the Scots were within 30 paces of the earthworks , the Patriots opened fire to devastating effect . MacLeod and Campbell both went down in a hail of gunfire ; Colonel Moore reported that MacLeod had been struck by upwards of 20 musket balls . Armed only with swords and faced with overwhelming firepower from muskets and artillery , the Scots could do little else other than retreat . The surviving elements of Campbell 's company got back over the bridge , and the Loyalist force dissolved and retreated . 
 Capitalizing on the success , the Revolutionary forces quickly replaced the bridge planking and gave chase . One enterprising company led by one of Caswell 's lieutenants forded the creek above the bridge , flanking the retreating Loyalists . Colonel Moore arrived on the scene a few hours after the battle . He stated in his report that 30 Loyalists were killed or wounded , " but as numbers of them must have fallen into the creek , besides more that were carried off , I suppose their loss may be estimated at fifty . " The Revolutionary leaders reported one killed and one wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Over the next several days , the Patriot forces mopped up the fleeing Loyalists . In all , about 850 men were arrested . Most of these were released on parole , but the ringleaders were sent to Philadelphia as prisoners . Combined with the capture of the Loyalist camp at Cross Creek , the Patriots confiscated 1 @,@ 500 muskets , 300 rifles , and $ 15 @,@ 000 ( as valued at the time ) of Spanish gold . Many of the weapons were probably hunting equipment , and may have been taken from people not directly involved in the Loyalist uprising . The action had a galvanizing effect on Patriot recruiting , and the arrests of many Loyalist leaders throughout North Carolina cemented Patriot control of the state . A pro @-@ Patriot newspaper reported after the battle , " This , we think , will effectually put a stop to loyalists in North Carolina " . Despite the hard feelings on both sides , the prisoners were treated with respect . This helped convince many not to take up arms against the Patriots again . 
 The battle had significant effects within the Scots community of North Carolina , where Loyalists refused to turn out when calls to arms were made later in the war , and many were routed out of their homes by the pillaging activities of their Patriot neighbors . Flora MacDonald ended up returning to her native Skye in 1779 , and when General Charles Cornwallis passed through the Cross Creek area in 1781 , he reported that " [ m ] any of the inhabitants rode into camp , shook me by the hand , said they were glad to see us and that we had beat Greene and then rode home . " 
 When news of the battle reached London , it received mixed commentary . One news report minimized the defeat since it did not involve any regular army troops , while another noted that an " inferior " Patriot force had defeated the Loyalists . Lord George Germain , the British official responsible for managing the war in London , remained convinced in spite of the resounding defeat that Loyalists were still a substantial force to be tapped . 
 The expedition that the Loyalists had been planning to meet was significantly delayed , and did not depart Cork , Ireland until mid @-@ February . The convoy was further delayed and split apart by bad weather , so the full force did not arrive off Cape Fear until May . As the fleet gathered , North Carolina 's provincial congress met at Halifax , and in early April passed the Halifax Resolves , authorizing the colony 's delegates to the Continental Congress to vote for independence from Great Britain . General Clinton used the force in an attempt to take Charleston , South Carolina . His attempt failed ; it represented the end of significant British attempts to control the southern colonies until late 1778 . 
 The battlefield site was preserved in the late 19th century through private efforts that eventually received state financial support . The Federal government took over the battle site as a National Military Park operated by the War Department in 1926 . The War Department operated the park until 1933 , when the National Park Service began managing the site as the Moores Creek National Battlefield . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966 . The battle is commemorated every year during the last full weekend of February . 
 = = Troop numbers = = 
 Early accounts of the battle often misstated the size of both forces involved in the battle , typically reporting that 1 @,@ 600 Loyalists faced 1 @,@ 000 Patriots . These numbers are still used by the National Park Service . Historian David Wilson , however , points out that the large Loyalist size is attributed to reports by General MacDonald and Colonel Caswell . MacDonald gave that figure to Caswell , and it represents a reasonable estimate of the number of men starting the march at Cross Creek . Alexander Mclean , who was present at both Cross Creek and the battle , reported that only 800 Loyalists were present at the battle , as did Governor Martin . The Patriot forces were also underreported since Caswell apparently casually grouped the ranger forces of John Ashe as part of Lillington 's company in his report . 
 = Great Notch ( NJT station ) = 
 The Great Notch train station , formerly known as Caldwell Junction , was a small New Jersey Transit facility in the Great Notch section of Little Falls , New Jersey . The station was served seven times a day , three inbound morning trains to Hoboken Terminal and four outbound evening trains from Hoboken by the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line from Monday to Friday . Located at the intersection of Notch Road and Long Hill Road , it was the second of three stations in Little Falls , the other two being Montclair State University and Little Falls , and was the first on the line to be strictly served by diesel trains . However , most trains bypassed this station and continued on to Little Falls ( westbound ) and Montclair State University ( eastbound ) . The station was served by a single track with an unused side track . The last trains stopped at the station on January 15 , 2010 , at 7 : <unk> . 
 Train service at Great Notch originated in 1891 , when the Caldwell Railway opened , serving Great Notch , Overbrook Hospital , Verona , and Caldwell . The station at Great Notch was first constructed in 1905 as a double station building for the Erie Railroad . The station was a green and red building serving the New York and Greenwood Lake Railway , along with the Caldwell Branch . The station also used an old boxcar as a tool shed for maintenance . By the early 1970s , the station had fallen into disrepair , and by 1974 , was repainted Erie Railroad @-@ style red with the tool shed box car removed . The station was abandoned when the Erie @-@ Lackawanna Railroad went out of business and was later picked up by New Jersey Transit . After making deals with the mayor of Little Falls , New Jersey Transit gave the station a one @-@ year " trial " to attract ridership . Ridership went down , however , and so the trial was canceled on December 18 , 2009 . The town of Little Falls was contacted by New Jersey Transit at that time , reporting that the Great Notch Station would be closed on January 17 , 2010 due to the " anemic " ridership at the station . 
 = = History = = 
 Train service at Great Notch originated with the introduction of the Caldwell Railway , a service that went from the community of Caldwell , New Jersey to the New York & Greenwood Lake Railway . Twelve trains a day served Caldwell , Verona and Overbrook Hospital . The station at Great Notch was deemed Caldwell Junction , inferring the junction between the two railways . The Great Notch station depot was built in 1905 for the New York & Greenwood Lake Railway , a subsidiary of the Erie Railroad . The station was built as a green @-@ red " type five " frame structure . While the main building was 12 ' × 28 ' × 18 ' in size , the station also included an old boxcar used as a tool house . The box car was only 12 ' × 45 ' and served the station for several decades . The station was just east of the " GA " signal tower , which was built in 1900 to serve the junction of the Greenwood Lake Railway and its Caldwell Branch , heading eastward for the communities of Cedar Grove , Verona , Caldwell and Essex Fells . The station also served a local yard for train storage for the branch line via a wye . At Essex Fells , connections could be made for train service to Morristown via the Morristown and Erie Railroad . The Caldwell Railroad diverged from the current New Jersey Transit line about 1 / 4 mile west of the New Jersey Transit Great Notch station and followed its own route to Caldwell . The station at Great Notch was more than just a building for people at the railroad . The station had a large water tower next to GA Signal and a potbelly stove . The station was tended by a husband and wife combination , serving the locals their daily newspapers and their mail . Great Notch did not receive mail delivery until the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 By the early 1970s , the Great Notch station , which was falling into disrepair , received a new paint job , changed from the red @-@ green colors for the Erie Lackawanna to a new all red Erie Railroad paint scheme . The abandoned tool shed made out of the old wooden boxcar was also removed . Due to the removal of the tool boxcar , the propane tanks that heated the station building were also made visible . After the ending of the Erie @-@ Lackawanna Railroad in 1976 , the Great Notch station lay abandoned . In June 1979 , the State of New Jersey began to remove the tracks for the Caldwell Branch , which also lay abandoned at Great Notch . Currently , what was the track leading to the Caldwell Branch is a siding . On January 20 , 1988 , the newly rehabilitated station building was destroyed by fire . During the construction of the Montclair Connection in 2001 , the adjacent Great Notch Yard received a major upgrade , becoming a new state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art yard with new trains storage facilities . 
 = = Closure = = 
 When Montclair State University station opened in 2004 and the Wayne Route 23 Transit Center 's train platform opened in 2008 , this made Great Notch one of three stations in Little Falls , and it did not nearly have the ridership either of the other two stations had . The opening of Montclair State University Station helped to pull away commuters from Great Notch due to its location very near it . The small parking lot facing the station had very little room for cars and a parking lot on the opposite side of the single tracked station was isolated from it by fencing . Further exacerbating the problem was that the small lot abutting Notch Road was not marked specifically for train passengers only . Great Notch had ( and still has ) a bus stop on the corner of Notch and Long Hill Roads that serves buses headed for Port Authority Bus Terminal , and commuters using the bus would park in the train station 's parking lot ( and still do , as it was never blocked off ) and catch the bus up the street . 
 In January 2008 , without knowledge of the township council , New Jersey Transit announced further and drastic service cuts at Great Notch . The only train to serve outbound customers was a train leaving for Hoboken Terminal in the morning , and two trains from Hoboken would serve the station at night . 
 The future of the 103 @-@ year @-@ old station was placed into further jeopardy on August 12 , 2008 , when New Jersey Transit announced to the community of Little Falls that they would possibly close the station as early as October 2008 . A few days after the announcement , rebuttal by the community began to appear , with a public hearing was announced for September 3 to work on plans for Great Notch . The service with only one inbound train ( to Hoboken ) and two outbound trains ( from Hoboken ) was canceled on April 1 , 2009 . On that day , New Jersey Transit announced it would add two more trains in each direction on April 16 as a " one @-@ year trial " for station ridership . The town hoped to get the then 67 @-@ person a day average to 100 people using the station by April 1 , 2010 , when the trial was set to expire . The mayor of Little Falls , Michael <unk> , urged people to use the station more . However , by December 2009 , ridership had declined to 9 per day . 
 On December 18 , 2009 , New Jersey Transit contacted Little Falls and said that the station would close in January 2010 , three months before the year @-@ long trial period to build ridership was set to end . The transit authority cited continued low ridership , as on average nine passengers a day boarded the train at Great Notch . On December 21 , 2009 , New Jersey Transit announced the closure stating that the " anemic " ridership had remained at Great Notch , with only an average of 9 boardings a day , compared to 203 at the local Little Falls station and 597 at the Montclair State University Station . The last train to depart Great Notch was the 6 : <unk> train from Hoboken Terminal on January 15 leaving Great Notch at 7 : <unk> , as weekend trains do not run on this portion of the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line . 
 = Battle of Noordhorn = 
 The Battle of Noordhorn , fought on 30 September 1581 , was a pitched battle of the Dutch Revolt , fought between a Spanish army commanded by Colonel Francisco Verdugo – consisting of Walloon , German , Spanish and Albanian soldiers – and a Dutch States rebel army under the Englishman John Norreys – comprising English , Scottish , Dutch and Walloon troops – in the province of Friesland . In 1580 , the Dutch stadtholder of Friesland , George van Lalaing , Count of Rennenberg , had shifted its allegiance from the Dutch to the Spanish side . This opened a new front at the back door of the Dutch Republic , forcing the States @-@ General to dispatch forces to the north . That year the Dutch , under the leadership of John Norreys , succeeded in relieving the town of Steenwijk . In July 1581 , Rennenberg died and was replaced by the Spaniard Francisco Verdugo , whose arrival in Friesland with reinforcements changed the situation . On 30 September Verdugo forced Norreys to give battle using a strategy of attrition . 
 The battle was fought on a rough , marshy ground very favourable to the Spanish army . Norrey 's initial assault on the Spanish right wing was successful , but the Spanish cavalry , led by Verdugo , routed the Dutch cavalry under William Louis , Count of Nassau @-@ Dillenburg and broke the States ' infantry . The English left was then cut off from the rest of the States ' army and destroyed . During the pursuit of the States ' troops Verdugo was nearly captured , but left unharmed in the end . Both Norreys and Count William Louis were wounded , and their army suffered a heavy death toll , losing many flags and all five of its guns . Verdugo could not capitalize on his victory because of a mutiny the following day by his German regiments and heavy flooding . The military situation in Friesland , however , had reached a turning point , and in 1582 the Spanish made great advances , even taking Steenwijk on 17 November 1582 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1580 , during the Eighty Years ' War , the Dutch stadtholder of Friesland , George van Lalaing , Count of Rennenberg , though having been appointed by the rebellious States @-@ General , shifted his allegiance to the Spanish government , held at that time by Don Alexander Farnese , Prince of Parma . In July 1581 after being defeated by John Norreys and <unk> <unk> at <unk> , Lalaing fell ill and died in the city of Groningen . Parma sent one of his most accomplished officers , the Spaniard Francisco Verdugo , to take the place of the deceased stadtholder . Verdugo , born in Talavera but raised amongst the Flemish and married to a daughter of the later governor @-@ general of the Netherlands , Peter Ernst von Mansfeld , began his career as a simple soldier , but rose through the ranks to become a colonel . He was considered by the historian Charles Maurice Davies " a leader of eminent skill and ability " , and was promoted to the post over other candidates such as Colonel Maarten Schenck van <unk> , whom Farnese had earlier sent to relieve Rennenberg and had dealt a serious defeat to a Dutch army at the Battle of Hardenberg , on 17 June 1580 . 
 Verdugo , having been forced by the Union of Arras – formed by the Dutch provinces loyal to Spanish King Philip II , who wanted the foreign troops out the Netherlands – to hand over his regiment to his brother @-@ in @-@ law Charles von Mansfeld , recruited a regiment of 2 @,@ 000 Walloon arquebusiers and made his way to Friesland . While mustering his infantry in the village of Kerpen , Verdugo learned that the Dutch rebels were <unk> a company of German reiters – a type of armoured cavalry armed with pistols – in Cologne under a rittmeister called Adam von Langen . As he lacked cavalry or pikemen and it was reported by Spanish agents that von Langen was angry because he had been paid by the Dutch with false coins , Verdugo managed to convince the rittmeister to escort his arquebusiers to Groningen . Passing through <unk> and <unk> , Verdugo and his regiment reached Groningen . There , Verdugo was met with a mutiny , which he ended by distributing 40 @,@ 000 escudos amongst the mutineers , disbanding an undisciplined German regiment and giving license to two companies of men @-@ at @-@ arms to join Farnese 's army in Hainault . With the loyal troops , meanwhile , he took two Dutch forts , one at the mouth of the Emden and another near Groningen . 
 Verdugo 's arrival quickly altered the situation in Friesland , which had until then been favourable to the Dutch . During 1580 , the Dutch forces fighting Rennenberg in Friesland had failed to prevent him from taking the towns of <unk> and <unk> , but in December , under the leadership of the English Colonel John Norreys , a veteran soldier with experience in the Netherlands and Ireland , they had succeeded in relieving Steenwijk from a Spanish siege . Norreys , appointed " Master of the Camp " by the Dutch States @-@ General , harassed the Spanish army during the winter of 1580 – 1581 , forcing Rennenberg to lift the siege and withdrew in February . The most effective force of the Dutch army in Friesland was Norreys ' English regiment . Though England was not officially at war against Spain , Queen Elizabeth I was playing a complex diplomatic role to keep the Dutch revolt alive , and this included sending troops to the Netherlands under the guise of " volunteers " , but factually maintained by the English crown . 
 In June 1581 , the States @-@ General appointed Norreys General of all the States ' troops beyond the Meuse . In August , the Dutch local council , assembled in Leeuwarden , tasked Norreys with preventing Verdugo from penetrating further into the country , for which his 30 companies of infantry were reinforced by five cavalry companies under William Louis , Count of Nassau @-@ Dillenburg . He was expected to besiege the Spanish forts around Groningen , but he lacked the artillery to do so , having been given only four small guns . Moreover , Norreys ' Dutch and Walloon soldiers were unhappy with being under the command of a foreigner . Norreys spent the summer months attempting in vain to blockade Groningen , while Verdugo , who was aware of the dissent amongst the Dutch army , patiently waited in his fortified posts despite being urged by the local authorities to confront Norreys . In early September , after a failed raid on his camp , Verdugo was sure of Norreys ' intentions of giving battle , and thus he advanced his army to near Norreys ' camp near the village of Noordhorn . Shortly thereafter , determined to fight , Norreys ' Anglo @-@ Dutch army was deployed over the dike of Niezijl . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The Spanish army , led by Francisco Verdugo , with Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Johann Baptista von Taxis as second in command , was deployed before the village of Noordhorn and behind broken ground with only one access point that was covered by a wide ravine and flanked on its left by a series of muddy ditches . Aiming to create a trap for Norreys ' army , the Spanish had smoothed the ground on their right in order to funnel English units and draw Norrey 's troops into an engagement area where a crossfire effect could be created . Verdugo himself drove two stakes into the ground to mark the point that his cavalry was to charge upon the English vanguard . 
 The Spanish army was organized into three infantry battalions with two cavalry companies at each wing : the right wing was taken by the Walloon harquebusiers under Monsieur de Villers and Verdugo 's Spanish lances under Corporal Alonso Mendo , plus a battalion formed by half of Verdugo 's foot regiment . 200 arquebusiers were detached later in a house nearby . The centre was made up by one battalion formed by the German foot regiments of Rennenberg , under Lieutenant Colonel <unk> , and Caspar de Robles , who was serving Farnese and had left the command to Lieutenant Colonel Johann Baptista von Taxis . The left consisted of two cavalry companies ( Famiano Strada names German reiters under Wolfgang <unk> , while Alonso Vázquez mentions Albanian horse under Captain Tomas Frate and Walloons under Baron de Bievres ) plus a battalion formed by the second half of Verdugo 's foot regiment . Verdugo also deployed a forlorn hope of 200 musketeers into a ditch covering the way , 300 steps ahead of his three foot battalions . 
 The Anglo @-@ Dutch army under John Norreys and Count William Louis of Nassau @-@ Dillenburg was formed by 30 companies of foot – 11 English and Scottish flags from the regiments of Norreys and Colonel Thomas Morgan , and 19 Dutch , Frisian and Walloon flags – plus four cavalry companies under Captains Hendrik van Eck , Goor , <unk> and Roger Williams , the latter of English cuirassiers . There existed a certain hostility between Norreys and Morgan , as Prince William of Orange favored Norreys despite Morgan 's longer experience in the Netherlands , having served since 1572 . When Queen Elizabeth 's secretary and advisor Francis Walsingham requested Orange appoint Morgan as a colonel , he refused , and Morgan attributed this to Norreys ' " hard dealings " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Having instructed his troops to hold their positions until he ordered them to attack , Verdugo sent 200 musketeers to occupy a house on his right flank , near the Villers ' position and that of his own companies of horse , to cut off the Anglo @-@ Dutch vanguard with musketry fire as they advanced towards the Spanish positions . After that , Spanish and English armies began to skirmish . Verdugo aimed to take over a hill in the middle of both armies in order to force Norreys to order a general advance . The Englishman fired over the Spanish battalions with his five guns , but the fire was ineffective because of the broken ground : Spanish sources state that only Verdugo 's drummer was killed . Seeing the ineffectiveness of the bombardment , Norreys ordered a general advance . As the way was narrow , the Dutch cavalry went in advance , flanked by the English infantry . Monsieur de Villers ' harquebusiers and Verdugo 's lances under Corporal Mendo ignored their general 's orders , and charged against the Dutch cavalry , which drove back them " broken and disrupted " . The English infantry , upon Norreys ' order , charged the Spanish foot on the right , gaining more ground despite the difficult advance , and pushing back Verdugo 's Walloons to Noordhorn . 
 On the left , on the other hand , Count William Louis of Nassau advanced with the remaining Dutch cavalry but was halted by the musketry fire of the 200 men standing on the advanced ditch . Aiming to disrupt the Dutch right , Verdugo then charged ahead of Frate 's Albanian company and that of Baron de Bievres . The Dutch horse , disorganized by the musketry fire , could not resist Verdugo 's rush and turned back , breaking the order , in turn , of the English foot standing behind . To capitalize on this success , Verdugo ordered his foot to follow up the victory . Unaware of the Spanish success on the other side of the field , the English infantry continued pressing back the Spanish right flank until they reached the Spanish camp . When they realized what had happened , however , the Englishmen turned back in a vain attempt to escape . The Spanish centre and left were blocking the way , and thus the English attempted to save themselves fleeing across the bogged ditches , only to be killed in large numbers . 
 In the meantime , Verdugo aimed to block Niezijl 's dike with Frate 's and Bievres ' companies , but as these troops lagged behind , he found himself alone on the dike when Norreys and his officers attempted to retreat back to their camp . Alone , Verdugo fought desperately against them . Twice the Spanish commander was taken prisoner , but in the end , as he killed or wounded many of his foes , Norreys preferred to let him go free rather than risk allowing the pursuing Spanish troops to capture himself or his remaining men . Once he had recovered , Verdugo massed some cavalry and completed the Anglo @-@ Dutch defeat by destroying an English troop which , trying to save the flags , fled across a field towards the Niezijl canal . Most of the English flags and all of their artillery were lost . As the night was falling , Verdugo collected his troops and returned to Noordhorn , where they formed into squadron formation and , kneeling down , prayed to thank God for their victory . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle was " a very greate <unk> " for the English , as noted by the affluent English trader Sir Christopher Hoddesdon in a letter written in Antwerp on 15 October . The Frenchman <unk> Baudart noted that half of the States ' infantry and a large number of cavalry were lost . Verdugo claimed between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 casualties in Norrey 's army , asserting that " Few times is true the number of dead that in such cases is said , but the common [ number ] for those who saw it was this " . Many English and Dutch officers were killed , mostly of foot : Charles van <unk> , George Robert , <unk> , <unk> van Ommeren , <unk> , Gerard <unk> , Corneille <unk> and , for the English , captains Cotton , Bishop , <unk> and <unk> , who died of a wound on the head . Amongst the cavalry Hendrik van Eck and Lieutenant <unk> of <unk> 's company were killed . Both States ' commanders were wounded : Norreys on one hand and Count William Louis in a leg . The Spanish army 's exact losses are unknown . Alonso Vázquez , a <unk> chronicler and soldier with direct access to the Spanish <unk> , wrote that " of the Catholics died no more than Verdugo 's drummer , but there were some wounded " . Charles Maurice Davies noted that " Scarcely any one of note fell on the side of the royalists " . 
 The day after the battle , the Spanish army 's German regiments , induced by Captain Jean van der <unk> , mutinied again in their quarters , claiming that they had not received their monthly pay . Verdugo sent Captain <unk> to take news of the Spanish victory to Farnese and , having refreshed his troops , aimed to capture the Niezijl fort with his Walloon regiment , his four cavalry companies and a few volunteers from among the German mutineers . As the season changed and a furious rain started , Verdugo was forced to abandon the project of seizing the fort and returned to Noordhorn . The autumnal floods made the Frisian land impassable for the armies , and thus Verdugo moved with his troops to the dry and gritty land of Drenthe , while Norreys kept the remains of his army behind the IJssel river . A group of 400 Dutchmen in Norreys ' army lodged themselves in the town of Keppel , in Gelderland . In January 1582 , Verdugo destroyed them and seized Keppel and the castle of Bronckhorst , achieving great success in Gelderland . 
 Over the following months many English soldiers , who were unpaid and decimated by disease and disappointed by the progress of the war , amongst them Captain Roger Williams , deserted the States @-@ General army and went to serve in Francis , Duke of Anjou 's French army . By the Treaty of Plessis @-@ les @-@ Tours , Francis had been recognized by the States @-@ General as the sovereign of the Netherlands instead of Philip II of Spain . Even Norreys , in the end , left the States ' service and put himself under Anjou 's command . Thus , in command of the English infantry , he found himself at the Battle of Steenbergen in 1583 , when he covered the rearguard of the defeated French army . 
 = Harvard Extension School = 
 Harvard University Extension School , in Cambridge , Massachusetts , is one of the twelve degree @-@ granting schools of Harvard University , offering graduate and undergraduate liberal arts @-@ based degree programs as well as professional and continuing education in 60 fields . Approximately 150 bachelor 's and 550 master 's degrees are awarded each year . 
 The school also has a long history of offering professional and distance education , and provides a variety of amenities and opportunities to students and degree earning alumni . Since its establishment in 1910 , it is estimated that 500 @,@ 000 students have taken a course at the Extension School . The majority of these students are not degree seekers but take one of the 715 on @-@ campus and distance @-@ learning based courses offered for professional development or personal enrichment . Such students are not granted the same privileges as degree @-@ seeking students . 
 = = History = = 
 Founded in 1910 by President A. Lawrence Lowell , the Harvard Extension School grew out of the Lowell Institute , which was created according to the terms of a bequest by John Lowell , Jr . It was designed to serve the educational interests and needs of the greater Boston community , particularly those " who had the ability and desire to attend college , but also had other obligations that kept them from traditional schools . " It has since extended its " academic resources to the public , locally , nationally , and internationally . " 
 During the 1920s professors from Boston and Harvard Universities left the confines of their campuses and traveled to teach courses offsite . While they were primarily aimed at teachers , courses were offered wherever 40 or more students expressed an interest . Professors traveled on a weekly basis to places around New England and as far away as Yonkers , New York , some 200 miles away . 
 Despite falling revenue due to the Great Depression , A. Lawrence Lowell insisted in 1931 that the bequest from John Lowell prevented courses from costing more than two bushels of wheat . As a result , a half @-@ year course cost could no more than $ 5 , and a full course no more than $ 10 . Some courses cost as little as $ 2 @.@ 50 . 
 University Extension courses were to be taught by " the most experienced teachers that can be secured " who all received " excellent pay . " In the early years courses were run by a commission composed of several Boston area schools , though it was largely a Harvard @-@ run program . In 1938 there were 28 professors from Commission faculties , including 11 full professors . Early faculty included Charles Townsend Copeland , William Yandell Elliot , William Langer , Oscar <unk> , Perry Miller , John Kenneth Galbraith , and Frank M. Carpenter . In 1953 there was a similar number of professors . 
 In his will , John Lowell asked his successors to set up courses " more erudite and particular corresponding to the age and wants of the age . " By the 50th anniversary of the University Extension in 1960 , more than 1 @,@ 400 courses had been offered and there had been more than 85 @,@ 000 enrollments . While the vast majority of classes were held on the Harvard campus , a few in the late 1960s were offered at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Boston University , as well as at the Old South Meeting House . At this time non @-@ credit courses cost between $ 15 and $ 25 , and courses for credit cost between $ 20 and $ 35 . 
 After 100 years , an estimated 500 @,@ 000 students have taken courses at the Extension School . While there has never been an entrance exam and fees were kept as low as possible to allow as many as possible to enroll , only .18 % have ever earned a degree . Including certificate earners , 2 @.@ 5 % have graduated . Today more degrees are awarded each year than were awarded in the first 50 years combined . 
 Several years after retiring , President Lowell wrote that the Extension courses " have given a service to the public ... which seems to me of the utmost importance . " In 2013 , more than 100 years after its founding , the Extension School 's classes were described as " surprisingly affordable " and the school itself was said to be a " thriving institution . " 
 = = = Degree development = = = 
 Harvard University currently offers two degrees in Extension Studies , the Bachelor of Liberal Arts and the Master of Liberal Arts ( ALM ) . From 1911 to 1933 , the university offered an Associate in Arts , and from 1933 to 1960 they offered an Adjunct in Arts . Both were considered the equivalent of a bachelor 's degree . From 1971 to 2014 , the University offered an Associate of Arts in Extension Studies ( AA ) , the equivalent of a two @-@ year degree . A Master 's in Liberal Arts was added in 1979 . 
 A proposal before the Faculty of Arts and Science in 2009 and 2010 to rename the school and the degrees offered was not accepted . A committee , led by Professor of Computer Science Harry R. Lewis , proposed renaming the school the " Harvard School of Continuing and Professional Studies , " and to drop the words " in Extension Studies " from degrees , so that the School would offer Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees . Some faculty objected , saying that those degrees were already offered by the College and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . 
 In 2016 , a student group calling itself the Harvard Extension Degree Change Initiative rallied in front of University Hall to call for removing “ Extension Studies ” from the degree name and adding a student 's concentration instead . The Harvard Crimson editorialized in favor saying that they " urge [ d ] Harvard to consider changing the title of Extension School degrees to include the field of study rather than the ambiguous ' Extension Studies . ' " 
 In 2014 , Harvard University conferred four certificates on behalf of the Extension School , as well as the following academic degrees : five Associate in the Arts , 152 Bachelor of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies , and 539 Master of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies . 
 = = = Deans = = = 
 There have been six deans in the School 's history : 
 James Hardy Ropes , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Dean of University Extension , 1910 – 1922 
 Arthur F. Whittem , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1922 – 1946 
 George W. Adams , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1946 – 1949 
 Reginald H. Phelps , Chairman of Commission on Extension Courses , Director of University Extension , 1949 – 1975 
 Michael Shinagel , Director of Continuing Education and University Extension , 1975 – 1977 , and Dean of Continuing Education and University Extension , 1977 – 2013 
 Huntington D. Lambert , Dean of Continuing Education and University Extension , 2013 – present 
 = = Academics = = 
 As a part of the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences , the Harvard Extension School offers more than six @-@ hundred on @-@ campus and online courses . Students take courses with Harvard professors , including Nobel laureates , as well as faculty from Boston @-@ area universities , business professionals , and community leaders in various fields . 
 Most of the courses at the Extension School are " virtually identical " to courses offered to the traditional students at Harvard College , with " the only significant difference " being that the classes are taught at night instead of during the day . This has remained constant over time , as Ropes , the first dean , said that " our aim will be to give the young people of Boston who have heretofore been prevented from securing a college education the same instruction they would receive were they undergraduates at Harvard . " In 1953 , it was said that the " format of the classes is exactly the same . " 
 Many daytime Harvard College courses are videotaped , and offered to Extension students online . Extension degree candidates who meet required criteria may also apply for " Special Student status " in order to take classes that are offered only to Harvard College students . Students may enroll full or part @-@ time , and classes may be taken on campus , via distance @-@ learning , or both . In order to earn an academic degree , students must complete a minimum number of on @-@ campus @-@ only credits at Harvard . 
 Non @-@ degree seeking students have access to resources through Harvard 's Grossman Library , electronic resources through the Harvard Libraries Portal and select computer facilities . A professor at both the Extension School and Harvard College has opined that the open enrollment system " ' give [ s ] a lot ' to the institution by permitting an atmosphere of valuable diversity that does not exist at any of Harvard 's other schools . " 
 = = = Accreditation and partnerships = = = 
 Harvard Extension School is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges as one of the twelve degree @-@ granting schools of Harvard University . 
 The Extension School and Harvard Business School have together created the the <unk> <unk> of Readiness ( <unk> ) program . Having begun in 2014 , This program allows undergraduate students at the Extension School to take courses with Business School professors for credit . Students at other institutions may be able to take the courses for transfer credit as well . 
 The graduate program in Museum Studies has also developed a partnership with the Smithsonian Institution . The new courses include two active learning weekends in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Pre @-@ medical program = = = 
 A pre @-@ med program was established at the Extension School in 1980 . Two years later , in 1982 , five students applied to medical school , and 3 were accepted at the University of Massachusetts , Tufts University , and New York University . Of the 19 students who applied to medical schools in 1985 , 15 were admitted , including two women to Harvard Medical School . 
 All 27 graduates who applied to medical school in 1989 were accepted , including three to Harvard Medical School and nine to the University of Massachusetts . Five years later , 90 % of students were accepted to medical school , including 5 to Harvard . Only one in three were accepted nationwide . The Health Careers Program has sponsored nearly 1 @,@ 000 students for admission to medical school since it was started in 1979 – 80 , and more than 845 were accepted . This 85 % success rate far exceeds the national acceptance rate of 35 % . 
 Students who successfully complete the pre @-@ medical program are eligible for sponsorship through the program and a committee letter of support in their applications to medical school . 
 = = = Distance education = = = 
 = = = = History = = = = 
 Harvard Extension was a pioneer in distance education . Beginning on December 5 , 1949 , courses were offered on the Lowell Institute 's new radio station . New Englanders could go to college six nights a week at 7 : 30 in their living rooms simply by tuning into courses on psychology , world history , and economics . The first course on radio was by Peter A. Bertocci of Boston University . For 30 years he taught Extension courses , with never fewer than 100 students . He often taught over 300 students per course and once had over 400 . Over the years Bertocci had at least 7 @,@ 000 Extension students , " surely a record in the annals of Extension at Harvard . " 
 The radio courses proved to be so successful that when the television station WGBH went on the air in October 1951 they began broadcasting an Extension class every weekday at 3 : 30 and 7 : 30 . The first course , offered by Robert G. Albion , was on European Imperialism on Monday and Thursday evenings . In the late 1960s , three of the televised courses were offered in the Deer Island Prison . Students who watched the courses on television could attend six " conferences " and take a mid @-@ term and a final exam at Harvard in order to gain credit for the class . 
 = = = = Modern = = = = 
 As of 2014 , distance @-@ learning courses at Harvard Extension School are offered in two formats : asynchronous video courses ( lectures are recorded and uploaded within 24 hours of on @-@ campus class meetings ) ; and live web @-@ conference courses ( courses are streamed live , and typically allow for synchronous participation from students via a secondary online platform ) . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 The Dean 's Prize for Outstanding Master of Liberal Arts thesis is awarded during commencement ceremonies , and includes a medal , a certificate , and a monetary award . It is awarded to a student whose graduate thesis " embodies the highest level of imaginative scholarship . " In addition to the Dean 's Prize for Outstanding ALM Thesis , there are several other academic prizes : 
 The Academy of American Poets is awarded to an ALB candidate or an undergraduate student at the college for the best poem or group of poems . 
 The Santo J. Aurelio Prize , named for Santo J. Aurelio , ALB ' 83 , ALM ' 85 , is awarded annually on the basis of " academic achievement and character . " It is normally given to Extension School undergraduate degree recipients who — as did Mr. Aurelio — complete their academic work with distinction after age 50 . 
 The Derek Bok Public Service Prizes are awards presented at Commencement . They consist of a cash prize along with a citation and a medal given to two graduating Extension School students . The award recognizes creative initiatives in community service or long @-@ standing records of civic achievement . 
 The Commencement Speaker Prize is awarded to either an ALB or ALM graduate who delivers the student Commencement speech at the Extension School diploma awarding ceremony . 
 The <unk> and Allan R. Crite prizes are awarded for a mother and son who are Extension School alumni . <unk> faithfully attended Extension courses for more than 50 years . Allan , who is widely recognized as the dean of African @-@ American artists in the Greater Boston area , received a bachelor 's degree in 1968 . The prize is awarded to Extension School degree recipients who demonstrate " singular dedication to learning and the arts " . 
 The Klein Family History Prize recognizes the thesis in the field of history that represents superior achievement in historical scholarship . 
 The Harold Langlois Award recognizes a Certificate of Special Studies graduate who has demonstrated exceptional academic accomplishment and promise as a manager . It was established in 2003 . 
 The Patrick Lee Award in Drama is an annual award given to the student who shows the best promise in the field of dramatic arts . 
 The Reginald H. Phelps Prize , named for the former dean , is awarded annually on the basis of " academic achievement and character " to outstanding graduating students receiving bachelor 's degrees . 
 The Emanuel and Lilly Shinagel prize , named in honor of Dean Michael Shinagel in honor of his parents , supports deserving and needy students in the Extension School 's Institute for English Language Programs . The prizes are awarded by the Institute for English Language . The Programs to outstanding students based on an essay writing contest . 
 The John Osborne Sargent Prize for a Latin Translation is offered for the best metrical translation [ students may choose meter ] of a lyric poem of Horace , to be selected each year by the Department of the Classics . In addition to ALB candidates , it is also open to undergraduates at the College and visiting undergraduate sunder the Faculty of Arts and Sciences . 
 The Thomas Small Prize is named for a Lithuanian immigrant who , at the age of 89 , became the oldest earned graduate degree recipient in the history of Harvard University . Two prizes are awarded annually on the basis " academic achievement and character " to two outstanding Master of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies degree recipients . 
 The Judith Wood Memorial Prizes are awarded during Commencement Week to Harvard Extension School students who , while compiling honors academic records at the School , also contended with disabilities of a serious nature . It was established in honor of a blind Extension Student student who had cystic fibrosis and diabetes to recognize students who must travel a singularly difficult path to degree or certificate completion . 
 The Katie Y. F. Yang Prize Fund was established to promote East Asian culture , grant scholarships to exceptional students , and provide charitable assistance to those in need . Mrs. Yang was a leading Chinese opera singer under the stage name Fong Yim Fun . Her daughter , <unk> Yang , received her Certificate of Special Studies ( CSS ) from the Extension School . The purpose of the Prize is " to recognize the initiative , character , and outstanding academic achievement of foreign students graduating from the CSS Program " in the Extension School . The award is generally given to the foreign student with the highest academic standing in the CSS program . 
 = = Academic degrees = = 
 Extension offers open enrollment courses , but its degree programs are not " open admission " . Students are " presumed capable " but then must " prove that presumption with actual performance . " The " democratic admissions policy for its degree programs ... is based on proof that a student is capable of Harvard @-@ level work , giving degree and certificate candidates the chance to prove themselves . " The " most relevant predictor " of success for students is a students ' " ability to do honors @-@ level work at Harvard . " 
 ALB students may graduate with the Latin honors , cum laude , but <unk> and <unk> cum laude are not offered . ALM students may , upon graduation , be included in the ALM Dean 's list for Academic achievement , based on strict GPA requirements . 
 Students who wish to earn degrees must be formally admitted to the Extension School by the Admissions Committee . Admitted degree candidates are granted full privileges to Harvard 's libraries , facilities , student resources , as well as access to Harvard 's museums and academic workshops . 
 An Extension School professor asserts that undergraduate HES students " are brilliantly milking the cow of Harvard University , " as they " get a very similar experience and then have the Harvard name on [ their ] résumé . " A professor at both the Extension School and Harvard College has opined that the open enrolment system " ' give [ s ] a lot ' to the institution by permitting an atmosphere of valuable diversity that does not exist at any of Harvard 's other schools . " 
 = = = Bachelor of Liberal Arts = = = 
 Undergraduate degree programs are based upon the curriculum for Harvard College students ; degree requirements include expository writing , quantitative reasoning , foreign language , moral reasoning , writing @-@ intensive classes , and courses in the student 's area of concentration . The expository writing class is known as a " gatekeeper course " as it will typically " determine whether [ students ] are prepared for the intensive and demanding curriculum . " 
 Once admitted as an ALB degree candidate , students must successfully complete 128 credits ( Harvard courses are typically 4 credits each ) and maintain good academic standing ( 3 @.@ 0 GPA ) to meet graduation requirements . Upon admission into the ALB program , students may petition to transfer up to a maximum of 64 credits from other accredited post @-@ secondary institutions , but 64 credits must be completed at Harvard University ( Extension School , Summer School , or the Faculty of Arts and Sciences ) . Students must also select one of three ' areas of concentration ' including : Sciences ; Social Sciences ; or Humanities . Students must earn 40 credits with at least a B – in their areas of concentration . 
 ALB degree candidates are also required to complete a minimum of 16 on @-@ campus @-@ only credits at Harvard ; students must also complete a minimum of 12 credits in " Writing intensive " courses , and earn a minimum of 52 credits in courses that are taught by Harvard instructors . In addition to a concentration , degree candidates have the option to pursue one of twenty ' Fields of study ' , ( akin to a traditional major ) . In order to successfully complete a field of study , students must earn a B – or higher in 32 Harvard credits in one field , and maintain a B average in the field . Students may also complement their field of study with a maximum of one liberal arts minor . 
 = = = = Undergraduate admissions = = = = 
 Undergraduate degree programs require pre @-@ admission courses as well as a formal application process . Students applying for degree candidacy must first complete three 4 @-@ credit liberal arts courses at Harvard ( Extension School , Summer School , or the Faculty of Arts and Sciences ) with at least a B grade in each , and maintain a minimum 3 @.@ 0 cumulative GPA . One of these three pre @-@ admission courses must be EXPO E @-@ 25 , the equivalent of Harvard College 's mandatory and " notoriously difficult " expository writing course . To enroll in this course , students must pass a placement test , which measures critical reading and writing skills . Students failing to earn at least a B in a class can retake it once . Students who meet all these criteria are then eligible for admission in the Extension School 's undergraduate degree programs . 
 = = = Master of Liberal Arts = = = 
 The Master of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies ( ALM ) includes 19 liberal arts fields of study and seven professional degree programs ( Biotechnology , Information Technology , Journalism , Management , Mathematics for Teaching , Museum Studies , & Sustainability and Environmental Management ) . ALM candidates must complete 10 to 12 courses including a thesis or capstone project depending on their degree program , which must be crafted under the direction of an instructor or Harvard faculty member holding a teaching appointment in the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences . 
 = = = = Graduate admissions = = = = 
 Generally , admission into a graduate degree program at Harvard Extension School requires a minimum of an accredited bachelor 's degree ( or foreign equivalent ) , as well as completion of three pre @-@ admission courses with grades of B or higher and a minimum of 3 @.@ 0 overall GPA . One of the three pre @-@ admission courses must be the " <unk> " course for the intended area of study , which is akin to a traditional research methods course , and prior to registering for a <unk> students must pass a qualification test to assess graduate @-@ level critical reading and writing skills . Certain disciplines have other specified pre @-@ admission coursework , while some have specific coursework that is required before submitting a master 's thesis proposal ( e.g. biology and psychology fields must take a specific graduate statistics course ) . Students who meet these criteria are then eligible to submit an application for admission into the graduate degree programs . 
 Once a student has met the three course requirement , he or she is then eligible to formally apply to the ALM program . Typically applicants must submit a completed application , proof of an accredited bachelor 's degree ( or foreign equivalent ) plus transcripts , resume , two essays , and a <unk> application fee . Some programs require additional specific classes to be part of the initial three before formal admission . Students will be denied admission indefinitely if they fail to earn a grade of B after twice enrolling in the <unk> course . 
 Some programs have additional requirements , including specific pre @-@ admission courses and supplemental application materials . For instance , the Literature and Creative writing candidates must submit original manuscripts . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Beginning in the 1960s , the university began providing additional facilities for Extension students . Study spaces , conferences rooms , library facilities , and a dining hall were set up in Lehman Hall for students in 1964 . In addition , there was a television lounge were students could watch the WGBH programs . 
 Today , admitted degree candidates are granted access to Harvard 's athletic facilities , dining services , on and off campus apartment housing , career services and student life organizations . Students have " nearly unfettered access to some of Harvard 's most prized resources — world @-@ renowned libraries , a distinguished faculty , and an impressive body of speakers . " 
 ALB candidates are eligible for membership in the Harvard Extension Student Association ( HESA ) . Established in 2001 , the HESA 's mission is to build and maintain a sense of community among Extension students . In partnership with many other organizations on campus , HESA provides a variety of social activities , educational events , and forums that enrich student life and experience . All degree and diploma candidates in good standing at Harvard Extension School are voting members of HESA . Alpha Sigma Lambda , a national honors society for nontraditional students , established the Phi Beta chapter in 2002 – 03 . The Harvard Extension School Pre @-@ Health Society offers advising , events , and networking for students who wish to go to medical school or to pursue a career in the health care industry . 
 President Faust said that " the Extension School is a critical part of the University " and " students increasingly should come to see themselves as full @-@ fledged members of not just an individual school but Harvard as a university . " 
 = = Student demographics = = 
 The graduating class of 2016 , the largest class to date , had 801 students receiving degrees . Of them , the youngest was 16 and the oldest was 70 with an average age of 36 . They were nearly equally split between the genders , with 52 % being male , and came from 36 countries and 42 states . 
 In 2000 there were 14 @,@ 216 students , with the youngest in their early teens and the oldest in their late 80s . There is often a span of 60 years between the oldest and youngest students , and students as young as 11 years old have taken courses alongside those old enough to be their parents or grandparents . Of the students enrolled at the turn of the century , 75 % had a bachelor 's degree , and 20 % had a graduate degree . More than 1 @,@ 700 were staff members using the Tuition Assistance Program , and an estimated 10 % -15 % were exclusively online students . Of the 255 Certificate of Special Studies graduates that year , 163 were international students hailing from 39 countries . 
 In the early 2000s there were 208 students under the age of 18 . Most attended local high schools , but a growing number of them were home @-@ schooled . Professor Paul Bamberg taught a class with both Extension and Harvard College students , and the top two students were from the Extension School , with the top student being a home @-@ schooled teenager . 
 Harvard Extension School accepts international students . To be admitted to courses or degrees , a student must prove proficiency in the English language . If English is not a student 's native language then he or she must submit an official TOEFL or IELTS score with a minimum score of 100 for the TOEFL or a minimum score of 7 @.@ 0 for the IELTS . International students must also meet the on @-@ campus @-@ only course requirements as outlined above . The Extension School does not issue I @-@ 20s for the F @-@ 1 visa but the Summer School does . In 2007 – 08 , more than 2 @,@ 500 international students and nearly 2 @,@ 000 Harvard University employees were enrolled in classes . In 2013 , students came from 118 countries and 46 states . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 Upon graduation , students are eligible for membership in the Harvard Alumni Association ( <unk> ) and the Harvard Extension Alumni Association ( <unk> ) . Graduates also take part in the commencement ceremonies with all other schools of Harvard . 
 The <unk> was founded in 1967 – 68 by Ella Smith and Edgar Grossman , both members of the class of 1966 . Extension School alumni have been admitted to all of the graduate schools at Harvard . 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 Both the oldest and youngest graduates in the more than 375 @-@ year history of Harvard University received their degrees from the Extension School . In 1997 Mary Fasano became the oldest undergraduate degree recipient , and in 1983 Thomas Small became the oldest student to ever earn a master 's degree . Both were in their 90th year . The youngest degree earner in Harvard history was 18 @-@ year @-@ old Amit Chatterjee who earned an ALB in 2002 . 
 One of Small 's classmates , Christopher Lohse , was selected to give the graduate commencement address . His speech , " The 10 @,@ 000 Ghosts of Harvard " , was a play on both the university 's fight song and the fact that classes are taught after dark . In 1989 another ALM graduate gave the commencement address . Joseph R. <unk> , Jr. began his studies as a Providence city councilor , and at the time of his speech he was the Mayor of Providence . He went on to become Ambassador to Malta . 
 In 1936 , one person had taken courses for 26 consecutive years . Two others that same year had been students for 24 years . 
 = = Coat of arms = = 
 The coat of arms for the Extension School was approved in 1983 . At the top of the shield the three books spelling out Veritas ( Latin for " truth " ) represent graduate education , as the same device is found on the arms of the other graduate schools . Instead of a straight line separating it from the rest of the shield , as is found in the other schools , a line with six arcs pointing up was used instead . A silver chevron was used to represent undergraduate education , a device used in the shield of Harvard College in the 17th to 19th centuries . Two bushels of wheat are included to represent John Lowell 's stipulation that courses should not cost more than two bushels of wheat . A golden lamp is included to represent both learning and the fact that classes are taught at night . 
 = Roy Conacher = 
 Roy Gordon Conacher ( October 5 , 1916 – December 29 , 1984 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey left winger who played 11 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Boston Bruins , Detroit Red Wings and Chicago Black Hawks . He was the NHL 's leading goal @-@ scorer in 1938 – 39 , his first season in the league . Conacher was a member of two Stanley Cup winning teams with the Bruins and scored the championship winning goal in 1939 . He won the Art Ross Trophy in 1948 – 49 season as the NHL 's leading point scorer and was named a first team All @-@ Star . 
 Conacher was a member of the Memorial Cup winning West Toronto Nationals in 1935 as Canadian junior champions and was a member of the Ontario Hockey Association senior champion Toronto Dominions in 1937 . Playing in the shadow of his more famous brothers Charlie and Lionel , Roy was known as the " forgotten Conacher " . He was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1998 , following his brothers to become the only trio of siblings so enshrined . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roy Conacher was born October 5 , 1916 , along with his twin brother Bert . They were the youngest children to Benjamin and Elizabeth Conacher and two of ten siblings : five boys and five girls . The family grew up in the Toronto <unk> of Davenport , which his brother Charlie described as " one of Toronto 's higher class slums " . His father was a teamster , and struggled to earn enough money to support the family . In the winter , he ploughed the snow off outdoor skating rinks to earn additional money . 
 All ten children were encouraged to participate in sports by the principal of Jesse Ketchum School , who felt that such pursuits would keep his students from getting into trouble . Roy joined his elder brothers in playing hockey , and having started younger than they had , was regarded as a better skater . Roy went on to join his brothers Lionel and Charlie in professional hockey . Bert was also an aspiring hockey player but his professional hopes were ended when lost an eye in his late teens to a freak accident while the brothers were playing street hockey in front of their home . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 Conacher played his minor hockey with the Toronto Marlboro organization and was a member of Ontario provincial championship winning teams at the bantam and midget age groups . He next played junior hockey with the West Toronto Nationals in the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) junior league between 1933 and 1936 . In his third season , 1935 – 36 , Conacher led the OHA junior league in scoring with 12 goals in 10 games . The Nationals , led by Roy and Bert Conacher , won the OHA title and reached the 1936 Memorial Cup final against the Saskatoon Wesleys . In 12 Memorial Cup playoff games , Roy Conacher recorded eight goals and five assists . West Toronto won the best @-@ of @-@ three final in two consecutive games , 5 – 1 and 4 – 2 , to capture the Dominion junior championship . Conacher played two seasons of senior hockey , first with the Toronto Dominions of the OHA senior league in 1936 – 37 where he was an all @-@ star for the OHA senior championship winning squad . He then played with then the Kirkland Lake Hargreaves of the Northern Ontario Hockey Association . 
 = = = Boston Bruins = = = 
 The Boston Bruins invited Conacher to their amateur camp in 1935 where the then 17 @-@ year @-@ old made a good impression on manager Art Ross . Following his two seasons of senior hockey , the Bruins signed Conacher to a contract on October 23 , 1938 . He made his National Hockey League ( NHL ) debut in the 1938 – 39 season and recorded 37 points in 47 games . His 26 goals were the most in the league ; it would be 54 years before another rookie , Teemu Selänne , would lead the league . Conacher added ten points in 12 playoff games , including both goals in a 2 – 0 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs in the fourth game of the 1939 Stanley Cup Final , and he scored the Stanley Cup @-@ winning goal in the deciding contest . 
 Conacher remained a leading offensive threat throughout his tenure with Boston ; he was one of the NHL 's top ten scorers in his first four seasons , including the 1939 – 40 season despite missing 16 games due to a broken wrist . He also finished second in goals in both 1940 – 41 and 1941 – 42 with 24 goals in each campaign . By 1941 , he had joined with Eddie Wiseman and Bill Cowley to form the " Three Gun Line " , so named because all three players were considered top scoring threats . Conacher had only one goal during the 1941 Stanley Cup playoffs , but the Bruins were the NHL 's dominant team and swept the Detroit Red Wings in the Final to win their second Stanley Cup in three years . 
 In 1942 , Conacher left the Bruins to enlist in the Royal Canadian Air Force for the duration of the Second World War where he served as a physical training instructor . He continued to play hockey in the Canadian military leagues , playing first for the Saskatoon RCAF team in 1942 – 43 , then with the Dartmouth RCAF for the following two seasons . He led the Halifax city league with nine goals in 1943 – 44 . Toward the end of the war , Conacher was deployed to England where he continued to play with military teams , but the deployment also meant he was unavailable to return to the Bruins at the start of the 1945 – 46 season like many of his teammates did . He appeared in only four games late in the season following his discharge from the military . 
 = = = Detroit and Chicago = = = 
 Art Ross feared that Conacher would not be able to return to his previous form due to losing four seasons to military service when he was in his physical prime and opted to trade him . Prior to the 1946 – 47 season , Ross sent Conacher to the Detroit Red Wings in exchange for Joe <unk> . Conacher excelled with Detroit . He led the team with 30 goals and 54 points , seventh best in the league , and scored four goals in one game that were all assisted by Billy Taylor on a night where the latter player set an NHL record with seven assists . Art Ross , once asked what his biggest mistake as a general manager was , replied " trading Roy Conacher " . 
 Conacher became embroiled in a bitter contract dispute with Detroit manager Jack Adams following the season . Adams offered $ 7 @,@ 600 for the season , but Conacher refused to sign for less than $ 8 @,@ 500 . Refusing to bow to his demands , Adams traded Conacher to the New York Rangers on October 22 , 1947 , in exchange for Edward Slowinski and a player to be named later . Conacher , however , refused to report to the Rangers . He announced instead that he planned to retire from hockey , a decision he claimed to have been mulling over for a couple years . The trade to New York was nullified as a result of Conacher 's failure to report . Bill Tobin of the Chicago Black Hawks received permission from Detroit to speak with Conacher and successfully negotiated a deal with the player . Tobin claimed the negotiation was easy : " It wasn 't hard to sign Roy . I offered him so much money he couldn 't refuse . " Tobin did not reveal what he was paying Conacher , but admitted that he spent $ 25 @,@ 000 combined on the contract and to purchase him from Detroit . 
 Conacher averaged nearly a point per game in 1947 – 48 with 48 points in 52 games . His best statistical season came in 1948 – 49 when he won the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL 's leading point scorer playing on a line with Bill Mosienko and Doug Bentley on a team that was coached by his brother Charlie . Conacher recorded 68 points while his 26 goals were good enough for second in the league . Additionally , he was named to the first All @-@ Star team at left wing and played in the 1949 All @-@ Star Game . He remained among the league 's scoring leaders in 1949 – 50 as his 56 points were sixth @-@ best in the league . He followed that up by leading the Black Hawks in goals ( 26 ) and points ( 50 ) in 1950 – 51 . Conacher scored his 200th career goal during the season , at the time a rare feat for an NHL player . However , the physical toll of the sport caught up to him ; after playing 12 games of the 1951 – 52 season , he opted to retire from the NHL . Chicago replaced him with his nephew , Pete Conacher . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During his final four seasons in the NHL , Conacher lived in Midland , Ontario . He remained in the community with his wife Fran and children Roy Jr . , Mark and Candace . Keeping active in hockey , he coached Midland 's junior C team to a provincial championship and regularly played with oldtimers teams . Conacher later moved to Victoria , British Columbia where , after an eight @-@ year battle with cancer , he died in 1984 . 
 Roy was one of several members of the Conacher family to play in the NHL . Three of his nephews , Pete and Brian Conacher , and Murray Henderson all followed . Cory Conacher is also a distant relative of his . Roy was relatively anonymous compared to his more famous brothers Lionel and Charlie , and was often referred to as the " forgotten Conacher " . Roy 's career was recognized by the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1998 when he was posthumously inducted by the veterans committee . He joined Charlie ( 1961 ) and Lionel ( 1994 ) as the only trio of brothers to be so honoured . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Alexander Novikov = 
 Alexander Alexandrovich Novikov ( Russian : Алекса ́ ндр Алекса ́ ндрович <unk> ́ <unk> ; November 19 [ O.S. November 6 ] 1900 – December 3 , 1976 ) was the Chief marshal of the aviation for the Soviet Air Force during Russia 's involvement in the Second World War . Lauded as " the man who has piloted the Red Air Force through the dark days into the present limelight " and a " master of tactical air power " , he was twice given the title of Hero of the Soviet Union , as well as a number of other Soviet decorations . 
 A gifted air force commander and one of the leading men of the Soviet armed forces , Novikov was involved in nearly all exploits of the air force during World War II and was at the forefront of developments in command and control and of air combat techniques . After the war , Novikov was arrested by order of the Politburo , and was forced by NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria into a " confession " which implicated Marshal Zhukov in a conspiracy . Novikov was then imprisoned until the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 , whereupon he became an avionics teacher and writer until his death . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Novikov was born in <unk> , a village in <unk> , in <unk> Oblast . In 1919 he became an infantryman in the Red Army , and in 1920 became a party member . 
 He served in the 384th regiment of the Russian 7th Army , helped put down the Kronstadt uprising in March 1921 , and he served as a platoon commander during anti @-@ guerrilla fighting in the Caucasus in 1922 . Having graduated from the Frunze Military Academy in 1930 , Novikov moved to the air force in 1933 , and served as chief of operations until 1935 , when he took command of a light bomber squadron . 
 Novikov was expelled from the party and the armed forces in 1937 ; however he was re @-@ admitted by the Commissioner of the <unk> Military District , A. I. <unk> , who was in turn arrested . Novikov served as chief of the air force staff of the Leningrad Military District prior to serving in the Soviet @-@ Finnish War during 1939 and 1940 . For his service in the conflict he was promoted to Major General and earned the Order of Lenin . He continued to command the Air Forces of the Leningrad Military District until the outbreak of World War II . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 During the early setbacks of the Russian army at the hand of Nazi Germany , Novikov and the Leningrad air forces took part in a number of strikes against the advancing German armies , including the first Soviet air operation of the war , from June 25 – 30 , 1941 , which cost the Germans 130 aircraft . During this time , Novikov was noted for his skill in command and for his innovation , particularly the then unknown use of radio to coordinate bomber flights . In July 1941 , Novikov expanded his command from Leningrad to include air forces of the Northern Front , Northwestern Front and the Baltic Fleet , and as the Germans approached Leningrad , Novikov and his forces flew 16 @,@ 567 sorties . 
 Novikov briefly held the position of First Deputy to the Air Force Commander from February until April 11 , 1942 . He then became Commander of the Red Army Air Force – Deputy to the People 's Commissar of Defense of the USSR for Aviation , a position from which he began to reorganize the Soviet air force . He worked specifically for the creation of separate divisions and air corps , as well as the improvement of front line coordination . During the siege of Stalingrad , Novikov successfully persuaded Marshal Zhukov and in turn , Joseph Stalin that the air force was not ready for a planned counter @-@ offensive , an argument to which both commanders eventually conceded . After a substantial period of development , Novikov was able to provide Zhukov with an aerial blockade of the German forces at Stalingrad , along with the destruction of 1 @,@ 200 enemy planes . Later operations over Kuban destroyed another 1 @,@ 100 planes . 
 At the Battle of Kursk , Novikov introduced new innovations such as shaped @-@ charge bombs , night fighters and ground @-@ attack aircraft . The Battle of Königsberg saw 2 @,@ 500 combat aircraft under Novikov being made available to the besieging armies , with the Soviet air marshal recommending low level heavy night bombers being used . 514 of these dropped 4 @,@ 440 tons of bombs on the beleaguered city . For his part in the operation Novikov was made Hero of the Soviet Union , and on June 24 , 1944 the United States awarded him a Legion of Merit . Novikov then transferred to the Pacific Theatre to fight against Japan , where he was made Hero of the Soviet Union a second time for his work in forming large air armies to bomb Japanese forces in China and Korea . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 On January 16 , 1946 Novikov submitted to Stalin plans that would lay the groundwork for the modern Soviet air force and the industry that would supply it . On April 22 , 1946 however , before these could be enacted , Novikov was stripped of his rank and titles and then arrested . The reason for this was that at the Potsdam conference it was discovered that the United States had better spy planes than the Soviet Union . He was interrogated and tortured the next day and again between May 4 and May 8 , 1946 by Lavrentiy Beria before being forced to read a confession to the Politburo implicating Marshal Zhukov . Novikov was tried by the Military Collegium and sentenced to fifteen years in a labor camp . 
 Novikov was released six years into his sentence following Stalin 's death on June 29 , 1953 , and reinstated as Chief Marshal of Aviation , where he was able to put his ideas into practice . A plan for using newly available jet aircraft and nuclear weapons to wage a possible future war with the United States was laid out by Novikov and shown to Nikita Khrushchev , who turned the proposal down in favor of ballistic missiles . 
 Following his retirement in 1958 , Novikov accepted an offer to become head of the Higher Civil Aviation School in Leningrad , where he worked for ten years . He became a professor , and was awarded the Order of the Red Banner in 1961 . 
 In retirement , Novikov wrote a number of works on aviation and warfare , which were used to educate new Soviet air force pilots . He died , aged 74 , on December 3 , 1976 . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Twice Hero of the Soviet Union 
 Three Orders of Lenin 
 Three Orders of the Red Banner 
 Three Orders of Suvorov 1st class 
 Order of Kutuzov 1st class 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour 
 Two Orders of the Red Star 
 Jubilee Medal " For <unk> Valour – In Commemoration of the 100th Anniversary since the Birth of Vladimir Il 'ich Lenin " 
 Medal " For the Defence of Leningrad " 
 Medal " For the Defence of Stalingrad " 
 Medal " For the Victory over Germany in the Great Patriotic War 1941 – 1945 " 
 Jubilee Medal " Twenty Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941 @-@ 1945 " 
 Jubilee Medal " Thirty Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941 @-@ 1945 " 
 Medal " For the Victory over Japan " 
 Medal " For the Capture of Königsberg " 
 Medal " For the Capture of Berlin " 
 Medal " Veteran of the Armed Forces of the USSR " 
 Jubilee Medal " XX Years of the Workers ' and Peasants ' Red Army " 
 Jubilee Medal " 30 Years of the Soviet Army and Navy " 
 Jubilee Medal " 40 Years of the Armed Forces of the USSR " 
 Jubilee Medal " 50 Years of the Armed Forces of the USSR " 
 Medal " In Commemoration of the 250th Anniversary of Leningrad " 
 Chief Commander of the Legion of Merit ( USA ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honour ( France ) 
 Order of Red Banner ( Mongolia ) 
 Order of the Polar Star ( Mongolia ) 
 = Roger Gale ( antiquary ) = 
 Roger Gale ( 27 September 1672 – 25 June 1744 ) was an English scholar and antiquary as well as a member of Parliament for Northallerton . His father was an ecclesiastic and professor at Cambridge , which the younger Gale also attended . After his graduation , Gale briefly served as a diplomat in France , as well as holding a position as a reader at Oxford University 's Bodleian Library . On his father 's death in 1702 , Gale retired to his family estate , but was elected to Parliament in 1705 , where he served until 1713 . He then continued in public service until 1735 , when he once more retired to his estates . 
 Besides his governmental career , Gale was a member of the Society of Antiquaries and the Royal Society , where he served as treasurer . Gale was known as a collector of manuscripts and other antiquarian items , writing a few published works on those subjects . He donated his manuscript collection to his alma mater in 1738 , and died in 1744 . Although contemporaries felt he was one of the foremost scholars of his age , later historians have been less convinced , contrasting his learning unfavourably with his father 's . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roger Gale was the eldest son of Thomas Gale and Barbara Pepys . His father was Dean of York as well as a professor of Greek at Cambridge University , while his mother was a cousin of the diarist Samuel Pepys . Roger was born on 27 September 1672 at <unk> , Cambridgeshire . Thomas and Barbara had a younger son , Samuel Gale , who also became an antiquary , and a daughter , Elizabeth , who became William Stukeley 's as second wife . 
 Gale was educated at St Paul 's School in London , where his father was in charge from 1672 to 1697 . He then went on to attend Trinity College starting in 1691 , earning his Bachelor of Arts in 1695 and a Master of Arts in 1698 . He then became a reader at the Bodleian Library at Oxford University on 6 March 1699 . Soon after this , probably in the later part of 1699 , he went with Charles Montagu , then the Earl of Manchester , on a diplomatic mission to France . His father died in 1702 , and Gale retired to his newly inherited estates at Scruton , Yorkshire . 
 = = Public service = = 
 In 1705 he was elected a member of Parliament ( MP ) for Northallerton in a by @-@ election . He remained an MP until 1713 , usually voting with the Whigs and working on committees concerned with regulating servant wages and the naturalisation of foreigners . After leaving Parliament , he was appointed to a commission dealing with stamp duties , then later was a commissioner of excise . He remained in that position until 1735 , when Robert Walpole had him removed to free the post for one of Walpole 's friends . 
 Gale also served as the first vice @-@ president of the Society of Antiquaries , and was the treasurer of the Royal Society for a number of years . In 1736 he returned to his estates and retired from public life . 
 = = Antiquary and writer = = 
 Gale inherited his father 's library of manuscripts and books , which he eventually donated to his alma mater , Trinity College , in 1738 . Included in Gale 's donation was one of only two complete manuscripts of the Liber Eliensis , now known as Trinity College MS <unk> Gale also collected coins , and donated his collection to Cambridge University . 
 In 1697 Gale translated Louis Jobert 's La science des <unk> into English , with the title of The Knowledge of Medals . This was designed as an instruction to the beginning coin collector , and also contained information to protect the new collector from fraud . Gale then in 1709 published his father 's work on the Antonine Itinerary , which Gale supplemented with his own notes and commentary . His last major published work was as the editor of a 12th @-@ century manuscript register of the Honour of Richmond that was contained in the Cotton library . He also contributed a number of essays on antiquarian topics to the <unk> Transactions journal put out by the Royal Society . 
 Gale 's letters survive , and some were first published in the third volume of John Nichols 's Bibliotheca <unk> Britannica in 1790 . Later more appeared in Nichols ' Literary Anecdotes , and then finally his complete letters were published in three volumes by the Surtees Society along with letters from his brother Samuel and brother @-@ in @-@ law William Stukeley . Nichols in 1781 declared that Gale was " one of the most learned men of his age " , but later scholars have been less full of praise . D. C. Douglas , writing in the 1950s , contrasted Gale with his father , and felt that the younger Gale was given a greater reputation than he deserved . Notwithstanding Douglas ' opinion , Gale 's work did much to preserve important historical information , as he was a member of the new style of antiquary , who instead of working just with manuscripts , turned to the topography and other relics in the countryside . This group of antiquaries did much to record information that has since disappeared . 
 = = Death and family = = 
 Gale married Henrietta Roper , the daughter of Henry Roper of Cowling , Kent . She died in 1720 . They had one son , Roger Henry Gale , who was born in 1710 . Gale himself died on 25 June 1744 at his estates in Scruton , and was buried near the church there . There is no monument in the churchyard , as he stipulated in his will that he be buried in such a manner that no one would know exactly where he was buried . 
 = 1948 American League tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 1948 American League tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1948 regular season , played between the Cleveland Indians and Boston Red Sox to determine the American League ( AL ) champion . The game was played on October 4 , 1948 , at Fenway Park in Boston , Massachusetts . It was necessary after both teams finished the season with identical win – loss records of 96 – 58 . This was the first @-@ ever one @-@ game playoff in the AL , and the only one prior to 1969 when the leagues were split into divisions . 
 The Indians defeated the Red Sox , 8 – 3 , as the Indians scored four runs in the fourth inning and limited the Red Sox to five hits . The Indians advanced to the 1948 World Series , where they defeated the Boston Braves , four games to two , giving them their second and most recent World Series championship . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker counted as the 155th regular season game by both teams , with all events in the game added to regular season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 1948 Major League Baseball season was predicted to be a close race between the Yankees and Red Sox . In a United Press poll conducted just before the season started , the majority of sportswriters chose the Yankees , who had won last year 's World Series , to face the Braves or St. Louis Cardinals that year , while others chose the Red Sox ; only one sportswriter chose the Indians to reach the World Series . Most of the American League managers had the Yankees finishing first , followed by the Red Sox , Indians , and Detroit Tigers . Tension and confidence was evident between the teams , as two months into the season , after defeating the Red Sox 7 – 0 , Yankees manager Bucky Harris declared that the Yankees would win the pennant , though they were currently at second place at the time . 
 The pennant race continued between the three teams throughout the entire season . On September 25 , after playing 147 games , with seven games left to play , all three teams had a record of 91 – 56 . After each team played four more games , the Indians were up two games , meaning the Yankees and Red Sox had to win their games on September 30 to stay in the pennant race . They did , and the month of October opened up with both teams 1 @.@ 5 games behind the Indians . The Indians ' last series was a three @-@ game stand against the Tigers , while the Red Sox and Yankees had a two @-@ game series against each other . 
 The Indians lost their first game 5 – 3 against the Tigers on October 1 , giving them a one @-@ game lead with two games left to play . As a result , speculation arose about the possibility of a three @-@ way tie . On October 2 , Cleveland beat Detroit to clinch at least a tie , and Boston beat New York 5 – 1 , ending the Yankees ' pennant run and bringing the race down to two teams . On the last day of the season , October 3 , Boston won their game and Cleveland lost , giving them identical 96 – 58 records and forcing a tiebreaker the following day at Boston . The Indians chose rookie Gene Bearden to start against Boston in the tie @-@ breaker , despite only having one day of rest , as he had beaten the Red Sox twice that season , and the Red Sox chose Denny Galehouse , passing on Mel Parnell , who had beaten the Indians on three separate occasions that season . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Monday October 4 , 1948 – 1 @.@ 15 p.m. ( ET ) at Fenway Park in Boston , Massachusetts 
 Galehouse started off the game by quickly getting outs from Dale Mitchell and Allie Clark . American League MVP Lou Boudreau then hit a solo home run off Galehouse to make the score 1 – 0 . After another out , Bearden came on the mound in the bottom of the first . Johnny Pesky doubled , then scored on a hit by Vern Stephens to make the score 1 – 1 at the end of the first inning . Both pitchers allowed one baserunner the following inning ; Ken Keltner reached base for Cleveland and Birdie Tebbetts reached base for the Red Sox . Both pitchers then got three quick outs in the third inning . 
 In the fourth inning , the Indians opened up the game . Boudreau and Joe Gordon hit back @-@ to @-@ back singles , which brought Keltner to the plate . The Red Sox expected a bunt , but instead the third baseman hit his 31st home run of the season to put the Indians ahead , 4 – 1 . Galehouse was then replaced with Ellis Kinder , who was met with a double by Larry Doby . Kinder responded by getting the next three batters out , which brought the score to 5 – 1 as Doby also scored . After Bearden got three Red Sox out , the Indians started the fifth inning with the top of their lineup . Mitchell and Eddie Robinson , who came in for Clark , were out . Boudreau then stepped up to the plate and hit his second home run of the night to make the score 6 – 1 . 
 The rest of the fifth inning saw no more hits , and after a Keltner double , three Indians were out in the top of the sixth inning . The Red Sox began to fight back in the bottom of the sixth inning . After getting Pesky out , Ted Williams reached first base on an error by Gordon . Stephens struck out , and with two outs in the inning , Bobby Doerr hit his 27th home run of the season to make the score 6 – 3 . No runs were scored in the seventh inning , though Bearden and Mitchell both reached base . The Indians were able to score another run in the eighth inning after Jim Hegan was intentionally walked . Bearden then hit a fly ball to Williams , who dropped it , allowing Hegan to score and making it 7 – 3 in the Indians ' favor . The Indians were able to score one more run in the ninth when Robinson scored after Keltner grounded into a bases @-@ loaded double play . Bearden got the final three Red Sox out in the bottom of the ninth , finishing the game with an 8 – 3 Indians victory and giving Bearden a complete game . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the victory , the Indians received their first playoff berth since the 1920 World Series . Indians ' Manager Lou Boudreau dedicated the victory to pitcher Don Black , who suffered a cerebral hemorrhage the previous month . The Indians went on to face the Boston Braves in the 1948 World Series , winning it four games to two . The Red Sox fans experienced disappointment when Boston mayor James M. Curley ordered the fire department sirens sounded when Boston won the pennant . The sirens did sound , but it was instead for a fire in the Boston navy yard . 
 The Red Sox 's defeat disappointed Boston fans , who had been rooting the entire season for an All @-@ Boston World Series . Prior to the October 4 game , the oddsmakers gave the Red Sox the advantage , meaning that an all @-@ Boston World Series was likely . The Red Sox did not make another playoff appearance until 1967 , when the St. Louis Cardinals defeated them in the 1967 World Series . 
 The game counted as a regular season game in baseball statistics . As a result , Dom DiMaggio and Vern Stephens led the league with 155 games played , which could not have been equaled by any team other than the Red Sox or Indians . DiMaggio 's four at @-@ bats in the game also gave him the league lead with 648 , four ahead of Bob Dillinger of the St. Louis Browns . Dale Mitchell 's one single also gave him the league lead in that statistics , beating out Dillinger by one . Gene Bearden 's nine inning , one earned run performance brought his earned run average ( ERA ) down to 2 @.@ 43 , which led the American League . Boudreau finished the season with a .355 batting average , 116 runs , 18 home runs , and 106 runs batted in , and won the Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award at the end of the season . 
 = Film career of Audie Murphy = 
 Audie Murphy ( 20 June 1925 – 28 May 1971 ) was a highly decorated American soldier and Medal of Honor recipient who turned actor . He portrayed himself in the film To Hell and Back , the account of his World War II experiences . During the 1950s and 1960s he was cast primarily in westerns . While often the hero , he proved his ability to portray a cold @-@ blooded hired gun in No Name on the Bullet . A notable exception to the westerns was The Quiet American in which he co @-@ starred with Michael Redgrave . Murphy made over 40 feature films and often worked with directors more than once . Jesse Hibbs who directed To Hell and Back worked with the star on six films , only half of which were westerns . When promoting his 1949 book To Hell and Back he appeared on the radio version of This Is Your Life . To promote the 1955 film of the same name , he appeared on Ed Sullivan 's Toast of the Town . He was a celebrity guest on television shows such as What 's My Line ? and appeared in a handful of television dramas . Murphy 's only television series Whispering Smith had a brief run in 1961 . For his cooperation in appearing in the United States Army 's Broken Bridge episode of The Big Picture television series he was awarded the Outstanding Civilian Service Medal . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Murphy became a national celebrity following his World War II military service when Life magazine proclaimed him America 's " most decorated soldier " in its 16 July 1945 issue cover story . That magazine cover brought him to the attention of veteran actor James Cagney who invited him to Hollywood . When Murphy arrived in California after his military discharge , Cagney cancelled the hotel reservations he 'd made for Murphy and instead took him into his own home , " I got the shock of my life . Audie was very thin . His complexion was bluish @-@ gray . " Commenting years later on his first impression , Cagney said , " [ Murphy was ] in such a nervous condition that I was afraid he might jump out of a window . I took him home and gave him my bed . " He spent three weeks as a guest of Cagney and then returned to Texas before finally agreeing to an offer from brothers James and William Cagney of $ 150 a week as a contract player with their production company . The Cagneys gave Murphy personal attention on acting techniques . He also took lessons at the Actors ' Lab on Sunset Boulevard . Murphy studied voice techniques , learned judo , and trained with choreographer John Boyle , Cagney 's dance coach for Yankee Doodle Dandy . A 1947 disagreement with William Cagney ended his association with the brothers without having been cast in a film production . 
 He moved into Terry Hunt 's Athletic Club and survived on his Army pension of $ 113 a month . In 1948 he became acquainted with writer David " Spec " McClure who got him a $ 500 bit part in Texas , Brooklyn and Heaven . He began dating actress Wanda Hendrix in 1946 . Her agent got Murphy a bit part in the 1948 Alan Ladd film Beyond Glory directed by John Farrow . Murphy and Hendrix married in 1949 and divorced in 1951 . 
 His 1949 film Bad Boy gave him his first leading role . Murphy became acquainted in Texas with Interstate Theatre executive James " Skipper " Cherry , who was best man at Murphy 's 1951 marriage to Pamela Archer and the namesake of the couple 's second son . Murphy 's association with Cherry brought him to the attention of Texas independent producer Paul Short . With financing from Texas theater owners and the children 's charitable organization Variety Clubs International , Short cast Murphy in Bad Boy to help promote the charity 's work with troubled children . Murphy performed well in the screen test , but Steve <unk> , president of the project 's production company Allied Artists did not want to cast someone in a major role with so little acting experience . Cherry , Short , and the theater owners refused to finance the film unless Murphy played the lead . The 1933 Thames Williamson novel The Woods Colt caught Murphy 's attention during this period of his career . He secured the rights to the story in the 1950s , and Marion Hargrove was hired to write the script . The film was never made . 
 Universal Studios signed Murphy to a seven @-@ year studio contract at $ 2 @,@ 500 a week . His first film for them in 1950 was as Billy the Kid in The Kid from Texas . He wrapped up that year making Sierra starring his wife Wanda Hendrix , and Kansas Raiders as outlaw Jesse James . He and director Budd Boetticher become acquainted through Terry Hunt 's Athletic Club where Murphy would request to be his boxing partner . Murphy appeared in the 1951 title role of Boetticher 's first <unk> Cimarron Kid . 
 The only film Murphy made in 1952 was Duel At Silver Creek with director Don Siegel . Murphy would team with Siegel one more time in 1958 for The Gun Runners . He only worked one time with director Frederick de Cordova , who later became producer of The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson . Murphy and de Cordova made Column South in 1953 . George Marshall directed Murphy in the 1954 Destry , based on a character created by author Max Brand . Two previous versions , one in 1932 with Tom Mix and one in 1939 with Jimmy Stewart and Marlene Dietrich , were both titled Destry Rides Again . 
 The only screenplay John Meredyth Lucas ever did for a Murphy film was the 1953 Tumbleweed , an adaptation of the Kenneth Perkins novel Three Were Renegades . Murphy played Jim Harvey , whose horse Tumbleweed displayed a talent for getting the hero out of any scrape . Director Nathan Juran oversaw Tumbleweed , as well as Gunsmoke and Drums Across the River . 
 As Murphy 's film career began to progress , so did his efforts to improve his skills . He continually practiced his fast draw with a gun . He took both private and classroom acting lessons from Estelle Harman , and honed his diction by reciting dialogue from William Shakespeare and William Saroyan . 
 = = The Red Badge of Courage = = 
 Murphy was lent to MGM at a salary of $ 25 @,@ 000 to appear in the 1951 The Red Badge of Courage directed by John Huston and adapted from the Stephen Crane novel . At the urging of Spec McClure and celebrity columnist Hedda Hopper , over the misgivings of producer Gottfried Reinhardt and studio executives Louis B. Mayer and Dore Schary , director Huston cast Murphy in the lead of The Youth ( Henry Fleming in the novel ) . The preview screening audiences were not enthusiastic , causing Schary to re @-@ edit Huston 's work , eliminating several scenes and adding narration by James Whitmore . MGM trimmed advertising efforts on what they believed was an unprofitable film . What eventually hit the theaters was not a commercial success , and it was also not the film both Murphy and Huston believed they had made . Murphy unsuccessfully tried to buy the rights to the film in 1955 in an attempt to re @-@ edit and re @-@ release it . Huston tried to buy it in 1957 , but was told the original negative of what he had filmed was destroyed . 
 = = To Hell and Back = = 
 Although Murphy was initially reluctant to appear as himself in To Hell and Back , the film version of his book , he eventually agreed to do so . Terry Murphy portrayed his brother Joseph Preston Murphy at age four . The film was directed by Jesse Hibbs with an on @-@ screen introduction by General Walter Bedell Smith . Susan Kohner , daughter of Murphy 's agent Paul Kohner , made her acting debut in the film . The finale shows Murphy being awarded the Medal of Honor while images of his unit 's casualties pass across the screen . It became the biggest hit in the history of Universal Studios at the time . 
 Both Murphy and Universal gave serious considerations to a follow @-@ up version of his post @-@ war life . Murphy rejected the Richard J. Collins script The Way Back which created the fictional scenario that filming To Hell and Back had been so therapeutic for Murphy that it cured him of his combat fatigue . Spec McClure scripted a second unused version of The Way Back that incorporated Murphy 's real @-@ life friends into the storyline and ended with the star living happily ever after with Pamela and their two sons . A third version by an unknown writer focused on the Murphy @-@ McClure friendship and was rejected by the threat of a lawsuit from McClure . Desi Arnaz offered to bankroll a 1965 project titled Helmets in the Dust . At Murphy 's request McClure wrote a film treatment , but the project never came to fruition . 
 = = Later films = = 
 The Hibbs @-@ Murphy team proved so successful in To Hell and Back that the two worked together on a total of five subsequent films . Hibbs directed Murphy in Ride Clear of Diablo in 1954 . The partnership resulted in the commercially unsuccessful non @-@ traditional 1956 western Walk the Proud Land . Hibbs and Murphy teamed with each other for non @-@ westerns Joe Butterfly and World in My Corner . They worked together a final time in the 1958 western Ride a Crooked Trail . Veteran character actor Dan Duryea who portrayed villain Whitey <unk> in Ride Clear of Diablo played a second lead in two more Murphy vehicles , Night Passage and Six Black Horses . The Story of Charles Russell with Murphy as the lead was under development at Universal but shelved after the disappointing receipts of Walk the Proud Land . Murphy , however , was enthusiastic enough about a biopic of Charles Marion Russell to give serious consideration tor his own production that would star Guy Mitchell in the lead , but no such film was made . 
 Murphy was hired by Joseph L. Mankiewicz to play the role of The American ( Alden Pyle in the book ) in the 1958 version of The Quiet American , replacing Montgomery Clift when the latter dropped out . Michael Redgrave replaced Laurence Olivier who dropped out when Clift withdrew . The cold @-@ war drama filmed in Vietnam was a departure from the genre in which Murphy had normally been cast . 
 Murphy formed a partnership with Harry Joe Brown to make three films , the first of which was the 1957 The Guns of Fort Petticoat . The partnership fell into disagreement over the remaining two projects , and Brown filed suit against Murphy . Although Murphy was to co @-@ star with Robert Mitchum in the 1957 film Night Riders , scheduling conflicts prevented him from doing so . Springing from his skin diving hobby , Murphy hired diving expert Paul <unk> to write the script Skin Diver with a Heart . Murphy reneged on the deal and the film was never made . <unk> sued Murphy in 1958 . 
 The 1950s decade ended with Murphy doing three westerns . He co @-@ starred with 14 @-@ year @-@ old Sandra Dee in the 1959 film The Wild and the Innocent . The film 's cast was rounded out with respected talent of the era in Gilbert Roland , Joanne Dru and Jim Backus . His collaboration with Walter <unk> on the black and white Cast a Long Shadow included an uncredited stint as co @-@ producer . The film co @-@ starred Terry Moore . His performance in No Name on the Bullet was well received . The storyline follows the cool , jaded hired gun as the townspeople are gripped with fear by his presence . 
 Murphy continued to make films in the 1960s . Murphy and Huston worked together one more time in the 1960 film The Unforgiven , in which Murphy took second billing as Burt Lancaster 's racist kid brother who was bent on the destruction of the <unk> Clair Huffaker had success in a number of his works being adapted for the films , including his 1958 novel Flaming Lance being filmed as the Elvis Presley western Flaming Star . Two of his works retained their original titles when Huffaker wrote the screenplays for them as Murphy 's films in 1961 , Seven Ways from Sundown and Posse from Hell . Author Bob Herzberg deemed the scripts two of the best Murphy worked with in that decade . Herbert Coleman directed Posse from Hell as well as the black and white World War II drama Battle at Bloody Beach set in the Philippines . 
 Willard W. Willingham and his wife Mary Willingham were friends of Murphy 's from his earliest days in Hollywood and who worked with him on a number of projects . <unk> was a producer on Murphy 's 1961 television series Whispering Smith . He additionally collaborated on Bullet for a Badman in 1964 and Arizona Raiders in 1965 . The latter was based on activities of Quantrill 's Raiders and a remake of the George Montgomery 1951 film The Texas Rangers . Moving the setting from Texas to Arizona , the film also featured veteran actor Buster Crabbe . Willard was a co @-@ writer on the screenplay for Battle at Bloody Beach . The <unk> as a team wrote the screenplays for <unk> as well the script for Murphy 's last starring lead in a western 40 Guns to Apache Pass . Released through Columbia Pictures in May 1967 , the storyline centered around Murphy 's character retrieving a cache of stolen rifles sold to Apache leader Cochise . 
 Apache Rifles in 1964 was another formula Murphy western . He stayed at Universal for a few more years , then left to work at Columbia and Allied Artists before making several films in Europe . In 1966 , he made Trunk to Cairo in Israel . He felt the film was , " the worst James Bond parody I 've ever seen , " but was unable to get out of the commitment . 
 I feel like a prostitute who is a little over the hill . I get all kinds of promotional offers for movies . But instead of my usual price of $ 100 @,@ 000 per picture , they offer $ 20 @,@ 000 and a percentage of the profit you never see . When people find you need the money in this town , they cut their offer by 80 percent . And I keep turning down liquor and cigarette commercials . I don 't believe they 're good for kids . I guess it 's a matter of not being 100 percent prostitute . 
 His own company <unk> Productions produced his last film A Time for Dying . He had a cameo role as Jesse James , and his sons Terry and James were given small roles . Willard W. Willingham played Frank James . Budd Boetticher wrote the script , and agreed to the production as a return favor for an earlier time when Murphy had bailed him out of financial setbacks . The production was beset with financial problems , and the set burned down twice . The film opened in France in 1971 , but was not shown in the United States until its limited release in 1982 . Two other projects that Murphy and Boetticher planned to produce , A Horse for Mr Barnum and When There 's Sumpthin ' to Do , never came to fruition . He made over 40 feature films in his career . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = Television = = 
 The only television series Murphy starred in was the 1961 Whispering Smith in which he played the title character . Based on the film of the same name , the show was about a 19th @-@ century Denver railroad investigator . Episodes were gleaned from real @-@ life cases of the Denver Police Department . The United States Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency was concerned about the violent content in the show and leveled charges against the network . 26 episodes had been filmed , but not all of them aired . 
 The cooperation of the United States Army and the United States Defense Department was extended for Murphy 's media appearances to publicize the film To Hell and Back . Among the 1955 celebrity television shows on which Murphy appeared to promote the film was Toast of the Town hosted by Ed Sullivan . 
 The Man 1960 suspense episode of Startime was based on an original Broadway play written by Mel <unk> . Murphy played a mentally unbalanced stranger who posed as a student and handyman and terrorized homeowner Thelma Ritter . 
 In 1960 , he was awarded the Outstanding Civilian Service Medal for his cooperation in the production of The Big Picture television series episode Broken Bridge . 
 = = Radio = = 
 = = Public Service Announcements = = 
 = Atlanta = 
 Atlanta is the capital of and the most populous city in the U.S. state of Georgia , with an estimated 2015 population of 463 @,@ 878 . Atlanta is the cultural and economic center of the Atlanta metropolitan area , home to 5 @,@ 522 @,@ 942 people and the ninth largest metropolitan area in the United States . Atlanta is the county seat of Fulton County , and a small portion of the city extends eastward into DeKalb County . 
 Atlanta was established in 1837 at the intersection of two railroad lines , and the city rose from the ashes of the American Civil War to become a national center of commerce . In the decades following the Civil Rights Movement , during which the city earned a reputation as " too busy to hate " for the progressive views of its citizens and leaders , Atlanta attained international prominence . Atlanta is the primary transportation hub of the Southeastern United States , via highway , railroad , and air , with Hartsfield – Jackson Atlanta International Airport being the world 's busiest airport since 1998 . 
 Atlanta is an " alpha- " or " world city " , exerting a significant impact upon commerce , finance , research , technology , education , media , art , and entertainment . It ranks 36th among world cities and 8th in the nation with a gross domestic product of $ 270 billion . Atlanta 's economy is considered diverse , with dominant sectors including logistics , professional and business services , media operations , and information technology . Topographically , Atlanta is marked by rolling hills and dense tree coverage . Revitalization of Atlanta 's neighborhoods , initially spurred by the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta , has intensified in the 21st century , altering the city 's demographics , politics , and culture . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the arrival of European settlers in north Georgia , Creek and Cherokee Indians inhabited the area . Standing Peachtree , a Creek village located where Peachtree Creek flows into the Chattahoochee River , was the closest Indian settlement to what is now Atlanta . As part of the systematic removal of Native Americans from northern Georgia from 1802 to 1825 , the Creek ceded the area in 1821 , and white settlers arrived the following year . 
 In 1836 , the Georgia General Assembly voted to build the Western and Atlantic Railroad in order to provide a link between the port of Savannah and the Midwest . The initial route was to run southward from Chattanooga to a terminus east of the Chattahoochee River , which would then be linked to Savannah . After engineers surveyed various possible locations for the terminus , the " zero milepost " was driven into the ground in what is now Five Points . A year later , the area around the milepost had developed into a settlement , first known as " Terminus " , and later as " <unk> " after a local merchant who built homes and a general store in the area . By 1842 , the town had six buildings and 30 residents , and was renamed " <unk> " to honor the Governor 's daughter . J. Edgar Thomson , Chief Engineer of the Georgia Railroad , suggested the town be renamed " Atlantica @-@ Pacifica , " which was shortened to " Atlanta " . The residents approved , and the town was incorporated as Atlanta on December 29 , 1847 . 
 By 1860 , Atlanta 's population had grown to 9 @,@ 554 . During the Civil War , the nexus of multiple railroads in Atlanta made the city a hub for the distribution of military supplies . In 1864 , following the capture of Chattanooga , the Union Army moved southward and began its invasion of north Georgia . The region surrounding Atlanta was the location of several major army battles , culminating with the Battle of Atlanta and a four @-@ month @-@ long siege of the city by the Union Army under the command of General William Tecumseh Sherman . On September 1 , 1864 , Confederate General John Bell Hood made the decision to retreat from Atlanta , ordering all public buildings and possible assets to the Union Army destroyed . On the next day , Mayor James Calhoun surrendered Atlanta to the Union Army , and on September 7 , General Sherman ordered the city 's civilian population to evacuate . On November 11 , 1864 , in preparation of the Union Army 's march to Savannah , Sherman ordered Atlanta to be burned to the ground , sparing only the city 's churches and hospitals . 
 After the Civil War ended in 1865 , Atlanta was gradually rebuilt . Due to the city 's superior rail transportation network , the state capital was moved to Atlanta from Milledgeville in 1868 . In the 1880 Census , Atlanta surpassed Savannah as Georgia 's largest city . Beginning in the 1880s , Henry W. Grady , the editor of the Atlanta Constitution newspaper , promoted Atlanta to potential investors as a city of the " New South " that would be based upon a modern economy and less reliant on agriculture . By 1885 , the founding of the Georgia School of Technology ( now Georgia Tech ) and the city 's black colleges had established the city as a center for higher education . In 1895 , Atlanta hosted the Cotton States and International Exposition , which attracted nearly 800 @,@ 000 attendees and successfully promoted the New South 's development to the world . 
 During the first decades of the 20th century , Atlanta experienced a period of unprecedented growth . In three decades ' time , Atlanta 's population tripled as the city limits expanded to include nearby streetcar suburbs ; the city 's skyline emerged with the construction of the Equitable , Flatiron , Empire , and Candler buildings ; and Sweet Auburn emerged as a center of black commerce . However , the period was also marked by strife and tragedy . Increased racial tensions led to the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906 , which left at least 27 people dead and over 70 injured . In 1915 , Leo Frank , a Jewish @-@ American factory superintendent , convicted of murder , was hanged by a lynch mob , drawing attention to antisemitism in the United States . On May 21 , 1917 , the Great Atlanta Fire destroyed 1 @,@ 938 buildings in what is now the Old Fourth Ward , resulting in one fatality and the displacement of 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 On December 15 , 1939 , Atlanta hosted the film premiere of Gone with the Wind , the epic film based on the best @-@ selling novel by Atlanta 's Margaret Mitchell . The film 's legendary producer , David O. Selznick , as well as the film 's stars Clark Gable , Vivien Leigh , and Olivia de Havilland attended the gala event at Loew 's Grand Theatre , but Oscar winner Hattie McDaniel , an African American , was barred from the event due to racial segregation laws and policies . 
 Atlanta played a vital role in the Allied effort during World War II due the city 's war @-@ related manufacturing companies , railroad network , and military bases , leading to rapid growth in the city 's population and economy . In the 1950s , the city 's newly constructed freeway system allowed middle class Atlantans the ability to relocate to the suburbs . As a result , the city began to make up an ever smaller proportion of the metropolitan area 's population . 
 During the 1960s , Atlanta was a major organizing center of the Civil Rights Movement , with Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . , Ralph David Abernathy , and students from Atlanta 's historically black colleges and universities playing major roles in the movement 's leadership . While minimal compared to other cities , Atlanta was not completely free of racial strife . In 1961 , the city attempted to thwart <unk> by erecting road barriers in Cascade Heights , countering the efforts of civic and business leaders to foster Atlanta as the " city too busy to hate " . Desegregation of the public sphere came in stages , with public transportation desegregated by 1959 , the restaurant at Rich 's department store by 1961 , movie theaters by 1963 , and public schools by 1973 . 
 In 1960 , whites comprised 61 @.@ 7 % of the city 's population . By 1970 , African Americans were a majority of the city 's population and exercised new @-@ found political influence by electing Atlanta 's first black mayor , Maynard Jackson , in 1973 . Under Mayor Jackson 's tenure , Atlanta 's airport was modernized , solidifying the city 's role as a transportation center . The opening of the Georgia World Congress Center in 1976 heralded Atlanta 's rise as a convention city . Construction of the city 's subway system began in 1975 , with rail service commencing in 1979 . However , despite these improvements , Atlanta lost over 100 @,@ 000 residents between 1970 and 1990 , over 20 % of its population . 
 In 1990 , Atlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games . Following the announcement , the city government undertook several major construction projects to improve Atlanta 's parks , sporting venues , and transportation infrastructure . While the games themselves were marred by numerous organizational inefficiencies , as well as the Centennial Olympic Park bombing , they were a watershed event in Atlanta 's history , initiating a fundamental transformation of the city in the decade that followed . 
 During the 2000s , Atlanta underwent a profound transformation demographically , physically , and culturally . Suburbanization , a booming economy , and new migrants decreased the city 's black percentage from a high of 67 % in 1990 to 54 % in 2010 . From 2000 to 2010 , Atlanta gained 22 @,@ 763 white residents , 5 @,@ 142 Asian residents , and 3 @,@ 095 Hispanic residents , while the city 's black population decreased by 31 @,@ 678 . Much of the city 's demographic change during the decade was driven by young , college @-@ educated professionals : from 2000 to 2009 , the three @-@ mile radius surrounding Downtown Atlanta gained 9 @,@ 722 residents aged 25 to 34 holding at least a four @-@ year degree , an increase of 61 % . Between the mid @-@ 1990s and 2010 , stimulated by funding from the HOPE VI program , Atlanta demolished nearly all of its public housing , a total of 17 @,@ 000 units and about 10 % of all housing units in the city . In 2005 , the $ 2 @.@ 8 billion BeltLine project was adopted , with the stated goals of converting a disused 22 @-@ mile freight railroad loop that surrounds the central city into an art @-@ filled multi @-@ use trail and increasing the city 's park space by 40 % . Lastly , Atlanta 's cultural offerings expanded during the 2000s : the High Museum of Art doubled in size ; the Alliance Theatre won a Tony Award ; and numerous art galleries were established on the once @-@ industrial Westside . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Atlanta encompasses 134 @.@ 0 square miles ( 347 @.@ 1 km2 ) , of which 133 @.@ 2 square miles ( 344 @.@ 9 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 85 square miles ( 2 @.@ 2 km2 ) is water . The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains , and at 1 @,@ 050 feet ( 320 m ) above mean sea level , Atlanta has the highest elevation of major cities east of the Mississippi River . Atlanta straddles the Eastern Continental Divide , such that rainwater that falls on the south and east side of the divide flows into the Atlantic Ocean , while rainwater on the north and west side of the divide flows into the Gulf of Mexico . Atlanta sits atop a ridge south of the Chattahoochee River , which is part of the ACF River Basin . Located at the far northwestern edge of the city , much of the river 's natural habitat is preserved , in part by the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Most of Atlanta was burned during the Civil War , depleting the city of a large stock of its historic architecture . Yet architecturally , the city had never been particularly " southern " — because Atlanta originated as a railroad town , rather than a patrician southern seaport like Savannah or Charleston , many of the city 's landmarks could have easily been erected in the Northeast or Midwest . 
 During the Cold War era , Atlanta embraced global modernist trends , especially regarding commercial and institutional architecture . Examples of modernist architecture include the Westin Peachtree Plaza ( 1976 ) , Georgia @-@ Pacific Tower ( 1982 ) , the State of Georgia Building ( 1966 ) , and the Atlanta Marriott Marquis ( 1985 ) . In the latter half of the 1980s , Atlanta became one of the early adopters of postmodern designs that reintroduced classical elements to the cityscape . Many of Atlanta 's tallest skyscrapers were built in the late 1980s and early 1990s , with most displaying tapering spires or otherwise ornamented crowns , such as One Atlantic Center ( 1987 ) , 191 Peachtree Tower ( 1991 ) , and the Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta ( 1992 ) . Also completed during the era is Atlanta 's tallest skyscraper , the Bank of America Plaza ( 1992 ) , which , at 1 @,@ 023 feet ( 312 m ) , is the 61st @-@ tallest building in the world and the 9th @-@ tallest building in the United States . The Bank of America Plaza is the tallest building outside of New York City and Chicago , and was the last building built in the United States to be in the top 10 tallest buildings in the world until One World Trade Center was completed externally in May 2013 . The city 's embrace of modern architecture , however , translated into an ambivalent approach toward historic preservation , leading to the destruction of notable architectural landmarks , including the Equitable Building ( 1892 – 1971 ) , Terminal Station ( 1905 – 1972 ) , and the Carnegie Library ( 1902 – 1977 ) . The Fox Theatre ( 1929 ) — Atlanta 's cultural icon — would have met the same fate had it not been for a grassroots effort to save it in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 Atlanta is divided into 242 officially defined neighborhoods . The city contains three major high @-@ rise districts , which form a north @-@ south axis along Peachtree : Downtown , Midtown , and Buckhead . Surrounding these high @-@ density districts are leafy , low @-@ density neighborhoods , most of which are dominated by single @-@ family homes . 
 Downtown Atlanta contains the most office space in the metro area , much of it occupied by government entities . Downtown is also home to the city 's sporting venues and many of its tourist attractions . Midtown Atlanta is the city 's second @-@ largest business district , containing the offices of many of the region 's law firms . Midtown is also known for its art institutions , cultural attractions , institutions of higher education , and dense form . Buckhead , the city 's uptown district , is eight miles ( 13 km ) north of Downtown and the city 's third @-@ largest business district . The district is marked by an urbanized core along Peachtree Road , surrounded by suburban single @-@ family neighborhoods situated among dense forests and rolling hills . 
 Surrounding Atlanta 's three high @-@ rise districts are the city 's low- and medium @-@ density neighborhoods , where the craftsman bungalow single @-@ family home is dominant . The eastside is marked by historic streetcar suburbs built from the 1890s @-@ 1930s as havens for the upper middle class . These neighborhoods , many of which contain their own villages encircled by shaded , architecturally @-@ distinct residential streets , include the Victorian Inman Park , Bohemian East Atlanta , and eclectic Old Fourth Ward . On the <unk> , former warehouses and factories have been converted into housing , retail space , and art galleries , transforming the once @-@ industrial West Midtown into a model neighborhood for smart growth , historic rehabilitation , and infill construction . In southwest Atlanta , neighborhoods closer to downtown originated as streetcar suburbs , including the historic West End , while those farther from downtown retain a postwar suburban layout , including Collier Heights and Cascade Heights , home to much of the city 's affluent African American population . Northwest Atlanta contains the areas of the city to west of Marietta Boulevard and to the north of Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive , including those neighborhoods remote to downtown , such as Riverside , Bolton and Whittier Mill , which is one of Atlanta 's designated Landmark Historical Neighborhoods . Vine City , though technically Northwest , adjoins the city 's Downtown area and has recently been the target of community outreach programs and economic development initiatives . 
 Gentrification of the city 's neighborhoods is one of the more controversial and transformative forces shaping contemporary Atlanta . The gentrification of Atlanta has its origins in the 1970s , after many of Atlanta 's neighborhoods had undergone the urban decay that affected other major American cities in the mid @-@ 20th century . When neighborhood opposition successfully prevented two freeways from being built through city 's the east side in 1975 , the area became the starting point for Atlanta 's gentrification . After Atlanta was awarded the Olympic games in 1990 , gentrification expanded into other parts of the city , stimulated by infrastructure improvements undertaken in preparation for the games . Gentrification was also aided by the Atlanta Housing Authority 's eradication of the city 's public housing . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Under the Köppen classification , Atlanta has a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) with four distinct seasons and generous precipitation year @-@ round , typical for the inland South . Summers are hot and humid , with temperatures somewhat moderated by the city 's elevation . Winters are cool but variable , with an average of 48 freezing days per year and temperatures dropping to 0 ° F ( − 17 @.@ 8 ° C ) on rare occasions . Warm air from the Gulf of Mexico can bring spring @-@ like highs while strong Arctic air masses can push lows into the teens ( ≤ − 7 ° C ) . 
 July averages 80 @.@ 2 ° F ( 26 @.@ 8 ° C ) , with high temperatures reaching 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on an average 44 days per year , though 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) readings are not seen most years . January averages 43 @.@ 5 ° F ( 6 @.@ 4 ° C ) , with temperatures in the suburbs slightly cooler due largely to the urban heat island effect . Lows at or below freezing can be expected 40 nights annually , but extended stretches with daily high temperatures below 40 ° F ( 4 ° C ) are very rare , with a recent exception in January 2014 . Extremes range from − 9 ° F ( − 23 ° C ) on February 13 , 1899 to 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) on June 30 , 2012 . Dewpoints in the summer range from 63 @.@ 6 ° F ( 18 ° C ) in June to 67 @.@ 8 ° F ( 20 ° C ) in July . 
 Typical of the southeastern U.S. , Atlanta receives abundant rainfall that is relatively evenly distributed throughout the year , though spring and early fall are markedly drier . The average annual rainfall is 50 @.@ 2 inches ( 1 @,@ 280 mm ) , while snowfall is typically light at around 2 @.@ 1 inches ( 5 @.@ 3 cm ) per year . The heaviest single snowfall occurred on January 23 , 1940 , with around 10 inches ( 25 cm ) of snow . However , ice storms usually cause more problems than snowfall does , the most severe occurring on January 7 , 1973 . Tornadoes are rare in the city itself , but the March 15 , 2008 EF2 tornado damaged prominent structures in downtown Atlanta . 
 Note 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The 2010 United States Census reported that Atlanta had a population of 420 @,@ 003 . The population density was 3 @,@ 154 per square mile ( 1232 / km2 ) . The racial makeup and population of Atlanta was 54 @.@ 0 % Black or African American , 38 @.@ 4 % White , 3 @.@ 1 % Asian and 0 @.@ 2 % Native American . Those from some other race made up 2 @.@ 2 % of the city 's population , while those from two or more races made up 2 @.@ 0 % . Hispanics of any race made up 5 @.@ 2 % of the city 's population . The median income for a household in the city was $ 45 @,@ 171 . The per capita income for the city was $ 35 @,@ 453 . 22 @.@ 6 % percent of the population was living below the poverty line . However , compared to the rest of the country , Atlanta 's cost of living is 6 @.@ 00 % lower than the U.S. average . Atlanta has one of the highest LGBT populations per capita , ranking third among major American cities , behind San Francisco and slightly behind Seattle , with 12 @.@ 8 % of the city 's total population identifying as gay , lesbian , or bisexual . 7 @.@ 3 % of Atlantans were born abroad . 
 In the 2010 Census , Atlanta was recorded as the nation 's fourth @-@ largest majority @-@ black city . It has long been known as a center of African @-@ American political power , education , and culture , often called a black mecca . African @-@ American residents of Atlanta have followed whites to newer housing in the suburbs in the early 21st century . From 2000 to 2010 , the city 's black population decreased by 31 @,@ 678 people , shrinking from 61 @.@ 4 % of the city 's population in 2000 to 54 @.@ 0 % in 2010 . 
 At the same time , the white population of Atlanta has increased . Between 2000 and 2010 , the proportion of whites in the city 's population grew faster than that of any other U.S. city . In that decade , Atlanta 's white population grew from 31 % to 38 % of the city 's population , an absolute increase of 22 @,@ 753 people , more than triple the increase that occurred between 1990 and 2000 . 
 Out of the total population five years and older , 83 @.@ 3 % spoke only English at home , while 8 @.@ 8 % spoke Spanish , 3 @.@ 9 % another Indo @-@ European language , and 2 @.@ 8 % an Asian language . Atlanta 's dialect has traditionally been a variation of Southern American English . The Chattahoochee River long formed a border between the Coastal Southern and Southern Appalachian dialects . Because of the development of corporate headquarters in the region , attracting migrants from other areas of the country , by 2003 , Atlanta magazine concluded that Atlanta had become significantly " de @-@ <unk> . " A Southern accent was considered a handicap in some circumstances . In general , Southern accents are less prevalent among residents of the city and inner suburbs and among younger people ; they are more common in the outer suburbs and among older people . At the same time , residents of the city express Southern variations of African American Vernacular English . 
 Religion in Atlanta , while historically centered on Protestant Christianity , now involves many faiths as a result of the city and metro area 's increasingly international population . Protestant Christianity still maintains a strong presence in the city ( 63 % ) , but in recent decades the Catholic Church has increased in numbers and influence because of new migrants in the region . Metro Atlanta also has numerous ethnic or national Christian congregations , including Korean and Indian churches . The larger non @-@ Christian faiths are Judaism , Islam and Hinduism . Overall , there are over 1 @,@ 000 places of worship within Atlanta . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Encompassing $ 304 billion , the Atlanta metropolitan area is the eighth @-@ largest economy in the country and 17th @-@ largest in the world . Corporate operations comprise a large portion of the Atlanta 's economy , with the city serving as the regional , national , or global headquarters for many corporations . Atlanta contains the country 's third largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies , and the city is the global headquarters of corporations such as The Coca @-@ Cola Company , The Home Depot , Delta Air Lines , AT & T Mobility , Chick @-@ fil @-@ A , UPS , and Newell @-@ <unk> . Over 75 percent of Fortune 1000 companies conduct business operations in the Atlanta metropolitan area , and the region hosts offices of about 1 @,@ 250 multinational corporations . Many corporations are drawn to Atlanta on account of the city 's educated workforce ; as of 2010 , nearly 43 % of adults in the city of Atlanta have college degrees , compared to 27 % in the nation as a whole . 
 Atlanta began as a railroad town and logistics has remained a major component of the city 's economy to this day . Atlanta is an important rail junction and contains major classification yards for Norfolk Southern and CSX . Since its construction in the 1950s , Hartsfield @-@ Jackson Atlanta International Airport has served as a key engine of Atlanta 's economic growth . Delta Air Lines , the city 's largest employer and the metro area 's third largest , operates the world 's largest airline hub at Hartsfield @-@ Jackson and has helped make it the world 's busiest airport , both in terms of passenger traffic and aircraft operations . Partly due to the airport , Atlanta has become a hub for diplomatic missions ; as of 2012 , the city contains 25 general consulates , the seventh @-@ highest concentration of diplomatic missions in the United States . 
 Media is also an important aspect of Atlanta 's economy . The city is a major cable television programming center . Ted Turner established the headquarters of both the Cable News Network ( CNN ) and the Turner Broadcasting System ( TBS ) in Atlanta . Cox Enterprises , the country 's third @-@ largest cable television service and the publisher of over a dozen major American newspapers , is headquartered in the city . The Weather Channel , owned by NBCUniversal , Bain Capital , and The Blackstone Group , is headquartered just outside Atlanta in Cobb County . 
 Information technology , an economic sector that includes publishing , software development , entertainment and data processing has garnered a larger percentage of Atlanta 's economic output . Indeed , Atlanta has been nicknamed the Silicon peach due to its burgeoning technology sector . As of 2013 , Atlanta contains the fourth @-@ largest concentration of information technology jobs in the United States , numbering 85 @,@ 000 . Atlanta also ranks as the sixth fastest @-@ growing city for information technology jobs , with an employment growth of 4 @.@ 8 % in 2012 and a three @-@ year growth near 9 % , or 16 @,@ 000 jobs . Information technology companies are drawn to Atlanta 's lower costs and educated workforce . 
 Largely due to a statewide tax incentive enacted in 2005 , the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act , which awards qualified productions a transferable income tax credit of 20 % of all in @-@ state costs for film and television investments of $ 500 @,@ 000 or more , Atlanta has become a center for film and television production . Film and television production facilities in Atlanta include Turner Studios , Pinewood Studios ( Pinewood Atlanta ) , Tyler Perry Studios , Williams Street Productions , and the EUE / Screen Gems soundstages . Film and television production injected $ 6 billion into Georgia 's economy in 2015 , with Atlanta garnering most of the projects . Atlanta has gained recognition as a center of production of horror and zombie @-@ related productions , with Atlanta magazine dubbing the city the " Zombie Capital of the World " . 
 Compared to other American cities , Atlanta 's economy has been disproportionately affected by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent recession , with the city 's economy earning a ranking of 68 among 100 American cities in a September 2014 report due to an elevated unemployment rate , declining real income levels , and a depressed housing market . From 2010 – 2011 , Atlanta saw a 0 @.@ 9 % contraction in employment and only a 0 @.@ 4 % rise in income . Though unemployment had dropped to 7 % by late 2014 , this was still higher than the national unemployment rate of 5 @.@ 8 % Atlanta 's housing market has also struggled , with home prices falling by 2 @.@ 1 % in January 2012 , reaching levels not seen since 1996 . Compared with a year earlier , the average home price in Atlanta fell 17 @.@ 3 % in February 2012 , the largest annual drop in the history of the index for any city . The collapse in home prices has led some economists to deem Atlanta the worst housing market in the country . Nevertheless , in August 2013 , Atlanta appeared on Forbes magazine 's list of the Best Places for Business and Careers . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Atlanta , while located in the South , has a culture that is no longer strictly Southern . This is due to a large population of migrants from other parts of the U.S. , in addition to many recent immigrants to the U.S. who have made the metropolitan area their home , establishing Atlanta as the cultural and economic hub of an increasingly multi @-@ cultural metropolitan area . Thus , although traditional Southern culture is part of Atlanta 's cultural fabric , it is mostly the backdrop to one of the nation 's most cosmopolitan cities . This unique cultural combination reveals itself in the arts district of Midtown , the quirky neighborhoods on the city 's eastside , and the multi @-@ ethnic enclaves found along Buford Highway . 
 = = = Arts and theater = = = 
 Atlanta is one of few United States cities with permanent , professional , resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines : opera ( Atlanta Opera ) , ballet ( Atlanta Ballet ) , orchestral music ( Atlanta Symphony Orchestra ) , and theater ( the Alliance Theatre ) . Atlanta also attracts many touring Broadway acts , concerts , shows , and exhibitions catering to a variety of interests . Atlanta 's performing arts district is concentrated in Midtown Atlanta at the Woodruff Arts Center , which is home to the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and the Alliance Theatre . The city also frequently hosts touring Broadway acts , especially at The Fox Theatre , a historic landmark that is among the highest grossing theatres of its size . 
 As a national center for the arts , Atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions . The renowned High Museum of Art is arguably the South 's leading art museum and among the most @-@ visited art museums in the world . The Museum of Design Atlanta ( <unk> ) , a design museum , is the only such museum in the Southeast . Contemporary art museums include the Atlanta Contemporary Art Center and the Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia . Institutions of higher education also contribute to Atlanta 's art scene , with the Savannah College of Art and Design 's Atlanta campus providing the city 's arts community with a steady stream of curators , and Emory University 's Michael C. Carlos Museum containing the largest collection of ancient art in the Southeast . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Atlanta has played a major or contributing role in the development of various genres of American music at different points in the city 's history . Beginning as early as the 1920s , Atlanta emerged as a center for country music , which was brought to the city by migrants from Appalachia . During the countercultural 1960s , Atlanta hosted the Atlanta International Pop Festival , with the 1969 festival taking place more than a month before Woodstock and featuring many of the same bands . The city was also a center for Southern rock during its 1970s heyday : the Allman Brothers Band 's hit instrumental " Hot ' Lanta " is an ode to the city , while Lynyrd Skynyrd 's famous live rendition of " Free Bird " was recorded at the Fox Theatre in 1976 , with lead singer Ronnie Van Zant directing the band to " play it pretty for Atlanta " . During the 1980s , Atlanta had an active Punk rock scene that was centered on two of the city 's music venues , 688 Club and the Metroplex , and Atlanta famously played host to the Sex Pistols first U.S. show , which was performed at the Great Southeastern Music Hall . The 1990s saw the birth of Atlanta hip hop , a subgenre that gained relevance following the success of home @-@ grown duo OutKast ; however , it was not until the 2000s that Atlanta moved " from the margins to becoming hip @-@ hop 's center of gravity , part of a larger shift in hip @-@ hop innovation to the South " . Also in the 2000s , Atlanta was recognized by the Brooklyn @-@ based Vice magazine for its impressive yet under @-@ appreciated Indie rock scene , which revolves around the various live music venues found on the city 's alternative eastside . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 As of 2010 , Atlanta is the seventh @-@ most visited city in the United States , with over 35 million visitors per year . Although the most popular attraction among visitors to Atlanta is the Georgia Aquarium , the world 's largest indoor aquarium , Atlanta 's tourism industry mostly driven by the city 's history museums and outdoor attractions . Atlanta contains a notable amount of historical museums and sites , including the Martin Luther King , Jr . National Historic Site , which includes the preserved childhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . , as well as his final resting place ; the Atlanta Cyclorama & Civil War Museum , which houses a massive painting and diorama in @-@ the @-@ round , with a rotating central audience platform , depicting the Battle of Atlanta in the Civil War ; the World of Coca @-@ Cola , featuring the history of the world famous soft drink brand and its well @-@ known advertising ; the College Football Hall of Fame which honors college football and its athletes ; the National Center for Civil and Human Rights , which explores the Civil Rights Movement and its connection to contemporary human rights movements throughout the world ; the Carter Center and Presidential Library , housing U.S. President Jimmy Carter 's papers and other material relating to the Carter administration and the Carter family 's life ; and the Margaret Mitchell House and Museum , site of the writing of the best @-@ selling novel Gone with the Wind . 
 Atlanta also contains various outdoor attractions . The Atlanta Botanical Garden , adjacent to Piedmont Park , is home to the 600 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 180 m ) <unk> Canopy Walk , a skywalk that allows visitors to tour one of the city 's last remaining urban forests from 40 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 12 m ) . The Canopy Walk is considered the only canopy @-@ level pathway of its kind in the United States . Zoo Atlanta , located in Grant Park , accommodates over 1 @,@ 300 animals representing more than 220 species . Home to the nation 's largest collections of gorillas and orangutans , the Zoo is also one of only four zoos in the U.S. to house giant pandas . Festivals showcasing arts and crafts , film , and music , including the Atlanta Dogwood Festival , the Atlanta Film Festival , and Music Midtown , respectively , are also popular with tourists . 
 Tourists are also drawn to the city 's culinary scene , which comprises a mix of urban establishments garnering national attention , ethnic restaurants serving cuisine from every corner of the world , and traditional eateries specializing in Southern dining . Since the turn of the 21st century , Atlanta has emerged as a sophisticated restaurant town . Many restaurants opened in the city 's gentrifying neighborhoods have received praise at the national level , including <unk> , <unk> , and Miller Union in West Midtown , Empire State South in Midtown , and Two Urban Licks and Rathbun 's on the east side . In 2011 , the New York Times characterized Empire State South and Miller Union as reflecting " a new kind of sophisticated Southern sensibility centered on the farm but experienced in the city . " Visitors seeking to sample international Atlanta are directed to Buford Highway , the city 's international corridor . There , the million @-@ plus immigrants that make Atlanta home have established various authentic ethnic restaurants representing virtually every nationality on the globe . For traditional Southern fare , one of the city 's most famous establishments is The Varsity , a long @-@ lived fast food chain and the world 's largest drive @-@ in restaurant . Mary Mac 's Tea Room and Paschal 's are more formal destinations for Southern food . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Atlanta is home to professional franchises for three major team sports : the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball , the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association , and the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League . The Braves , who moved to Atlanta in 1966 , were established as the Boston Red Stockings in 1871 and are the oldest continually operating professional sports franchise in the United States . The Braves won the World Series in 1995 , and had an unprecedented run of 14 straight divisional championships from 1991 to 2005 . 
 The Atlanta Falcons have played in Atlanta since their inception in 1966 . The Falcons have won the division title five times ( 1980 , 1998 , 2004 , 2010 , 2012 ) and the conference championship once , when they finished as the runner @-@ up to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999 . The Atlanta Hawks began in 1946 as the Tri @-@ Cities Blackhawks , playing in Moline , Illinois . The team moved to Atlanta in 1968 , and they currently play their games in Philips Arena . The Atlanta Dream is the city 's Women 's National Basketball Association franchise . 
 Atlanta has also had its own professional ice hockey and soccer franchises . The National Hockey League ( NHL ) has had two Atlanta franchises : the Atlanta Flames began play in 1972 before moving to Calgary in 1980 , while the Atlanta Thrashers began play in 1999 before moving to Winnipeg in 2011 . The Atlanta Chiefs was the city 's professional soccer team from 1967 to 1972 , and the team won a national championship in 1968 . In 1998 another professional soccer team was formed , the Atlanta <unk> of the North American Soccer League . In April 2014 , a Major League Soccer team , Atlanta United FC , was formed as an expansion team to begin play in 2017 . 
 Atlanta has been the host city for various international , professional and collegiate sporting events . Most famously , Atlanta hosted the Centennial 1996 Summer Olympics . Atlanta has also hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000 . In professional golf , The Tour Championship , the final PGA Tour event of the season , is played annually at East Lake Golf Club . In 2001 and 2011 , Atlanta hosted the PGA Championship , one of the four major championships in men 's professional golf , at the Atlanta Athletic Club . In professional ice hockey , the city hosted the 56th NHL All @-@ Star Game in 2008 , three years before the Thrashers moved . In 2011 , Atlanta hosted professional wrestling 's annual WrestleMania . The city has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men 's Basketball Championship four times , most recently in 2013 . In college football , Atlanta hosts the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Kickoff Game , the SEC Championship Game , and the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Peach Bowl . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 Atlanta 's 343 parks , nature preserves , and gardens cover 3 @,@ 622 acres ( 14 @.@ 66 km2 ) , which amounts to only 5 @.@ 6 % of the city 's total acreage , compared to the national average of just over 10 % . However , 64 % of Atlantans live within a 10 @-@ minute walk of a park , a percentage equal to the national average . Furthermore , in its 2013 ParkScore ranking , the The Trust for Public Land , a national land conservation organization , reported that among the park systems of the 50 most populous U.S. cities , Atlanta 's park system received a ranking of 31 . Piedmont Park , located in Midtown is Atlanta 's most iconic green space . The park , which has undergone a major renovation and expansion in recent years , attracts visitors from across the region and hosts cultural events throughout the year . Other notable city parks include Centennial Olympic Park , a legacy of the 1996 Summer Olympics that forms the centerpiece of the city 's tourist district ; Woodruff Park , which anchors the campus of Georgia State University ; Grant Park , home to both Zoo Atlanta and the Atlanta Cyclorama & Civil War Museum ; and Chastain Park , which houses an amphitheater used for live music concerts . The Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area , located in the northwestern corner of the city , preserves a 48 mi ( 77 km ) stretch of the river for public recreation opportunities . The Atlanta Botanical Garden , adjacent to Piedmont Park , contains formal gardens , including a Japanese garden and a rose garden , woodland areas , and a conservatory that includes indoor exhibits of plants from tropical rainforests and deserts . The BeltLine , a former rail corridor that forms a 22 mi ( 35 km ) loop around Atlanta 's core , will eventually be transformed into a series of parks , connected by a multi @-@ use trail , increasing Atlanta 's park space by 40 % . 
 Atlanta offers resources and opportunities for amateur and participatory sports and recreation . <unk> is a particularly popular local sport . The Peachtree Road Race , the world 's largest 10 km race , is held annually on Independence Day . The Georgia Marathon , which begins and ends at Centennial Olympic Park , routes through the city 's historic east side neighborhoods . Golf and tennis are also popular in Atlanta , and the city contains six public golf courses and 182 tennis courts . Facilities located along the Chattahoochee River cater to watersports enthusiasts , providing the opportunity for kayaking , canoeing , fishing , boating , or tubing . The city 's only skate park , a 15 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) facility that offers bowls , curbs , and smooth @-@ rolling concrete mounds , is located at Historic Fourth Ward Park . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Atlanta is governed by a mayor and the Atlanta City Council . The city council consists of 15 representatives — one from each of the city 's 12 districts and three at @-@ large positions . The mayor may veto a bill passed by the council , but the council can override the veto with a two @-@ thirds majority . The mayor of Atlanta is Kasim Reed , a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot whose first term in office expired at the end of 2013 . Reed was elected to a second term on November 5 , 2013 . Every mayor elected since 1973 has been black . In 2001 , Shirley Franklin became the first woman to be elected Mayor of Atlanta , and the first African @-@ American woman to serve as mayor of a major southern city . Atlanta city politics suffered from a notorious reputation for corruption during the 1990s administration of Bill Campbell , who was convicted by a federal jury in 2006 on three counts of tax evasion in connection with gambling income he received while Mayor during trips he took with city contractors . 
 As the state capital , Atlanta is the site of most of Georgia 's state government . The Georgia State Capitol building , located downtown , houses the offices of the governor , lieutenant governor and secretary of state , as well as the General Assembly . The Governor 's Mansion is located in a residential section of Buckhead . Atlanta serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy , including the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Atlanta also plays an important role in federal judiciary system , containing the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia . 
 Historically , Atlanta has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party . Although municipal elections are officially nonpartisan , nearly all of the city 's elected officials are registered Democrats . The city is split among 14 state house districts and four state senate districts , all held by Democrats . At the federal level , Atlanta is split between two congressional districts . The northern three @-@ fourths of the city is located in the 5th district , represented by Democrat John Lewis . The southern fourth is in the 13th district , represented by Democrat David Scott . 
 The city is served by the Atlanta Police Department , which numbers 2 @,@ 000 officers and oversaw a 40 % decrease in the city 's crime rate between 2001 and 2009 . Specifically , homicide decreased by 57 % , rape by 72 % , and violent crime overall by 55 % . Crime is down across the country , but Atlanta 's improvement has occurred at more than twice the national rate . Nevertheless , Forbes ranked Atlanta as the sixth most dangerous city in the United States in 2012 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Due to the more than 30 colleges and universities located in the city , Atlanta is considered a center for higher education . Among the most prominent public universities in Atlanta is the Georgia Institute of Technology , a research university located in Midtown that has been consistently ranked among the nation 's top ten public universities for its degree programs in engineering , computing , management , the sciences , architecture , and liberal arts . Georgia State University , a public research university located in Downtown Atlanta , is the largest of the 29 public colleges and universities in the University System of Georgia and a major contributor to the revitalization of the city 's central business district . Atlanta is also home to nationally renowned private colleges and universities , most notably Emory University , a leading liberal arts and research institution that ranks among the top 20 schools in the United States and operates Emory Healthcare , the largest health care system in Georgia . Also located in the city is the Atlanta University Center , the largest contiguous consortium of historically black colleges , comprising Spelman College , Clark Atlanta University , Morehouse College , Morehouse School of Medicine , and Interdenominational Theological Center . Atlanta also contains a campus of the Savannah College of Art and Design , a private art and design university that has proven to be a major factor in the recent growth of Atlanta 's visual art community . 
 Atlanta Public Schools enrolls 55 @,@ 000 students in 106 schools , some of which are operated as charter schools . The district has been plagued by a widely publicized cheating scandal exposed in 2009 . Atlanta is also served by many private schools , including parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Atlanta . 
 = = Media = = 
 The primary network @-@ affiliated television stations in Atlanta are WXIA @-@ TV ( NBC ) , <unk> @-@ TV ( CBS ) , WSB @-@ TV ( ABC ) , and <unk> @-@ TV ( FOX ) . The Atlanta metropolitan area is served by two public television stations and one public radio station . <unk> is the flagship station of the statewide Georgia Public Television network and is a PBS member station , while WPBA is owned by Atlanta Public Schools . Georgia Public Radio is listener @-@ funded and comprises one NPR member station , <unk> , a classical music station operated by Atlanta Public Schools . 
 Atlanta is served by the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution is the result of a 1950 merger between The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution , with staff consolidation occurring in 1982 and separate publication of the morning Constitution and afternoon Journal ceasing in 2001 . Alternative weekly newspapers include Creative Loafing , which has a weekly print circulation of 80 @,@ 000 . Atlanta magazine is an award @-@ winning , monthly general @-@ interest magazine based in and covering Atlanta . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Atlanta 's transportation infrastructure comprises a complex network that includes a heavy rail line , a streetcar line , multiple interstate highways , the world 's busiest airport , and over 45 miles ( 72 kilometres ) of bike paths . 
 With a network of freeways that radiate out from the city , automobiles are the dominant mode of transportation in the region . Three major interstate highways converge in Atlanta : I @-@ 20 ( east @-@ west ) , I @-@ 75 ( northwest @-@ southeast ) , and I @-@ 85 ( northeast @-@ southwest ) . The latter two combine in the middle of the city to form the Downtown Connector ( I @-@ 75 / 85 ) , which carries more than 340 @,@ 000 vehicles per day and is one of the most congested segments of interstate highway in the United States . Atlanta is mostly encircled by Interstate 285 , a beltway locally known as " the Perimeter " that has come to mark the boundary between " Inside the Perimeter " ( ITP ) , the city and close @-@ in suburbs , and " Outside the Perimeter " ( OTP ) , the outer suburbs and <unk> . The heavy reliance on automobiles for transportation in Atlanta has resulted in traffic , commute , and air pollution rates that rank among the worst in the country . 
 The Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority ( MARTA ) provides public transportation in the form of buses and heavy rail . Notwithstanding heavy automotive usage in Atlanta , the city 's subway system is the eighth busiest in the country . MARTA rail lines connect many key destinations , such as the airport , Downtown , Midtown , Buckhead , and Perimeter Center . However , significant destinations , such as Emory University and Cumberland , remain <unk> . As a result , a 2012 Brookings Institution study placed Atlanta 87th of 100 metro areas for transit accessibility . Emory University operates its Cliff shuttle buses with 200 @,@ 000 boardings per month , while private minibuses supply Buford Highway . Amtrak , the national rail passenger system , provides service to Atlanta via the Crescent train ( New York – New Orleans ) , which stops at Peachtree Station . In 2014 , the Atlanta Streetcar opened to the public . The streetcar 's line , which is also known as the Downtown Loop , runs 2 @.@ 7 miles around the downtown tourist areas of Peachtree Center , Centennial Olympic Park , the Martin Luther King , Jr . National Historic Site , and Sweet Auburn . The Atlanta Streetcar line is also being expanded on in the coming years to include a wider range of Atlanta 's neighborhoods and important places of interest , with a total of 66 miles of track being laid in the near future . 
 Hartsfield @-@ Jackson Atlanta International Airport , the world 's busiest airport as measured by passenger traffic and aircraft traffic , offers air service to over 150 U.S. destinations and more than 80 international destinations in 52 countries , with over 2 @,@ 700 arrivals and departures daily . Delta Air Lines maintains its largest hub at the airport . Situated 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of downtown , the airport covers most of the land inside a wedge formed by Interstate 75 , Interstate 85 , and Interstate 285 . 
 Cycling is a growing mode of transportation in Atlanta , more than doubling since 2009 , when it comprised 1 @.@ 1 % of all commutes ( up from 0 @.@ 3 % in 2000 ) . Although Atlanta 's lack of bike lanes and hilly topography may deter many residents from cycling , the city 's transportation plan calls for the construction of 226 miles ( 364 kilometres ) of bike lanes by 2020 , with the BeltLine helping to achieve this goal . In 2012 , Atlanta 's first " bike track " was constructed on 10th Street in Midtown . The two lane bike track runs from Monroe Drive west to Charles Allen Drive , with connections to the Beltline and Piedmont Park . Starting in June 2016 , Atlanta received a bike sharing program with 100 bikes in Downtown , with 500 more being expected by the end of the year . 
 = = Tree canopy = = 
 Atlanta has a reputation as a " city in a forest " due to an abundance of trees that is rare among major cities . The city 's main street is named after a tree , and beyond the Downtown , Midtown , and Buckhead business districts , the skyline gives way to a dense canopy of woods that spreads into the suburbs . The city is home to the Atlanta Dogwood Festival , an annual arts and crafts festival held one weekend during early April , when the native <unk> are in bloom . However , the nickname is also factually accurate , as the city 's tree coverage percentage is at 36 % , the highest out of all major American cities , and above the national average of 27 % . Atlanta 's tree coverage does not go unnoticed — it was the main reason cited by National Geographic in naming Atlanta a " Place of a Lifetime " . 
 The city 's lush tree canopy , which filters out pollutants and cools sidewalks and buildings , has increasingly been under assault from man and nature due to heavy rains , drought , aged forests , new pests , and urban construction . A 2001 study found that Atlanta 's heavy tree cover declined from 48 % in 1974 to 38 % in 1996 . However , the problem is being addressed by community organizations and city government : Trees Atlanta , a non @-@ profit organization founded in 1985 , has planted and distributed over 75 @,@ 000 shade trees in the city , while Atlanta 's government has awarded $ 130 @,@ 000 in grants to neighborhood groups to plant trees . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Atlanta has 18 sister cities , as designated by Sister Cities International , Inc . ( SCI ) : 
 = The 37 's = 
 " The 37 's " is the first episode of the second season , and seventeenth episode overall , of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Voyager . Due to differing release schedules , it was also released as the final episode of the first season in other countries . The episode originally aired August 28 , 1995 , on the UPN network . Directed by James L. Conway , it was written by producers Jeri Taylor and Brannon Braga . It was originally intended to be a two @-@ part episode to bridge between the first and second seasons , and was subsequently re @-@ written to be a single part . Due to late changes to the final act of the episode , special effects shots of the settlers ' cities could not be completed , which Braga and series creator Michael Piller were unhappy with . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet and Maquis crew of the starship USS Voyager after they were stranded in the Delta Quadrant , far from the rest of the Federation . In this episode , Voyager 's crew discovers a group of humans — including Amelia Earhart ( Sharon Lawrence ) — who were abducted from Earth in 1937 . 
 Lawrence was cast as Amelia Earhart after she had previously worked with Voyager 's casting director on NYPD Blue . The episode shows the first time that a Federation starship lands on a planet 's surface . CGI was used to show the landing struts unfold , and feet were added to the Voyager model for filming ; however the production crew weren 't pleased with these and obscured them during filming . The episode received Nielsen ratings of 7 @.@ 5 percent , and was given a mixed response by critics . Among the criticisms were the density of the ideas in the episode and the gimmicky appearance of Earhart . It was also said to be redeemed by the vignettes showing the crew discussing whether to leave the ship , and that the episode contained a " powerful feminist narrative " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On stardate <unk> @.@ 1 , the crew of Voyager follows an ancient SOS to a Class L planet whose atmospheric interference requires landing the ship to investigate . On the surface , Captain Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) leads an away team to discover the source of the transmission : it is a Lockheed Model 10 Electra with an alien generator added to sustain the SOS . Joining Commander Chakotay 's ( Robert Beltran ) team , the crew finds a " <unk> chamber " containing eight humans preserved since the 1930s , including Amelia Earhart ( Sharon Lawrence ) and her navigator , Fred Noonan ( David Graf ) . 
 After resuscitation , Noonan uses a handgun to hold the Voyager officers hostage , disbelieving their story and insisting on speaking to J. Edgar Hoover . Janeway speaks to Earhart and explains her significance to human history and to Janeway herself ; Earhart , as Noonan 's boss , tells him to cooperate , and some of them go out of the caves . Outside , however , a firefight breaks out between Starfleet officers from Voyager and three hooded figures . Janeway flanks the aliens and disarms them ; they are human , and are surprised that Janeway is also . They had assumed the Voyager was a Briori ship . 
 Janeway learns that the Briori are an alien species who visited Earth in 1937 and abducted more than 300 humans , bringing them to this planet in the Delta Quadrant as slaves ; but the humans successfully rose up against the Briori , who never returned . Fifteen generations later , there are more than 100 @,@ 000 humans living in three cities on the planet . The last eight un @-@ revived humans in <unk> were believed dead by the others , who came to revere " the 37s " as " monuments to [ their ] ancestors " . 
 The settlers cannot offer Janeway the Briori technology that brought them there , as their ancestors dismantled the alien ship long ago . But they do offer to accept any of the Voyager crew into their society . Janeway thus faces a crisis of conscience : can she decide , for all 152 people on Voyager , to condemn them to the 70 @-@ year journey home to Earth ? Yet , if the choice is presented to the crew and only some decide to stay , the ship cannot be staffed by fewer than 100 . Meanwhile , Earhart says that as much as she admires Voyager and yearns to learn to pilot it , she and the other 37s feel a stronger affinity to the people on the planet and they will all be staying . In the end , Janeway allows the crew to decide as individuals , and none of them choose to leave . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The 37 's " was written by Jeri Taylor and Brannon Braga . One of four season two episodes produced during season one ( the others being " Projections " , " Elogium " , and " Twisted " ) , " The 37 's " was originally intended to round out the first season of Voyager ; UPN delayed these episodes to begin Voyager 's second season before other networks ' shows . This delay influenced a lot of decision @-@ making about an episode that wound up pushed to the second season . Both writers wanted to end the first season by showing the Starfleet and Maquis factions aboard the ship banding together as a crew , accepting their long journey home , and " whining less about home . " The landing of Voyager was also intended to take advantage of the last episode of the season as an opportunity to really wow the audience . 
 Braga wanted the episode to be broken into a two @-@ part episode because of what he called " a wealth of material " , what Kate Mulgrew would later describe as " every scene " containing a monologue . However , nobody else on the staff wanted to end the first season on a cliffhanger , as the first half would have been . Braga therefore condensed it into one episode , and admitted to struggling with the story , pointing out dramatically different tones in the first three acts as compared to the final two . Ultimately , though , he was satisfied with the end result and how the story came back around to focus on the Voyager crew in the end . 
 The colonists ' cities , which are described in the episode as " [ something ] to be proud of " , " amazing " , and impressive , were never actually seen . Jeri Taylor explained that the last act of the episode was developed late , and between budgetary considerations and time constraints , it was impossible to realize them . Unlike co @-@ writer Brannon Braga and series creator Michael Piller , who felt not seeing the cities was detrimental to the overall episode , Taylor did not think the compromise was " a big deal . " 
 = = = Sharon Lawrence = = = 
 Casting for " The 37 's " was done by Junie Lowry @-@ Johnson , C.S.A. , and Ron Surma . Lowry @-@ Johnson was familiar with guest star Sharon Lawrence from their work together on NYPD Blue . Lawrence later expressed the belief that the qualities of her NYPD Blue character ( " somebody who had ... a professional strength about them " ) was what cinched her role as Amelia Earhart . 
 The actress was excited to be portraying a version of Earhart , saying that she relishes the professional relationships roles like these have — as opposed to ones featuring " domestic or familial relationship [ s ] . " In " The 37 's " , Lawrence was drawn to the relationship Earhart has with Janeway : two women , two professional pilots who have risen to great heights in their chosen fields . Not only did the historical character appeal to her , Lawrence also reveled in the " what @-@ if " twist , the alternate historical story about what happened . 
 Lawrence grew up watching Mulgrew as Mary Ryan on the soap opera Ryan 's Hope . As Lawrence came from a family where women more often than not became homemakers , Mary Ryan was an " exotic " character — with her career and life in New York City — who served as inspiration . On the set of Star Trek : Voyager the two actresses spoke frequently about their careers , their backgrounds in theatre , and the struggles of balancing home and professional requirements . Lawrence felt that her relationship with Mulgrew influenced the relationship between their characters on screen . Mulgrew praised Lawrence 's performance in " The 37 's " , saying that " [ she ] really played the hell out of that role " . 
 Though she specifically remarked on her pleasure at seeing Robert Beltran ( Chakotay ) again , Lawrence praised all the cast 's professionalism and their ability to cope with the " vast amount of virtually <unk> text that they have on Star Trek . " 
 = = = Landing the USS Voyager = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 For the original Star Trek , to avoid the tremendous costs of landing the Enterprise every week , Gene Roddenberry invented the transporter to get the crew to and from planets cheaply and quickly . For Star Trek : Voyager however , the concept of landing the Voyager was considered from the beginning as a way to differentiate the new series from those that preceded it . Episode co @-@ writer Brannon Braga explained that it was understood from the beginning that the ship could land . 
 = = = = Effects = = = = 
 " The 37 's " is the first time in Star Trek canon that a starship is landed on a planet 's surface . This was accomplished with a combination of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) and physical modeling . Overhead views of the ship as it descended were CGI because it allowed the ship to descend " to a virtual pinpoint " . 
 Because the initial description of the ship described its landing capability , four small hatches on the ventral hull were included on both the ship miniature and model . However the legs that were to emerge from those hatches had not yet been designed by " The 37 's " . In the 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) allowed by the design of the ship , Rick Sternbach had difficulty designing " an articulated set of legs and footpads " that would fold out and support some of the ship 's 750 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 740 @,@ 000 long tons ; 830 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Shots of the unfolding " landing struts " were CGI because motorized versions were not installed in the physical model ; visual effects producer Dan Curry later said that installing such motorized elements in the 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) model was impossible due to the size . For filming the landed Voyager , miniature feet were made ; however , because the producers felt the feet looked inappropriately sized for the rest of the ship , they were partially obscured by landscape in post @-@ production . 
 Scenes with the landed ship were shot in Bronson Canyon . Before filming , shots were plotted out with a styrofoam , " foam @-@ core Voyager mockup for scale and perspective . " Since the canyon could not provide enough space to show the entire landed ship , the Voyager set down with the <unk> of the ship visible outside the mouth of the canyon against a matte painting backdrop . Visual effects supervisor Ronald B. Moore later admitted that the composited Voyager in the canyon was far too small with respect to the shooting location , though without any visible references for the audience , and by keeping the cast between the ship and camera , it was not obvious to anyone except the visual effects crew . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The 37 's " was first aired in the United States on UPN on August 28 , 1995 . It received a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 5 percent , meaning that it was watched by 7 @.@ 5 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was the most watched episode of the season , receiving the highest ratings since the first season episode " Ex Post Facto " . 
 Kate Mulgrew later recalled that she " loved shooting every second of ' The 37 's ' " ; she specifically praised the writing , Sharon Lawrence as Amelia Earhart , and director James L. Conway . Tim Russ ( Tuvok ) praised the episode as a fine example of science fiction and said he wished to see more of this type of episode . Braga felt " The 37 's " had a lot of fun and cool elements such as meeting Earhart and landing the ship , but that the episode fell flat after meeting the colonists and never seeing their cities on the planet . Star Trek : Voyager co @-@ creator Michael Piller described the premise of the episode as hokey , comparing it to " old Star Trek " ; instead Piller praised the landing of the ship as " pretty amazing . " Series co @-@ creator Rick Berman described " The 37 's " as " a great episode . " 
 Cinefantastique 's Dale Kutzera felt that " The 37 's " had too many disparate ideas crammed into one episode . Specifically , in his view , Amelia Earhart served little purpose as the subject of Janeway 's idolization ( as compared to Captain Kirk and Abraham Lincoln in The Original Series episode " The Savage Curtain " ) , and he complained that she all but disappears from the second half of the episode . Kutzera also noted the lauded unseen cities . He awarded " The 37 's " two out of four stars . In Frank Garcia and Mark Phillips ' book Science Fiction Television Series , 1990 – 2004 , " The 37 's " was specifically called out for being gimmicky , noting the appearance of not only " a phony @-@ looking , 1936 Ford truck ... but long @-@ lost aviatrix Amelia Earhart . " In his book Delta Quadrant : The unofficial guide to Voyager , David McIntee described the acting in " The 37 's " as watchable , and felt the episode was redeemed by the little vignettes such as Earhart and Janeway 's discussion , or Harry Kim ( Garrett Wang ) and B 'Elanna Torres ( Roxann Dawson ) debating whether to leave the ship . He gave the episode a 6 / 10 rating . Though David Greven , in his book Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek , also described the plot as hokey , he felt the episode contained " a powerful feminist narrative of shared female aspiration and daring . " 
 = 2009 International Bowl = 
 The 2009 International Bowl was a postseason college football bowl game between the Connecticut Huskies ( UConn ) and the Buffalo Bulls at the Rogers Centre in Toronto , Ontario , Canada , on January 3 , 2009 . The game was the final contest of the 2008 NCAA Division I @-@ Football Bowl Subdivision ( Division I @-@ FBS ) football season for both teams , and ended in a 38 – 20 victory for Connecticut . UConn represented the Big East Conference ( Big East ) in the game ; Buffalo entered as the Mid @-@ American Conference ( MAC ) champion . 
 Connecticut was selected as a participant in the 2009 International Bowl following a 7 – 5 regular season where they won their first five games , only to lose five of their last seven contests . Facing the Huskies were the Buffalo Bulls with a regular season record of 8 – 5 , highlighted by an upset win over then @-@ No. 12 and undefeated Ball State in the 2008 MAC Championship Game . Pre @-@ game media coverage focused on the legacy of the 1958 Buffalo Bulls , the first team from the university to be invited to a bowl game . When told that the two African @-@ American members of the team would not be allowed to play because of segregation , the team elected to refuse the bowl bid . Buffalo would not play in a bowl until this game , 50 years later . 
 The game began at 12 : 00 PM EST . Connecticut , led by running back Donald Brown 's 208 yards rushing , dominated the first half statistically , but found themselves down 20 – 10 midway through the second quarter because they committed six fumbles , five of which were recovered by Buffalo . UConn would close the gap to 20 – 17 by halftime , and take the lead for good late in the third quarter off a 4 @-@ yard touchdown pass from quarterback Tyler Lorenzen to tight end Steve Brouse . The Connecticut victory was sealed when , late in the fourth quarter , Buffalo quarterback Drew Willy threw a pass that was intercepted by UConn safety <unk> <unk> and returned 100 yards for a touchdown . 
 UConn junior running back Donald Brown was named player of the game . He finished with 261 rushing yards and one touchdown ; his 2 @,@ 083 rushing yards for the 2008 season was best in the NCAA . Following the game , Brown declared his eligibility for the 2009 NFL Draft ; he would become the first Connecticut player ever drafted in the first round . Three other UConn players were drafted in the second round . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 The International Bowl had contracts with the Big East and Mid @-@ American Conferences that allowed them to select one team from each conference to participate in their annual game . By virtue of being the Big East champion Cincinnati was awarded an automatic Bowl Championship Series berth ; they would play in the 2009 Orange Bowl . The Gator Bowl and Sun Bowl shared the second pick of Big East teams ; after the Gator Bowl opted to select Big 12 member Nebraska and the Sun Bowl learned that they would not be allowed to select Notre Dame , Pittsburgh received the Sun Bowl invitation . The Meineke Car Care Bowl , which had the third selection , picked West Virginia . The fourth , fifth , and sixth selections of Big East teams belonged collectively to the International Bowl , PapaJohns.com Bowl , and St. Petersburg Bowl , which , in consultation with the Big East , decided which schools were the best fit for each bowl . There were three remaining bowl @-@ eligible Big East teams : Connecticut , Rutgers , and South Florida . The previous season , Rutgers had played in the International Bowl and South Florida had appeared in the PapaJohns.com Bowl ; bowls in general dislike inviting the same team in consecutive years , on the theory that fans are less likely to want to travel to the same destination they were at the year before . Additionally , the St. Petersburg Bowl , in its inaugural year , sought to have local team South Florida play in their game to drive local attendance . Therefore , the teams were apportioned among the bowls as follows : South Florida to the St. Petersburg Bowl , Rutgers to the PapaJohns.com Bowl , and Connecticut to the International Bowl . On December 7 , 2008 , UConn formally accepted the bowl invitation , the third in their history . 
 Buffalo accepted an invitation to the International Bowl following their victory over then @-@ undefeated Ball State in the 2008 MAC Championship Game . Although in past years the MAC champion had been invited to the Motor City Bowl , Buffalo preferred to go to the International Bowl due to Toronto being closer to the school than Detroit , the home of the Motor City Bowl . The game marked the first bowl for the Bulls after their first MAC Championship since moving to Division I @-@ A and joining the MAC in 1999 . 
 The Bulls and Huskies had been frequent opponents during the previous decade as both programs made the transition from Division I @-@ AA to Division I @-@ A. The two teams played each other in six consecutive seasons from 1999 to 2005 , with Connecticut winning five of the six contents . The 2005 game , won by UConn 38 – 0 , was the most recent meeting between the two teams . Overall , the Huskies and Bulls had played each other 16 times since their first meeting in 1939 , with Connecticut holding a 12 – 4 advantage in the all @-@ time series . Prior to the 2008 season , Buffalo and UConn had signed a contract to play a four @-@ game , home @-@ and @-@ home series beginning in 2010 . 
 = = = Buffalo = = = 
 Entering 2008 , the Bulls sought to build off of their 2007 season , where they shared the MAC East championship but did not appear in the championship game due to a 31 – 28 loss to fellow division co @-@ champion Miami ( Ohio ) . Their 5 – 7 final record , while not good enough to qualify for a bowl game , was still the best by a Buffalo team since they had moved up to Division I @-@ A in 1999 . With 10 starters returning on offense and eight on defense , the 2008 team was predicted to be perhaps the most talented team in Bulls history ; however , due to their challenging schedule , their final record was predicted to be no better than 3 – 9 . 
 Buffalo opened the season stronger than expected , with a dominant home win over the University of Texas @-@ El Paso ( UTEP ) , 42 – 17 . This was followed by a closer @-@ than @-@ predicted loss at heavily favored Pittsburgh , 27 – 16 . Buffalo 's third game and conference opener , versus Temple , was a back @-@ and @-@ forth contest that came down to the final play of the game . Keeping the game within seven points for the first three quarters , the Bulls first took the lead with 2 : 27 left in the fourth quarter , on a 25 @-@ yard field goal by A.J. Principe . Temple responded with a nine @-@ play , 74 @-@ yard drive capped by an 11 @-@ yard touchdown catch by wide receiver Bruce Francis , his second score of the game , to take a 28 – 24 lead with only 38 seconds remaining . Taking over at their own 40 @-@ yard line after the kickoff went out of bounds , the Bulls drove down the field , scoring the game @-@ winning touchdown on a 35 @-@ yard desperation heave from Drew Willy to wide receiver Naaman Roosevelt with no time remaining on the clock . Buffalo 's record following the last @-@ second win was 2 – 1 , marking the first time since 1969 that the Bulls had a record over .500 beyond Week 1 as a Division I @-@ A team . The last time the Bulls had started a season 2 – 1 was 1998 , while they were still played in Division I @-@ AA . 
 The Bulls proceeded to lose their next three games . Buffalo was unable to keep up with No. 5 @-@ ranked Missouri , losing 42 – 21 in a game that Missouri saw as a <unk> for their later season . In the next contest , against MAC opponent Central Michigan , down nine points with under three minutes left Buffalo scored on a 65 @-@ yard pass to James Starks , recovered an onside kick to retain possession , and attempted a game @-@ winning field goal — but A.J. Principe 's 46 @-@ yard kick hit the right goalpost to give Central Michigan the victory . In the next game , against the Western Michigan Broncos , also in the MAC , Buffalo squandered a two @-@ touchdown advantage with just over five minutes left , allowing the Broncos to win the game in overtime . Buffalo 's overall record fell to 2 – 4 , 1 – 2 in the MAC . 
 Bouncing back , Buffalo won their next five games . Against Army , Buffalo reversed the result of the Western Michigan game , coming back from a two @-@ touchdown deficit to win in overtime . Handling conference opponents Ohio and Miami ( Ohio ) with relative ease , Buffalo continued conference play by beating Akron in a four @-@ hour , four @-@ overtime <unk> , 43 – 40 , in Akron 's final football game at the Rubber Bowl . In their next game , against Bowling Green , the Bulls found themselves down 21 – 0 midway through the third quarter , but still managed to come back for their third overtime win of the season . With the win , Buffalo clinched the MAC East championship and ensured that they would have their first winning regular season since moving to Division I @-@ A ; the final regular season game , a 24 – 21 loss to Kent State , was only a formality . The Bulls finished the regular season with an overall record of 7 – 5 , 5 – 3 within the conference . 
 Buffalo 's opponent in the 2008 MAC Championship Game would be the No. 12 @-@ ranked Ball State Cardinals , who had gone undefeated in winning the MAC West . Ball State was a two @-@ touchdown favorite entering the game ; Buffalo in its history was 0 – 5 against the Cardinals . The Bulls struck first with a touchdown late in the first quarter ; Ball State responded with a touchdown and a field goal in the second quarter to take a 10 – 7 lead at the half . The two teams traded touchdowns early in the third quarter . Disaster then struck for Ball State : on two consecutive possessions late in the third quarter , after having driven into the red zone , the Cardinals fumbled the ball . Buffalo returned both of these fumbles for touchdowns and took a lead they would not surrender . The Bulls won the game 42 – 24 , earning their first @-@ ever MAC Championship as well as their first @-@ ever win over a ranked opponent in nine attempts . 
 = = = Connecticut = = = 
 The Huskies entered 2008 seeking to prove their success the previous season was no fluke . In 2007 , Connecticut earned their first Big East co @-@ championship , albeit after losing to their fellow co @-@ champion , West Virginia , 66 – 21 . A loss to Wake Forest in the 2007 Meineke Car Care Bowl — the team 's second bowl appearance all @-@ time — gave the Huskies a final 2007 record of 9 – 4 . In the Big East preseason media poll , UConn was picked to finish 6th overall in the conference . 
 UConn started the season strong , winning their first five games . The Huskies easily won their first game 35 – 3 against Division I @-@ Football Championship Subdivision ( Division I @-@ FCS ) opponent Hofstra . The second game , at Temple , was played as the remnants of Hurricane Hanna hit Philadelphia . UConn won 12 – 9 in overtime as Donald Brown ran for a then @-@ career high 214 yards and scored the game @-@ winning touchdown . Connecticut next avenged their loss to Virginia from 2007 , winning the rematch 45 – 10 . Baylor was next on the schedule ; the Huskies pulled out the win in a back @-@ and @-@ forth game , 31 – 28 . Connecticut opened Big East conference play in their next game against Louisville . The game was not decided until UConn linebacker Lawrence Wilson returned an interception for a touchdown with 2 : 45 left in the fourth quarter , giving the Huskies a 26 – 21 lead they would not relinquish . This was the second straight season where Connecticut won their first five games ; before 2007 , they had not opened a season so successfully since 1995 , when they won their first six straight . Following the game , UConn achieved their first and only ranking of the year , appearing at No. 24 in the Associated Press ( AP ) and Harris polls and No. 23 in the Coaches ' poll . However , starting quarterback Tyler Lorenzen broke his foot in the Louisville game ; the Huskies would be forced to rely on backup Zach Frazer for the next few games . 
 The Huskies were unable to match their early success in the second half of the season , losing five of their next seven games . Everything went wrong for UConn in their game at North Carolina , as Frazer was intercepted three times and three Connecticut punts were blocked ; North Carolina won in a blowout , 38 – 12 . Against Big East rival Rutgers , UConn lost 12 – 10 as kicker Tony <unk> missed three field goals , including one with 1 : 09 left in the game that hit the right goalpost . The Huskies bounced back in their next game against eventual Big East champion Cincinnati , winning in a blowout 40 – 16 . While not ranked in any of the polls , after the win Connecticut found itself No. 25 in the BCS standings . The Huskies would promptly give up that honor , losing to West Virginia 35 – 13 after leading 10 – 0 at the end of the first quarter and 13 – 7 at halftime . UConn would win the next week at Big East bottom @-@ dweller Syracuse , 39 – 14 , as Lorenzen returned from his injury . This would prove to be their last win of the regular season , as the Huskies finished with losses to South Florida ( 17 – 13 ) and No. 23 @-@ ranked Pittsburgh ( 34 – 10 ) . Connecticut ended the regular season with a record of 7 – 5 , 3 – 4 within the Big East conference . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 In the weeks leading up to the game , media coverage focused on the achievements of the Buffalo Bulls . Buffalo had been one of the least @-@ successful programs in college football from their transition to Division I @-@ A in 1999 to 2006 , during which they had a cumulative record of 12 – 79 . In 2008 , the Bulls had their first winning season since 1996 , won five games in a row for the first time since 1986 , beat a ranked team for the first time in program history with their upset victory over Ball State in the MAC Championship Game , and would be making the first bowl appearance in school history . The turnaround of the Buffalo program brought acclaim to Bulls head coach Turner Gill , who had taken over the team in 2007 . 
 Comparatively , Connecticut was an afterthought heading into the game . Pre @-@ bowl coverage of UConn focused on NCAA rushing leader Donald Brown , who was considering foregoing his senior season to enter the 2009 NFL Draft . Brown indicated before the game that he had decided to return to UConn for the 2010 season . 
 = = = Coaching change rumors = = = 
 Following the regular season , speculation surrounded whether Turner Gill would leave Buffalo for another school 's head coaching position . He was identified as a candidate at two schools : Syracuse and Auburn . In neither case was Gill hired ; Syracuse opted for New Orleans Saints offensive coordinator Doug Marrone , while Auburn passed him over in favor of Iowa State head coach Gene Chizik , a move that prominent former National Basketball Association ( NBA ) player , Basketball Hall @-@ of @-@ Famer , and Auburn alumnus Charles Barkley claimed was due to racism . Gill ended up signing a contract extension with Buffalo . 
 UConn head coach Randy Edsall , who had been with the Huskies since 1999 , was also rumored to be a candidate for the Syracuse job . Edsall , a Syracuse alumnus , denied any interest . Offensive coordinator Rob Ambrose accepted the head coaching position at Towson , his alma mater ; he would stay to coach UConn during the bowl game , however . 
 = = = Legacy of the 1958 Buffalo Bulls = = = 
 While the 2009 International Bowl marked the first appearance of the Buffalo Bulls in a bowl game , it was not the first time the school had been invited to a bowl . Fifty years earlier , the 1958 Buffalo Bulls team finished with a record of 8 – 1 . They were awarded the Lambert Cup , given to the best small college team in the eastern US , and received a bid to play in the 1958 Tangerine Bowl , where they would face Florida State . There was one catch : the team 's African @-@ American players — starting running back Willie Evans and backup defensive end Mike Wilson — would not be allowed to play . The Tangerine Bowl Stadium was controlled by the Orlando High School Athletic Association , who prohibited integrated football games . University officials and the coaching staff decided to allow the team to vote on whether they would accept the bowl bid . Before secret ballots could be passed out , the players unanimously decided to reject the bid . 
 Surviving members of the 1958 Bulls team were invited to the 2009 International Bowl and were honored before the game . The Reverend Jesse Jackson spoke at the kickoff luncheon prior to the game , paying tribute to the legacy of the 1958 team . 
 = = = Offensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Buffalo offense = = = = 
 Buffalo featured a high @-@ powered , high @-@ tempo , balanced offense that was good at not committing turnovers . During the regular season the Bulls averaged 380 @.@ 5 offensive yards per game , 45th best in the nation , and scored an average of 31 @.@ 3 points per game , 31st best . Buffalo 's turnover margin was 6th best in the nation , at + 1 @.@ 15 . 
 The Bulls were led offensively by the triple threat of quarterback Drew Willy , running back James Starks , and wide receiver <unk> Roosevelt . The three combined to break 14 single @-@ season school records , including most points scored in a season ( 404 ) . Willy , heading into his final game as a Buffalo Bull , had already surpassed the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ yard mark in passing on the season , throwing for 25 touchdowns against only five interceptions . Starks , while not seen as the same caliber of player as UConn 's Donald Brown , had run for over 1 @,@ 300 yards and caught 41 passes for 340 yards , scoring 16 touchdowns on the year . Roosevelt was seen as the top playmaker , going over the 100 @-@ yard mark in each of Buffalo 's last five games and scoring at least once in his last seven . 
 = = = = Connecticut offense = = = = 
 Especially compared to Buffalo , the UConn offense was extremely unbalanced ; the Huskies ranked 19th in the nation in running , averaging 204 @.@ 6 yards per game , but only 106th in the nation in passing , averaging 147 @.@ 3 yards per game . Connecticut 's offense was centered around running back Donald Brown . Described as " the ultimate workhorse " , Brown led the NCAA in rushing going into the game with 1 @,@ 822 yards . He had already tied the school single @-@ season rushing touchdown record with 17 scores . His dominant performance led to him being named the Big East offensive player of the year as well as an All @-@ American by multiple organizations . Somewhat surprisingly , he was not a finalist for the Doak Walker Award , annually given to the best running back in college football ; the award was eventually won by Shonn Greene of Iowa . UConn 's rushing attack was supplemented by the efforts of quarterback Tyler Lorenzen and running back Jordan Todman . 
 The Huskies struggled to pass the ball all season , only completing four touchdown passes as a team heading into the International Bowl . Lorenzen completed under half of his passing attempts on the season . He threw for 820 yards with more interceptions ( eight ) than touchdowns ( two ) . Nevertheless , before the game Randy Edsall confirmed that Lorenzen would be the starting quarterback for UConn in the International Bowl . This would be his ninth appearance at quarterback on the season ; he missed four games with a broken right foot . 
 = = = Defensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Buffalo defense = = = = 
 The Buffalo defense was described as " among the worst in the MAC , meaning it 's among the worst in college football " . In Division I @-@ FBS , the Bulls ranked 84th in total defense , allowing an average of 408 yards per game . Buffalo 's run defense was 83rd in the country , allowing 141 @.@ 1 yards per game ; their pass defense was ranked 97th , allowing almost 250 yards per game . The Bulls allowed other teams to score an average of 27 points against them per game , which ranked 73rd in the country . 
 Buffalo did have one strength on defense : forcing turnovers . The Bulls recovered 20 fumbles and caught eight interceptions on the year . Buffalo 's turnover margin of + 1 @.@ 15 was 6th best in the nation . 
 = = = = Connecticut defense = = = = 
 Conversely , UConn boasted one of the better defenses in the country . The Huskies allowed the 10th @-@ fewest yards per game in the nation with 281 yards allowed . Connecticut was especially good against the pass ; they allowed an average of only 165 yards per game , seventh @-@ best in the country . No UConn opponent passed for more than 259 yards during the regular season . 
 The Huskies had several standout players on defense . One was defensive end Cody Brown , who led UConn with 14 tackles for a loss ( TFL ) and nine sacks while also being named to the All @-@ Big East first team . Cornerback Jasper Howard was another standout player : he had 37 tackles and four interceptions on the year while also leading the Big East in punt returns . 
 = = Starting lineups = = 
 Source : 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2009 International Bowl kicked off on January 3 , 2009 , at 12 : 00 PM in Toronto , Ontario , Canada . Official attendance was listed at 40 @,@ 184 , the highest in the history of the International Bowl . The attendance record was largely due to Buffalo fans ; an estimated 30 @,@ 000 attended the game . John Saunders , Jesse Palmer , and Doug Flutie , all with ties to Canada , were the announcers for the television broadcast , which aired on ESPN2 . The game was watched by over 2 million households with a rating of 2 @.@ 12 , both the highest in International Bowl history . Prior to the game , spread bettors favored Connecticut to win by four and a half points . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Buffalo received the ball first to begin the game , and returned the opening kickoff to their own 24 @-@ yard line . They were unable to move the ball in three plays , and punted the ball to Connecticut . The Huskies took possession on their own 18 @-@ yard line and drove down the field with alternating rushes by running back Donald Brown and quarterback Tyler Lorenzen , earning two first downs . On 2nd down and 5 from the UConn 49 @-@ yard line , Lorenzen was sacked by Buffalo 's Sherrod Lott and fumbled ; the ball was recovered by UConn right tackle Mike Hicks , allowing the Huskies to retain possession . A holding penalty on the next play called on UConn left tackle William Beatty set up 3rd @-@ and @-@ 24 . Donald Brown rushed for fifteen yards but was unable to reach the first @-@ down marker , forcing UConn to punt . 
 Buffalo took over at their own 19 @-@ yard line and promptly earned their 1st first down of the game on a 10 @-@ yard pass from quarterback Drew Willy to wide receiver Naaman Roosevelt . The Bulls ' drive stalled from there , forcing them to punt . The punt struck the ground and hit UConn 's Jonathan Jean @-@ Louis , who was attempting to block for the punt return ; Buffalo recovered the loose ball , giving them back possession at the Connecticut 23 @-@ yard line . The Bulls were unable to move the ball any closer to the end zone , and settled for a 38 @-@ yard field goal by kicker A. J. Principe , giving them a 3 – 0 lead with 4 : 26 remaining in the first quarter . 
 The ensuing kickoff was returned by UConn running back Jordan Todman 45 yards to the Buffalo 45 @-@ yard line . On the first play from scrimmage , Donald Brown broke through the Buffalo defense and ran the length of the field for the first touchdown of the day . UConn kicker Dave Teggart 's extra point attempt was good , giving UConn their first lead of the day , at 7 – 3 . 
 Buffalo got the ball back at their own 21 @-@ yard line and were only able to advance it to their 34 @-@ yard line before punting the ball back to Connecticut . UConn cornerback Jasper Howard returned the ball 26 yards to the Bulls ' 41 @-@ yard line . The Huskies handed the ball to Donald Brown for five straight running plays , advancing the ball to the Buffalo 19 @-@ yard line as the first quarter clock expired . At the end of the first quarter , UConn held a 7 – 3 lead and looked to be in position to score more when the second quarter began . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 UConn began the second quarter by having Tyler Lorenzen rush the ball for four yards . On 3rd and 7 , Lorenzen attempted his first pass of the game , which was behind Husky wide receiver Michael Smith . Dave Teggart kicked a 32 @-@ yard field goal to increase Connecticut 's lead to 10 – 3 . 
 The Bulls began their next drive at their own 26 @-@ yard line , but went three @-@ and @-@ out . Buffalo punter Peter Fardon kicked the ball over the head of UConn returner Jasper Howard ; rather than let the ball go , he ran backwards chasing after it . Trying to grab the ball over his shoulder , he muffed the catch , and the ball bounced into the end zone , where it was recovered by Buffalo 's Ray Anthony Long for a Bull touchdown . The special @-@ teams miscue by Howard allowed Buffalo to tie the game at 10 – 10 with 11 : 36 remaining in the second quarter . 
 UConn 's turnover woes continued on their next possession when , on their second play from scrimmage after receiving Buffalo 's kickoff , Tyler Lorenzen was sacked , causing him to fumble the ball . The Bulls recovered and drove down the field to the UConn 12 @-@ yard line where they were stopped . Principe kicked a 29 @-@ yard field goal giving Buffalo back the lead , at 13 – 10 . 
 The ensuing kickoff saw yet another Connecticut special @-@ teams blunder . UConn running back Robbie Frey misplayed the ball off of the kickoff , letting it roll back into the end zone . Frey recovered the loose ball ; if he had simply taken a knee , by rule it would have been a touchback and the Huskies would have gotten the ball at their own 20 @-@ yard line . Instead , Frey carried the ball out of the end zone , was hit at the 4 @-@ yard line , and fumbled . Buffalo recovered and promptly scored on a 4 @-@ yard touchdown run by Bull running back James Starks , giving themselves a 20 – 10 lead . UConn had committed its fifth fumble of the game , four of which were recovered by Buffalo . All of Buffalo 's 20 points were directly off of UConn turnovers . 
 Connecticut fumbled the ball for the sixth time on the next possession ; this time Donald Brown was responsible for dropping the ball . Buffalo recovered for the fifth time , but was unable to score , punting to ball back to UConn with 4 : 37 left in the half . Brown made up for his earlier mistake by breaking off a 75 @-@ yard run before being caught from behind . On the next play Tyler Lorenzen ran the ball into the end zone from 13 yards out . Neither team scored for the remainder of the first half , making the score 20 – 17 Buffalo going into halftime . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Connecticut received the ball to start the third quarter and drove down the field on rushing plays by Donald Brown , Jordan Todman and Tyler Lorenzen , before the drive stalled at the Buffalo 36 @-@ yard line . UConn punter Desi Cullen 's punt was downed at the Buffalo 1 @-@ yard line , pinning them against their own end zone . The Bulls were unable to move the ball , punting the ball back to UConn after three plays . Starting from their own 44 @-@ yard line , the Huskies drove to within the Buffalo 10 @-@ yard line ; an offside penalty on Buffalo 's Jerry <unk> gave UConn a 1st @-@ and @-@ goal at the Buffalo 4 @-@ yard line . Connecticut used a play @-@ action pass , only their second pass attempt of the game , to fool the Bulls ; UConn tight end Steve Brouse was wide open in the end zone , catching the ball for the touchdown and giving Connecticut back the lead at 24 – 20 with 5 : 22 left in the third quarter . 
 Buffalo received the ball off the kickoff on their own 28 @-@ yard line . Losing eight yards on their three plays , Buffalo once again punted the ball to Connecticut . UConn drove to the Buffalo 25 @-@ yard line and attempted a 42 @-@ yard field goal ; the kick by Dave Teggart was blocked . Buffalo got the ball back with less than a minute left in the quarter and completed two passes , moving the ball 13 yards down the field before the quarter expired . The score remained in Connecticut 's favor , 24 – 20 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Buffalo began the final quarter with the ball in a 2nd @-@ and @-@ 11 situation and were unable to convert the first down . UConn received Buffalo 's punt and were also unable to move the ball , going three @-@ and @-@ out and punting back to the Bulls . On their next possession Buffalo managed to get a first down off of a Drew Willy pass to tight end Jesse Rack , but were unable to move the ball further than UConn 's 49 @-@ yard line and punted again . 
 Connecticut took over at their own 32 @-@ yard line and , after throwing only two passes in the first three quarters , completed three passes over 10 yards apiece to move down the field . On a 2nd @-@ and @-@ 5 from the Buffalo 15 @-@ yard line , Tyler Lorenzen scored his second rushing touchdown of the game . UConn 's lead was extended to 31 – 20 with less than five minutes left in the game . 
 Receiving the ball at their own 8 @-@ yard line following a penalty on the kickoff return , Buffalo began to move down the field , with Drew Willy completing a 38 @-@ yard pass to wideout Brett Hamlin and a 29 @-@ yard pass to Naaman Roosevelt . On 3rd @-@ and @-@ 4 from the Connecticut 19 @-@ yard line , Willy completed a ten @-@ yard pass to James Starks , giving the Bulls a 1st @-@ and @-@ goal . Starks rushed for four yards on first down ; on second down , Willy threw an incomplete pass intended for Roosevelt . On 3rd @-@ and @-@ goal from the Husky 5 @-@ yard line , Willy attempted a pass that was deflected and intercepted by UConn safety <unk> <unk> , who returned the ball 100 yards for the game @-@ sealing touchdown . UConn won the game 38 – 20 . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 For his performance in the 2009 International Bowl , Connecticut running back Donald Brown was named the player of the game . Brown rushed for 261 yards and one touchdown on 29 attempts . He finished the 2008 college football season with 2 @,@ 083 rushing yards which led the nation . Brown set several new UConn school records , including the single @-@ season records for rushing yards ( 2 @,@ 083 ) , attempts ( 367 ) , and yards per game ( 160 @.@ 2 ) , the career records for rushing yards ( 3 @,@ 800 ) and attempts ( 698 ) , and the record for consecutive games with at least 100 yards rushing ( 8 ) . His performance did not break the International Bowl rushing records , however ; the previous year Rutgers running back Ray Rice ran for 280 yards and four touchdowns . 
 Brown 's dominant rushing performance was supplemented by RB Jordan Todman 's 62 yards on seven attempts , QB Tyler Lorenzen 's 32 yards on twelve attempts , including two touchdowns , and fullback Anthony Sherman 's three yards on one attempt ; in total Connecticut ran for 358 yards . The Huskies attempted to pass only six times during the game ; Lorenzen completed four of them for 49 yards and a touchdown . Four different UConn receivers caught one pass each : wide receiver Kashif Moore ( 18 yards ) , cornerback and sometime wide receiver Darius Butler ( 16 yards ) , fullback Anthony Sherman ( 11 yards ) , and tight end Steve Brouse ( 4 yards and a touchdown ) . 
 Buffalo 's offensive performance was in some ways the opposite of Connecticut 's : while UConn dominated on the ground and barely passed the ball , Buffalo struggled with the run but had a good day passing . The Bulls ran for a total of 24 yards on the game ; James Starks accounted for 25 yards on thirteen carries and scored a touchdown , while RB Brandon <unk> ran three times for five yards . Their total was partially offset by Drew Willy , who lost six yards on three rushing attempts . Willy had a much more successful day passing , completing 29 out of 43 passes for 213 yards and one interception . <unk> Roosevelt led the Buffalo receivers with 90 yards on eight catches ; of the five other Bulls who received passes , WR Brett Hamlin caught four passes for 54 yards , TE Jesse Rack caught three for 22 yards , RB Starks caught 11 for 21 yards , WR Ernest Jackson caught two for 17 yards , and WR Gary Rice caught one for 9 yards . 
 Connecticut dominated Buffalo statistically in the first half , gaining 225 yards to the Bulls ' 94 , led by Donald Brown 's 208 yards rushing . Buffalo won the turnover battle however , recovering five UConn fumbles . The Bulls scored 20 points off UConn turnovers in the first half , but were held scoreless in the second half when the Huskies stopped turning the ball over . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Connecticut 's win gave the team a final record of 8 – 5 and back @-@ to @-@ back winning seasons for the first time since 2003 – 04 . Buffalo 's final record fell to 8 – 6 , which still marked the first winning season for the Bulls since transitioning to Division I @-@ A football in 1999 . 
 In a press conference after the game , Brown announced that he would not return for his senior season and enter the NFL Draft , saying he told the media he said he was staying to take the focus off of himself prior to the game . Brown was drafted 27th overall by the Indianapolis Colts , becoming the first UConn player ever drafted in the first round . Three other UConn players were drafted in the second round : Darius Butler 41st overall by the New England Patriots , William Beatty 60th overall by the New York Giants , and defensive end Cody Brown 63rd overall by the Arizona Cardinals . Tight end Martin Bédard was drafted 15th overall in the second round of the Canadian Football League 's ( CFL ) 2009 Draft . Buffalo did not have any players drafted by either league in 2009 ; in the 2010 NFL Draft James Starks was selected in the sixth round , 193rd overall , by the Green Bay Packers . UConn cornerback Robert McClain was also drafted by the NFL in 2010 , in the seventh round , 249th overall , by the Carolina Panthers . 
 In the offseason Connecticut hired Joe Moorhead as their new offensive coordinator , replacing the departed Rob Ambrose . Turner Gill returned to coach Buffalo in 2009 . Following that season , however , he left to take over the football program at the University of Kansas . 
 Connecticut and Buffalo resumed their rivalry on September 25 , 2010 , playing a regular season game at UConn 's Rentschler Field . Although the score was tied 14 – 14 at halftime , the Huskies pulled away in the second half after changing quarterbacks , winning the rematch 45 – 21 . 
 = Battery White = 
 Battery White was an artillery battery constructed by the Confederates during the American Civil War . Built in 1862 – 63 to defend Winyah Bay on the South Carolina coast , the battery was strongly situated and constructed ; however , it was inadequately manned , and was captured without resistance during the final months of the war . 
 The battery is listed in the National Register of Historic Places . It is located on private land , but is open to the public . 
 = = Island fortifications = = 
 Even before the outbreak of the Civil War , the secessionist government of South Carolina was concerned with the possibility of attack by sea in Georgetown County . Shortly after the December 20 , 1860 passage of the Ordinance of Secession , an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to governor Francis Pickens urged Lowcountry planters to " aid in the erection of Batteries to protect and defend the entrance of Winyah Bay and the Santee River " . 
 The area offered a tempting target to Union forces . Winyah Bay would furnish a sheltered anchorage large enough for the entire United States Navy of 1861 . The city of Georgetown on the bay was the largest on the South Carolina coast north of Charleston . Georgetown County produced nearly half of the rice grown in the United States , amounting to some 54 million pounds ( 24 @,@ 000 tonnes ) in 1860 ; Georgetown exported more rice than any other port in the world . This production and shipping could be disrupted by gunboats moving up the Black , the Pee Dee , the <unk> , and the Sampit rivers , which flow into the bay ; and the two distributary channels of the Santee River , whose mouths lie just below the bay . <unk> rice production would not only damage the local economy , but would impair the Confederacy 's ability to feed its armies . 
 In May 1861 , General P. G. T. Beauregard ordered the development of coastal defenses for South Carolina , including batteries situated on three islands flanking the mouth of Winyah Bay : North Island , South Island , and Cat Island . The Federal capture of Port Royal in November 1861 lent urgency to the construction and improvement of these works , which was done under Robert E. Lee , the newly appointed commander of the Department of South Carolina , Georgia , and East Florida , with Colonel Arthur Middleton <unk> in charge of the district that included Georgetown and Horry counties . 
 The island fortifications were never tested against a major Union attack . However , they served a useful purpose in dealing with grounded ships , both Confederate and Federal ; in protecting the entrance to the bay ; and in maintaining Confederate possession of the islands . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 Matters changed in early 1862 . In March of that year , Lee was recalled to Richmond as military advisor to President Jefferson Davis . He was replaced by General John C. Pemberton , who ordered the withdrawal of troops and artillery from the positions around Georgetown , apparently in order to concentrate his limited manpower on shorter defensive lines . 
 Union naval forces were quick to take advantage of this new vulnerability . In May 1862 , the gunboats USS Albatross and USS Norwich noted that the island forts were unoccupied . They landed troops to occupy North Island , which became the principal local Union base for much of the war ; and they destroyed the fortifications on South and Cat Islands . They also sailed some 10 miles ( 16 km ) up the <unk> River , where they raided a mill and carried off 80 slaves . Settled on North Island , these freed slaves formed the nucleus of a colony of " <unk> " that grew to more than a thousand before being removed to Port Royal for fear of Confederate raids leading to their recapture or massacre . 
 The Federal forces made no attempt to seize territory up the rivers , and their expeditions were limited by the draft of their vessels . Nevertheless , they conducted a number of raids in which they damaged facilities , seized rice , and released slaves ; and these raids severely disrupted the region 's economy . Rice production in particular suffered , since it depended on a labor force of skilled slaves performing carefully timed tasks . 
 Pemberton still refused to move artillery and men to the Georgetown area , maintaining that all of his resources were necessary for the protection of Charleston . However , his superiors ordered him to construct new fortifications at Winyah Bay . Since the Union now controlled the islands , it was necessary to find sites further up the bay . On August 3 , 1862 , Pemberton visited the area and selected Mayrant 's Bluff and Frazier 's Point as the sites for the new batteries . 
 = = Battery White = = 
 Later in August 1862 , Pemberton was promoted to lieutenant general and sent to the Department of Mississippi and East Louisiana , where he would eventually surrender Vicksburg . He was replaced in the Department of South Carolina and Georgia by Beauregard , who assumed command on September 24 , 1862 . The new commander supported the fortification of Winyah Bay : on October 8 , 1862 , he assured Governor Pickens that he had ordered the construction of a battery of five or six pieces of artillery at Mayrant 's Bluff ; on November 10 , he wrote Colonel James Chesnut , Jr. that the battery was " armed and completed " , and that he had sent a new regiment of the State Reserves to General James H. Trapier , in command of the Georgetown District . 
 Trapier was less than pleased with the troops and artillery that he had been given . The new regiment , he noted , arrived at the battery without arms and ammunition ; and as Reserves , would only be in service for 90 days , not enough time to make effective soldiers of them even had they been armed . He had also been given fairly light guns ; what he wanted was Columbiads , suitable for defending the battery and the bay against incursions by ironclads . 
 Despite the paucity of men and weaponry , the new battery proved effective . On November 11 , 1862 , two Union gunboats entered Winyah Bay and began firing on the Mayrant 's Bluff works . The Second South Carolina Artillery , which had set up nine guns in the fortification , responded ; and within a few minutes , the Federal vessels were forced to retire . 
 In February 1863 , Trapier reported that the Mayrant 's Bluff fortification , now named Battery White , was occupied by only 53 men and nine guns . Even this small force sufficed to stop Federal incursions up the rivers of Winyah Bay . However , rice production in the Georgetown area did not recover : the raids had destroyed too much of the physical plant , carried off too many of the slaves , and created too much uncertainty for planters to return to anything near full production . 
 The battery continued to lose manpower , despite Trapier 's ongoing calls for more troops and guns . In October 1864 , a body of eleven deserters from the Confederate German Artillery reached the gunboat USS <unk> ; they reported that there was great discontent among the troops , and that many would desert were they not so strongly guarded . They also reported that there were ten guns at the battery ; the captain of the <unk> concluded that the bay was too well defended for him to render aid to prospective deserters . 
 = = Capture = = 
 In November 1864 , Trapier was ordered to bring most of his forces to Mount Pleasant , just north of Charleston . Only a company of the German Artillery was left to defend the Georgetown district . By the end of January 1865 , only a small crew commanded by a lieutenant remained at Battery White . 
 In January and early February 1865 , Union forces under General William Tecumseh Sherman moved northward from Georgia into South Carolina . On February 2 and 3 , they defeated a Confederate force in the Battle of Rivers ' Bridge , clearing their pathway into the state . After a feint at Charleston , they marched to Columbia , which they entered on February 17 ; on the same day , Charleston was evacuated , and on the 18th , it was surrendered . 
 From Charleston , Union naval forces under Admiral John A. Dahlgren moved up the coast to Georgetown , which Dahlgren thought might be a useful point of communication with Sherman 's land forces . On February 23 , deserters told the captain of the gunboat USS Mingoe that Battery White had been or would soon be evacuated . The Mingoe fired four rounds into the battery . When no response was made , a party was sent ashore ; they found the battery abandoned and its guns spiked . The sloop @-@ of @-@ war USS Pawnee and the gunboat USS <unk> continued up the bay and landed a party of Marines to take possession of Georgetown ; the intendant and wardens of the city formally surrendered it on February 25 . 
 Soon thereafter , Dahlgren inspected the battery , and was impressed . The fortification , he wrote , was well situated and designed , laid out to defend against both shipborne bombardment and attack by landing parties . Eleven guns bore on the channel : two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) Columbiads , three banded rifled 32 @-@ pounders , four smoothbore 24 @-@ pounders , and two banded rifled 12 @-@ pounders . A 6 @-@ pound smoothbore flanked the ditch . The rear was defended by a " formidable " rampart and ditch , with a 24 @-@ pound smoothbore at either end ; in the fort were numerous traverses and magazines . The approach along the beach to the battery 's right flank was covered by a 24 @-@ pound and a 12 @-@ pound smoothbore . " If the works had been sufficiently manned " , wrote Dahlgren , " it would have required good troops to take the work . " 
 = = = Sinking of the USS Harvest Moon = = = 
 By the fall of 1864 , the Union fleet had effectively closed Winyah Bay to blockade runners . Accordingly , the Confederate command had elected to lay mines , at the time known as " torpedoes " , in the bay . Eighteen mines had been constructed in Georgetown by Captain Thomas West Daggett and Stephen W. <unk> and placed strategically in the bay . 
 As early as January 1865 , Union sympathizers in Georgetown had warned Dahlgren 's forces about the existence of mines in the channel . While approaching Battery White , the Mingoe had sent its boats out to sweep for such devices . However , their efforts may have been perfunctory : according to Dahlgren 's report , " ... so much has been said in ridicule of torpedoes that very little precautions are deemed necessary , and if resorted to are probably taken with less care than if due weight was attached to the existence of these mischievous things . " 
 On the morning of March 1 , 1865 , Dahlgren 's flagship , the side @-@ wheel steamer USS Harvest Moon , sailed from Georgetown toward Battery White , which Dahlgren intended to inspect . En route , the vessel struck one of Daggett and <unk> 's mines , which blew a large hole in it , killing one sailor ; the boat quickly sank in two and a half fathoms of water . 
 = = Battery White postbellum = = 
 For over a century after the Civil War , the grounds on which Battery White stood were part of the Belle Isle Plantation . During the late 19th century , extensive landscaping was undertaken on the plantation . The United Daughters of the Confederacy erected a memorial stone on the site in 1929 . In about 1946 , the plantation gardens , including the battery , were opened to the public , and remained thus until 1974 . 
 In the 1970s , the plantation was developed as a condominium complex . Portions of the 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) complex of fortifications were lost to construction . However , the owners elected to preserve Battery White itself . In 1977 , a 3 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) area encompassing the battery was nominated to the National Register of Historic Places . In 2008 , the site was re @-@ opened to the public . 
 The battery 's earthworks are for the most part well preserved . The powder magazines have deteriorated , owing to collapse of the earth mounds following decay of their wooden interior shoring . The two Columbiads have been re @-@ mounted and once again point out over Winyah Bay . 
 Three of the battery 's guns have been placed in Georgetown . A 24 @-@ pound gun has been mounted in front of the National Guard Armory , and two cannon are displayed in Constitution Park on the Georgetown waterfront . 
 The Harvest Moon was never salvaged , and has gradually sunk deeper into the mud of the bay . In the mid @-@ 1960s , the top deck lay under an estimated six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of mud . A Georgetown group attempted to salvage and restore the vessel as a tourist attraction , and in 1964 the U.S. Navy formally abandoned it , rendering it eligible for private salvage ; but the attempt failed for lack of funds . As of 2011 , the ship 's boiler stack was still visible at low tide . 
 = Tropical Storm Beryl ( 1988 ) = 
