 However , his personal correspondence , his own articles and some third @-@ party articles show that he had long and friendly relationships with many people and groups in the chess world , including Ignác Kolisch ( one of his earliest sponsors ) , Mikhail Chigorin , Harry Nelson Pillsbury , Bernhard Horwitz , Amos Burn and the Cuban and Russian chess communities . He even co @-@ operated with the American Chess Congress in its project to regulate future contests for the world title that he had earned . 
 Steinitz strove to be objective in his writings about chess competitions and games , for example he attributed to sheer bad luck a poor tournament score by Henry Edward Bird , whom he considered no friend of his , and was generous in his praise of great play by even his bitter enemies . He could poke fun at some of his own rhetoric , for example " I remarked that I would rather die in America than live in England . ... I added that I would rather lose a match in America than win one in England . But after having carefully considered the subject in all its bearings , I have come to the conclusion that I neither mean to die yet nor to lose the match . " At a joint simultaneous display in Russia around the time of the 1895 – 96 Saint Petersburg tournament , Emanuel Lasker and Steinitz formed an impromptu comedy double act . 
 Although he had a strong sense of honour about repaying debts , Steinitz was poor at managing his finances : he let a competitor " poach " many of his clients in 1862 – 63 , offered to play the 1886 world title match against Johannes Zukertort for free , and died in poverty in 1900 , leaving his widow to survive by running a small shop . 
 = = Notable games = = 
 Wilhelm Steinitz vs Augustus Mongredien , London 1862 Awarded the brilliancy prize at the 1862 London International Tournament . 
 Adolf Anderssen vs Wilhelm Steinitz ; 13th match game , London 1866 Emanuel Lasker regarded this well @-@ prepared attack as a precursor of the positional approach that Steinitz later advocated . 
 Johannes Zukertort vs Wilhelm Steinitz , WCH ( 9th game of the match ) 1886 , Queen 's Gambit Declined : Vienna . Quiet Variation ( <unk> ) , 0 – 1 Steinitz exchanges his powerful centre to create two weak hanging pawns on White 's queenside and creates strong pressure against them . Zukertort eventually tries to slug his way out of trouble , but Steinitz wins with a sharp counter @-@ attack . 
 Wilhelm Steinitz vs Mikhail Chigorin , Havana WCH 1892 ( 2nd game of the match ) , Ruy Lopez , 1 – 0 Steinitz weakens Chigorin 's pawns , gains superior mobility then forces a pawn promotion with the aid of a little combination . 
 Wilhelm Steinitz vs Mikhail Chigorin , Havana WCH 1892 ( 4th game of the match ) , Spanish Game : General ( C65 ) , 1 – 0 Positional preparation creates the opportunity for a swift attack leading to mate on the 29th move . 
 Wilhelm Steinitz vs Curt von Bardeleben , Hastings 1895 , Italian Game : Classical Variation . Greco Gambit Traditional Line ( <unk> ) , 1 – 0 A great attacking combination in the old 1860s style . After White 's 22nd move , all the White pieces are en prise but Black is lost . The game won the first brilliancy prize of the tournament . 
 = = Tournament results = = 
 Sources : 
 = = Match results = = 
 Sources : 
 = Guepinia = 
 Guepinia is a genus of fungus in the Auriculariales order . It is a monotypic genus , containing the single species Guepinia helvelloides , commonly known as the apricot jelly . The fungus produces salmon @-@ pink , ear @-@ shaped , gelatinous fruit bodies that grow solitarily or in small tufted groups on soil , usually associated with buried rotting wood . The fruit bodies are 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall and up to 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide ; the stalks are not well @-@ differentiated from the cap . The fungus , although rubbery , is edible , and may be eaten raw with salads , pickled , or candied . It has a white spore deposit , and the oblong to ellipsoid spores measure 9 – 11 by 5 – 6 micrometers . The fungus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , and has also been collected from South America . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described and illustrated as Tremella rufa by Nicolaus Joseph von Jacquin in 1778 . Elias Magnus Fries later ( 1828 ) called it Guepinia helvelloides in his Elenchus Fungorum , based on Augustin Pyramus de Candolle 's Tremella helvelloides , both being names he sanctioned . This has made Tremella rufa and all names based on it unavailable for use , as they are conserved . Later , Lucien Quélet erected a separate monotypic genus <unk> for Jacquin 's species , whereas Julius Oscar <unk> placed it ( as <unk> rufa ) in Persoon 's small genus <unk> ( rejected name for Gyromitra ) . The proper name for the fungus was debated for some time , as the name Guepinia is a homonym ( pointed out by Fries in 1828 ) , because it had been used by Toussaint Bastard in 1812 for a genus of flowering plants in the Cruciferae family . To further complicate matters , the generic name <unk> , originally considered to have priority over the name Guepinia for the plant genus , was later determined to have been validly published after Guepinia , rendering <unk> an illegitimate name . In 1982 , changes in the International Code for Botanical Nomenclature gave protected status to all names adopted by Fries in the Elenchus Fungorum , and established Guepinia as the correct genus name . 
 Guepinia is variously classified in the Auriculariales order , with uncertain familial position ( incertae sedis ) , or as part of the <unk> family . 
 The genus is named after French mycologist Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> ( 1779 – 1858 ) . The mushroom is commonly known as the " red jelly fungus " , or " apricot jelly " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Guepinia helvelloides grow singly or in small clumps . Although they can appear to be growing in the soil , their mycelium lives in buried wood . They are 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 3 – 17 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide , spoon- or tongue @-@ shaped , and twisted like a cornet or horn so that they look like a slender funnel , cut out on one side and often with a wavy margin . The fruit bodies are flexible , 2 – 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 14 in ) thick , and smooth on the outer side which they are usually attenuated on the underside into a cylindrical or depressed stem that is up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) high and about 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The stem is normally covered with a white tomentum at the base . The upper side ( inside ) of the fruit body is usually quite sterile or with a few isolated basidia and is slightly verrucose as a result of the densely crowded protruding ends of the hyphae . The sterile and fertile surfaces of the fruit body are almost the same color , transparent reddish @-@ orange to flesh pink or flesh orange , at other times more purplish @-@ red . The fruit bodies usually develop a slightly brownish tinge when they are old . The underside is usually slightly more vividly colored than the upper side . The flesh is gelatinous , softly so in the upper part of the fruit body and with a more cartilage @-@ like consistency in the stem . It has a nondescript odor , and a watery , insignificant taste . 
 The hymenium is developed on the under ( outer ) side of the fruit body . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) consist of a globular part ( the <unk> ) to which inflated or elongated <unk> are attached . In Guepinia , the <unk> are egg @-@ shaped to ellipsoid , measuring 12 – 16 by 9 – 12 μm , and attached to fibril @-@ like <unk> that are 20 – 45 by 3 – 4 μm . The spore deposit is white , while the spores are 9 – 11 by 5 – 6 μm , hyaline ( translucent ) , cylindrical to elongated ellipsoid in shape , and have a large oil drop . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Guepinia helvelloides is an edible , but bland , fungus . Older specimens are usually tough and indigestible . It can be used raw in salads , for pickling in vinegar and also for preserving in sugar like candied fruit . One source reports using it to prepare a wine by fermenting with wine yeast . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Guepinia helvelloides has a rather unusual appearance , and is not likely to be mistaken for other fungi . However , the red chanterelle species Cantharellus cinnabarinus is superficially similar ; unlike G. helvelloides , however , it does not have a rubbery and gelatinous texture , and its undersurface is wrinkled , not smooth . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Guepinia helvelloides is saprobic , deriving nutrients by breaking down organic matter . The fruit bodies of G. <unk> typically grow solitarily or in small tufts on soil , usually in association with buried rotting wood . Although the fruit bodies sometimes appear in the spring , they are more commonly found in the summer and autumn months . In North America , it is associated with coniferous forests . It is also found throughout temperate North America , from Canada to Mexico . Europe , Iran , and Turkey . It is also known from Brazil and Puerto Rico . The fungus has also been collected from the Qinling region of China . 
 = German aircraft carrier I ( 1915 ) = 
 The aircraft carrier I was the first planned aircraft carrier conversion project of the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The Imperial Navy had experimented previously with seaplane carriers , though these earlier conversions were too slow to operate with the High Seas Fleet and carried an insufficient number of aircraft . I was intended to carry between 23 and 30 aircraft , including fighters , bombers , and torpedo @-@ bombers . 
 The ship was based on the incomplete hull of the Italian passenger ship Ausonia , which was being built in Hamburg . The conversion was proposed by the Air Department of the Reichs Navy Office , but it was abandoned after negotiations within the German Navy over a proposed moratorium on new ships at the end of the war . After World War I ended , high inflation in Germany added to the cost of the ship , and as a result , the Italian shipping company for whom the ship was originally built , declined to purchase her . The vessel was therefore sold to shipbreakers and dismantled in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Ausonia began her existence as a turbine @-@ powered passenger steamer , ordered by Italian <unk> in 1914 . The ship was built in the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg , under construction number 236 . At the time , the only German seaplane carrier was the armored cruiser Friedrich Carl , which carried two planes . The leadership of the German Navy believed that zeppelins were much more effective than seaplanes , both for reconnaissance and attack . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the architect of the German Navy , was particularly unimpressed by the performance of fixed @-@ wing aircraft . Nevertheless , the Navy developed several naval aircraft before and during the war , including a pair of seaplane fighters , the <unk> and the <unk> , both built by Hansa @-@ Brandenburg . Twin @-@ engined torpedo @-@ floatplanes were also designed . 
 Regardless of the preference toward airships , several small merchant vessels were converted into seaplane carriers during World War I. They carried only two to four aircraft each , however , and were too slow to operate with the High Seas Fleet . The light cruiser Stuttgart , which was fast enough to steam with the Fleet , was converted into a seaplane carrier in 1918 . She too , though , only carried two seaplanes . It was decided to convert the liner Ausonia into a flight @-@ deck carrier for wheeled aircraft as well as floatplanes . The plan for the conversion was drawn up by Leutnant zur See Jürgen <unk> in 1918 , an officer of the 1st Aviation Detachment . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Once converted , I was to have been 158 meters long overall and 149 @.@ 6 m long between perpendiculars . The ship had a beam of 18 @.@ 8 m and a draft of 7 @.@ 43 m , and displaced 12 @,@ 585 metric tons . The ship was powered by two sets of Blohm & Voss geared turbines that drove a pair of screws , the diameter of which is not known . The details of the boiler system and electrical power plant are unknown . 
 The ship was to have been equipped with two 82 m @-@ long hangar decks for wheeled aircraft and a third 128 m @-@ long hangar deck for seaplanes ; all of the hangars were 18 @.@ 5 m wide . The flight deck would have been 128 @.@ 5 m long and 18 @.@ 7 m wide . All three of the hangars and flight deck were intended to have been mounted above the main structural deck . The ship 's designers intended to mount a take off deck on the bow , which would have been 30 m long and 10 @.@ 5 m wide . According to naval historian Erich Gröner , the ship was designed to carry either 13 fixed @-@ wing or 19 folding @-@ wing seaplanes , along with around 10 wheeled aircraft . Rene Greger estimated the ship to carry eight to ten fighter aircraft and a combination of fifteen to twenty bombers and torpedo @-@ floatplanes . 
 = = Conversion = = 
 She was launched as the passenger ship Ausonia on 15 April 1915 . While the ship was still being fitted out , the German navy decided to convert her into an aircraft carrier . The proposed design was completed by 1918 , but by then , the majority of naval construction efforts were diverted to building new U @-@ boats . The demands on labor and resources the war imposed on the German economy reduced the shipbuilding industry to barely being able to cover the maintenance and repair needs of the High Seas Fleet . What resources were left over were by 1918 funneled into U @-@ boat production . As a result of the growing importance of U @-@ boat construction and a moratorium on new surface ships imposed by the Reichsmarineamt ( RMA — the Imperial Navy Office ) , the conversion project was abandoned . 
 The design influenced the planned conversion of the armored cruiser SMS Roon into a seaplane carrier . This plan too , however , was scrapped . In 1920 , the Italian shipping company canceled its order for Ausonia because the post @-@ war inflation in Germany substantially increased the price of the ship . As a result , she was sold to ship breakers in 1922 and broken up for scrap . 
 = Kit ( association football ) = 
 In association football , kit ( also referred to as strip or soccer uniform ) is the standard equipment and attire worn by players . The sport 's Laws of the Game specify the minimum kit which a player must use , and also prohibit the use of anything that is dangerous to either the player or another participant . Individual competitions may stipulate further restrictions , such as regulating the size of logos displayed on shirts and stating that , in the event of a match between teams with identical or similar colours , the away team must change to different coloured attire . 
 Footballers generally wear identifying numbers on the backs of their shirts . Originally a team of players wore numbers from 1 to 11 , corresponding roughly to their playing positions , but at the professional level this has generally been superseded by squad numbering , whereby each player in a squad is allocated a fixed number for the duration of a season . Professional clubs also usually display players ' surnames or nicknames on their shirts , above ( or , infrequently , below ) their squad numbers . 
 Football kit has evolved significantly since the early days of the sport when players typically wore thick cotton shirts , knickerbockers and heavy rigid leather boots . In the twentieth century , boots became lighter and softer , shorts were worn at a shorter length , and advances in clothing manufacture and printing allowed shirts to be made in lighter synthetic fibres with increasingly colourful and complex designs . With the rise of advertising in the 20th century , sponsors ' logos began to appear on shirts , and replica strips were made available for fans to purchase , generating significant amounts of revenue for clubs . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = Basic equipment = = = 
 The Laws of the Game set out the basic equipment which must be worn by all players in Law 4 : The Players ' Equipment . Five separate items are specified : shirt ( also known as a jersey ) , shorts , socks ( also known as stockings ) , footwear and shin pads . Goalkeepers are allowed to wear tracksuit bottoms instead of shorts . 
 While most players wear studded football boots ( " soccer shoes " or " cleats " in U.S. English ) , the Laws do not specify that these are required . Shirts must have sleeves ( both short and long sleeves are accepted ) , and goalkeepers must wear shirts which are easily distinguishable from all other players and the match officials . Thermal <unk> may be worn , but must be the same colour as the shorts themselves . Shin pads must be covered entirely by the stockings , be made of rubber , plastic or a similar material , and " provide a reasonable degree of protection " . The only other restriction on equipment defined in the Laws of the Game is the requirement that a player " must not use equipment or wear anything that is dangerous to himself or another player " . 
 It is normal for individual competitions to specify that all outfield players on a team must wear the same colours , though the Law states only " The two teams must wear colours that distinguish them from each other and also the referee and the assistant referees " . In the event of a match between teams who would normally wear identical or similar colours the away team must change to a different colour . Because of this requirement a team 's second @-@ choice is often referred to as its " away kit " or " away colours " , although it is not unknown , especially at international level , for teams to opt to wear their away colours even when not required to by a clash of colours , or to wear them at home . The England national team sometimes plays in red shirts even when it is not required , as this was the strip worn when the team won the 1966 FIFA World Cup . Many professional clubs also have a " third kit " , ostensibly to be used if both their first @-@ choice and away colours are deemed too similar to those of an opponent . Most professional clubs have retained the same basic colour scheme for several decades , and the colours themselves form an integral part of a club 's culture . Teams representing countries in international competition generally wear national colours in common with other sporting teams of the same nation . These are usually based on the colours of the country 's national flag , although there are exceptions — the Italian national team , for example , wear blue as it was the colour of the House of Savoy , the Australian team like most Australian sporting teams wear the Australian National Colours of green and gold , neither of which appear on the flag , and the Dutch national team wear orange , the colour of the Dutch Royal House . 
 Shirts are normally made of a polyester mesh , which does not trap the sweat and body heat in the same way as a shirt made of a natural fibre . Most professional clubs have sponsors ' logos on the front of their shirts , which can generate significant levels of income , and some also offer sponsors the chance to place their logos on the back of their shirts . Depending on local rules , there may be restrictions on how large these logos may be or on what logos may be displayed . Competitions such as the Premier League may also require players to wear patches on their sleeves depicting the logo of the competition . A player 's number is usually printed on the back of the shirt , although international teams often also place numbers on the front , and professional teams generally print a player 's surname above his number . The captain of each team is usually required to wear an <unk> armband around the left sleeve to identify him as the captain to the referee and supporters . 
 Most current players wear specialist football boots , which can be made either of leather or a synthetic material . Modern boots are cut slightly below the ankles , as opposed to the high @-@ <unk> boots used in former times , and have studs attached to the soles . Studs may be either moulded directly to the sole or be detachable , normally by means of a screw thread . Modern boots such as the Adidas Predator , originally designed by former Liverpool player Craig Johnston , feature increasingly intricate , scientifically aided designs and features such as air pockets in the soles and rubber " blades " on the sole rather than studs . The blades have been the subject of controversy as several top managers have blamed them for injuries both to opposition players and to the wearers themselves . 
 The Laws of the Game specify that all players , regardless of gender , must wear the same kit , however in September 2008 the Dutch women 's team FC de <unk> made international headlines by swapping its old strip for a new one featuring short skirts and tight @-@ fitting shirts . This innovation , which had been requested by the team itself , was initially vetoed by the KNVB , Dutch football 's governing body , but this decision was reversed when it was revealed that the FC de <unk> team were wearing hot pants under their skirts , and were therefore technically in compliance . 
 = = = Other equipment = = = 
 All players are permitted to wear gloves , and goalkeepers usually wear specialist goalkeeping gloves . Prior to the 1970s , gloves were rarely worn , but it is now extremely unusual to see a goalkeeper without gloves . In Portugal 's match against England in the Euro 2004 tournament , Ricardo drew much comment for deciding to remove his gloves during the penalty shoot @-@ out . Since the 1980s significant advancements have been made in the design of gloves , which now feature protectors to prevent the fingers bending backwards , segmentation to allow greater flexibility , and palms made of materials designed to protect the hand and to enhance a player 's grip . Gloves are available in a variety of different cuts , including " flat palm " , " roll finger " and " negative " , with variations in the stitching and fit . Goalkeepers sometimes also wear caps to prevent glare from the sun or floodlights affecting their performance . Players with sight problems may wear glasses as long as there is no risk of them falling off or breaking and thereby becoming dangerous . Most players affected choose to wear contact lenses , although Dutch player Edgar Davids , who is unable to wear contact lenses due to his glaucoma , is known for his distinctive wraparound goggles . Other items that may be dangerous to other players , such as jewellery , however , are not allowed . Players may also choose to wear headgear to protect themselves from head injury as long as it presents no risk to the safety of the wearer or any other player . 
 = = = Match officials ' kit = = = 
 Referees , assistant referees and fourth officials wear kits of a similar style to that worn by players ; until the 1950s it was more common for a referee to wear a blazer than a jersey . Although not specified in the Laws of the Game , it is considered a principle of football that officials wear shirts of a different colour to those worn by the two teams and their goalkeepers . Black is the traditional colour worn by officials , and " the man in black " is widely used as an informal term for a referee , although increasingly other colours are being used in the modern era to minimise colour clashes . The 1994 World Cup was the first in which FIFA allowed officials to wear colours other than black . In 1998 Premier League referee David Elleray was forced to change his black shirt for a white one midway through a match between Aston Villa and Wimbledon as it was deemed too similar to the navy blue worn by the Wimbledon players . Referees also sometimes have sponsors ' logos on their shirts , although these are normally confined to the sleeves . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Victorian era = = = 
 The first written evidence of a clothing item specifically dedicated to football comes in 1526 from the Great Wardrobe of King Henry VIII of England , which included a reference to a pair of football boots . The earliest evidence of coloured shirts used to identify football teams comes from early English public school football games , for example an image of Winchester College football from before 1840 is entitled " The commoners have red and the college boys blue jerseys " and such colours are mentioned again in a Bell 's Life in London article of 1858 . House sporting colours are mentioned in Rugby football ( rule XXI ) as early as 1845 : " No player may wear cap or jersey without leave from the head of his house " . In 1848 it was noted at Rugby that " considerable improvement has taken place in the last few years , in the appearance of a match ... in the use of peculiar dress consisting of velvet caps and jerseys " 
 Organised association football was first played in England in the 1860s , and many teams would probably play in whatever clothing they had available , with players of the same team distinguishing themselves by wearing coloured caps or sashes . This came to be problematic though , and an 1867 handbook of the game suggested that teams should attempt " if it can be previously so arranged , to have one side with striped jerseys of one colour , say red , and the other with another , say blue . This prevents confusion and wild attempts to wrest the ball from your neighbour . " 
 The first standard strips began to emerge in the 1870s , with many clubs opting for colours associated with the schools or other sporting organisations from which the clubs had emerged . Blackburn Rovers , for example , adopted shirts of a halved design based on those of the team for former pupils of Malvern College , one of the schools where the sport had developed . Their original colours of light blue and white were chosen to reflect an association with Cambridge University , where a number of the club 's founders had been educated . Colours and designs often changed dramatically between matches , with Bolton Wanderers turning out in both pink shirts and white shirts with red spots within the same year . Rather than the modern shorts , players wore long knickerbockers or full @-@ length trousers , often with a belt or even braces . Lord Kinnaird , an early star of the game , was noted for always being resplendent in long white trousers . There were no numbers printed on shirts to identify individual players , and the programme for an 1875 match between Queen 's Park and Wanderers in Glasgow identifies the players by the colours of their caps or stockings . The first shin pads were worn in 1874 by the Nottingham Forest player Sam Weller <unk> , who cut down a pair of cricket pads and wore them outside his stockings . Initially the concept was ridiculed but it soon caught on with other players . By the turn of the century pads had become smaller and were being worn inside the stockings . 
 As the game gradually moved away from being a pursuit for wealthy amateurs to one dominated by working @-@ class professionals , kits changed accordingly . The clubs themselves , rather than individual players , were now responsible for purchasing kit and financial concerns , along with the need for the growing numbers of spectators to easily identify the players , led to the lurid colours of earlier years being abandoned in favour of simple combinations of primary colours . In 1890 the Football League , which had been formed two years earlier , ruled that no two member teams could register similar colours , so as to avoid clashes . This rule was later abandoned in favour of one stipulating that all teams must have a second set of shirts in a different colour available . Initially the home team was required to change colours in the event of a clash , but in 1921 the rule was amended to require the away team to change . 
 Specialised football boots began to emerge in the professional era , taking the place of everyday shoes or work boots . Players initially simply nailed strips of leather to their boots to enhance their grip , leading the Football Association to rule in 1863 that no nails could project from boots . By the 1880s these crude attachments had become studs . Boots of this era were made of heavy leather , had hard <unk> , and came high above a player 's ankles . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 As the game began to spread to Europe and beyond , clubs adopted kits similar to those worn in the United Kingdom , and in some cases chose colours directly inspired by British clubs . In 1903 , Juventus of Italy adopted a black and white strip inspired by Notts County . Two years later , Argentina 's Club Atlético Independiente adopted red shirts after watching Nottingham Forest play . 
 In 1904 the Football Association dropped its rule that players ' knickerbockers must cover their knees and teams began wearing them much shorter . They became known as " knickers " , and were referred to by this term until the 1960s when " shorts " became the preferred term . Initially , almost all teams wore knickers of a contrasting colour to their shirts . In 1909 , in a bid to assist referees in identifying the goalkeeper amongst a ruck of players , the Laws of the Game were amended to state that the goalkeeper must wear a shirt of a different colour to his team @-@ mates . Initially it was specified that goalkeepers ' shirts must be either scarlet or royal blue , but when green was added as a third option in 1912 it caught on the extent that soon almost every goalkeeper was playing in green . In this period goalkeepers generally wore a heavy woollen garment more akin to a jumper than the shirts worn by outfield players . 
 Sporadic experiments with numbered shirts took place in the 1920s but the idea did not initially catch on . The first major match in which numbers were worn was the 1933 FA Cup Final between Everton and Manchester City . Rather than the numbers being added to the clubs ' existing strips , two special sets , one white and one red , were made for the final and allocated to the two teams by the toss of a coin . The Everton players wore numbers 1 – 11 , while the City players wore 12 – 22 . It was not until around the time of the Second World War that numbering became standard , with teams wearing numbers 1 – 11 . Although there were no regulations on which player should wear which number , specific numbers came to be associated with specific positions on the field of play , a prime example being the number 9 shirt which was usually reserved for the team 's main striker . In contrast to the usual practice , Scottish club Celtic wore numbers on their shorts rather than their shirts until 1975 for international matches , and until 1994 for domestic matches . The 1930s also saw great advancements in boot manufacture , with new synthetic materials and softer leathers becoming available . By 1936 players in Europe were wearing boots which weighed only a third of the weight of the rigid boots of a decade earlier , although British clubs did not adopt the new @-@ style boots , with players such as Billy Wright openly pronouncing their disdain for the new footwear and claiming that it was more suited to ballet than football . 
 In the period immediately after the war , many teams in Europe were forced to wear unusual kits due to clothing restrictions . England 's Oldham Athletic , who had traditionally worn blue and white , spent two seasons playing in red and white shirts borrowed from a local rugby league club , and Scotland 's Clyde wore khaki . In the 1950s kits worn by players in southern Europe and South America became much more lightweight , with V @-@ necks replacing collars on shirts and synthetic fabrics replacing heavy natural fibres . The first boots to be cut below the ankle rather than high @-@ topped were introduced by Adidas in 1954 . Although they cost twice as much as existing styles the boots were a huge success and cemented the German company 's place in the football market . Around the same time Adidas also developed the first boots with screw @-@ in studs which could be changed according to pitch conditions . Other areas were slower to adopt the new styles – British clubs again resisted change and stuck resolutely to kits little different from those worn before the war , and Eastern European teams continued to wear kits that were deemed old @-@ fashioned elsewhere . The FC Dynamo Moscow team that toured Western Europe in 1945 drew almost as much comment for the players ' long baggy shorts as for the quality of their football . With the advent of international competitions such as the European Cup , the southern European style spread to the rest of the continent and by the end of the decade the heavy shirts and boots of the pre @-@ war years had fallen entirely out of use . The 1960s saw little innovation in kit design , with clubs generally opting for simple colour schemes which looked good under the newly adopted floodlights . Designs from the late 1960s and early 1970s are highly regarded by football fans . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 In the 1970s clubs began to create strongly individual strips , and in 1975 Leeds United , who had changed their traditional blue and gold colours to all white in the 1960s to mimic Real Madrid , became the first club to design shirts which could be sold to fans in the form of replicas . Driven by commercial concerns , other clubs soon followed suit , adding manufacturers ' logos and a higher level of trim . In 1973 , German team Eintracht Braunschweig signed a deal with local alcohol producer Jägermeister to display its logo on the front of their shirts . Soon almost all major clubs had signed such deals , and the cost to companies who sponsor large teams has increased dramatically . In 2008 German club FC Bayern Munich received € 25 million in sponsorship money from Deutsche Telekom . However Spanish clubs FC Barcelona and Athletic Bilbao refused to allow sponsors ' logos to appear on their shirts as recently as 2005 . Until 2011 Barcelona refused paying sponsors in favour of wearing the UNICEF logo on their shirts while donating € 1 @.@ 5 million to the charity per year . Players also began to sign sponsorship deals with individual companies . In 1974 Johan Cruijff refused to wear the Dutch national team 's strip as its Adidas branding conflicted with his own individual contract with Puma , and was permitted to wear a version without the Adidas branding . Puma had also paid Pelé $ 120 @,@ 000 to wear their boots and specifically requested that he bend down and tie his laces at the start of the 1970 FIFA World Cup final , ensuring a close @-@ up of the boots for a worldwide television audience . 
 In the 1980s manufacturers such as Hummel and Adidas began to design shirts with increasingly intricate designs , as new technology led to the introduction of such design elements as shadow prints and pinstripes . Hummel 's distinctive halved strip designed for the Danish national team for the 1986 FIFA World Cup caused a stir in the media but FIFA worried about moiré artefacts in television pictures . Shorts became shorter than ever during the 1970s and 1980s , and often included the player 's number on the front . In the 1991 FA Cup Final Tottenham Hotspur 's players lined up in long baggy shorts . Although , the new look was derided , clubs in Britain and elsewhere had within a short time adopted the longer shorts . In the 1990s shirt designs became increasingly complex , with many teams sporting extremely gaudy colour schemes . Design decisions were increasingly driven by the need for the shirt to look good when worn by fans as a fashion item , but many designs from this era have since come to be regarded as amongst the worst of all time . In 1996 , Manchester United notoriously introduced a grey strip which had been specifically designed to look good when worn with jeans , but abandoned it halfway through a match after manager Alex Ferguson claimed that the reason why his team was losing 3 – 0 was that the players could not see each other on the pitch . United switched to different colours for the second half and scored one goal without reply . The leading leagues also introduced squad numbers , whereby each player is allocated a specific number for the duration of a season . A brief fad arose for players celebrating goals by lifting or completely removing their shirts to reveal political , religious or personal slogans printed on undershirts . This led to a ruling from the International Football Association Board in 2002 that undershirts must not contain slogans or logos ; since 2004 it has been a bookable offence for players to remove their shirts . 
 The market for replica shirts has grown enormously , with the revenue generated for leading clubs and the frequency with which they change designs coming under increased scrutiny , especially in the United Kingdom , where the market for replicas is worth in excess of £ 200m . Several clubs have been accused of price fixing , and in 2003 Manchester United were fined £ <unk> by the Office of Fair Trading . The high prices charged for replicas have also led to many fans buying fake shirts which are imported from countries such as Thailand and Malaysia . Nonetheless , the chance for fans to purchase a shirt bearing the name and number of a star player can lead to significant revenue for a club . In the first six months after David Beckham 's transfer to Real Madrid the club sold more than one million shirts bearing his name . A market has also developed for shirts worn by players during significant matches , which are sold as collector 's items . The shirt worn by Pelé in the 1970 FIFA World Cup Final sold at auction for over £ 150 @,@ 000 in 2002 . 
 A number of advances in kit design have taken place since 2000 , with varying degrees of success . In 2002 the Cameroon national team competed in the African Cup of Nations in Mali wearing shirts with no sleeves , but FIFA later ruled that such garments were not considered to be shirts and therefore were not permitted under the Laws of the Game . Manufacturers Puma AG initially added " invisible " black sleeves to comply with the ruling , but later supplied the team with new one @-@ piece singlet @-@ style tops . FIFA ordered the team not to wear the tops but the ruling was disregarded , with the result that the Cameroon team was docked six points in its qualifying campaign for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , a decision later reversed after an appeal . More successful were the skin @-@ tight shirts designed for the Italian national team by manufacturers Kappa , a style subsequently emulated by other national teams and club sides . 
 A brief fashion for men wearing snood @-@ scarf <unk> ended in 2011 when the IFAB banned them as potentially dangerous . A ban on women wearing the hijab was introduced by the IFAB in 2007 , but lifted in 2012 after pressure from Prince Ali of Jordan . In keeping with French views , the French Football Federation said it would maintain its ban . 
 = USS West Avenal ( ID @-@ 3871 ) = 
 USS West Avenal ( ID @-@ 3871 ) was a cargo ship in the United States Navy during World War I. She had been built as SS West Avenal for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) as part of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States . West Avenal was launched in October 1918 by the Western Pipe and Steel Company of San Francisco , California , and delivered to the US Navy when she was completed in February 1919 . After she was commissioned and had taken on a load of flour , West Avenal sailed to Norfolk , Virginia , where she was decommissioned in early April . 
 Though little is available regarding West Avenal 's civilian career , she is known from contemporary news account to have visited ports in Spain , Italy , France , Brazil and Uruguay in the early 1920s . In January 1920 , West Avenal was rammed by a British cargo ship in New York Harbor and was grounded to prevent her sinking . By late 1928 , West Avenal had been abandoned by the USSB , and was scrapped in August 1929 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Avenal , one of some 15 West ships built by the Western Pipe and Steel Company of San Francisco , California . 
 West Avenal ( Western Pipe and Steel No. 3 ) was launched on 13 October 1918 , and delivered to the Navy upon completion on 1 February 1919 . The ship was 5 @,@ 692 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 410 feet 5 inches ( 125 @.@ 10 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) abeam . West Avenal had a steel hull and a 29 @-@ foot @-@ 9 @-@ inch ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) deep hold . She displaced 12 @,@ 200 t , and had a deadweight tonnage of 8 @,@ 735 DWT . 
 In common with the first eight ships built by Western Pipe & Steel , West Avenal was powered by a single General Electric steam turbine rated at 2 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower , that drove a single screw propeller , and moved the ship at a 10 @.@ 5 kn ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) pace . These General Electric turbines proved unreliable and most of the ships powered by them were either lost or scrapped by the end of the 1920s . Later vessels of the same type built by WPS for the USSB were powered by much more reliable Joshua Hendy triple expansion steam engines , and had considerably longer service lives . 
 = = Career = = 
 USS West Avenal ( ID @-@ 3871 ) was commissioned into the Navy on 1 February with Lieutenant Commander Franz Patterson , USNRF , in command . West Avenal took on an initial load of flour and departed San Francisco on 17 April for New York . She soon developed a steering gear problem and put in at San Diego for repairs . After getting underway again , she transited the Panama Canal and , cutting short her journey , arrived at Norfolk , Virginia , on 4 April . There she was decommissioned the next day and returned to the USSB . 
 West Avenal departed Norfolk on a voyage to Leith , Scotland on 9 April 1919 , but was forced to return to port after suffering an engine breakdown . Following repairs , she made several voyages between the East Coast of the United States and various destinations in South America , Spain , France and England . A few mentions of the ship crop up in contemporary news accounts . In August 1919 , for example , The New York Times shows West Avenal slated for departure to Buenos Aires , Argentina , on 12 August . The following January , the newspaper reported that West Avenal was rammed by the British Leyland Line cargo ship <unk> . Departing New York in a dense fog on the morning of 9 January 1920 for Antwerp , <unk> rammed into the port side of West Avenal , which was inbound with a load of onions from Valencia , Spain . The damage was severe enough that West Avenal 's captain ordered her grounded to avoid sinking in New York Harbor . More than two weeks later , The Washington Post printed a photograph of West Avenal , still grounded off the Red Hook flats . Another report in the Times a year later showed her arrival in Saint @-@ Nazaire , France , on 13 August 1920 . 
 In January 1921 , The Atlanta Constitution ran a travelogue of a local man who had sailed on West Avenal to South America in August 1919 . During his travels , West Avenal had departed the US on 27 August and called at Saint Thomas , U.S. Virgin Islands ; Rio de Janeiro ( where the ship arrived on 24 September ) Santos in Brazil ; and Montevideo , Uruguay . Another report in The New York Times the following year listed West Avenal 's arrival in Genoa , Italy , on 19 January 1921 . 
 West Avenal underwent further repairs in 1921 , after which she was laid up by the USSB in the Staten Island Reserve Fleet 3 Section 1 . The vessel was delivered at New York to the Union Shipbuilding Company of Baltimore , Maryland for scrapping on 29 August 1929 . 
 = A Ballads = 
 A Ballads ( stylized as <unk> ) is the second greatest hits compilation by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki . It was released physically on March 12 , 2003 through Avex Trax , and digitally distributed worldwide on September 14 , 2006 by Avex Entertainment Inc . It is her first compilation release in two years since A Best ; it premiered three months after her sixth studio album Rainbow . The compilation compiles ballad @-@ inspired singles released by Hamasaki between 1998 and 2003 , whilst the material is divided into new @-@ arrangement remixes and the original versions . With all the tracks written by Hamasaki , it includes two new songs — " Rainbow " , which served as the album 's promotional single , and a cover version of Japanese singer Yumi Matsutoya 's 1975 track " Sotsugyō Shashin " . 
 Released in six formats featuring a photograph by <unk> , A Ballads received favorable reviews from music critics . Many praised the collection for including some of Hamasaki 's best vocal work , and commended the songwriting . Minor criticism was aimed on the newer renditions of the original songs . Commercially , the album was a success in Japan , reaching number one on the Oricon Albums Chart , making it Hamasaki 's second compilation and eighth album to reach the top spot . It was certified Million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of one million units . The album experienced limited promotion during its release , with some of the tracks appearing during Japanese commercial endorsements . 
 = = Background and material = = 
 In December 2002 , Hamasaki released her sixth studio album Rainbow . Early issues of the album included a code number and URL address that allowed customers to visit an exclusive website that promoted the album and listen to a 40 @-@ second demo of her unfinished song " Rainbow " . During its promotion , Avex Trax and Hamasaki received over 100 @,@ 000 messages from fans , telling them their opinions about the unfinished demo . Due to the mixed response of her fanbase , Hamasaki decided to develop the song further and release it as part of an upcoming compilation album , which was later named A Ballads . During the process , Hamasaki confessed that " [ she ] had never before written lyrics that were based on messages received directly from [ her ] fans . It was with " Rainbow " that [ she ] decided to give this approach a try " . 
 A Ballads is Hamasaki 's first compilation to compile songs that were inspired by ballad music , with it portraying her second greatest hits album after A Best ( 2001 ) . Each track from the album was released either as a single or as a promotional recording , recorded between the years 1998 and 2003 . Six of the tracks on the album were composed and co @-@ produced by Hamasaki , who used the alias Crea . The album consists of fifteen tracks , including two new recordings — " Rainbow " and a cover version of Japanese singer Yumi Matsutoya 's 1975 track " Sotsugyō Shashin " . Seven of the album 's tracks — " Appears " , " You " , " To Be " , " M " , " Seasons " , " A Song for × × " and " Who ... " — feature new arrangements and compositions , whilst the songs " Key " , " Hanabi " , " Dearest " and " Voyage " are included with their original versions . 
 = = Songs = = 
 To explain Hamasaki 's the background and development , Hamasaki hosted a commentary on her website . The first song , " Rainbow " , was originally composed by CMJK , but Hamasaki felt the finishing product was " missing something " , and re @-@ worked the demo version with Japanese musician Dai Nagao . According to Hamasaki , she wanted to reflect the emotion and words used in each 100 @,@ 000 messages she received from her fans to create the song , but because there were numerous emails , she decided to write it as a summary and her feelings as an " aftermath " from reading the messages . The song was described by a staff member at CD Journal as an " organic midtempo pop ballad " song . " Appears " was remixed by Japanese group HΛL . According to Hamasaki , she had asked the group to re @-@ compose their original version of the track in order to reflect " current [ musical ] themes of 2003 . " 
 The album included the original version of " Key ( Eternal Tie ) " as Hamasaki felt that the original was " more important and unknown " than the proposed @-@ reworked version she had planned . " You ( Northern Breeze ) " was one of the last reworked tracks , and was described by Hamasaki as being influenced by Western music . " To Be ( 2003 <unk> Mix ) " was not re @-@ worked or re @-@ arranged by any of the album 's collaborators , with it being purely remastered and mixed again by music engineer Koji Morimoto . " Hanabi " was one of the album 's only tracks to appear in its original version , and has been described by a CD Journal staff member to have been inspired by Europop , trip hop , and dub music . " Dolls " , a J @-@ pop influenced pop ballad , remained the sophomore original track to make part of the record . 
 Like " To Be " , the next track " Seasons " was remastered and mixed by Morimoto . The final original track , " Voyage " , was described by CD Journal as a midtempo ballad influenced by gospel music , layered with several string arrangements and other instrumentation . " A Song for × × " was re @-@ worked as a live demo , recorded at the Avex Trax studios in Japan . For the promotional track " Who ... " , Hamasaki asked CMJK to create a more " warmer " version than the original . The closing track for A Ballads was " Sotsugyō Shashin " . According to Hamasaki , she had imagined recording a cover for a studio album , but was unsuccessful at doing so . To compose the track , she and the songs co @-@ composer Tasuku composed it by using a Fender Rhodes Suitcase Mk I electric piano in order to reflect the songs original 1960s – 1970s pop influence . 
 = = Release = = 
 A Ballads was released physically on March 12 , 2003 through Avex Trax in five formats , and digitally distributed worldwide on September 14 , 2006 by Avex Entertainment Inc . The first five formats were compact discs ; each one of the four early editions included a slipcase sleeve that had two clones of Hamasaki asleep next to each other , with the inner booklet portraying four different photographs of the clones . The four alternative covers were different variations of the two Hamasaki figures in a pink @-@ coloured room . The fifth format came without a slipcase , and had the slipcase image as the inner booklet cover . The digital release featured the slipcase cover and the entire photo shoot was photographed by <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , A Ballads received favorable reviews from most music critics . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Express believed that the album 's material was able to connect with both younger and older audiences . He also pointed out the " Royal @-@ esque " tracks " Seasons " and " <unk> " as some of her best recordings . An editorial review on HMV singled out A Ballads as one of the best ballad albums in recent history ; the review labelled it a " classic " , and commended Hamasaki 's vocal abilities , her songwriting and her vulnerability . In a similar review , a staff member of CD Journal enjoyed the album and complimented it 's new additions to the album . 
 Commercially , the album was successful in Japan , with it debuting at number one on the Oricon Albums Chart and replacing 200 Km / h in the Wrong Lane ( 2002 ) by Russian female duo t.A.T.u. at the top spot . Hamasaki 's entry sold 561 @,@ 127 units in comparison to t.A.T.u. ' s 167 @,@ 627 unit sales . By the end of 2003 , A Ballads was ranked at number eight as the best selling album in Japan of that year . It sold 917 @,@ 555 units , and was also her second album to enter the top ten , just behind Rainbow which sold 1 @,@ 856 @,@ 919 units . As of July 2016 , it has sold over 924 @,@ 242 units , her first greatest hits album to not sell over the one million mark . Nevertheless , it was certified Million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of one million units . It is Hamasaki 's ninth best selling album based on Oricon 's sale database . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The album experienced limited promotion during its release , with some of the tracks appearing during Japanese commercial endorsements . The compilation 's only release was promotional song " Rainbow " , which was used as the theme song for Hamasaki 's Japanese talk show Ayuready ? , and to promote products by <unk> . An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Wataru Takeishi , featuring two clones of Hamasaki chasing each other , and eventually meeting at a dinner in Japan . Near the end of the video , it is revealed that the second clone is in fact her imagination or conscious . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Ayumi Hamasaki with the exception of Yumi Matsutoya 's contribution on track 14 .. 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Russell Howarth = 
 Russell Michael Howarth ( born 27 March 1982 ) is an English former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper . 
 Howarth started his career in the youth system of hometown club York City in 1996 while a schoolboy , before becoming a trainee in 1998 . He made his first team debut at the age of 17 , playing in the first six games of the 1999 – 2000 season . During this run in the team he signed a professional contract with the club . However , he was unable to play regularly for York because of the form of Bobby Mimms and Alan Fettis . After having trials with Premier League and First Division clubs , Howarth left York in November 2002 to sign for Tranmere Rovers for a five @-@ figure fee . Here , he again played sporadically , only having runs in the team when first @-@ choice goalkeeper John Achterberg was unavailable . After being released by Tranmere in 2005 , Howarth signed for Bradford City . However , he was unable to dislodge Donovan Ricketts in goal and was released in 2007 . He immediately retired from football and started working as a paramedic . 
 While at York , Howarth played for England at a number of youth levels . He was capped twice at under @-@ 16 level in 1999 , while still a trainee at York . He tussled with Chelsea 's Rhys Evans for a starting place in the under @-@ 18 side , playing for them in 2001 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship qualifying . After making four under @-@ 18 appearances from 2000 to 2001 , he progressed to the under @-@ 20 side , competing with Evans , Stephen Bywater and Boaz Myhill for a place in the side . He was capped four times for the side from 2001 to 2002 before being given a late call @-@ up to the under @-@ 21 squad for the 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship . Following his move to Tranmere he was still included in under @-@ 21 squads , but failed to be capped at that level . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Howarth was born in York , North Yorkshire to Michael and Lyn Howarth ( née Hammond ) . He was baptised in Riccall , North Yorkshire . He attended Barlby High School . As a youth he played as a goalkeeper for Olympia Station FC , before representing York and District Schools at the age of 12 . In one season however he played as a left @-@ sided midfielder and scored 29 goals . He soon returned to playing in goal and impressed Huntington School teacher Alan Whitehead , a former York City player , who was running the York and District team . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Howarth started his career with hometown club York City in their youth system , joining in 1996 on schoolboy terms . In the summer of 1998 he signed a three @-@ year academy scholarship at York and became a first @-@ year trainee . During May 1999 he played for York in the Candia @-@ 66 International Under @-@ 20s Tournament , a youth tournament hosted in Europe . York won the tournament after defeating <unk> <unk> in the final ; Howarth saved two penalty kicks in the 4 – 2 penalty shoot @-@ out victory . At the age of 17 he made his first team debut for Third Division York in a 1 – 0 victory at home to Swansea City in the opening game of the 1999 – 2000 season on 7 August . He started the season as York 's first @-@ choice first team goalkeeper ahead of the experienced Bobby Mimms , keeping clean sheets in the first three games of the campaign . On 26 August , two days after making his fifth successive appearance , Howarth signed a three @-@ year professional contract with York . However , after conceding 11 goals in three games , and having played in York 's first six games of the season , manager Neil Thompson dropped him in favour of the more experienced Mimms . York 's management team insisted Howarth 's exclusion was intended to safeguard the player , and was not based on merit . His next appearance came as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute in York 's 2 – 0 defeat away at Plymouth Argyle on 19 February 2000 following an injury to Mimms . Howarth was favoured over Mimms for the following game , a 0 – 0 draw at home to Exeter City on 26 February , in which he gave a " solid showing " . However , following the signing of Northern Ireland international Alan Fettis , Howarth was once again restricted to the York bench . His first season in senior football finished with eight appearances . 
 In May Howarth played for Premier League club Leeds United in a seven @-@ a @-@ side tournament in Singapore , because their own goalkeepers were unavailable . He also represented York in the Candia @-@ 66 International Under @-@ 20s Tournament for a second successive summer , although he only played one game as he was being rested after playing for Leeds . His first appearance of the 2000 – 01 season came in York 's 5 – 1 defeat at home to Stoke City in the League Cup first round first leg . During the match he fumbled a Graham Fenton cross , and Stoke were able to open the scoring from the error . He garnered praise from York 's part @-@ time goalkeeping coach and former Everton player Neville Southall , who Howarth held as a boyhood hero , by saying " Russ can be as good as he wants to be . He works hard and has a great attitude when a lot of youngsters today at big clubs don 't have such a good attitude . He will succeed . Even if it is in three , five or even ten years , he will succeed . " With Fettis being rested Howarth made his second appearance of the season on 9 January 2001 , starting in a 4 – 0 defeat at home to Darlington in the Football League Trophy Northern Section first round . Despite conceding four goals he was the only player to escape criticism from manager Terry Dolan , who said " He was let down by everyone else around him . He had no protection whatsoever . His kicking was excellent and he did everything else he had to do without a problem . " Due to the good form of Fettis , Howarth finished the season with only two appearances . 
 Howarth made his first appearance of the 2001 – 02 season in the 2 – 0 defeat away at Notts County on 16 October in the Football League Trophy Northern Section first round . Having made a number of fine saves he was named man of the match and Dolan remarked that " he is playing as well as I have seen him and he is putting real pressure on Alan Fettis . " Despite not featuring regularly for York he spent four days on trial with Premier League outfit Sunderland , training with the side for three days and playing 45 minutes of a practice match against Huddersfield Town . Howarth then spent a brief period on trial with Wolverhampton Wanderers of the First Division in January 2002 . He played in a reserve team game against Huddersfield and reportedly impressed manager Dave Jones . Howarth made his first league appearance for York in over two years as a substitute for an injured Fettis in the 65th minute of a 3 – 0 home win over Bristol Rovers on 17 April . Two days later he was offered a new contract by York . With Fettis still injured for the following game , Howarth was selected to start for the first time since February 2000 in the 1 – 0 defeat away at Scunthorpe United , York 's final game of the season . He finished the season with three appearances . 
 Larger clubs became interested in buying him during the summer and he decided to consider his options before deciding on his future . He trialled with Everton in May 2002 , and played in a friendly against Falkirk in the Alex Scott Memorial Trophy , in which he kept a clean sheet . He later revealed he was interested in a move to Everton and due to Fettis ' good form for York he decided to pursue a move from the club . After his York contract expired on 30 June Howarth joined Wolves for a second trial in July for a two @-@ week period . After playing in Wolves ' opening pre @-@ season friendly against Morecambe he was invited to join them for their pre @-@ season tour of Portugal . Despite being out of contract at York the club was entitled a fee as he was under 24 years of age , but a bid of £ 60 @,@ 000 from Wolves was rejected . He was recalled by York to take part in a pre @-@ season friendly against Sunderland , although he refused to participate . Howarth told Dolan he did not want to play for the club as any potential injury could have ended his proposed transfer to Wolves . His proposed move to Wolves continued until August and late that month he trained with Premier League side Tottenham Hotspur . He played in a practice match for Tottenham , but after they failed to follow up their interest in him Wolves made a bid to sign him on loan , which York again rejected . After Marlon Beresford left York and Howarth 's proposed moves elsewhere fell through he re @-@ signed for the club on a week @-@ to @-@ week contract . Despite this , he spent two days on trial with Premier League side Newcastle United in late September . Howarth 's first appearance of the 2002 – 03 season came in a 4 – 3 defeat to Lincoln City on 22 October in the Football League Trophy Northern Section first round after Fettis was rested due to injury . 
 = = = Tranmere Rovers = = = 
 Howarth eventually completed a move away from York , signing for Second Division club Tranmere Rovers for an undisclosed five @-@ figure fee on 5 November . York chairman John Batchelor later revealed the transfer fee was an initial figure of £ 25 @,@ 000 . After signing Howarth said , " I felt I had gone a little bit stale at York and the time was right to move on " . He made his debut for Tranmere three weeks later in the 2 – 1 defeat away at Cardiff City in an FA Cup first round replay on 26 November , entering play as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute after John Achterberg was sent off . Tranmere did not concede a goal during Howarth 's 18 minutes on the pitch and his performance was positive , as he looked " cool and composed between the sticks " . However , with Achterberg established in the Tranmere goal Howarth had to wait until 4 February 2003 to make his league debut against Cheltenham Town , coming on as a substitute in the 57th minute after Achterberg sustained an injury . He conceded two goals in 33 minutes on the pitch on as Tranmere went on to lose the game 3 – 1 . Howarth returned to the substitutes ' bench for the following game against Swindon Town on 8 February as Achterberg had recovered from his injury . His first start in a Tranmere shirt came over two months later in a 0 – 0 draw away at Luton Town on 5 April after Achterberg picked up an injury in training the previous day . He kept his starting place for the following match , a 1 – 0 victory at home to Wycombe Wanderers on 12 April . Despite keeping clean sheets in both of these games , he was dropped for the next game against Notts County on 19 April . 
 Howarth continued to be kept out of the side in the 2003 – 04 season and only made his first appearance after Achterberg was injured during the warm @-@ up against Swindon on 3 March 2004 . Tranmere lost the game 2 – 0 although his performance was positive , making a number of good saves . However , Achterberg was declared fit for the following game against Millwall on 7 April and Howarth returned to the bench . He did not play another game for Tranmere that season . Howarth 's first appearance of the 2004 – 05 season came as a 20th @-@ minute substitute after Achterberg was injured away at Hull City on 18 December . After conceding a goal scored by Ian Ashbee in the 34th minute , Howarth was then also injured in a challenge with Stuart Elliott , and was substituted at half @-@ time . He was available for Tranmere 's next game against Barnsley on 26 December , and with Achterberg ruled out for the Christmas period with a knee injury he started in a 1 – 1 draw . This meant Howarth had a run of nine consecutive games in goal for Tranmere , with an appearance against Oldham Athletic in the Football League Trophy Northern semi @-@ final on 25 January 2005 being his last before Achterberg made a return against Luton on 29 January . He failed to play for the side again that season , and was released by Tranmere on 24 May . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 On 8 June 2005 , Howarth signed a two @-@ year contract with League One club Bradford City . He was signed to provide competition for Donovan Ricketts ; manager Colin Todd said " It was a position we needed filling badly . I am delighted to have got a keeper of Russell 's calibre " . Despite being given a chance to affirm himself in pre @-@ season with Ricketts away on international duty , it was Ricketts who started the 2005 – 06 season as first @-@ choice goalkeeper . Howarth made his debut in Bradford 's fourth game of the season away at Rotherham United on 20 August , coming on as a 27th @-@ minute substitute after Ricketts was injured . The match finished in a 1 – 1 draw . He made his first start in the subsequent 5 – 0 victory over League Two side Rochdale in the League Cup first round on 23 August . These were the first two appearances of a 12 @-@ game run in the team , before being dropped after nearly two months when Ricketts returned from injury against Port Vale on 15 October . His last two appearances for Bradford that season , which came when Ricketts was suspended , were a 5 – 3 defeat at home to Barnsley in an FA Cup second round replay and a 2 – 1 defeat at home to Rotherham on 17 December . Howarth finished his first campaign at Bradford with a career @-@ record 15 appearances . 
 After starting the 2006 – 07 season again as second @-@ choice to Ricketts , he revealed his desire for a loan away from Bradford for first team football , saying " It is approaching make or break in terms of my career . I need to start playing regularly again as soon as possible " . Former club York , by this time playing in the Conference National , made a failed bid to sign him on loan in September 2006 . Howarth 's first and only appearance of the season , a 2 – 1 defeat at home to Scunthorpe in the Football League Trophy Northern Section first round on 17 October , proved to be the last game of his career . He was released by Bradford on 9 May 2007 and subsequently retired from professional football at the age of 25 . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = England under @-@ 16 = = = 
 Howarth received his first international call @-@ up when he was included in the England national under @-@ 16 team to play Turkey on 12 January 1999 . He was the only player with a club from below the top two divisions to have been selected . He made his debut in the match as a 70th minute substitute for Chelsea 's Rhys Evans , with England winning 2 – 0 . His second cap and first start for the side came two months later in a 1 – 0 victory at home to Turkey on 30 March . Following the game , Sky Sports commentator Brian Marwood described his performance as " outstanding " . 
 = = = England under @-@ 18 = = = 
 Howarth 's next international call @-@ up came over a year later when selected for the under @-@ 18s for a game against Luxembourg on 27 April 2000 , this time being one of two players with clubs below the top two divisions . He debuted for the side after coming on as a 60th @-@ minute substitute for Evans in this game , in a 2 – 0 victory for England . Howarth was then called up for a friendly with Israel on 1 September , although he did not feature in the game as Evans was chosen to start . In September he was named in the team that would participate in a 2001 UEFA European Under @-@ 18 Football Championship qualifying mini @-@ tournament hosted in Ancona , Italy . He failed to appear in the first game against Andorra on 7 October , but made his first start for the under @-@ 18s in the next game , a 5 – 0 victory over the Faroe Islands on 9 October . Howarth was excluded from the line @-@ up for the final game against Italy , which England won to progress to the intermediate qualifying round . 
 Howarth was called up for a friendly against Belgium at Bradford City 's Valley Parade on 16 November , in which he started as England won 3 – 2 , despite Evans having seemingly established himself as the number one goalkeeper for the under @-@ 18s . He was then included in the squad for another friendly against the Netherlands on 1 March 2001 , although Evans was eventually chosen to play ahead of Howarth . He was called into the squads to play Poland in the intermediate qualifying round , although he failed to play a part in either leg of the tie , as Evans started in both the 1 – 0 loss at White Hart Lane on 22 March and the 0 – 0 away draw on 26 April . With Evans omitted from the squad to play Switzerland at FC <unk> 's Stadion Brühl in a friendly on 30 May , Howarth started in a 1 – 0 defeat . The match , in which he was substituted for Boaz Myhill of Aston Villa , proved to be his final appearance for the under @-@ 18s . 
 = = = England under @-@ 20 = = = 
 Howarth was ineligible to play for the under @-@ 19 team due to an alteration to the England set @-@ up , and was subsequently called up for the under @-@ 20 game against Portugal at St Mary 's Stadium on 21 November . The game was England 's first at under @-@ 20 level since the 1999 FIFA World Youth Championship . He started the game and was substituted for Myhill after half @-@ time , with the side winning the game 1 – 0 . Howarth came on for England as a half @-@ time substitute for Evans in a 3 – 0 victory over Finland in their penultimate friendly ahead of the 2002 Toulon Tournament . A call @-@ up came for the final friendly away at Portugal on 10 April , and he again entered as a half @-@ time substitute , this time for Myhill . 
 After originally being left out the squad , he was given a last minute call @-@ up to play at the Toulon Tournament in May , after Stephen Bywater was called up for the under @-@ 21 team . Howarth did not play in the first group game against Poland on 10 May as Bywater started , but in the second game against Portugal he was chosen ahead of Evans in a 1 – 0 victory over Portugal on 12 May . However , he was dropped for the final group game against Brazil on 14 May to make way for Evans , who also played in England 's final game in the tournament against Japan on 17 May . 
 = = = England under @-@ 21 = = = 
 Shortly after the under @-@ 20s ' exit from the Toulon Tournament , Howarth was called up for the under @-@ 21 side playing in the 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship after Bywater and Evans picked up injuries . He was on the bench for England 's final two group games against Italy and Portugal , and after losing both of these games the team was eliminated . Following the tournament he was re @-@ called by the under @-@ 21s for a game against Yugoslavia on 6 September , although Liverpool 's Chris Kirkland started . He was then included in the squad for the under @-@ 21s ' next game against Slovakia on 11 October in qualification Group 7 of the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship and , despite Kirkland being injured , he failed to play as Wolves ' Matt Murray was selected . For the following qualifier against Macedonia on 15 October Howarth failed to make the bench . Following his move to Tranmere his international call @-@ ups continued , and he was selected for a get @-@ together of the under @-@ 21s in November , ahead of their 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship qualifiers against Portugal and Turkey in March and April 2003 . However , he did not play in either game , with Bywater and Murray starting . He was given a late call @-@ up to the squad for qualifiers against Macedonia and Portugal in September , but did not eventually meet up with the team as an agreement was reached that he would only be on standby for the games . 
 = = Post @-@ football = = 
 Following his retirement from football , Howarth became a paramedic . He became a coach for City Football Development in August 2009 , which was set up to offer coaching to youngsters in York . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Howarth has been an Everton supporter since the early 1990s . His girlfriend Victoria worked as a deputy head teacher and while Howarth was a Tranmere player the couple lived on the Wirral . Their daughter , Georgia May , was born in late 2004 . After signing for Bradford in 2005 , Howarth briefly lived with his parents in Riccall before purchasing a second home in Halifax , West Yorkshire to live in with his partner . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = A Man Will Rise = 
 A Man Will Rise ( originally known as Local Hero ) is an uncompleted comedy western film directed by Tony Jaa and <unk> <unk> , and starring Jaa , Dolph Lundgren , Conan Stevens , and Byron Gibson . Set in 1950s Thailand , the film follows a local gangster who terrorizes a town . When a young man opposes him , the gangster hires a group of foreign hit men to kill the rebel and silence the town . 
 In January 2013 , Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme was rumored to be co @-@ starring alongside Jaa ; in reality , he was never available due to scheduling issues , and as a result , Lundgren was cast as an alternative . The film entered production in April 2013 , but came to an abrupt halt after three months of filming . Sahamongkol Film International filed a $ 49 – 50 million lawsuit against Jaa , Universal Pictures , and United International Pictures , claiming Jaa was in breach of his contract by accepting a role in Fast and Furious 7 . After two years of legal proceedings , Sahamongkol dropped the lawsuit in July 2015 . Despite this , production of A Man Will Rise has not continued , and the film remains uncompleted . 
 = = Background = = 
 News of the film first emerged under the working title of Local Hero in January 2013 . Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme was rumored to be co @-@ starring alongside Jaa , but he could not commit due to scheduling issues ; he was filming <unk> at the time . Dolph Lundgren was cast as an alternative . 
 Filming began in April 2013 ; Jaa was announced as co @-@ director the same month . After three months of filming , production came to an abrupt halt with only 20 % of the film complete . Sahamongkol Film International filed a $ 49 – 50 million lawsuit against Jaa , Universal Pictures , and United International Pictures in September 2013 , claiming that Jaa was in breach of his contract by accepting the role of Kiet in Fast and Furious 7 . Sahamongkol based their sum on the cost of launching Jaa 's career and loss of future earnings , plus an additional 7 @.@ 5 % interest . They attempted to halt the release of Fast and Furious 7 in Thailand , and on March 27 , 2015 , a civil court approved , blocking release the film until a settlement had been reached by both parties . The court came to its decision after interviewing two employees of Sahamongkol : <unk> <unk> , the son of the company 's president , Somsak <unk> ; and <unk> <unk> , a member of Sahamongkol 's legal team . In response to the allegations , Jaa stated that his contract with Sahamongkol had ended . He claimed that it was terminated through his lawyer in 2013 , describing it as " business slavery " due to its allegedly <unk> terms and conditions . Sahamongkol claimed that the contract had been renewed for another ten years , through 2023 . In the suit , <unk> also requested that Jaa pay back his salary for A Man Will Rise , reportedly ฿ 26 million ( $ 722 @,@ 000 ) . The legal matters surrounding the lawsuit have prevented the completion of the film , and although the lawsuit was dropped in July 2015 , the film remains unfinished . There are currently no plans to complete the film . 
 = = Cast ( preliminary ) = = 
 Tony Jaa as Unknown 
 Dolph Lundgren as Cowboy Hitman 
 Conan Stevens as Cowboy Hitman 
 David <unk> as Cowboy Hitman 
 Byron Gibson as Diego 
 Damian Mavis as Cowboy Gangster 
 Russell Geoffrey Banks as Cowboy Gangster 
 <unk> Soler as Cowboy Gangster 
 <unk> <unk> as Unknown 
 Leigh Barwell as Mexican Prostitute 
 Alexandra Merle as Mexican Prostitute 
 = California State Route 57 = 
 State Route 57 ( SR 57 ) , also known as the Orange Freeway for most of its length , is a north – south state highway in the Greater Los Angeles Area of California . It connects the interchange of Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and SR 22 near downtown Orange , locally known as the Orange Crush , to the Glendora Curve interchange with I @-@ 210 and SR 210 in Glendora . The highway provides a route across several spurs of the Peninsular Ranges , linking the Los Angeles Basin with the Pomona Valley and San Gabriel Valley . 
 A predecessor to this road ran through Brea Canyon by the early 20th century and was added to the state highway system . The freeway was built in stages during the 1950s , one of which included the Brea Canyon Freeway ; SR 57 was designated as part of the 1964 state highway renumbering . The final portion of the present @-@ day Orange Freeway was not completed until the mid 1970s . The latest piece of SR 57 to be added was formerly part of I @-@ 210 , after SR 210 was legislatively extended to San Bernardino in 1998 . An unconstructed extension from Santa Ana south to Huntington Beach remains in the legal definition of SR 57 , and has been studied as a toll road above the Santa Ana River . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 57 begins at the Orange Crush interchange near downtown Orange , where it meets the northwest – southeast Santa Ana Freeway ( I @-@ 5 ) and the east – west Garden Grove Freeway ( SR 22 ) . The Orange Crush interchange , which had long been considered a major bottleneck , was rebuilt in the 1990s and 2000s . The freeway heads north from the junction and soon crosses to the west side of the Santa Ana River , continuing north through suburban portions of Anaheim and passing next to Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center , Angel Stadium and Honda Center . In northern Anaheim , SR 57 meets the Riverside Freeway ( SR 91 ) . SR 57 briefly passes through Placentia and Fullerton , providing access to California State University , Fullerton . As it crosses Imperial Highway ( SR 90 ) near the Brea Mall and enters Brea , SR 57 enters more rugged terrain before climbing through Brea Canyon , the gap between the Chino Hills and Puente Hills . Near the rim of the canyon , the highway curves north out of the Brea Canyon , and descends slightly to a junction with the Pomona Freeway ( SR 60 ) in Diamond Bar , right on the edge of the San Gabriel Valley . 
 A short overlap carries SR 57 traffic on the same roadway as SR 60 . The two routes head northeast through an arm of the San Gabriel Valley ; after they split , SR 57 ascends slightly and then slopes through the edge of the Puente Hills and into the west end of the Pomona Valley . Here it meets the San Bernardino Freeway ( I @-@ 10 ) and Chino Valley Freeway ( SR 71 ) at the four @-@ level Kellogg Hill Interchange . In the north half of that interchange , SR 57 enters the San Jose Hills , climbing to its highest elevation before descending back into the connected San Gabriel and Pomona Valleys and ending at the Glendora Curve interchange with the Foothill Freeway ( I @-@ 210 ) in Glendora . 
 High @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes ( HOV ) exist in the median of SR 57 south of SR 60 in Diamond Bar . Elevated ramps allow HOV traffic bound to or from Brea Canyon to connect with I @-@ 5 towards the southeast , SR 91 towards the west , or SR 60 towards the east without entering the main lanes . 
 SR 57 is legally eligible for the State Scenic Highway System through Brea Canyon , between SR 90 and SR 60 , though it has not officially been designated by Caltrans as such because it has not successfully been through the nomination process . The entire route is in the California Freeway and Expressway System , and is a freeway for its entire constructed length . SR 57 is also part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . The highway from SR 1 to SR 60 in Diamond Bar is officially designated as the Orange Freeway . In 2013 , SR 57 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 129 @,@ 000 between SR 60 and Sunset Crossing Road in Diamond Bar , and 278 @,@ 500 between SR 91 in Anaheim and <unk> Avenue in Placentia , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The road through Brea Canyon was oiled dirt by the late 1910s , providing a good connection across an <unk> of the Peninsular Ranges between the Los Angeles Basin and Pomona Valley . This road left the main coast highway ( Harbor Boulevard ) at Fullerton and followed the present Brea Boulevard and Brea Canyon Road , merging with the Valley Boulevard from Los Angeles near Walnut and continuing east to Pomona via Valley and Pomona Boulevards . Los Angeles County paved the road in concrete in early 1923 , and in 1931 it was added to the state highway system as a branch of Route 19 . Until then , Route 19 had connected Route 9 near Claremont with Riverside , following Garey Avenue and Mission Boulevard through Pomona . 
 The state built a bypass of the Valley Boulevard portion of the route in the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 1930s , leaving the old road near Diamond Bar and heading northeast through the foothills , along the present freeway alignment and Mission Boulevard . To the south , the legislature added then @-@ unrelated Route 180 along State College Boulevard in 1933 , connecting Route 2 ( I @-@ 5 ) near the Santa Ana River with Route 175 ( <unk> Avenue , later replaced by SR 91 ) near Placentia . By 1955 , the Brea Canyon Freeway was proposed to begin at the Santa Ana Freeway ( I @-@ 5 ) near La <unk> Avenue in Santa Ana and head north , paralleling Routes 180 and 19 to Pomona . The portion northeast of Diamond Bar into Pomona soon became part of the planned Pomona Freeway , and the name of the remainder was changed to Orange Freeway . The state legislature altered the definition of Route 19 to reflect this in 1957 by moving its south end to Santa Ana . 
 Then , in 1957 , the northernmost part of present SR 57 was added to the state highway system as part of Route 240 , which the legislature designated along the route planned for I @-@ 210 . This became part of the proposed Temescal Freeway , later the Corona Freeway ; a southerly extension of the Orange Freeway to Legislative Route 60 ( SR 1 ) near Huntington Beach was added in 1959 as Route 273 . Also in 1959 , the legislature created Route 272 , extending the line of the Orange Freeway north from the Pomona Freeway to the Temescal Freeway , completing the proposed freeway corridor that is now SR 57 . When the entire route , except Route 240 which was still part of I @-@ 210 , was redesignated SR 57 in the 1964 renumbering , none of these proposed freeways had been built ; the only constructed segment was the old surface road from Fullerton towards Pomona . The part of old Route 19 east of Route 272 became part of SR 60 . As part of the same renumbering , Route 180 on State College Boulevard became Route 250 , which was amended the next year to provide for its deletion once that portion of the SR 57 freeway was completed ( between I @-@ 5 and SR 91 ) . 
 A groundbreaking ceremony was held in Placentia on January 30 , 1967 , to begin construction of the Orange Freeway . The first portion was dedicated on May 16 , 1969 , and opened soon after , extending north from the Riverside Freeway ( SR 91 ) to <unk> Avenue in Fullerton . Over the next few years , the freeway was completed from SR 91 north to I @-@ 10 , and I @-@ 210 was built north to the present end of SR 57 ; the Pomona Freeway ( SR 60 ) , which overlaps it through Diamond Bar , was constructed at the same time . The last pieces of that portion were the freeway through Brea Canyon , which opened March 13 , 1972 , and the four @-@ level Kellogg Hill Interchange at I @-@ 10 , which was dedicated May 1 , 1972 , and opened soon thereafter . Finally , the Orange Freeway was extended south from SR 91 to I @-@ 5 in the mid @-@ 1970s , allowing Route 250 to be turned back to local governments , though the subsequent deletion from the Streets and Highways Code did not take place until 1981 . With the extension of SR 210 around San Bernardino in 1998 , the former easternmost piece of I @-@ 210 to the Kellogg Hill Interchange instead became a northerly extension of SR 57 , though it remains officially part of the Interstate Highway System . 
 = = Future = = 
 The southerly extension to Huntington Beach remains unconstructed . In 1986 , Orange County 's plans were for a toll road elevated above the Santa Ana River rather than through existing neighborhoods , only extending south to the San Diego Freeway ( I @-@ 405 ) in Costa Mesa with connections to the Corona del Mar Freeway ( SR 73 ) ; this was largely inspired by congestion on SR 55 through the Santa Ana area . The extension was considered by Caltrans as two 11 @.@ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 18 @.@ 0 km ) , two @-@ lane viaducts that would cost $ 950 million . The toll road franchise that American Transportation Development ( ATD ) held for this portion of SR 57 expired in January 2001 , after a request to delay the expiration until January 2007 . Following this , ATD sued to restore the franchise , and this case lasted until November 2003 . The termination was due to ATD not beginning the construction during the first ten years of the franchise , after it had been enacted by the state legislature . 
 In April 2009 , the Orange County Transportation Authority continued to study the extension of SR 57 , where the freeway would travel along the Santa Ana River and terminate at I @-@ 405 in Fountain Valley . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Interstate 375 ( Michigan ) = 
 Interstate 375 ( I @-@ 375 ) in Detroit , at only 1 @.@ 062 miles ( 1 @.@ 71 km ) in length , once had the distinction of being the shortest signed Interstate Highway in the country . It is the southernmost leg of the Walter P. Chrysler Freeway and a spur of I @-@ 75 into downtown Detroit , ending at the unsigned Business Spur Interstate 375 ( BS I @-@ 375 ) , better known as Jefferson Avenue . The freeway opened on June 12 , 1964 . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) announced in 2013 that it may remove I @-@ 375 in the future . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 375 and the Chrysler Freeway begin at Jefferson Avenue and St. Antoine Street in downtown Detroit near the Renaissance Center . They run east before turning north . Just about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) after the southern terminus , I @-@ 375 meets the Fisher Freeway which carries I @-@ 75 north of downtown . At this interchange , I @-@ 75 takes ramps to leave the Fisher Freeway and use the Chrysler Freeway , replacing I @-@ 375 . I @-@ 375 is a four @-@ lane freeway the entire length . The entire length of I @-@ 375 is included on the National Highway System , a network of roadways that are important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 According to the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , I @-@ 375 is 1 @.@ 062 miles ( 1 @.@ 709 km ) . At the time it opened until at least 2007 , I @-@ 375 was the shortest signed Interstate in the country . Based on FHWA data , there are three Interstates that are shorter : I @-@ 110 in Texas ( 0 @.@ 92 mi or 1 @.@ 48 km ) , I @-@ 878 in New York ( 0 @.@ 70 mi or 1 @.@ 13 km ) and I @-@ 315 in Montana ( 0 @.@ 83 mi or 1 @.@ 34 km ) . The latter two designations are not signed on their respective roadways , and I @-@ 110 in Texas has since been signed . 
 Every year , MDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . In 2009 , MDOT calculated that 14 @,@ 112 vehicles per day used the southernmost section of I @-@ 375 , on average , and 53 @,@ 900 vehicles used the northernmost section near I @-@ 75 . These vehicles included 798 trucks . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction on the first segments of the Chrysler Freeway started on January 30 , 1959 . The area where the freeway was built was called Black Bottom , a historic district that received its name from the soil found there by French explorers . In the 1940s and 1950s , the area was the home to a community of African @-@ American entrepreneurs and businesses that rivaled Harlem in New York City . Black Bottom was one of the oldest neighborhoods in the city , and at the time of freeway construction , it had wooden sewers and dilapidated buildings . The area , like Corktown to the west of downtown , was targeted for urban renewal and infrastructure improvements in the 1950s and 1960s , which included the Chrysler Freeway and public housing projects . 
 On June 12 , 1964 , a surface street highway / freeway in Detroit was opened running north from Jefferson Avenue and Randolph Street to the Fisher / Chrysler freeway interchange . The southern most segment , built through the Black Bottom neighborhood , was designated I @-@ 375 at this time . The freeway cost $ 50 million to build ( equivalent to $ 780 million in 2015 ) . 
 In April 2013 , MDOT announced that it was studying whether to repair the freeway at a cost of $ 80 million , or convert the freeway south of Gratiot Avenue into a boulevard to reduce maintenance cost , making the area around it more pedestrian @-@ friendly , and thus attract development . Converting this segment to a boulevard would free up 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of land for development which is currently used for the freeway and its right @-@ of @-@ way . The department invited businesses and other groups affected by the potential project to participate in the study in November 2013 . Advocates of the conversion cite increased pedestrian access and an improved connection between Eastern Market and downtown as reasons to remove the freeway . Some people who live or work along the freeway and in the downtown area note the improved access I @-@ 375 provides to the area as reasons to retain the freeway . 
 Six alternative proposals for rebuilding I @-@ 375 were unveiled by MDOT in June 2014 . They ranged in price from $ 40 million to $ 80 million . These options include rebuilding the freeway as is , reducing it to a boulevard or one @-@ way streets , or upgrading the existing freeway right @-@ of @-@ way to include bike lanes and other pedestrian @-@ friendly features . In January 2016 , the department announced that any decision on a course of action would be delayed indefinitely . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire highway is in Detroit , Wayne County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = Business spur = = 
 The unsigned Business Spur Interstate 375 ( BS I @-@ 375 ) , which is 0 @.@ 167 miles ( 0 @.@ 269 km ) long , continues west on Jefferson Avenue from the southern end of I @-@ 375 , ending at the entrance to the Detroit – Windsor Tunnel at Randolph Street ( M @-@ 3 ) . Jefferson Avenue past that intersection is M @-@ 10 . BS I @-@ 375 runs next to the Renaissance Center and under a segment of the People Mover . This designation was created in 1964 . The 2009 traffic surveys by MDOT reported that 33 @,@ 376 vehicles , including 922 trucks , had used BS I @-@ 375 . 
 = 2000 Hungarian Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Hungarian Grand Prix ( formally the XVI Marlboro Magyar Nagydíj ) was a Formula One motor race held on 13 August 2000 at Hungaroring , near Budapest , Hungary . It was the twelfth race of the 2000 Formula One season and the 18th Hungarian Grand Prix . The 77 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen after starting from third position . Michael Schumacher finished second in a Ferrari with Häkkinen 's teammate David Coulthard third . 
 Michael Schumacher started alongside Coulthard on the front row of the grid . Going into the first corner , Häkkinen accelerated faster than Michael Schumacher and Coulthard off the line and overtook both drivers for the lead . He managed to maintain his lead until his first pit stop on lap 31 . As his teammate Coulthard made his pit stop one lap later , Häkkinen regained the lead which he held to win his third win of the season . Michael Schumacher fended off Coulthard , who challenged him in the later stages despite losing time lapping backmarkers , to take second . 
 Häkkinen 's victory promoted him into the lead of the Drivers ' Championship for the first time in the 2000 season , two points ahead of Michael Schumacher and six ahead of Coulthard . Häkkinen and Coulthard 's strong finishes promoted McLaren into the lead of the Constructors ' Championship , one point ahead of Ferrari and 88 ahead of Williams with five races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors , were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre compounds to the race ; the Soft and the Extra Soft dry compound tyres . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 56 points , ahead of McLaren teammates Mika Häkkinen and David Coulthard , who were tied for second on 54 points . Rubens Barrichello was fourth with 46 points while Giancarlo Fisichella was fifth on 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 102 points , four points ahead of their rivals McLaren in second . Williams on 22 points and Benetton with 18 points contended for third place , while BAR were fifth on 12 points . McLaren and Ferrari had so far dominated the championship , winning the previous eleven races . Championship participants Fisichella and Barrichello had each gained second place podium finishes while Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had each achieved third place podium finishes . 
 Following the German Grand Prix on 30 July , six teams conducted mid @-@ season testing at the Circuit Ricardo Tormo from August 3 – 5 . McLaren test driver Olivier Panis was fastest on the first day , ahead of Häkkinen . Pedro Diniz 's Sauber car was afflicted with an oil leak , limiting his team 's testing time as the leak was repaired . Coulthard was fastest on the second day . Fisichella set the fastest times on the final day of testing . His teammate Alexander Wurz spun off and collided with the tyre barrier . His car 's wishbone struck his right leg and was taken to the circuit 's medical center before a transfer to a local hospital . Wurz was passed fit to compete in the race the day after his accident . Ferrari opted to spend five days testing at the Fiorano Circuit and concentrated on car development , practice starts , aerodynamic testing and race distance simulations with their test driver Luca Badoer . He was joined by Barrichello on the second day and Michael Schumacher from the fourth day onwards . Badoer and Michael Schumacher spent two further days at the circuit performing shakedowns of the Ferrari F1 @-@ 2000 car . 
 After consecutive retirements in the previous three races which included first lap collisions in Austria and Germany , Michael Schumacher said that his aim in Hungary was to avoid any incidents on the first lap and to finish in a points @-@ scoring position . He was also confident that Ferrari would perform well at the circuit . Barrichello revealed that he received backing from Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo to challenge for more victories and the championship despite the latter 's comments to the press about Barrichello assisting Michael Schumacher 's title aspirations . 
 Prost 's Jean Alesi was passed fit in the days leading up to the race . At the previous race , Alesi had suffered a serious crash which involved a collision with Sauber driver Pedro Diniz , although he escaped uninjured apart from abdominal pains and suffered from dizziness and vomiting . Prost had their test driver Stéphane Sarrazin ready to replace Alesi should the latter had suffered a relapse . Alesi said he felt ready to race again : " It took a few days before I really started to recover , but now I sleep and feel much better " . 
 Some teams made technical changes to their cars for the Grand Prix . McLaren introduced a revised aerodynamic for their MP4 / 15 chassis , aimed at increasing the amount of downforce , and therefore grip , produced by the bodywork . They also brought revised nose wings . BAR fitted their cars with one @-@ off components that were produced to help optimise the performance of the monocoque 's cooling systems . Ferrari introduced an aerodynamic set @-@ up similar to that used at the Monaco Grand Prix , and the team debuted a modified version of the F1 @-@ 2000 's chimneys . Minardi arrived with new radiator intakes and exits to rectify temperature issues with their Fondmetal V10 engines . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday practice sessions took place in dry conditions . Michael Schumacher set the first session 's fastest time , a 1 : 20 @.@ 198 , almost six @-@ tenths of a second faster than teammate Barrichello . Jaguar 's Eddie Irvine was third fastest , ahead of Ralf Schumacher , Fisichella and BAR driver Jacques Villeneuve . Jarno Trulli , Diniz , Mika Salo and Jenson Button completed the top ten . In the second practice session , Coulthard set the quickest lap of the day , a 1 : 18 @.@ 792 ; Häkkinen finished with the second fastest time . The two Ferrari drivers were third and fourth — Michael Schumacher ahead of Barrichello . Trulli was running quicker finishing fifth fastest , ahead of Fisichella and Williams drivers Ralf Schumacher and Button . Frentzen and Irvine followed in the top ten . The weather remained dry for the Saturday practice sessions . Barrichello was fastest in the third practice session , with a time of 1 : 18 @.@ 268 . Coulthard was second fastest and was one thousands of a second off Barrichello 's pace . Frentzen continued his strong practice form , setting the third fastest time , ahead of Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen and Ralf Schumacher . Sauber driver Mika Salo , Button , Trulli and Fisichella took the final top ten places . In the final practice session , Michael Schumacher was fastest setting a time of 1 : 17 @.@ 395 , ahead of Coulthard and Barrichello . Frentzen set the fourth fastest time , narrowly faster than Ralf Schumacher and Häkkinen . Trulli , Fisichella , Salo and Diniz completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry weather ; the air temperature ranged from 30 – 31 ° C ( 86 – 88 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 42 – 43 ° C ( 108 – 109 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched his 28th pole position of his career , and his fourth at the circuit , with a time of 1 : 17 @.@ 514 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Coulthard , who was three @-@ tenths of a second off Michael Schumacher 's pace . Häkkinen qualified third , and stated that his team made changes to his car 's set @-@ up having been unhappy with his car in previous sessions . Ralf Schumacher qualifed fourth , and said he was pleased with revisions to his car 's aerodynamics . Barrichello struggled with the handling of his car taking fifth position and stated that Coulthard prevented him from setting a faster lap time . Frentzen , Fisichella , Button , Salo and Irvine rounded out the top ten positions . Wurz missed out on qualifying in the top ten by two @-@ tenths of a second . Trulli qualified 12th having struggled with oversteer , ahead of Diniz , Alesi , Arrows driver Pedro de la Rosa and Villeneuve . Johnny Herbert for Jaguar qualified 17th despite spinning late in the session , and was followed by Zonta , Nick Heidfeld and Jos Verstappen . The Minardi drivers qualified last ; Marc Gené outqualified his teammate Gastón Mazzacane by two @-@ tenths of a second . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . Coulthard maintained his good performance from qualifying and set the fastest time , a 1 : 19 @.@ 261 . The Ferrari cars were second and third — Michael Schumacher faster than Barrichello . Häkkinen completed the top four , 1 @.@ 2 seconds behind teammate Coulthard . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race ; the air temperature was 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) and the track temperature ranged between 34 – 44 ° C ( 93 – 111 ° F ) ; conditions were expected to remain consistent throughout the race . Whilst the grid was forming up , Mazzacane 's car was afflicted with a gearbox problem and he was forced to start the race with his spare car . Herbert also planned to use his spare car as his regular car developed a leak which was fixed before the start . Häkkinen accelerated faster than Michael Schumacher and Coulthard off the line , getting ahead of both drivers going into the first corner . Coulthard then withstood Ralf Schumacher 's attempts to pass him for third position . Heading into the chicane , Villeneuve and de la Rosa collided . Villeneuve pitted for a new front wing followed by Verstappen who pitted for a new left rear tyre . At the end of the first lap , Häkkinen led from Michael Schumacher , Coulthard , Ralf Schumacher , Barrichello , Frentzen , Fisichella , Irvine , Wurz , Salo , Diniz , Trulli , Alesi , Herbert , Zonta , Heidfeld , Verstappen , Gené , Mazzacane , Villeneuve and de la Rosa . Häkkinen began to gradually pull away from Michael Schumacher as the McLaren driver set consecutive fastest laps . 
 Fisichella spun off from 7th place on lap 8 losing eight positions and Irvine moved into Fisichella 's former position . Alesi pitted on lap 9 and re @-@ emerged at the rear of the field after repairs to his car 's steering . Villeneuve passed de la Rosa for 21st position . Two laps later , Alesi drove to his garage and became the first retirement of the race . Fisichella ran wide on lap 12 and was passed by Herbert for 13th . Three laps later , Fisichella made his first pit stop for repairs to his car 's brakes and came out in 19th position . Häkkinen 's lead over Michael Schumacher was 7 seconds by lap 19 . Coulthard was a further 3 seconds behind the Ferrari driver and was drawing ahead from Ralf Schumacher . Villeneuve moved into 18th position after passing Fisichella and Zonta by lap 20 . Heidfeld became the race 's second retirement when he stalled after making the first scheduled pit stop on lap 22 . Two laps later , Irvine , who had been running seventh , made his first pit stop and dropped to 11th . 
 Ralf Schumacher took his first pit stop on lap 28 , emerging in 7th position . Barrichello pitted one lap later . Race leader Häkkinen took his pit stop on lap 31 and came out behind teammate Coulthard . Häkkinen regained the lead after Coulthard made his pit stop on lap 32 , who came out in 3rd position . Fisichella retired with further brake problems on lap 32 . Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 20 @.@ 028 on lap 33 , as he continued to stretch his lead over Michael Schumacher . Coulthard , who was on fresh tyres , gradually began to close the gap to Michael Schumacher by lap 39 . Michael Schumacher increased the gap when Coulthard lost two seconds ; the result of being held up by <unk> who was later issued a 10 @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty . Barrichello pitted for the second time on lap 47 . Michael Schumacher and Ralf Schumacher made their pit stops on lap 50 , one lap ahead of Coulthard . 
 Häkkinen pitted on lap 53 and remained in the lead , having built a 20 @-@ second lead over Michael Schumacher . Frentzen became the last driver to make a scheduled pit stop on lap 56 . At the end of lap 57 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the running order was Häkkinen , Michael Schumacher , Coulthard , Barrichello , Ralf Schumacher , Frentzen , Button , Trulli , Diniz , Irvine , Salo , Wurz , Herbert , Villeneuve , Verstappen , Zonta , Gené , Mazzacane and de la Rosa . Herbert spun while battling for 13th position with Villeneuve . Diniz retired from the race when his engine failed on lap 63 . Herbert came under pressure from Verstappen on lap 67 and suffered his second spin , losing the position to the Arrows driver . Herbert retired on lap 69 as the result of gearbox problems . Mazzacane pulled off the track on lap 70 and retired because of an engine failure . 
 Trulli managed to close the gap to Button and passed him for seventh on lap 74 , while Button lost another position to Irvine one lap later . Häkkinen crossed the finish line on lap 77 to win his third victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 45 : 33 @.@ 869 , at an average speed of 108 @.@ 097 miles per hour ( 173 @.@ 965 km / h ) . Michael Schumacher finished second 7 @.@ 9 seconds behind , ahead of Coulthard in third , Barrichello in fourth , Ralf Schumacher in fifth with Frentzen rounding out the points scoring positions in sixth . Trulli , Irvine , Button , Salo and Wurz filled the next five positions abeit one lap behind the race winner . Villeneuve , Verstappen , Zonta , Gené and de la Rosa were the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Häkkinen stated that his good start was instigated by modifications made to his car 's engine . His win was praised by the Vice President of Mercedes @-@ Benz Motorsport Norbert Haug . " Mika had a great race , " he said . " His victory may have looked easy , but it was tough to achieve and in my view this was one of his best drives ever . " Michael Schumacher said that although he was unable to catch Häkkinen , he was happy to finish in second position . Coulthard said that he believed that his car 's suffered from balance issues before taking his first pit stop which accounted for his lack of pace . He also added that spending time behind back @-@ markers during the second stint hindered his attempts to overtake Michael Schumacher but admitted that third position was his best possible result . 
 After Ferrari 's victory at the previous race , their team 's technical director Ross Brawn said that " Our pitstops and our race strategy went well , but we just weren 't quick enough . " , while di Montezemolo urged the mechanics and engineers of Ferrari to concentrate on rectifying the issue of wheel @-@ spin and also praised Häkkinen for his recent trend of good starts . Barrichello said that he blamed his poor qualifying performance for his fourth @-@ place finish . Ralf Schumacher and Frentzen were pleased to finish in fifth and sixth places respectively . Fisichella , who retired from the race from an brake problem , said that the reoccurring problem caused damage to his car and forced his later retirement . Gené placed blame upon faulty radio communication to his team as the reason for his stop @-@ go penalty and said that he did not receive the blue flag until the last moment . Jaguar 's technical director Gary Anderson was angry with Gené after the race as he believed the Spaniard 's driving cost Irvine the chance to take a points @-@ scoring position . " I don ’ t understand why the blue flags weren ’ t waved because it was plain for all to see . " said Anderson . 
 As a consequence of the race , Häkkinen moved into the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , on 64 points , taking the championship lead for the first time in the 2000 season . Michael Schumacher lost the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , falling two points behind Häkkinen . Coulthard maintained third place with 58 points , nine points ahead of Barrichello and forty @-@ one in front of Fisichella . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren took over the lead of the Constructors ' Championship with 112 points , pushing Ferrari on 111 points to second place . Williams increased the gap to Benetton to 6 points , with Jordan jumping ahead of BAR for fifth on 12 points . Despite McLaren taking the lead of both championships , their team principal Ron Dennis acknowledged that he expected both his drivers would have the advantage in the most of the five remaining races although he believed that being complacent would reduce McLaren 's chances of success . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Darlington 's Bridge at Delaware Station = 
 The Darlington 's Bridge at Delaware Station was a highway bridge over the Delaware River in the community of Delaware , New Jersey ( known locally as Delaware Station ) . Formerly a railroad bridge constructed by the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad in 1871 to replace an earlier 1855 timber span , the bridge was sold off when the new one upstream was constructed . Henry V. Darlington , an Episcopal minister in Delaware and nearby Belvidere offered to buy the second @-@ hand bridge for $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 1914 USD , equal to $ 118 @,@ 123 today ) . Darlington converted it into a highway bridge , using two fired members of the nearby Meyer 's Ferry to be toll collectors . The bridge prospered , becoming a part of State Highway Route 6 in 1927 and U.S. Route 46 in 1936 . In 1932 , during the massive state takeover of bridges by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , Darlington refused offers , bargaining his way up to $ 275 @,@ 000 ( 1932 USD , equal to $ 4 @,@ 769 @,@ 573 today ) before accepting the sale . This amount was a far cry from the nearby Belvidere @-@ Riverton and Portland @-@ Columbia Covered Bridge , which were accepted for $ 60 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 1 @,@ 040 @,@ 634 today ) and $ 50 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 867 @,@ 195 today ) respectively . On that moment , tolls along the bridge and Route 6 were eliminated . The bridge prospered toll @-@ free for another 21 years , until the construction of the Portland @-@ Columbia Toll Bridge upstream at Columbia . Although Reverend Darlington was still alive to see all this transpire , the Commission ceased operations on the Darlington Bridge on April 3 , 1954 , and the bridge was immediately demolished . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Railroad bridge = = = 
 As expansion of the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad ( DL & W ) continued westward from Hoboken , the railroad company saw the need to build a new bridge over the Delaware River . Reaching the community of Delaware ( named after the river nearby ) , DL & W built a train station previously in the community , denoted as Delaware Station . The new wood bridge was constructed on the railroad mainline during 1855 . The structure lasted a short time , until DL & W replaced the wooden crossing for a new 740 feet ( 230 m ) long iron bridge . The new bridge had two tracks to cross the river , serving the local area with coal cars and boxcars crossing . The new bridge survived the floods in 1903 that destroyed many bridges ( including the nearby Riverton @-@ Belvidere Bridge ) along the Delaware and continued to prosper . 
 However , as trains , cars and locomotives began to get heavier and larger , the DL & W needed to build a new bridge across the river to support the heavier weights . In 1914 , they built the new bridge just upstream for the reason that it would not have to move much track for better service . As soon as the new bridge was finished , DL & W put the former one up for sale . Demand for second @-@ hand bridges were not high at the time , and when Henry V.B. Darlington , a local Episcopal minister , put up an offer of $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 1914 USD ) for the bridge , DL & W immediately took the money . The railroad did not check on the background of Reverend Darlington or asked what he wanted to do with the iron structure . His money was " as good as anybody 's " , according to DL & W. 
 = = = Henry Darlington 's ownership = = = 
 After Darlington bought the railroad bridge from the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad , he made his intentions with the five decade @-@ old bridge clear . He took out the tracks , replacing them with a paved roadway . Darlington knew the automobile was becoming a big entity in the 1910s and 1920s , turning the bridge into a vehicular bridge was an important decision to make the most out of the crossing . He also figured that the bridge would make a good approach for drivers coming to visit the local natural attractions , such as the Delaware Water Gap and the Pocono Mountains . Darlington created new roadway approaches ( Lackawanna Road and Ferry Lane ) to the bridge and even two buildings on the New Jersey side of the span . One building was for toll collecting while the other was for living quarters . These quarters were soon occupied by Edward McCracken and his wife . McCracken and his wife had come from the Meyer 's Ferry , a local ferry service running at that point on the Delaware since the early 18th century . McCracken had been the local ferry operator , but when a large accident occurred during a dinner break killed four passengers , the owner put the ferry under his control and later fired McCracken . Klein later sold the ferry , which Darlington bought and shut down . He immediately hired the McCrackens to work as the toll collectors . 
 In the meantime , the only other bridge across the Delaware River easily accessible for vehicular use was the covered bridge in Columbia , New Jersey and Portland , Pennsylvania . Drivers heading along the local roads ( later designated as State Highway Route 5 ) , often came to Darlington 's Bridge first . The McCrackens collected tolls in large bushel baskets , which were often filled to the brim of quarters and half @-@ dollars . Locals said that the McCrackens were sometimes spotted dropping these coins off the bridge and into the river below , although swimmers were never able to find anything of value to support the myth . Even though the bridge made a large sum of a money and the tollhouse was often filled with money , the place was never robbed for the money . This was because the McCrackens kept two <unk> in the tollhouse , named Duke and <unk> . They kept the place clear from thieves and to add insult to injury , kept people away from visiting the McCrackens at all . Duke and <unk> often kept people from getting money they may have dropped on the ground for people exiting their cars . 
 In the time of the bridge prospering , Reverend Darlington was wed to Dorothy Stone Smith at the Trinity Chapel in Newark . The wedding , which occurred in November 1920 , made the local news and the ceremony was performed by Darlington 's father , a big @-@ name bishop . Two years later , Darlington made the news again , this time with the birth of he and his wife 's first child ( a son ) in Orange , New Jersey at Orange Memorial Hospital . 
 = = = Buyout and dismantling = = = 
 The bridge continued to prosper through the 1920s and 1930s with a toll of one quarter to cross the bridge , with drivers of State Highway Route 6 coming along the bridge from the junction with State Highway Route 8 coming across the bridge since 1927 . During the 1920s and 1930s , the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania began to buy out bridges along the Delaware River under the Joint Commission for the Elimination of Toll Bridges . The reconstructed bridge at Belvidere was bought by the commission for $ 60 @,@ 000 ( 1920s USD ) and the covered bridge at Columbia for only $ 50 @,@ 000 . Although the commission tried to buy the second @-@ hand railroad bridge for a lower , unspecified amount , Darlington used his strong bargaining skills to raise the amount to $ 275 @,@ 000 , a far cry from the other local bridges . Residents of Knowlton Township , New Jersey rejoiced at the fact of when the bridge was bought , tolls were eliminated from the crossing . The new generation of people prospered at the thought that the crossing the Delaware would be forever free . 
 Although the bridge remained in service for another 21 years as a free crossing , the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission constructed a brand new bridge at the Portland @-@ Columbia . The new toll bridge was constructed in 1953 for $ 4 million ( 1953 USD , equal to $ 35 @,@ 378 @,@ 109 today ) , but the toll was only one quarter ( equal to $ 2 @.@ 21 today ) , like the former price of the Darlington 's Bridge . Darlington , who had retired from his job in Orange in 1950 , was alive and was in disbelief . The next April , the Toll Bridge Commission went ahead and dismantled the bridge made useful by Darlington , which was fought by several legal actions . The bridge ceased operations on April 3 , 1954 , being demolished soon after . The covered bridge at Columbia was destroyed during Hurricane Diane the next August . Just before the demolishing of the Darlington 's Bridge , the approach on the New Jersey side had been renumbered to State Highway Route 163 , which remains in condition from when the bridge was in use . 
 = SMS Nymphe = 
 SMS Nymphe was the third member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class , built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , laid down in 1898 , launched in November 1899 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in September 1900 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Nymphe was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The ship had a long , if uneventful , career that spanned over thirty years and saw service in both the Imperial Navy and the Reichsmarine . She served as a coastal defense ship during the first two years of World War I before being reduced to a barracks ship . She returned to active duty with the Reichsmarine in 1924 and served until 1929 . She was stricken in August 1931 and broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Nymphe was ordered under the contract name " A " and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1898 and launched on 21 November 1899 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 20 September 1900 . The ship was 105 @.@ 1 meters ( 345 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 11 m ( 13 @.@ 5 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 017 t ( 2 @,@ 969 long tons ; 3 @,@ 326 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines manufactured by AG @-@ Germania . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Nymphe carried 500 tonnes ( 490 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 570 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 610 km ; 4 @,@ 110 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , for 100 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in 1900 , Nymphe served with the High Seas Fleet in home waters . She also served as a training ship for naval cadets . At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was reduced to a coastal defense ship , a role she served in up to 1916 . She was then withdrawn from active service and used as a barracks ship and training vessel , based in Kiel . She was among the six cruisers permitted to the newly reorganized Reichsmarine by the Treaty of Versailles . In 1924 , the ship was significantly modernized at the Deutsche Werke in Wilhelmshaven . Her ram bow was rebuilt into a clipper bow , which increased her overall length to 108 @.@ 7 m ( 357 ft ) . Her old 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns were replaced with newer SK L / 45 guns in U @-@ boat mountings and two 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes in deck @-@ mounted launchers were <unk> served on active duty with the Reichsmarine from 1925 to 1929 , when she was withdrawn from service a second time . She was formally stricken from the naval register on 31 March 1931 , and she was sold for scrapping on 29 August , for 61 @,@ 500 Reichsmarks . She was broken up the following year in Hamburg . 
 = Court of Chancery = 
 The Court of Chancery was a court of equity in England and Wales that followed a set of loose rules to avoid the slow pace of change and possible harshness ( or " inequity " ) of the common law . The Chancery had jurisdiction over all matters of equity , including trusts , land law , the administration of the estates of lunatics and the guardianship of infants . Its initial role was somewhat different , however ; as an extension of the Lord Chancellor 's role as Keeper of the King 's Conscience , the Court was an administrative body primarily concerned with conscientious law . Thus the Court of Chancery had a far greater remit than the common law courts , whose decisions it had the jurisdiction to overrule for much of its existence , and was far more flexible . Until the 19th century , the Court of Chancery could apply a far wider range of remedies than the common law courts , such as specific performance and injunctions , and also had some power to grant damages in special circumstances . With the shift of the Exchequer of Pleas towards a common law court and loss of its equitable jurisdiction by the Administration of Justice Act 1841 , the Chancery became the only national equitable body in the English legal system . 
 Academics estimate that the Court of Chancery formally split from and became independent of the curia regis in the mid @-@ 14th century , at which time it consisted of the Lord Chancellor and his personal staff , the Chancery . Initially an administrative body with some judicial duties , the Chancery experienced an explosive growth in its work during the 15th century , particularly under the House of York , which academics attribute to its becoming an almost entirely judicial body . From the time of Elizabeth I onwards the Court was severely criticized for its slow pace , large backlogs , and high costs . Those problems persisted until its dissolution , despite being mitigated somewhat by reforms , particularly during the 19th century . Attempts at fusing the Chancery with the common law courts began in the 1850s , and finally succeeded with the 1873 and 1875 Supreme Court of Judicature Acts , which dissolved the Chancery and created a new unified High Court of Justice , with the Chancery Division – one of three divisions of the High Court – succeeding the Court of Chancery as an equitable body . 
 For much of its existence the Court was formally led by the Lord Chancellor , assisted by the judges of the common law courts . The staff of the court included a large number of clerks , led by the Master of the Rolls , who regularly heard cases on his own . In 1813 a Vice @-@ Chancellor was appointed to deal with the Chancery 's increasing backlogs , and two more were appointed in 1841 . Offices of the Chancery were sold by the Lord Chancellor for much of its history , raising large amounts of money . Many of the clerks and other officials were sinecures who , in lieu of wages , charged increasingly exorbitant fees to process cases , one of the main reasons why the cost of bringing a case to the Chancery was so high . The 19th century saw the abolition of many sinecure offices and the institution of a wage and pension for the Lord Chancellor to curb the sale of offices , and later the right to appoint officials was transferred from the Chancellor to the Crown . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The Court of Chancery originated , as did the other High Courts before 1875 , in the Norman curia regis or King 's Council , maintained by most early rulers of England after 1066 . Under the feudal system , the Council was made up of the Monarch , the Great Officers of the Crown and anyone else the Monarch allowed to attend . Its jurisdiction was virtually unlimited , with executive , judicial and legislative functions . This large body contained lawyers , peers , and members of the Church , many of whom lived far from London . It soon became apparent that it was too unwieldy to deal with the nation 's day @-@ to @-@ day business . As a result , a smaller curia was formed to deal with the regular business of the country , and this soon split into various courts : first the exchequer of pleas , to deal with finance , and then the Court of Common Pleas , to deal with " common " cases . 
 The Chancery started as the personal staff of the Lord Chancellor , described as " a great secretarial bureau , a home office , a foreign office , and a ministry of justice " . The earliest reference to legal issues being sent to him is from 1280 , when Edward I of England , annoyed with the number of cases coming to him which could have been dealt with by other elements of his administration , passed a statute saying that : 
 all petitions that touch the Seal shall go first to the Chancellor , and those that touch the Exchequer to the Exchequer , and those that touch the justices or the law of the land to the justices , and those that touch the <unk> to the justices of the <unk> . And if the matters are so great , or so much of grace , that the Chancellor and the others cannot do what is asked without the King , then they shall take them to the King to know his will , and that no petition come before the King and his Council except by the hands of the said Chancellor and the other chief ministers ; so that the King and his Council may be able , without the embarrassment of other business , to attend to the important business of his kingdom and his foreign lands . 
 Records show dozens of early cases being sent to the Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls , but at the time the Chancellor had no specific jurisdiction to deal with them ; the cases were referred to him only as a matter of convenience . Under Edward II the Chancellor dedicated set days to hearing pleas , as documented in the records of the Parliament of Lincoln in 1315 , which also show that some cases were heard by his personal staff , the Chancery , and not by the Chancellor . By 1320 requests were regularly sent there , and heard by the judges of the common law courts , with the rules used to settle cases being those of " law or reason " , sometimes simply " reason " , a far more liberal and adjustable approach than the common law . 
 = = = Rise and early years = = = 
 The Chancery came to prominence after the decline of the Exchequer , dealing with the law of equity , something more fluid and adaptable than the common law . The early Court of Chancery dealt with verbal contracts , matters of land law and matters of trusts , and had a very liberal view when setting aside complaints ; poverty , for example , was an acceptable reason to cancel a contract or obligation . Complaints were normally brought via a bill or petition , which had to show that the common law did not provide a remedy for the problem . The Chancery writs were in French , and later English , rather than the Latin used for common law bills . In the reign of Edward III , the Court found a fixed home at Westminster Hall , where it sat almost continually until its dissolution . Prior to this , the disposing of justice had been made difficult by the fact that the Lord Chancellor was required to travel with the King wherever he went . 
 By 1345 the Lord Chancellor began to be seen as the leader of the Court of Chancery , rather than as a representative of the King , and writs and bills were addressed directly to him . Under Richard II it became practice to consider the Chancery separate from the curia ; academic William Carne considers this a key moment in confirming the independence of the Court of Chancery . The Chancellor and his clerks often heard the cases directly , rather than having them referred to the council itself ; occasionally a committee of lay and church members disposed of them , assisted by the judges of the common law courts . John Baker argues that it was the late 14th century that saw Chancery procedure become fixed , citing the work done by John Waltham as Master of the Rolls between 1381 and 1386 , and notes that this period also saw the first complaints about the Chancery . 
 The Chancery and its growing powers soon came to be resented by Parliament and the nobility ; Carne says that it is possible to trace a general " trend of opposition " during the Plantagenet period , particularly from members of the clergy , who were more used to Roman law than equity . From the reign of Richard II , the House of Commons regularly complained about the work of the Court , and in 1390 it petitioned the King to pronounce that the Court could not act contrary to the common law , nor annul a judgement without due process . At the same time , it asked that no writ could be issued that would compel a man to appear before the Court ; if it was , the clerk who issued it would lose his job and the Lord Chancellor would be fined £ 100 . The King gave evasive answers to the requests , and made no decision . The Commons did succeed in making some changes to the Court 's procedure , however ; in 1394 the King assented to their request that victorious defendants in the Court have their costs recompensed from the other side , and in 1341 the King , on their application , allowed the Lord Chancellor to send cases directly to the common law courts , to avoid the common law judges having to waste time travelling . Kerly suggests that many complaints from the Commons came from lawyers of the common law , aggrieved at the Chancery 's extended jurisdiction that overlapped with that of the common law . These complaints from the Commons did not prevent the Court from successfully functioning ; in 1393 , for example , it was considered prominent enough that the House of Lords sent two cases there to be dealt with . 
 According to many academics , the Court of Chancery really began to expand its caseload during the 15th century ; Margaret Avery reports a massive increase in cases during the 1440s , while Nicholas <unk> suggests that the real expansion came during Yorkist rule ( 1461 – 85 ) , when the number of cases submitted each year quadrupled . He gives complaints about the perversion of justice in the common law courts , along with growing mercantile and commercial interests , as the main reason for the growth , arguing that this was the period when the Chancery changed from being an administrative body with some judicial functions to " one of the four central courts of the realm ... the growth in the number of [ cases ] is a primary indicator of the changing position of Chancery " . This increasing role was assisted by the changing function of the court : until the late 14th century , private parties could not bring cases to the Chancery as they could to the other courts , while by the 15th century the number of private cases had increased to the point where there were many complaints in Parliament . Marsh writes that another reason for the Chancery 's growing influence was the remedies available ; through orders of specific performance and injunctions , the Court could not only rectify previous wrongs but prevent future wrongs from occurring , while the common law courts were limited to awarding damages . 
 = = = = Chancery 's role in development of Standard English = = = = 
 Chancery English , used in official documents , can be seen as the beginnings of Standard English – a national standard of spelling and grammar . By the 15th century , the City of Westminster had been the seat of government administration for about three centuries . After about 1430 , the use of English in administrative documents replaced French which had been used since the Norman conquest . Consequently , the written English that developed at the Court of Chancery eventually became a standard , both in its style of handwriting ( ' Chancery hand ' ) and in its grammar and vocabulary . By the 1440s and 1450s comparative regularisation of spelling had begun to emerge . 
 = = = Competition with the common law = = = 
 The early Elizabethan period featured a dispute between the Court of Chancery and common @-@ law courts over who held pre @-@ eminence . It had been the practice under Henry VI that plaintiffs in the common @-@ law courts could not execute judgments given by the common @-@ law judges if the Lord Chancellor felt their claim was " against conscience " . This had been vehemently opposed by the common @-@ law judges , who felt that if the Lord Chancellor had the power to override their decisions , parties to a case would flock to the Court of Chancery . The dispute over the pre @-@ eminence of the Lord Chancellor continued into Elizabeth I 's reign , with the judges increasing in strength ; the Lord Chancellor was no longer a clergyman whom it was risky to offend , while the judges had grown in stature . Sir Edward Coke cites in his Reports a case at the end of Elizabeth 's reign which seems to indicate that the Chancellor 's prerogative had been overturned , when the judges ( without opposition from the Monarch ) allowed a claim to proceed despite the Lord Chancellor 's implied jurisdiction . At the same time , the common @-@ law judges ruled that the Chancery had no jurisdiction over matters of freehold . 
 The Lord Chancellor of the time , Lord Ellesmere , was not dissuaded , and maintained that he had the jurisdiction to oversee decisions of the common @-@ law courts and matters of freehold . In 1614 , he heard the case of Courtney v. Glanvil , dictating that Glanvil should be imprisoned for deceit ; this was overruled by Sir Edward Coke in the Court of King 's Bench , who demanded that Glanvil be released and issued a writ of habeas corpus . Two years later , the Earl of Oxford 's Case came before Ellesmere , who issued a judgment that directly contradicted English law based on the " Law of God " . Coke and the other judges overruled this judgment while Ellesmere was ill , taking the case as an opportunity to completely overthrow the Lord Chancellor 's jurisdiction . Ellesmere appealed to the Monarch , who referred the matter to the Attorney General for the Prince of Wales and Francis Bacon , the Attorney General for England and Wales . Both recommended a judgment in Ellesmere 's favour , which the Monarch made , saying : 
 as mercy and justice be the true supports of our Royal Throne ; and it properly <unk> to our princely office to take care and provide that our subjects have equal and indifferent justice ministered to them ; and that when their case <unk> to be relieved in course of equity by suit in our Court of Chancery , they should not be abandoned and exposed to perish under the rigor and extremity of our laws , we ... do approve , <unk> and confirm , as well the practice of our Court of Chancery . 
 Coke 's challenge to the Chancery is seen by academic Duncan Kerly as helping him lose his position as a judge , and until its dissolution the Court of Chancery could overrule judgments issued in the common @-@ law courts . This was not the end of the dispute , however ; in his Institutes of the Lawes of England , Coke suggested that the Monarch 's decree was unlawful , and his contemporary David Jenkins wrote in Eight Centuries of Reports that " the excess of Jurisdiction in Chancery , in examining Judgments at Common Law " was one of the largest abuses of the law . In the 17th century Robert Atkyns attempted to renew this controversy in his book An Enquiry into the Jurisdiction of the Chancery in Causes of Equity , but without any tangible result . Even so , future Lord Chancellors were more cautious ; when Francis Bacon succeeded Ellesmere , he made sure to prevent the misuse of injunctions . Horwitz writes that this was not just limited to Bacon , and that " after the dramatic confrontations between Lord Chief Justice Coke and Lord Chancellor Ellesmere , chancellors took care to circumscribe the Court 's corrective jurisdiction and to focus more narrowly on territories they had staked out as peculiarly their own " . 
 = = = Attempted reform under the Commonwealth of England = = = 
 By the time of the English Civil War , the Court of Chancery was being criticised extensively for its procedure and practice . During the 16th century the Court was vastly overworked ; Francis Bacon wrote of 2 @,@ 000 orders being made a year , while Sir Edward Coke estimated the backlog to be around 16 @,@ 000 cases . This was partly due to the incompetence of the judges , and partially due to the procedure used ; evidence was re @-@ heard up to three times and orders were issued and then overruled , only to be issued again : " what was ordered one day was contradicted the next , so as in some cases there had been five hundred orders and faire more as some affirmed " . The Court spent a long time on each case , which , combined with the backlog , made the pursuit of a case extremely expensive . This was exacerbated by the appointment to the Court of useless , highly paid officials by the Lord Chancellor or Master of the Rolls , many of whom were their friends . The Chancellor and Master both openly sold these roles , whose exorbitant pay is more surprising considering that their duties were normally such that could be easily performed by solicitor 's clerks , and that they were usually performed by <unk> , not by the officials . 
 In 1649 , during the English Civil War , Parliament published a series of orders to reform the Court . Most were from the doctrines set out by Francis Bacon as Lord Chancellor , but there were some more modern reforms : counsels to the defendants could deliver pleas , rather than defendants in person , thus saving the cost of a Commissioner of Oaths , and cases were to be heard in the order they were accepted by the court . Parliament also fixed the fees that officers could charge , in an attempt to reduce the expense of a case . The following year , Parliament appointed a commission to look at court reform ; this made many recommendations , but none that directly affected the Chancery . In August 1653 another debate took place in Parliament , lasting two days , in which a paper titled " Observations concerning the Court of Chancery " was circulated ; this concerned the costs , workings , and officers of the Court . A second paper was given out , " for the regulation or taking away of the Court of Chancery , and settling the business of Equity according to the original and primitive constitution of it ; and for taking away all unnecessary fees , offices and officers and formalities now used , and for the speedy dispatch of business " . 
 Parliament eventually proposed dissolving the court as it then stood and replacing it with " some of the most able and honest men " , who would be tasked with hearing equity cases . Rather than the mass of clerks on the staff , a sufficient number of godly , able , honest and experienced clerks , which be working attorneys and clerks and not overseeing officers " would be appointed , and the Bar would elect two supervising Chief Clerks to advise on points of practice . A far @-@ reaching and heavily criticised draft , this was eventually replaced by an even more thorough @-@ going bill . The judges would be six Masters , who would sit in groups of three and be appointed by Parliament , assisted by a Chief Clerk . All Justices of the Peace would be allowed to submit cases to the court , with cases to be heard within 60 days . The party that lost the case was to pay full fees to the other side ; the fees would be set ludicrously low . This bill was never put into effect , as Parliament was dissolved . Oliver Cromwell did appoint a Commission to institute similar provisions in 1654 , but the Commission refused to perform its duties . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 After the English Restoration , those judges and officials sacked under Cromwell were reinstated , with little modern progression ; as Kerly puts it , " unjust judges presided again , and rank maladministration invaded the offices " . The situation was much improved , nonetheless , because many of the faults were down to the machinery of the court rather than the spirit , which Lord Clarendon soon rectified . Upon appointment as Lord Chancellor he immediately published a new issue of the Orders for the Regulation of the Practice of the Court of Chancery . This was based on the code set by the Cromwellian Commissioners , and limited the fees charged by the court and the amount of time they could take on a case . 
 An effect of the Civil War and resulting Commonwealth of England , particularly the " liberal " values and feelings it stirred up , was the continuous modernisation and improvement of the common law courts , something that reduced the interference of the Lord Chancellor in common law matters , except in areas where they had wildly divergent principles and law . Under Charles II , for the first time , there was a type of common law appeal where the nature of the evidence in the initial trial was taken into account , which reduced the need to go to the Court of Chancery . As a result , the nature of the Court of Chancery changed ; rather than being a major corrective system for the common law , it became primarily concerned with the administration and protection of rights , as opposed to the common law courts , which were mainly concerned with the remedy and retribution of problems . This was further enforced by the Statute of Frauds , which confirmed Chancery principles across the board , allowing people to receive the same treatment in the common law courts as they did in the Chancery . 
 A major reform to the Court happened soon after the restoration , with the introduction of a right of appeal to the House of Lords from the Chancery . Prior to this there had been no records of appeals to the Lords , and a committee had concluded that there was no precedent to give the Lords jurisdiction over equity matters , except when problems and cases were sent directly to Parliament ( as occasionally had been the case ) . In 1660 the Convention Parliament claimed for itself the right of appellate jurisdiction over equity matters , and also the right of original jurisdiction to hear equity cases at first instance . After disputes which lasted into the next Parliament , this second measure was dropped , but the right to hear equity appeals was confirmed . Horowitz writes that despite these changes , one of the academic certainties is that the problems which had dogged the court for the last two centuries persisted ; Observations on the <unk> and Expensive Proceedings in the Court of Chancery , written in 1701 , listed 25 different procedures , areas and situations which contributed to the problems of high fees and slow processes . 
 = = = Further reform = = = 
 Lord Somers , following his dismissal as Lord Chancellor , introduced an Act in 1706 which " became the most important act of law reform which the 18th century produced " . The Act significantly amended the existing law and court procedure , and while most of it was aimed at the common @-@ law courts , it did affect the Chancery . For equity , the Act provided that a party trying to have his case dismissed could not do so until he had paid the full costs , rather than the nominal costs that were previously required ; at the same time , the reforms the Act made to common @-@ law procedure ( such as allowing claims to be brought against executors of wills ) reduced the need for parties to go to equity for a remedy . Legal historian Wilfrid Prest writes that despite these legislative enactments , the tally of which " begins to look quite impressive " , the old problems continued , albeit less frequently ; one barrister of the time claimed that going to the Court with a case worth anything less than £ 500 was a waste of time . 
 Under Lord Hardwicke , Chancery procedure was further reformed with a pair of orders published in 1741 and 1747 , which mandated that a claimant who brought his case to court and had it dismissed immediately should pay full costs to the other side , rather than the 40 shillings previously paid , and that parties filing bills of review should pay £ 50 for the privilege . At the same time , a review of the Court 's costs and fees was undertaken by a Parliamentary Committee . The Committee reported that fees and costs had increased significantly since the last review under Charles I , a number of expensive honorary positions had been created , and on many occasions court officers had not known what the correct fees were . At the same time , proceedings had grown to several thousand pages in length , necessitating additional expense . The Committee concluded " that the interest which a great number of officers and clerks have in the proceedings of the Court of Chancery , has been a principal cause of extending bills , answers , pleadings , examinations and other forms and copies of them , to an unnecessary length , to the great delay of justice and the oppression of the subject " . They recommended that a list of permissible fees be published and circulated to the court officials . 
 The recommendations were not immediately acted on , but in 1743 a list of permissible fees was published , and to cut down on paperwork , no party was required to obtain office copies of proceedings . The permissible fees list contained over 1 @,@ 000 items , which Kerly describes as " an appalling example of the abuses which the unrestrained farming of the Offices of the Court , and the payment of all officials by fees had developed " . 
 = = = Victorian era = = = 
 Despite these small reforms , the 18th century ended with continuous and unrestrained attacks on the Court . Although complaints had been common since the time of Elizabeth I , the problems had become more unrestrained , at the same time as politically neutral law reformers first arose in any great number . Many critics were barristers of the common law , ignorant of the court 's workings , but some , such as Sir Samuel Romilly , had trained as a Chancery advocate and were well aware of the Chancery 's procedure . The success of the Code Napoleon and the writings of Jeremy Bentham are seen by academic Duncan Kerly to have had much to do with the criticism , and the growing wealth of the country and increasing international trade meant it was crucial that there be a functioning court system for matters of equity . While the upper classes had been struggling with the Court for centuries , and regarded it as a necessary evil , the growing middle and merchant classes were more demanding . With increasing court backlogs , it was clear to many law reformers and politicians that serious reform was needed . 
 The first major reforms were the appointment of a Vice @-@ Chancellor in 1813 to hear cases , and the extension of the Master of the Rolls ' jurisdiction in 1833 to hear any and all cases . In 1824 a Chancery Commission was appointed to oversee the Court , which the political opposition maintained was simply to protect it ; the membership included the Lord Chancellor , the Master of the Rolls and all senior Chancery judges . Some significant reforms were proposed ; in 1829 , for example , Lord Lyndhurst proposed unsuccessfully that the equity jurisdiction of the Court of Exchequer be merged with the Chancery , and that a fourth judge be appointed to hear the additional cases . A year later , when the common law courts were each gaining a judge , he repeated his proposal , but the bill was strongly opposed by judges who maintained that the court backlog did not justify the additional expense of a fourth judge . Eventually , two more Vice @-@ Chancellors were appointed in 1841 , and a decade later two Lord Justices were tasked with hearing appeals from the Court through the Court of Appeal in Chancery . These are described by Lobban as " hasty reactions to mounting arrears " rather than the result of long @-@ term planning . 
 As a result of the new appointments , the court backlog was significantly reduced – the court processed 1 @,@ 700 cases in 1846 – 49 compared to 959 in 1819 – 24 – but it rose again after the death of Shadwell VC and retirement of Wigram VC . Shadwell , appointed under the 1831 Act of Parliament , could be replaced , but a principal in the 1841 Act ( under which Wigram had been appointed ) meant that it provided for two life appointments to the court , not two open positions ; after the retirement or death of the judges , no more could be appointed . Again , the backlog became a problem , particularly since the Lord Chancellor was distracted with the appellate cases through the Court of Appeal in Chancery and the House of Lords , leaving a maximum of three Chancery judges who were available to hear cases . Further structural reforms were proposed ; Richard Bethell suggested three more Vice @-@ Chancellors and " an Appellate Tribunal in Chancery formed of two of the Vice Chancellors taken in rotation " , but this came to nothing . 
 The 1830s saw a reduction in the " old corruption " that had long plagued the court , first through the Chancery <unk> Act 1832 ( which abolished a number of sinecure offices within the court and provided a pension and pay rise for the Lord Chancellor , in the hope that it would reduce the need for the Chancellor to make money by selling court offices ) and then through the Chancery Regulation Act 1833 . ( which changed the appointments system so that Masters in Chancery would henceforth be appointed by The Crown , not by the Lord Chancellor , and that they would be paid wages . ) Through the abolition of sinecures , taking into account the wages and pension , this saved the Court £ 21 @,@ 670 a year . The government had initially intended the 1832 bill to go further and abolish the Six Clerks , but the Clerks successfully lobbied to prevent this . This did not save them , however ; in 1842 the " nettle " of the Six Clerks Office was grasped by Thomas Pemberton , who attacked them in the House of Commons for doing effectively sinecure work for high fees that massively increased the expense involved in cases . As a result , the Court of Chancery Act 1842 was passed in the same year that abolished the office of the Six Clerks completely . 
 Some further procedural reforms were undertaken in the 1850s . In 1850 , a new set of Chancery orders were produced by the Lord Chancellor , allowing Masters to speed up cases in whatever way they chose and allowing plaintiffs to file a claim , rather than the more expensive and long @-@ winded bill of complaint . The Suitors in Chancery Relief Act 1852 gave all court officials salaries , abolished the need to pay them fees and made it illegal for them to receive gratuities ; it also removed more sinecure positions . The Master in Chancery Abolition Act 1852 abolished the Masters in Chancery , allowing all cases to be heard directly by judges instead of bounced back @-@ and @-@ forth between judges and Masters . As a result of these reforms the court became far more efficient , and the backlog decreased ; in the 1860s an average of 3 @,@ 207 cases were submitted each year , while the Court heard and dismissed 3 @,@ 833 , many of them from the previous backlog . Much of this work was carried out by the growing number of clerks , however , and members of the legal profession became concerned about the " famine " of equity judges .. Despite these reforms , it was still possible for Charles Dickens , writing in 1852 in the preface to his novel Bleak House , to bemoan the inefficiencies of the Court of Chancery . His novel revolves around a fictional long @-@ running Chancery case , Jarndyce and Jarndyce . He observed that at the time he was writing there was a case before the Chancery court " which was commenced nearly twenty years ago ... and which is ( I am assured ) no nearer to its termination now than when it was begun " . He concluded that " If I wanted other authorities for Jarndyce and Jarndyce , I could rain them on these pages , to the shame of a parsimonious public " . 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 The idea of fusing the common @-@ law and equity courts first came to prominence in the 1850s ; although the Law Times dismissed it as " suicide " in 1852 , the idea gained mainstream credibility , and by the end of the year the Times was writing that there was " almost unanimity " of opinion that the existence of two separate systems was " the parent of most of the defects in the administration of our law " . Much of the impetus for fusion came from pressure groups and lawyers ' associations . They partially succeeded with the Common Law Procedure Act 1854 and Chancery Amendment Act 1858 , which gave both courts access to the full range of remedies . Until then , the common @-@ law courts were limited to granting damages , and the Chancery was limited to granting specific performance or injunctions . The County Courts ( Equity Jurisdiction ) Act 1865 gave the county courts the authority to use equitable remedies , although it was rarely used . The Lord Chancellors during this period were more cautious , and despite a request by the lawyers ' associations to establish a Royal Commission to look at fusion , they refused to do so . 
 After the Chancery Regulation Act 1862 had gone some way toward procedural reform , in February 1867 , <unk> Palmer again brought the problem of having two separate court systems to Parliament 's attention , and in March 1870 Lord Hatherley introduced a bill to create a single , unified High Court of Justice . The bill was a weak one , not containing any provision addressing which court would deal with the common law and which with equity , and was also silent on the structure of the court , as Hatherley believed the difference between the common law and equity was one of procedure , not substance . As a result , the bill was heavily opposed from two sides : those who opposed fusion , and those who supported fusion but felt the provisions were too weak and vague to be of any use . As a result , the bill was eventually withdrawn . 
 In 1873 the idea was resurrected – again by Palmer , who was now Lord Selborne and the new Lord Chancellor – as the Supreme Court of Judicature bill . While still cautious , Selborne 's bill was far more structured than Hatherley 's , and contained more detail on what was to be done . Rather than fusing the common law and equity , which he saw as impracticable since it would destroy the idea of trusts , he decided to fuse the courts and the procedure . The final draft provided that all of the existing superior courts would be fused into one court consisting of two levels ; one of first instance , one appellate . The court of first instance , to be known as the High Court of Justice , would be subdivided into several divisions based on the old superior courts , one of which , the Chancery Division , would deal with equity cases . All jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery was to be transferred to the Chancery Division ; Section 25 of the Act provided that , where there was conflict between the common law and equity , the latter would prevail . An appeal from each division went to the appellate level , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales . These provisions were brought into effect after amendment with the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1875 , and the Court of Chancery ceased to exist . The Master of the Rolls was transferred to the new Court of Appeal , the Lord Chancellor retained his other judicial and political roles , and the position of Vice @-@ Chancellor ceased to exist , replaced by ordinary judges . The Chancery Division remains to this day part of the High Court of Justice of England and Wales . 
 = = Jurisdiction = = 
 = = = Trusts and the administration of estates = = = 
 The idea of a trust originated during the Crusades of the 12th century , when noblemen travelled abroad to fight in the Holy Land . As they would be away for years at a time it was vital that somebody could look after their land with the authority of the original owner . As a result , the idea of joint ownership of land arose . The common law courts did not recognise such trusts , and so it fell to equity and to the Court of Chancery to deal with them , as befitting the common principle that the Chancery 's jurisdiction was for matters where the common law courts could neither enforce a right nor administer it . The use of trusts and uses became common during the 16th century , although the Statute of Uses " [ dealt ] a severe blow to these forms of conveyancing " and made the law in this area far more complex . The court 's sole jurisdiction over trusts lasted until its dissolution . 
 From its foundation , the Court of Chancery could administer estates , due to its jurisdiction over trusts . While the main burden in the 16th century fell on the ecclesiastical courts , their powers over administrators and executors was limited , regularly necessitating the Court of Chancery 's involvement . Prior to the Statute of Wills , many people used feoffees to dispose of their land , something that fell under the jurisdiction of the Lord Chancellor anyway . In addition , in relation to the discovery and accounting of assets , the process used by the Court of Chancery was far superior to the ecclesiastical one ; as a result , the Court of Chancery was regularly used by beneficiaries . The common law courts also had jurisdiction over some estates matters , but their remedies for problems were far more limited . 
 Initially , the Court of Chancery would not entertain a request to administer an estate as soon as a flaw in the will was discovered , rather leaving it to the ecclesiastical courts , but from 1588 onwards the Court did deal with such requests , in four situations : where it was alleged that there were insufficient assets ; where it was appropriate to force a legatee to give a bond to creditors ( which could not be done in the ecclesiastical courts ) ; to secure femme covert assets from a husband ; and where the deceased 's debts had to be paid before the legacies were valid . 
 = = = Insanity and guardianship = = = 
 The Chancery 's jurisdiction over " lunatics " came from two sources : first , the King 's prerogative to look after them , which was exercised regularly by the Lord Chancellor , and second , the Lands of Lunatics Act , which gave the King ( and therefore the Chancellor ) custodianship of lunatics and their land ; the Lord Chancellor exercised the first right directly and the second in his role as head of the Court of Chancery . This jurisdiction applied to any " idiots " or " lunatics " , regardless of whether or not they were British , or whether their land was within England and Wales . They were divided into two categories – idiots , " who have no glimmering of reason from their birth and are , therefore , by law , presumed never likely to attain any " , and lunatics , " who have had understanding but have lost the use of it " . Lunatics and idiots were administered separately by the Lord Chancellor under his two prerogatives ; the appeal under the King 's prerogative went directly to the King , and under the Lands of Lunatics Act to the House of Lords . 
 Idiots and lunatics had their land looked after by a court @-@ appointed administrator , and any profits went into a trust fund to support the insane person . Due to the vested interest of the King ( who would hold the lands ) the actual lunacy or idiocy was determined by a jury , not by an individual judge . Under the Lunacy Act 1845 the Lord Chancellor had a right to appoint a commission to investigate the insanity of an individual ; as part of his role as Keeper of the King 's conscience , however , he would only do this when it was beneficial to the lunatic , not simply because somebody had been found insane . 
 The law courts ' jurisdiction over the guardianship of children is said to have come from the King 's prerogative of parens patriae . The Chancery had administered this area of law from an early period , since it primarily concerned the holding of land – a form of trust . Since these were mainly dealt with orally there are few early records ; the first reference comes from 1582 , when a curator was appointed to deal with the property of an infant . While the common law courts regularly appointed guardians , the Chancery had the right to remove them , replace them or create them in the first place . Similarly , while there were actions against guardians which the child could undertake in the common law courts , these were regularly undertaken in the Court of Chancery . This jurisdiction was first regularly recognised from 1696 onwards , and its main focus was the welfare of the child . As such , wards of the court had certain principles : their estates had to be administered under the supervision of the Court , they had to be educated under the same supervision , and any marriage had to be sanctioned by the Court . 
 = = = Charities = = = 
 The Lord Chancellor had , since the 15th century , been tasked with administering estates where the estate was to be used for charitable purposes . In Bailiff of Burford v Lenthall , Lord Hardwicke suggested that the jurisdiction of the Court over charity matters came from its jurisdiction over trusts , as well as from the Charitable Uses Act 1601 . Carne suggests that , as the Court had long been able to deal with such situations , the 1601 act was actually just the declaration of pre @-@ existing custom . This is illustrated by the Chancellor 's original jurisdiction over <unk> to uses , which came from his original status as a clergyman , as charity had been originally enforced by the Church and the ecclesiastical courts . Essentially , an owner of land could dispose of it by granting the right to use it and collect fees to another , not just by selling it . This was not valid at the common law courts but was in the Court of Chancery ; the Lord Chancellor is reported as having said , in 1492 , " where there is no remedy at common law there may be good remedy in conscience , as , for example , by a <unk> upon confidence , the <unk> has no remedy by common law , and yet by conscience he has ; and so , if the feoffee transfers to another who knows of this confidence , the <unk> , by means of a subpoena , will have his rights in this Court " . After the reign of Edward IV , if the charitable land were to be sold ( or land were to be sold to create the charity ) the Court of Chancery was the only place this could be done , as ecclesiastical and probate courts did not have a valid jurisdiction . 
 = = Remedies = = 
 The Court of Chancery could grant three possible remedies – specific performance , injunctions and damages . The remedy of specific performance is , in contractual matters , an order by the court which requires the party in breach of contract to perform his obligations . The validity of the contract as a whole was not normally considered , only whether there was adequate consideration and if expecting the party that breached the contract to carry out his obligations was viable . Injunctions , on the other hand , are remedies which prevent a party from doing something ( unlike specific performance , which requires them to do something ) . Until the Common Law Procedure Act 1854 , the Court of Chancery was the only body qualified to grant injunctions and specific performance . 
 Damages is money claimed in compensation for some failure by the other party to a case . It is commonly believed that the Court of Chancery could not grant damages until the Chancery Amendment Act 1858 , which gave it that right , but in some special cases it had been able to provide damages for over 600 years . The idea of damages was first conceived in English law during the 13th century , when the Statutes of Merton and Gloucester provided for damages in certain circumstances . Despite what is normally assumed by academics , it was not just the common law courts that could grant damages under these statutes ; the Exchequer of Pleas and Court of Chancery both had the right to do so . In Cardinal Beaufort 's case in 1453 , for example , it is stated that " I shall have a subpoena against my feoffee and recover damages for the value of the land " . A statute passed during the reign of Richard II specifically gave the Chancery the right to award damages , stating : 
 For as much as People be compelled to come before the King 's Council , or in the Chancery by Writs grounded upon untrue Suggestions ; that the Chancellor for the Time being , presently after that such Suggestions be duly found and proved untrue , shall have Power to ordain and award Damages according to his Discretion , to him which is so troubled unduly , as afore is said . 
 This did not extend to every case , but merely to those which had been dismissed because one party 's " suggestions [ are ] proved untrue " , and was normally awarded to pay for the innocent party 's costs in responding to the party that had lied . Lord Hardwicke , however , claimed that the Chancery 's jurisdiction to award damages was not derived " from any authority , but from conscience " , and rather than being statutory was instead due to the Lord Chancellor 's inherent authority . As a result , General Orders were regularly issued awarding the innocent party additional costs , such as the cost of a solicitor on top of the costs of responding to the other party 's false statements . 
 The Court became more cautious about awarding damages during the 16th and 17th centuries ; Lord Chancellors and legal writers considered it a common law remedy , and judges would normally only award damages where no other remedy was appropriate . Damages were sometimes given as an ancillary remedy , such as in Browne v Dom Bridges in 1588 , where the defendant had disposed of waste inside the plaintiffs woods . As well as an injunction to prevent the defendant dumping waste in the woods , damages were also awarded to pay for the harm to the woods . " This convention ( that damages could only be awarded as an ancillary remedy , or where no others were available ) remained the cause until the 18th and early 19th centuries , when the attitude of the Court towards awarding damages became more liberal ; in Lannoy v <unk> , for example , it was held that where there was sufficient evidence of harm , the Court could award damages in addition to specific performance and other remedies . This changed with Todd v Gee in 1810 , where Lord Eldon held that " except in very special cases , it was not the course of proceeding in Equity to file a Bill for specific performance of an agreement ; praying in the alternative , if it cannot be performed , an issue , or an inquiry before the Master , with a view to damages . The plaintiff must take that remedy , if he chooses it , at Law . " This was followed by Hatch v Cobb , in which Chancellor Kent held that " though equity , in very special cases , may possibly sustain a bill for damages , on a breach of contract , it is clearly not the ordinary jurisdiction of the court " . 
 The Court 's right to give damages was reiterated in Phelps v Prothero in 1855 , where the Court of Appeal in Chancery held that if a plaintiff starts an action in a court of equity for specific performance and damages are also appropriate , the court of equity may choose to award damages . This authorisation was limited to certain circumstances , and was again not regularly used . Eventually , the Chancery Amendment Act 1858 gave the Court full jurisdiction to award damages ; the situation before that was so limited that lawyers at the time commented as if the Court had not previously been able to do so . 
 = = Officers of the Court = = 
 = = = Lord Chancellor = = = 
 The Lord Chancellor was the official head of the Court of Chancery . For much of its early existence he was closely linked with the curia regis ; even after the Court became independent around 1345 , petitions were addressed to " the King and others " . By the time of Edward IV , however , petitions were issued in the name of the Lord Chancellor and the Court of Chancery . In the early years , the Lord Chancellor made most of the decisions himself ; he summoned the parties , set a date for hearings , addressed questions from the parties to the case and announced the verdict . He regularly called for assistance from the common law judges , who complained that this prevented them from doing the work of the common law courts , and early records frequently say that the decision was made " with the advice and consent of the justices and servants of our Lord the King in the Chancery " . 
 In one period , particularly under Edward III , the Lord Chancellor also possessed some common law jurisdiction , able to hear cases for petitions of right and the repeal of letters patent , as well as other cases in which the King was a party . He heard cases on recognizances , the execution of Acts of Parliament and any case in which an officer of the Court of Chancery was involved . Records show that he enrolled recognizances and contracts , and also issued writs commanding a sheriff to enforce them . Carne considers that this common law jurisdiction was likely down to a failure to separate the common law jurisdiction and the equity jurisdiction possessed by the Lord Chancellor , a failure that continued into the 16th century ; Sir Edward Coke wrote that in the Chancery there was both an ordinary court and an " extraordinary " one . 
 Most of the early Lord Chancellors were members of the clergy ; the first legally trained Lord Chancellor was Robert <unk> SL , who was appointed in 1341 and held the office for two years . His successors were again clerics until the appointment of Robert Thorpe in 1371 , probably due to pressure from Parliament . The precedent of appointing legally trained Lord Chancellors was not followed strongly , although others such as Nicholas Bacon did hold the office ; one Lord Chancellor is said to have been appointed because the Queen was impressed with his skill at dancing . According to William Carne , Thomas Egerton was the first " proper " Lord Chancellor from the Court of Chancery 's point of view , having recorded his decisions and followed the legal doctrine of precedent . Marsh writes that the use of clergymen as Lord Chancellors had a tremendous influence on the Court 's actions , tracing the idea of following natural law in the Court back to the Chancellors ' Christian roots . Following the dissolution of the Court of Chancery in 1873 , the Lord Chancellor failed to have any role in equity , although his membership of other judicial bodies allowed him some indirect control . 
 = = = Other officers of the Court = = = 
 When the Court was a part of the curia regis , the Officers were fluid ; they could include Doctors of Civil Law , members of the curia and " those who ought to be summoned " . As the members of the curia ceased to sit as Officers , however , the composition of the court became more solid . From an early period , the Lord Chancellor was assisted by twelve Clerks in Chancery , known as the Masters in Chancery . It was said that these positions had existed since before the Norman Conquest , sitting as part of the Witenagemot . After the conquest they gradually lost their authority , and became advisers and assistants to the Lord Chancellor . It was the Masters who started court cases , issuing the initial writs without which parties could not begin cases in the common law courts . In addition , they took depositions and acted as secretaries to the Lord Chancellor , maintaining the plea rolls . In the early years they were almost always members of the clergy , called the " <unk> de prima forma " ; it was not until the reign of Edward III that they were referred to as Masters in Chancery . 
 The twelve Masters in Chancery were led by one of their number , known as the Master of the Rolls . He was almost as powerful as the Lord Chancellor , and had wielded judicial power since the time of Edward I. He was sometimes known as the " Vice @-@ Chancellor " , and was given the title " The Right Worshipful " . The Master of the Rolls assisted the Court 's judges in forming judgments , and regularly sat in place of the Lord Chancellor . The first reference to the Master of the Rolls comes from 1286 , although it is believed that the position probably existed before that ; the first reference to his having independent judicial authority is from 1520 . The Master of the Rolls had six clerks , simply known as the Six Clerks , who helped keep the records ; they were independently accountable for any mistakes . These were initially solicitors for the people suing in the Court , and no other counsel was allowed , but by the time of Francis Bacon claimants were allowed their own counsel . The Master of the Rolls and his clerks were housed in the Rolls Office , along with the Six Clerks ' clerks , who numbered sixty . The Six Clerks were abolished in 1843 , the Masters in Chancery in 1852 , and when the Court of Chancery was abolished , the Master of the Rolls moved to the newly established Court of Appeal of England and Wales . 
 From an early period , the Court was also assisted by two Registrars , who enrolled decrees of the court and orders ; their books documented the legal precedent set by the court . At the same time , two Examiners were appointed to assist the Master of the Rolls in examining witnesses . The positions were regularly and openly sold by the Master of the Rolls and Lord Chancellor – Masters in Chancery went for £ 6 @,@ 000 in 1625 . To avoid the sale of offices , and due to the corruption of many court officials , an Act was passed that year requiring that fees be paid directly into the Bank of England , and creating an Accountant @-@ General to oversee the financial aspects of the court . In 1813 the first Vice @-@ Chancellor was appointed to deal with the increasing number of cases submitted to the Court . With the backlog growing larger , two more were appointed in 1841 under a second Act of Parliament , although this provided for two life appointments , not two new positions ; when the new Vice @-@ Chancellors died , there could be no replacements . With the dissolution of the Court in 1873 , the position of Vice @-@ Chancellor ceased to exist . 
 = A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love = 
 " A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ’ thirteenth season . The episode first aired on the Fox network on December 2 , 2001 . In the episode , Mr. Burns falls in love with Gloria , a woman who is much younger than he is and who turns out to be Snake Jailbird 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , directed by Lance Kramer and dedicated to the memory of George Harrison . The episode featured , along with George Takei as a waiter and Karl Wiedergott as a delivery boy , Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus , who appeared as Mr Burns ' love interest Gloria . The episode received positive reviews from critics following the thirteenth season 's release on DVD and Blu @-@ Ray . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons visit a Chinese restaurant , where Homer is hired to write Chinese fortune cookies after complaining that the current fortunes are unimaginative . One of his fortunes says " You will find true love on Flag Day " . This cookie makes its way to Mr. Burns on , coincidentally , Flag Day . Eager for true love at last , Burns and a reluctant Smithers spend the evening womanising at a wealthy social gathering and a strip club . With mere minutes left in the day , Burns finds a cop ticketing his car , which he had parked in the middle of the road . After discovering the cop is a beautiful woman named Gloria ( voiced by Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) , Burns asks her out on a date . Gloria warily accepts , much to Burns ' delight and Smithers ' chagrin . 
 After a pleasant first date at the carnival , Burns asks about another date but Gloria is about to turn him down when Homer runs by . Burns asks Homer to vouch for him to Gloria , so Homer regales her by listing Burns ' many exploits . After Gloria agrees to a second date , Burns enlists Homer to be his " youthful advisor " , accompanying the couple on their next date at the disco hall , and even carrying Burns and Gloria up the stairs when they go to have sex . In these cases , Burns overcomes his weakness and extreme age by means of a powerful aphrodisiac ( made from an extract of the " pocket fox " , a species which only existed for three weeks in the 16th century ) . 
 Eventually , during a date at the bowling alley , Burns decides to ask Gloria to marry him . She says yes . As Burns goes off to get some champagne to celebrate , Snake comes to rob the bowling alley , and is surprised to see Gloria , who turns out to be his ex @-@ girlfriend . Despite Gloria 's protests , Snake kidnaps her and Homer . When Burns finds Gloria 's ring , dropped in the commotion , he assumes she ran off with Homer . Snake takes Gloria and Homer to his hideout . Though Gloria says she loves Burns , Snake vows he can change . The police arrive and confront Snake . Homer tries to escape but instead sets Snake 's house on fire . Snake and Homer get out and Burns runs in to save Gloria , however he is soon overcome by the smoke and Gloria is then seen carrying him to safety . Although initially grateful , Gloria begins to reminisce about Snake , causing her to break up with Burns and become Snake 's girl again . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love " was written by John Swartzwelder while Lance Kramer served as director . It first aired in the United States on December 2 , 2001 on the Fox network . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Mike Scully , who worked as an executive producer and show runner for the episode , stated in the episode 's DVD audio commentary that the first thing the writers tried to think of while writing the episode was how the Simpson family would fit into the story . In the episode 's first draft , Gloria worked as a food truck driver , however this was later changed so that she instead worked as a police lady . Scully also stated that , in the scene after Homer carries Burns and Gloria up the stairs , there were originally a lot of jokes about Homer " taking care of business " for Burns , however the staff decided to leave it out since it would make Homer " unlikable . " In the episode , Snake Jailbird 's mailbox reads " Snake ( Jailbird ) " which is a reference to a debate that the writers had over whether Snake 's mailbox would read " Snake " or " Jailbird " . Originally , the episode would end with Burns taking the " pocket fox " extract , however when seeing the animatic , the writers felt that that ending would be " too slow " , so they changed it into Gloria falling in love with Snake again . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 On the DVD audio commentary for the episode , Kramer stated that there was an issue over which color to paint the fortunes with . Kramer wanted the fortunes to be white while one of his co @-@ workers suggested they should be pink . Kramer stated that the co @-@ worker had been to a Chinese restaurant close to the studio that had pink fortunes , and that " that 's why she [ colored the fortunes pink ] . " The animators also found it difficult to draw Mr Burns happy . Kramer stated that Burns was " designed to look like a vulture " and look " evil all the time " , so in order to make Burns look happy and more sympathetic , the animators had to change some things in Burns ' regular model . For example , Burns ' eyebrows are not visible through the majority of the episode . The scene with Mr Burns and Gloria on the Ferris wheel was difficult to animate as well , since the animators had to " keep everything moving to sell it . " In the scene in which Snake 's house is burning down , the animators chose to color the sky red , in order to reflect the fire as well as make the scene " a little more exciting . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus guest @-@ starred as Gloria in the episode . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , current show runner Al Jean stated that working with Louis @-@ Dreyfus was " an absolute pleasure " , stating that " not only was she funny but you 'd give her , like , one suggestion , and she 'd do three great things with it . " The waiter in the Chinese restaurant was portrayed by actor George Takei . Dan Castellaneta , who plays Homer among several characters on the show , supplied the voice for Woody Allen . The delivery boy was portrayed by Karl Wiedergott , a voice actor who usually fill in for the male actors on The Simpsons when they are not available for the table read . Jean described him as " versatile " and " very talented " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Following the release of thirteenth season of The Simpsons on DVD and Blu @-@ Ray on August 24 , 2010 , " A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love " received positive reviews from critics . Writing for Project : Blu , Nate Boss was favorable , describing it as " A hilarious episode , with some fantastic one liners " , and went on to say that the episode was " so far the best in the season . " Ron Martin of 411Mania was also positive towards the episode , writing " The antics of Mr. Burns and Homer trying to woo a young police officer are at worst amusing , at most hilarious . " He wrote that Snake Jailbird was " a welcome side character " , and went on to write that the episode was the best of the first disc of The Simpsons ´ thirteenth season on DVD . 
 Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B + rating , and wrote that the episodes highlights were " Burns ' reaction walking into a strip club " [ sic ] and " a fortune cookie Homer writes , ' You will be aroused by a shampoo commercial ' . " Colin Jacobsson , writing for DVD Movie Guide , stated that , while it was not as good as the previous episode , " Homer the Moe " , " A Hunka Hunka Burns in Love " still " offers a reasonably solid episode " . He liked the parts related to the fortune cookies , and stated that “ Burns ’ attempts to woo a much younger woman fare pretty well ” . He concluded his review by saying that “ enough smiles and snickers emerge to make this an enjoyable show ” . Obsessed With Film 's Adam Rayner , in his review of The Simpsons thirteenth season , wrote that Julia Louis Dreyfus ' appearance in the episode was " arguably the best [ cameo ] of the season " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode title makes reference to a line from " Burning Love " , a song made popular by Elvis Presley in 1972 . 
 = Florian Znaniecki = 
 Florian Witold Znaniecki ( 15 January 1882 – 23 March 1958 ) was a Polish philosopher and sociologist who taught and wrote in Poland and in the United States . Over the course of his work he shifted his focus from philosophy to sociology . He remains a major figure in the history of Polish and American sociology ; the founder of Polish academic sociology , and of an entire school of thought in sociology . He won international renown as co @-@ author , with William I. Thomas , of the study , The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( 1918 – 20 ) , which is considered the foundation of modern empirical sociology . He also made major contributions to sociological theory , introducing terms such as humanistic coefficient and culturalism . 
 In Poland , he established the first Polish department of sociology at Adam Mickiewicz University where he worked from 1920 to 1939 . His career in the US begun at the University of Chicago ( 1917 to 1919 ) and continued at Columbia University ( 1932 to 1934 and 1939 to 1940 ) and at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign ( 1942 to 1950 ) . He was the 44th President of the American Sociological Association ( for the year 1954 ) . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Florian Znaniecki was born on 15 January 1882 at <unk> , Congress Poland , a state controlled by the Russian Empire to Leon Znaniecki and Amelia , née Holtz He received early schooling from tutors , then attended secondary schools at Warsaw and Częstochowa . While in secondary school , he was a member of an underground study group , specializing in history , literature and philosophy . His secondary @-@ school grades were average at best , and he had to repeat a year of school ; this was largely due to his extracurricular interest in Polish @-@ language study , which was banned under the Russified school program . As a youth , he wrote some poetry , including a drama , Cheops ( 1903 ) . A poem of his , " Do <unk> " ( " To Prometheus " ) , was included in a 1900 anthology ; however , neither he in later life , nor literary critics , judged his poetry outstanding . 
 He entered the Imperial University of Warsaw in 1902 , but was soon expelled after taking part in protests against the Russian administration 's curtailment of student rights . Threatened with conscription into the Imperial Russian Army , he chose to emigrate and in early 1904 left Warsaw for Switzerland . 
 During that period , he was briefly an editor at a French @-@ language literary magazine , Nice <unk> ( late 1904 – early 1905 ) ; faked his own death ; briefly served in the French Foreign Legion in Algeria ; and worked at a flea market , on a farm , in a traveling circus , and as a librarian at the Polish Museum in Rapperswil , Switzerland . 
 In Switzerland he soon resumed his university studies , first at the University of Geneva ( 1905 – 07 ) , then at the University of Zurich ( 1907 – 08 ) , eventually transferring to the Sorbonne in Paris , France ( 1908 – 09 ) , where he attended lectures by sociologist Émile Durkheim . In 1909 , after the death of his supervisor Frédéric Rauh , he returned to Poland , where in 1910 he obtained his Ph.D. degree at Jagiellonian University , in Kraków , under a new supervisor , Maurycy <unk> . 
 = = = Early Polish career = = = 
 That year he also joined the Polish Psychological Society ( Polskie Towarzystwo <unk> ) , in which he would be highly active over the next few years , becoming its vice president in 1913 – 14 . Much of his early academic work at that time could be classified as philosophy . In 1909 , aged 27 , he published his first academic paper , <unk> <unk> i nauka o <unk> <unk> ( " Philosophical Ethics and the Science of Moral Values " ) ; a year later he published Zagadnienie <unk> w filozofii ( The Question of Values in Philosophy ) , based on his doctoral dissertation , and a paper , <unk> i <unk> ( " Mind and Reality " ) . In 1912 he published a new book , <unk> i <unk> ( Humanism and Knowledge ) , and a paper , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Elements of Practical Reality " ) . A year later , he published an annotated translation of Henri Bergson 's Creative Evolution and a paper , <unk> <unk> <unk> i <unk> ( " The Meaning of World and Human Development " ) . The year 1914 saw the publication of his papers , <unk> i <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Forms and Principles of Moral Creativity " ) and <unk> <unk> jako <unk> <unk> ( " The Principle of Relativity as a Foundation of Philosophy " ) . His works , published in Polish , were well received by the Polish scholarly community and intelligentsia . 
 Due to his past political activism , he was unable to secure a post at a major university . From 1912 to 1914 he lectured at a novel women 's institution of higher education , the Advanced Pedagogical Courses for Women ( <unk> <unk> <unk> dla <unk> ) . During his studies , he had worked at several European institutions dealing with Polish immigrants ; he would build on his experiences by becoming involved with the Warsaw @-@ based Society for the Welfare of <unk> ( Towarzystwo <unk> nad <unk> ) , where he worked in 1910 – 14 . By 1911 he was the Society 's director and ( 1911 – 12 ) editor of its journal , <unk> Polski ( The Polish <unk> ) . Znaniecki became an expert on Polish migration , in 1914 authoring for the government a 500 @-@ page report , <unk> <unk> ( Seasonal Migration ) . 
 = = = Work with Thomas = = = 
 A year earlier , in 1913 , Znaniecki had met William I. Thomas , an American sociologist who had come to Poland in connection with his research on Polish immigrants in the United States . Thomas and Znaniecki had begun to collaborate , and soon Thomas invited Znaniecki to come to Chicago to continue work with him in the United States . In July 1914 , just on the eve of World War I , Znaniecki left Poland to work with Thomas as a research assistant . From 1917 to 1919 Znaniecki also lectured in sociology at the University of Chicago . 
 Their work culminated in co @-@ authoring of The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( 1918 – 20 ) , considered a sociology classic . It was his collaboration with Thomas that marked the transition in Znaniecki 's career from philosopher to sociologist . Znaniecki stayed with Thomas in Chicago until mid @-@ 1919 , when he moved to New York , following Thomas , who had lost his job at Chicago due to a spurious scandal . 
 That year Znaniecki published a new book , still mostly philosophical rather than sociological , Cultural Reality . Published in English , it was a synthesis of his philosophical thought . In New York , Thomas and Znaniecki carried on research for the Carnegie Corporation on the process of immigrant Americanization . Znaniecki contributed to Thomas ' book , Old World Traits <unk> , and published an anonymous solicited article on that topic to the February 1920 Atlantic Monthly . 
 = = = Founding Polish sociology = = = 
 Poland had regained independence following World War I , in 1918 . In 1919 Znaniecki contacted the newly founded Ministry of Religion and Education , offering to return to Poland if the Ministry could help him secure a chair at a Polish university . He proposed creating a novel Institute of Sociology , but bureaucracy and communication delays resulted in that idea being shelved , and he was offered a philosophy professorship at the newly organized Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań . 
 In 1920 Znaniecki returned to the newly established Second Polish Republic , where at Poznań University he soon became Poland 's first chair in sociology . He accomplished this by renaming the department , originally " Third Philosophical Department " , to " Department of Sociology and Cultural Philosophy " , doing the same for his chair , and establishing a Sociological Seminary . That same year he also founded the Polish Institute of Sociology ( Polski <unk> <unk> ) , the fifth @-@ oldest sociological institute in Europe . 
 In 1927 his department was officially renamed to " department of sociology " , and in 1930 the department gained authorization to issue degrees in sociology . In 1930 the Polish Institute of Sociology began publishing the first Polish sociological journal , Przegląd <unk> ( The Sociological Review ) , with Znaniecki its chief editor from 1930 to 1939 . That year the Institute organized Poland 's first academic sociologists ' conference . Due to his role as founder of so many of its building blocks , Znaniecki is considered the father of sociology in Poland . 
 = = = Late U.S. career = = = 
 Keeping in touch with American sociologists , Znaniecki lectured as a visiting professor at Columbia University in New York in 1932 – 34 and during the summer of 1939 . That summer ended the Polish stage of his career , as the German invasion on Poland and the start of World War II prevented his return to Poland . He was already aboard a ship bound for Poland when his travel was cut short in the United Kingdom . He still briefly considered returning to Poland , where his wife and daughter remained ; however , faced with the occupation of Poland , he returned to the United States , where his family eventually joined him in 1940 . 
 With help from American colleagues , Znaniecki obtained an extension of his appointment at Columbia University through mid @-@ 1940 . He then moved to the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign and in 1942 obtained American citizenship , allowing him to transition from a visiting to a regular professorship . He taught at the University of Illinois until his retirement , deciding not to return to the communist People 's Republic of Poland , established in the aftermath of World War II ( despite the offer of a chair at Poznań University ) . In 1950 he retired , becoming a professor emeritus . 
 He was 44th President of the American Sociological Association ( for 1954 ) . His presidential address , " Basic Problems of Contemporary Sociology , " was delivered on 8 September 1954 at the Association 's annual meeting and was later published in the American Sociological Review . 
 He died on 23 March 1958 in Champaign , Illinois . The cause of death was arteriosclerosis . His funeral took place on 26 March , and he was buried at Roselawn Champaign Cemetery . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1906 Znaniecki married a fellow Polish student at the University of Geneva , Emilia <unk> . They had a son , poet and writer Juliusz Znaniecki , born 1908 . Znaniecki 's wife Emilia died in 1915 . 
 Next year Znaniecki married Eileen Markley ( 1886 – 1976 ) . They had one daughter , sociologist Helena Znaniecki Lopata , born 1925 . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Polish sociologist and historian of ideas Jerzy Szacki writes that Znaniecki 's major contributions include : the founding of sociology in Poland ; his work in empirical sociology ; and his work in sociological theory . Szacki notes that Znaniecki sought to bridge a number of gaps : between empirical sociology and more theoretical approaches ; between objectivity and subjectivity ; between humanistic and naturalistic methodologies and viewpoints ; and between American and European intellectual traditions . 
 Szacki writes that , while Znaniecki 's theoretical contributions were subsequently pushed into the background by Talcott Parsons ' " functionalism " , Znaniecki offered the most ambitious sociological theory known to America before Parsons . 
 Znaniecki 's most famous work remains The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( 1918 – 20 ) , co @-@ authored with William I. Thomas . His other major works include <unk> do socjologii ( An Introduction to Sociology , 1922 ) , The Method of Sociology ( 1934 ) , Social Actions ( 1936 ) , The Social Role of the Man of Knowledge ( 1940 ) and Cultural Sciences ( 1952 ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Empirical sociology = = = 
 Znaniecki 's contributions to empirical sociology began after , and were influenced by , his collaboration with William I. Thomas . The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( 1918 – 20 ) , a five @-@ volume work which he wrote with Thomas , is considered a classic of empirical sociology . It is a study of Polish immigrants to America , based on personal documents . The work became a landmark study of Americanization — of how new immigrants to the United States " become Americans " . 
 This work represents Znaniecki 's most valued contribution to empirical sociology . Most of his other works focused on theory , the only other notable exception being Miasto w <unk> jego <unk> ( The City in the Consciousness of its Citizens , 1931 ) . 
 = = = Sociology : theory and definition = = = 
 A key element of Znaniecki 's sociological theory is his view of sociology in particular , and of the social sciences in general , as a scientific field uniquely different from the natural sciences . Znaniecki defines sociology as a study of social actions . His recommended methodology was analytic induction : analysis of typical case studies , and generalization from them . 
 Znaniecki 's theories form a major part of sociology 's action theory , and his work is a major part of the foundation of humanistic sociology . Another term connected with Znaniecki 's theories is " systematic sociology " ( " <unk> <unk> " ) . He sought to create a grand sociological theory , one that would bridge the gap between empirical sociology and more theoretical approaches . 
 Znaniecki criticized the widespread definition of sociology as the study of society . In Znaniecki 's <unk> perspective , sociology is a study of culture ( though it is not the study of culture , as Znaniecki recognized that other social sciences also study culture ) . His definition of sociology has been described as that of " a cultural science whose function is to study systems of social interaction based upon patterns of values and norms of behaviour , through the use of the humanistic coefficient " , or more simply , " the investigation of organized , interdependent interaction among human beings . " The part of the culture that sociology focused on was that of social relation or interaction . 
 Znaniecki saw culture as a field separate from nature , but also from individuals ' perceptions . The essence of culture is socially constructed objects . He was one of the first sociologists to begin analyzing personal documents such as letters , autobiographies , diaries , and the like . He considered the analysis of such documents an important part of the humanistic @-@ coefficient method . 
 Znaniecki saw sociology as an objective , inductive and generalizing science . According to Szacki , Znaniecki viewed sociology as a <unk> science that should be able to use a methodology similar to that of the natural sciences ( however , Znaniecki 's daughter Helena Znaniecki Lopata , in her introduction to Social Relations and Social Roles , contradicts Szacki , writing that , for Znaniecki , sociology was a science " whose subject matter calls for a method different from that of the natural sciences . " ) . In 1934 he formulated the principle of analytic induction , designed to identify universal propositions and causal laws . He contrasted it with enumerative research , which provided mere correlations and could not account for exceptions in statistical relationships . He was also critical of the statistical method , which he did not see as very useful . 
 In addition to the science of sociology , Znaniecki was also deeply interested in the larger field of the sociology of science . He analyzed the social roles of scientists , and the concept of a school of thought . 
 = = = Four social systems = = = 
 According to Znaniecki , sociology can be divided into the study of four dynamic social systems : social action theory , social relation theory , social actors theory , and social groups theory . Znaniecki saw social actions as the foundation of a society , as they give rise to more complex social relations , and he saw this theory as the foundation of all the others . Unlike Max Weber , he did not believe that everything can be reduced to social actions ; he was also quite skeptical of any insights coming from the science of psychology , which he held in low esteem . 
 The four major forms of cooperative interaction , or four social systems , in growing complexity , were : 
 social actions ( in Polish , " <unk> społeczne " or " <unk> społeczne " ) : the most basic type of social fact ; 
 social relations ( in Polish , " <unk> społeczne " ) : these require at least two persons and a mutual obligation ; the study of social relations is the study of norms regulating social actions ; 
 social personalities ( in Polish , " <unk> społeczne " or " <unk> społeczne " ) : the combined picture that emerges from a number of different social roles that an individual has ; 
 social group ( in Polish , " <unk> <unk> " ) : any group which is recognized by some as a separate entity ; Znaniecki saw a society as a group of groups , but denied it primacy as an area that the sociologist should focus on ( while at the same time recognizing that most sociologists differed on this ) . 
 The four @-@ category division described above appeared in his 1934 book , The Method of Sociology . By 1958 he had reformulated the division , and was speaking instead of social relations , social roles , social groups , and societies . 
 = = = Sociology of culture = = = 
 Znaniecki coined the term " humanistic coefficient " for a method of social research by way of data analysis that emphasizes participants ' perceptions of the experience being analyzed . The humanistic coefficient sees all social facts as being created by social actors and as being understandable only from their perspective . Thus the sociologist ought to study reality by trying to understand how others see the world , not ( objectively ) as an independent observer ; in other words , the scientist needs to understand the subject 's world . While some have criticized this approach as being too close to <unk> , Znaniecki himself saw it as anti @-@ subjectivist ; he observed that social facts such as cultural systems can exist even if no one perceives their existence . He was also skeptical of any value coming from personal , subjective observations , arguing that such observations have value only if they can be objectively described . He argued that the difference between the natural and social sciences lies not in the difference between objective and subjective experiences , but in the subject being studied : for Znaniecki , the natural sciences studied things , and the social sciences studied cultural values . 
 Znaniecki characterized the world as being caught within two contrary modes of reflection ; idealism and realism . He proposed a third way , which he called " culturalism " . His culturalism was one of the founding ideas of modern antipositivist and <unk> sociology . The term " culturalism " was introduced into English in his book , Cultural Reality ( 1919 ) , and was translated into Polish as " <unk> " ; previously Znaniecki had discussed the concept in Polish as " humanism " ( " <unk> " ) . 
 = = = Other themes = = = 
 Znaniecki 's work also touched on many other areas of sociology , such as intergroup conflict , urban sociology , and rural sociology . 
 = = Works = = 
 Znaniecki 's first academic works , of the 1910s , were more philosophical than sociological in nature ; beginning in the 1920s , his works were primarily sociological . His Cultural Reality ( 1919 ) was a synthesis of his philosophical thought , but the simultaneous publication of his much more popular The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( 1918 – 20 ) associated his name in academic circles primarily with sociology rather than with philosophy . His early works focused on analysis of culture and strongly criticized the principles of sociological naturalism . Szacki notes a puzzling gap in Znaniecki 's research : while he was well @-@ read in , and engaged with , most previous and current theories , he largely ignored the works of some notable sociologists of his time such as Max Weber , Vilfredo Pareto and Talcott Parsons . On the other hand , his works engaged closely with those of William I. Thomas , Georg Simmel , Robert E. Park , and Émile Durkheim . 
 His The Method of Sociology first introduced his concept of divisions within subfields of sociology . His most notable works included two books published in the same year ( 1952 ) : Modern Nationalities , and Cultural Sciences . The former is an analysis of the evolution of national @-@ culture societies , and the latter presents a theoretical study of the relation between sociology and other sciences . Znaniecki never finished his magnum opus , Systematic Sociology , which would eventually be collected and published posthumously in its unfinished but final form as Social Relations and Social Roles : The Unfinished Systematic Sociology ( 1965 ) . 
 = = = List of works = = = 
 Roughly half of Znaniecki 's published works are in English ; the rest , in Polish . 
 In English : 
 The Polish Peasant in Europe and America ( with William I. Thomas , 5 vols . , <unk> @-@ 20 ) . 
 " The Principle of Relativity and Philosophical Absolutism " , The Philosophical Review , vol . 24 , no . 2 ( March 1915 ) , pp. 150 – 64 . 
 Cultural Reality , Chicago , 1919 . 
 " The Subject Matter and Tasks of the Science of Knowledge " , translated by Christopher <unk> ( first published in Polish as " <unk> i <unk> <unk> o <unk> " , 1923 ) , Polish Contributions to the Science of Science , edited by Bohdan Walentynowicz , Dordrecht , D. Reidel Publishing Company , 1982 , ISBN 83 @-@ 01 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 , pp. 1 – 81 . ( Znaniecki proposes the founding of a new empirically based science which would study science itself , and which he terms " the science of knowledge " ; Znaniecki 's proposed meta @-@ science has since been called by various other names , including " the science of science " , " the sociology of science " , and " <unk> " . ) 
 The Laws of Social Psychology , Warsaw , 1926 . 
 The Method of Sociology , New York , 1934 . 
 Social Actions , New York 1936 . 
 The Social Role of the Man of Knowledge , New York , 1940 . 
 Cultural Sciences : Their Origin and Development , Urbana , 1952 . 
 Modern Nationalities , Urbana , 1952 . 
 Social Relations and Social Roles : The Unfinished Systematic Sociology , San Francisco , 1965 
 On Humanistic Sociology ( a selection of works edited by R. <unk> ) , Chicago , 1969 . 
 The Social Role of the University Student , Poznań , 1994 . 
 In Polish : 
 Zagadnienie <unk> w filozofii ( The Question of Value in Philosophy ) , Warsaw , 1910 . 
 <unk> i <unk> ( Humanism and Knowledge ) , Warsaw , 1912 . 
 Upadek <unk> <unk> : <unk> z <unk> filozofii kultury i socjologii ( The Decline of Western Civilization : A Sketch from the Interface of Cultural Philosophy and Sociology ) , Poznań , 1921 . 
 <unk> do socjologii ( An Introduction to Sociology ) , Poznań , 1922 . 
 " <unk> i <unk> <unk> o <unk> " ( " The Subject Matter and Tasks of the Science of Knowledge " ) , <unk> Polska ( Polish Science ) , vol . IV ( 1923 ) , no . 1 . ( English translation : " The Subject Matter and Tasks of the Science of Knowledge " , translated by Christopher <unk> , Polish Contributions to the Science of Science , edited by Bohdan Walentynowicz , Dordrecht , D. Reidel Publishing Company , 1982 , ISBN 83 @-@ 01 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 , pp. 1 – 81 . ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Sociology of Education ) , Warsaw ( vol . I : 1928 ; vol . II : 1930 ) . 
 Miasto w <unk> jego <unk> ( The City in the Consciousness of Its Citizens ) , Poznań , 1931 . 
 <unk> <unk> a <unk> <unk> ( Contemporary People and the Civilization of the Future ) , Lwów , 1934 . 
 = Wooden Leg : A Warrior Who Fought Custer = 
 Wooden Leg : A Warrior Who Fought Custer is a book by Thomas Bailey Marquis about the life of a Northern Cheyenne Indian , Wooden Leg , who fought in several historic battles between United States forces and the Plains Indians , including the Battle of the Little Bighorn , where he faced the troops of George Armstrong Custer . The book is of great value to historians , not only for its eye @-@ witness accounts of battles , but also for its detailed description of the way of life of 19th @-@ century Plains Indians . 
 The book was dictated to Marquis by Wooden Leg in Indian Sign Language , their only common language . Marquis gathered the stories for the book from Wooden Leg and others while he was physician at the agency in Montana from 1922 . They were reluctant to open up to him at first , but eventually Marquis gained their trust . 
 Wooden Leg lived through some of the most turbulent times in Cheyenne history , but the book begins with his childhood and descriptions of Cheyenne customs . These include tribal organisation , the warrior societies , sport , religion and mythology , their friendship and cooperation with the Sioux , arrow recognition , <unk> entitlement , and much more . Wooden Leg was introduced to warfare at a very young age via conflict with the Crow and joined the Elk warrior society at age 14 . 
 The book describes Wooden Leg 's participation in the important battles of the war of 1876 – 1877 , when the Cheyenne , Sioux , and other plains tribes fought the United States . These included not only the Little Big Horn , but the preceding Battle of the Rosebud and the succeeding Dull Knife Fight . Following the Cheyenne surrender , the tribe was deported to Oklahoma , but eventually Wooden Leg was allowed to return . At Fort Keogh he worked as a scout for the army and was later appointed a judge at the Tongue River Indian Reservation . Wooden Leg describes in detail how he befriended the old chief Little Wolf towards the end of the latter 's life . Little Wolf had been a great war leader but was now ostracised for having killed another Cheyenne while drunk . 
 Wooden Leg 's description of the Battle of the Little Bighorn caused controversy when the book was first published , particularly his claim that many of the US soldiers committed suicide . This claim is still discussed by scholars and has been investigated by archeologists , but no firm conclusions have been reached . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 First published in 1931 under the title A Warrior Who Fought Custer , the book was later reprinted under its current title by the University of Nebraska Press . The book was written in the first person in the style of an autobiography by Thomas Bailey Marquis , who translated and edited Wooden Leg 's stories , placing them in chronological order . The 2003 edition bills Marquis as interpreter ; however , he describes himself as author in the book 's original preface . Marquis went on to write several other books on the participants and events of the era . 
 = = Research = = 
 Marquis wrote the book in 1930 at the age of 61 , but had begun researching it in 1922 . In this year Marquis , a doctor , came into contact with the Northern Cheyenne when appointed agency physician on their reservation in Montana . His initial aim was to collect first @-@ hand accounts of the Battle of the Little Bighorn . Since there had been no white survivors , obtaining the Indian accounts was all the more important for obtaining a complete historical record . However , it took him many years to fully gain the trust of the Indians and he did not complete the task until 1930 . In the meantime the project grew as Marquis added details of Wooden Leg 's life before and after the events at the Little Bighorn . It eventually metamorphosed from a historical account of the battle into a biography of Wooden Leg , Marquis ' principal informant . 
 The issue of trust was difficult to overcome . Wooden Leg himself relates the attitudes of the Cheyenne at a peace feast organised to commemorate the 30th anniversary ( 1906 ) of the Battle of the Little Bighorn . In the presence of many United States soldiers , the Cheyenne were questioned about the battle . They answered with extreme caution ; many facts , particularly regarding the deaths of US soldiers , were avoided . Despite the long passage of time since the battle , they feared that they were being trapped into incriminating admissions . They also chose not to reveal that they believed that many soldiers had died through suicide or at the hands of their comrades , as they knew this issue had made soldiers angry in the past . They left most of the talking to one boastful Indian , Two Moons , who gave a colourful — but entirely inaccurate — account . The others elected not to contradict him since this allowed them to remain silent . Marquis slowly broke down the barriers and eventually persuaded all the Cheyenne survivors he was in contact with , not just Wooden Leg , to open up to him . 
 Some sixteen hundred Northern Cheyenne were at the battle of the Little Big Horn . For all of the intervening period of more than fifty years between the battle and Marquis ' interviews , the Cheyenne had lived in Montana at sites overlooking the battlegrounds . In Marquis ' view , this made them the most reliable of witnesses because their continual retelling of the stories was always anchored in the visible reality of the locations before them . 
 Wooden Leg spoke little English and Marquis spoke no Cheyenne . They communicated mainly through Plains Indian Sign Language and only occasionally used an interpreter . Wooden Leg provided maps and sketches as well as narrative . The book is an amalgam of material from Wooden Leg along with support and corroboration from many contributors , including most of the seventeen Northern Cheyenne participants of the Battle of the Little Big Horn still alive at the time of the interviews . From these , Marquis gives specific credits to Limpy , Pine , <unk> Horse , Sun Bear , Black Horse , Two Feathers , Wolf Chief , Little Sun , Blackbird , Big Beaver , White Moon , White Wolf , Big Crow , Medicine Bull , and the younger Little Wolf . The last is a different person from the more well known Chief Little Wolf who led the Northern Cheyenne Exodus from Oklahoma in 1877 – 79 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Wooden Leg was born in 1858 in the Black Hills . His father was previously known as Many Bullet Wounds . Wooden Leg took his own name from an admired uncle of the same name who was a tireless walker , an ability which Wooden Leg shared . The meaning is that his legs must be made of wood since they feel no pain no matter what the exertion . Warfare was common , and the narrative is soon describing a conflict with the Crow . 
 Wooden Leg took part in fighting from a very young age . The Cheyenne were involved in many conflicts with other Indian tribes , especially the neighbouring Crows , but also the Shoshone . They also fought US soldiers ; his elder brother was killed in the fight at Fort Phil Kearny during Red Cloud 's attempt to clear the Bozeman Trail of US forts . 
 The hardships of hunting in the snow with minimal clothing as a boy are described , as are the unique Indian methods of transport during camp moves . In his early life Wooden Leg travelled all around the Black Hills region and along the Tongue and Powder Rivers . 
 = = = Cheyenne ways of life = = = 
 According to Wooden Leg , at the top of the tribal organisation were four " old men " tribal chiefs , and under these were forty " big chiefs " . The Northern Cheyenne , along with other Plains Indian tribes , had a number of warrior societies ; each of these was led by a warrior chief helped by nine little warrior chiefs . In Wooden Leg 's time , there were three Northern Cheyenne warrior societies : the Elk , the Crazy Dog and the Fox . The tribal chiefs delegated executive authority to one or the other of the warrior societies . These would put into action the requirements for war , hunting expeditions , and camp moves as decided by the tribal chiefs . The currently designated warrior society also acted as police . 
 At age 14 Wooden Leg joined the Elk society , a big event in the young boy 's life . By the rules of Cheyenne society , the currently " on duty " warrior society had sole prerogative in the task at hand . Members of other societies were not allowed to get in front of their scouts in a camp move , nor to approach the buffalo in a hunt . Of course , teenage boys are wont to push the boundaries and Wooden Leg was no exception . Several episodes are related where he and his friends are reprimanded and narrowly avoid serious punishment . 
 Sport events and betting were usual between the warrior societies , and a great many contests of all kinds took place . If the Cheyenne happened to be travelling with the Sioux , their warrior societies also took part . Chief Little Wolf , who had been a great distance runner in his youth , was once jokingly challenged by an Ogallala Sioux when he was in his fifties . Little Wolf accepted this challenge and won , despite being behind for most of the race , by intelligently pacing himself . 
 Many mythological or magical stories are found in the book . One tale recounts a Cheyenne version of the story of the great bear which is supposed to have put its claw marks on the side of Devils Tower , a feature later seen in the film Close Encounters of the Third Kind . Much else of Cheyenne life is documented , as the book includes a guide to arrow recognition and information on marriage customs and the entitlement to wear <unk> , amongst many other subjects . As Wooden Leg puts all this in perspective by comparison with other Plains tribes , the reader also learns much about other tribes , especially the Sioux . 
 The Cheyenne deity is called by Wooden Leg the Great Medicine . A sacred tepee in the camp holds the tribal medicine object , which in the case of the Northern Cheyenne is a Buffalo Head . Because of this , buffalo heads often appear in Cheyenne myths and ceremonies . Wooden Leg first " made medicine " , an important event for him , at age 17 under the supervision of an experienced old medicine man . Making medicine is a form of contemplative worship that involves fasting , prayer , and sometimes the infliction of pain ( as in the Sun Dance ) . Making medicine takes place in a specially constructed medicine lodge . 
 = = = War of 1876 – 1877 = = = 
 After the Indians were driven out of the Black Hills , Wooden Leg 's family chose not to live on the reservation , but instead took advantage of a provision in the Fort Laramie treaty for Indian hunting grounds between the Black Hills and the Bighorn River . They decided to live permanently in the hunting grounds , staying out of contact with the white man as far as possible . Other Cheyenne and Sioux also chose to do this , but most spent at least the winter on their reservations . When reservation Indians arrived in camp with rare goods such as tobacco and sugar , it was a cause for celebration . 
 In February 1876 they received news that the US intended to make war on all Indians who did not return to their reservations . The report was initially not believed ; they were not fighting the white man and were acting within the provisions of the treaty . However , after similar information was brought by respected chiefs , the Cheyenne started posting good lookouts . Soon Wooden Leg and his friends were in a skirmish with a party of soldiers . In the subsequent ongoing fighting of the Great Sioux War of 1876 – 77 , Wooden Leg took part in nearly every major engagement . 
 Towards the end of winter , the Cheyenne camp on Powder River was attacked and destroyed ; however , most of the Indians escaped . Because they now had no possessions during winter , the Cheyenne moved to join their allies , the Ogallala Sioux , led by Crazy Horse . Together they moved north @-@ east to Chalk Butte to join the <unk> Sioux , led by Sitting Bull . At some point the <unk> Sioux under Lame Deer also joined the group . The Indians had to continually move their camp to find enough game and grazing for the large numbers of people and horses . The Arrows all Gone Sioux then joined , and then the Blackfeet Sioux . Small groups of other tribes , such as the Waist and Skirt Indians , the <unk> , and Burned Thigh Sioux also joined . Even Chief Lame White Man was there with a small group of Southern Cheyenne . 
 Wooden Leg believed that the chiefs had gathered the tribes in one place for defence , not to prepare to make war on the whites , though many of the young men were keen to do just that . On the other hand , they made no attempt to hide . Wooden Leg says " our trail ... could have been followed by a blind person " since it was between a quarter and half a mile wide . While on a scouting mission , Wooden Leg and his group spotted soldiers coming from the south towards their camp on the Rosebud River . Wooden Leg took part in the ensuing Battle of the Rosebud , in which the soldiers were driven off . 
 = = = = Little Bighorn = = = = 
 The Indians placed their camp circles with the openings facing east in the valley of the Little Bighorn river . The camps occupied a considerable area and its total size was difficult to assess . The river was to the north @-@ east of the camp and beyond that was a high ridge of hills . 
 The Indians were not expecting further trouble from the soldiers ; they were relaxing and recuperating . Wooden Leg attended an organised social dance the night before the battle . On the day of the battle , Wooden Leg had bathed and was awoken from a nap to find the camp in a panic . The commotion was caused by US soldiers under Major Marcus Reno attacking from the south @-@ east on the orders of Lieutenant Colonel George Custer . Wooden Leg was torn between his desire to quickly join the battle and the need to first put on his best clothes and paint his face ( it was the Indian custom to always look one 's best if there was any possibility of ending up in the afterlife ) . He was only stopped from oiling and braiding his hair as well when his father urged him to hurry . 
 The Indians drove back and pinned down Reno 's soldiers , but then spotted additional troops making their way along the hills to the east of the encampment . This force was led by Custer himself , though that name would have meant nothing to Wooden Leg and the other Cheyenne at the time . Most of the Indians broke off their fight with Reno to engage Custer and his soldiers . Wooden Leg went back through the camp in the river valley rather than directly uphill towards the soldiers . While he was there , his father tried to dissuade him from further fighting on the grounds that he had already done enough , but Wooden Leg would not hear of it , and even persuaded others to rejoin the fight and take part in the total annihilation of Custer 's command . 
 After the Custer fight , Wooden Leg helped save Little Wolf 's life . A group of Sioux were angry that Little Wolf had arrived after the fight , accused him of aiding the soldiers , and threatened to kill him . Wooden Leg , who had accompanied the Sioux and knew Little Wolf , was fluent in the Sioux language , so he presented Little Wolf 's case for him , as he could not speak Sioux himself . It was not realised by the Indians at the time , but it had been the actions of Little Wolf 's small band that had provoked Custer into a premature attack when he wrongly believed his presence had become known to the main body of Indians . 
 Custer 's command had been wiped out , but Reno and his soldiers were still present . Wooden Leg returned to fight them that night and again the next morning with a handful of comrades . Initially firing without success from the high ground , Wooden Leg descended into the gulch to lie in wait for soldiers coming to fetch water . He succeeded in killing a man ( Private J. J. Tanner . ) 
 Wooden Leg describes the recovery of many objects from the dead soldiers , some of which the Indians did not understand , such as a compass and a pocketwatch . He threw away paper money he found , not realising its value . He gave away coins even though he knew their value , because he had no wish to trade with white men . When a new column of soldiers was observed approaching ( the main force of infantry under Brigadier General Alfred Terry ) , the council of Chiefs decided not to continue the fight . At this point the Indians disengaged and the entire camp packed up and relocated . 
 = = = = Parting of the tribes = = = = 
 The tribes travelled together for some weeks , camping at various locations in the Bighorn Valley and along the Rosebud and Tongue Rivers . After arriving back at the Cheyennes ' starting point on Powder River , the tribes decided to split up . It was becoming too difficult to hunt enough food to provide for everyone , and the danger seemed to be over . 
 As winter approached , Wooden Leg joined a small war party on a raid into Crow territory . On the return journey they visited the site of the Little Bighorn battle , looking for rifle cartridges and whatever else they could scavenge . Wooden Leg remarks that there were a large number of soldier boot bottoms ; the Indians had no use for complete boots , so they cut the tops off to use the leather to make other items . 
 As they came down the Tongue River valley , the group was surprised by the sight of the entire Northern Cheyenne tribe on the move . They had been attacked at the Powder River camp by soldiers and Pawnee Indians . The camp had been destroyed and they had lost all their possessions . They searched for the Ogallala Sioux under Crazy Horse , who they eventually found at Beaver Creek . The Ogallala welcomed them and together they journeyed to Tongue River . As they had now sufficiently replenished their supplies , the Cheyenne decided to separate at Hanging Woman Creek in early 1877 . While they were in the process of doing so , they were attacked by soldiers . Wooden Leg 's sister was captured in this engagement . Wooden Leg rode to attempt a rescue , but was driven back by gunfire from the soldiers . Most of the Indians escaped down Tongue River ; the soldiers did not follow and the Cheyenne hunted peacefully for several months . 
 = = = = Surrender = = = = 
 As spring approached , the Cheyenne received envoys from Bear Coat , the Cheyenne name for Colonel Nelson Miles , future Commanding General of the United States Army , inviting them to surrender . They received encouraging reports from released prisoners , who said that they were being well treated . The chiefs decide to move the tribe closer to Fort Keogh , at the mouth of Tongue River , without yet committing to a surrender . They stopped at Powder River and sent a delegation of chiefs to the fort to negotiate . While negotiations were proceeding , Wooden Leg heard of the suicide of his sister , Crooked Nose , who was still a prisoner in the fort . 
 After discussion , the tribal chiefs decided they would go to their agency , which was the same agency as their friends the <unk> , and surrender there instead . Most of the tribe followed the chiefs , but everyone was allowed to make their own decision . Most of Wooden Leg 's family decided to surrender at the agency , but he and his brother Yellow Hair joined one of several groups who chose not to surrender at either place . This group was led by the Fox warrior society chief Last Bull . The small band , however , was unable to hunt sufficient food and slowly became weaker . Eventually they too travelled to the agency and surrendered . At first they were satisfied with their situation , but then came word that they were to be moved south to Oklahoma . Along with many others , Wooden Leg was shocked and angered by this news . They had expected to be able to continue to live in their homeland . However , there was nothing that could be done , as they had all given up their guns and horses on entering the agency . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 The journey to Oklahoma began in May 1877 and took 70 days . A few Indians fled the agency when the news was announced , amongst them Wooden Leg 's brother Yellow Hair . While in Oklahoma Wooden Leg received news that Yellow Hair had been killed by white men while out hunting . Wooden Leg hunted on the reservation , but there was no large game to be had and the Indians were not allowed to leave . Nor were they being fed as promised , and there was much sickness . Little Wolf campaigned for action , and eventually he and Dull Knife led much of the tribe off the reservation to fight their way back North . 
 Wooden Leg and his father stayed on the reservation hoping that food would eventually be provided . He was in frequent contact with the Southern Cheyenne during this period . He learnt from them who Custer was ; the Southern Cheyenne were very familiar with him from the Battle of Washita River ( 1868 ) . Wooden Leg learned that the Southern Cheyenne had tried to come north to fight with them in the summer of 1876 , but had met too much opposition from US soldiers . Finally , Wooden Leg took a wife from amongst the Southern Cheyenne . 
 After six years in the south , the Northern Cheyenne were given permission to leave , either to join Little Wolf or to go to the Pine Ridge agency ( formerly White River agency ) . Wooden Leg 's father had died in the south , but he and the rest of his family departed for Pine Ridge and later relocated to the Tongue River country , where most of the tribe were living . 
 = = = Changed times = = = 
 Many changes had taken place in the north . Cheyennes were now acting as scouts for the US Army , as had previously been done by the hated Pawnees , Crows , and Shoshones . Little Wolf had had his chiefship revoked after he killed a man while drunk . In 1889 , at age 31 , Wooden Leg himself joined the army scouts at Fort Keogh . There was not much to do ; he spent most of his time learning to drink whisky . The following year the Cheyenne scouts were involved in a campaign against rebellious Sioux , and Wooden Leg was present at the Wounded Knee Massacre . The Cheyenne scouts had prepared themselves to fight ( on the US side ) but were not called upon to do so . 
 Wooden Leg befriended the exiled Little Wolf towards the end of that great chief 's life . Wooden Leg said that no one had " bad hearts " against Little Wolf for the murder ; even the dead man 's brother , Bald Eagle , said " Little Wolf did not kill my brother , it was the white man whisky that did it " . Little Wolf was interred standing upright in a pile of stones overlooking the Rosebud valley . 
 Wooden Leg attended a " peace feast " at the Little Bighorn to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the battle . Some Cheyenne veterans would not go , fearful of retribution from the soldiers present . As late as 1926 there were still Cheyennes who would not go to the 50th anniversary . Wooden Leg himself did not attend the 50th anniversary , not out of fear , but because the site was now on Crow land , to whom he still felt much animosity . He had resolved " never again to go to any place where I might be called upon to shake hands with a Crow " . This was very different to his attitude to other former enemies such as the Shoshones , to whom he travelled on a friendly visit . In 1913 Wooden Leg was part of a Cheyenne delegation to Washington . He also visited New York and Philadelphia during this trip . 
 Around 1908 he was baptised a Christian . However , he still privately prayed to the Great Medicine , feeling more comfortable praying this way . From 1927 , the Cheyenne were again allowed to hold their annual Great Medicine dance ( the Sun Dance ) . Other customs were still forbidden : anyone practising Indian medicine could end up in jail . Wooden Leg was appointed by the US government as a judge on the agency . In this capacity he was obliged to enforce a ruling forbidding multiple wives . He found this difficult , not least because he had two wives himself . He felt obliged to set an example by being the first to send away a wife . After ten years , clearly struggling with his conscience , Wooden Leg resigned the post , but was later persuaded to take it on again by a new Indian agent . 
 Wooden Leg hoped that his two daughters would have a more comfortable life than his . The younger , however , died unexpectedly of an illness . Later the other daughter died . Wooden Leg then adopted his grandnephew , Joseph White Wolf , and brought him up as his own . The story ends with Wooden Leg an old man who is increasingly unable to farm his land . But he is well off compared to most Cheyennes , as he had a pension from his scouting days and his pay as a judge . He appreciates the comfortable life he now has but thinks much about the old days when " every man had to be brave " . 
 = = Academic importance = = 
 Wooden Leg is an important original source of information on the Cheyenne and Plains Indians in general and on the Battle of the Little Big Horn in particular . Many hundreds of books have been written about the Great Sioux War , its battles , and its characters . A large number of these books have looked to Marquis to provide source material . This is especially true of the Custer fight , where there is a shortage of eyewitness accounts from the United States side . Books on social issues and archaeology also find usable material in Wooden Leg on the topic of Plains Indians . A small selection of the hundreds of books that use Wooden Leg as a reference are listed at the end of this article . 
 Wooden Leg is also regularly cited in papers in academic journals . Those addressing social and educational issues are found just as often as those in historical journals . Again , a selection of such papers is given at the foot of this article . 
 As well as source information for Cheyenne military and social history , the book is a rich source of anecdotes . One tale describes how Wooden Leg and Little Bird chase a fleeing Reno soldier . Neither Indian was willing to shoot a fleeing man , as it " seemed not brave " to do so . This did not prevent the soldier from shooting Little Bird , after which Wooden Leg clubbed the soldier off his horse . Wooden Leg describes the screams of his mother when she is presented with a scalp as a present . In another story , Wooden Leg is sitting in the lodge with his friend , Noisy Walking , who is dying of his battle wounds . He wants to support his friend but doesn 't know what to say . There are many other examples . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 = = = New York Times , 1931 = = = 
 The review in the New York Times after the book 's first publication finds Marquis ' writing praiseworthy . The reviewer notes that the details of the Cheyenne lifestyle are " deeply interesting " . However , most of the review is taken up with challenges to the factual accuracy of the Indian account of the Battle of the Little Bighorn . 
 Despite the only surviving eyewitnesses to these events being from the Indian side and the passage of time since the battle , many of the details given by the Indian participants were still controversial and not believed ( Custer 's widow Libbie , who had dedicated her life to enshrining the memory of her husband as a hero and who attacked anyone offering a different point of view , was still alive ) . Special exception is taken to the claim that many of Custer 's men committed suicide when defeat seemed inevitable . The claim that Tom Custer 's body was decapitated by the Indians is also disputed for reasons that are not made clear . The identification of the headless body as Tom Custer is not from Wooden Leg , who at the time of the battle knew nothing of either Custer or his brother Tom , but is information provided by Marquis . Wooden Leg had merely described the markings he saw on the body . Tom Custer 's biography describes the decapitation as indisputable fact , as the body was identified from tattoos . 
 = = = Richard Littlebear = = = 
 Dr. Richard Littlebear , a Northern Cheyenne himself , provides an introduction to the 2003 edition of the book . He is president of Chief Dull Knife College and an educator who writes about Indian culture and language . He describes how his career choice was inspired by his reading an earlier edition of the book while an undergraduate . 
 Littlebear is most struck by the rapid transition of a free and independent people to a society restricted to reservations and dependent on the federal government . He expresses bitterness against the US government and shows some expression of shame at the part played by Cheyenne scouts for actions such as their role in locating Chief Joseph during his epic but ultimately futile attempt to escape US government control . He notes that Wooden Leg himself describes a sense of shame when talking about the latter part of his life . 
 Littlebear believes the book helps explain the historical origins of the modern attitudes of the Northern Cheyenne towards other tribes . For instance , the Crow are traditionally enemies of the Cheyenne and the Sioux are traditionally allies . Littlebear says that although he knew of these prejudices , he did not understand the underlying reasons until he read this book . Ted Rising Sun 's humorous claim that the alliance with the Sioux was only because the Cheyenne " needed someone to hold the horses " only emphasises their friendship . This claim , repeated by others , possibly originated because after the Sioux 's migration into the Black Hills region , they obtained their first horses from the Cheyenne . Ted Rising Sun is a descendant of Chief Dull Knife , a major figure in Cheyenne history and a contemporary of Wooden Leg . 
 = = Suicide controversy = = 
 The theory that Custer 's soldiers committed suicide en masse toward the end of the Battle of the Little Bighorn has been controversial right from the very start , and the discussion still continues today . Marquis was a keen advocate of this theory and developed it most fully in a later book , Keep the Last Bullet for Yourself . The notion was so controversial that he could not find a publisher , and the book did not appear in print until long after his death . 
 Marquis has many critics who say he either exaggerated the role played by suicide or is entirely mistaken ; Hardorff says the theory is discounted by most academics . Hardorff suggests that Marquis may have made errors due to the use of sign language which , he claims , cannot convey the nuances of language . Despite this criticism , Hardorff still maintains that Marquis ' work is of great importance . There can be no doubt that Wooden Leg is indeed relating a tale of mass suicide . In the book he discusses at length what may have been the cause . The effects of whisky was a common theory amongst the Indians , but Wooden Leg believed the prayers of medicine men to have been the cause . Wooden Leg 's only taste of whisky up to the time of the battle had been a mouthful — which he immediately spat out — that he took from a captured bottle . In later life Wooden Leg changed his mind and subscribed to the whisky theory after experiencing the effects of alcohol first @-@ hand . 
 R. A. Fox and others note that while Wooden Leg 's version is corroborated by the oral tradition of other Cheyenne witnesses , notably that of Kate <unk> , a young woman who witnessed the battle , there is no corroboration in the oral tradition of the Sioux . Fox concludes that " quite simply , the contention is nonsense . A few troopers undoubtedly took their own lives , but it is hard to know what factors fostered the idea of wholesale suicide " . Fox in his turn has been criticised for selectively using Indian oral tradition when it suits him , but discarding it as nonsense when he finds it disagreeable . 
 Another suggestion is that the Cheyenne warriors , pressed to recount details of the Custer battle , were still reluctant to admit to killing soldiers for fear of punishment . A simple way out of this dilemma was to say when questioned by non @-@ Indians that most of the soldiers died at their own hands . Researchers R. A. Fox and Thom Hatch say that Wooden Leg retracted the claim in later life ; this would have been in extreme old age , as he had still not recanted at the age of 73 when the book was written , other than to say it was whisky that was the cause rather than prayer . In his book Cheyenne Memories , John Stands In Timber , tribal historian for the Northern Cheyenne , agrees : " Wooden Leg said some other things ( in his book ) he took back later . One was that the soldiers were drunk , and many killed themselves . I went with two army men to see him one time . They wanted to find out about it . I interpreted ... and we asked him if it were true that the Indians said the soldiers did that . He laughed and said there were just too many Indians . The soldiers did their best . He said if they had been drunk they would not have killed as many as they did . But it was in the book . " 
 Archaeologists have attempted to test the suicide theory , particularly by the examination of the remains of skulls , but have been unable to reach a conclusion . The suicide theory cannot be ruled out by the archaeological evidence , but there is no evidence to support it either . 
 = = Works citing this book = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Kingsley M. Bray , Crazy Horse : A Lakota Life , University of Oklahoma Press , 2008 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Dee Brown , Hampton Sides , Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee : An Indian History of the American West , Sterling Publishing Company , Inc . , 2009 ISBN 1 @-@ 4027 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 H. David <unk> , An Annotated Bibliography of American Indian and Eskimo Autobiographies , University of Nebraska Press , 1981 ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ 1175 @-@ 9 . 
 Colin Gordon Calloway , Our Hearts Fell to the Ground : Plains Indian Views of How the West was Lost , Bedford Books of St. Martin 's Press , 1996 ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Thomas W. <unk> , Wolves for the Blue Soldiers : Indian Scouts and Auxiliaries with the United States Army , 1860 – 90 , University of Nebraska Press , <unk> <unk> . 
 William Alexander Graham , The Custer Myth , Stackpole Books , 2000 ISBN 0 @-@ 8117 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Jerome A. Greene , Lakota and Cheyenne : Indian Views of the Great Sioux War , 1876 – 1877 , University of Oklahoma Press , 2000 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Thom Hatch , The Custer Companion : A Comprehensive Guide to the Life of George Armstrong Custer and the Plains Indian Wars , Stackpole Books , 2002 ISBN 0 @-@ 8117 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Gary R. Lock , Brian Leigh Molyneaux , Confronting Scale in Archaeology : Issues of Theory and Practice , Springer , 2007 ISBN 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Gregory <unk> , Lakota Noon : The Indian Narrative of Custer 's Defeat , Mountain Press Pub . , 1997 ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 356 @-@ 7 . 
 John H. Monnett , Tell Them We Are Going Home : The Odyssey of the Northern Cheyennes , University of Oklahoma Press , 2004 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Wayne <unk> , Charles Lincoln Van Doren , Great Documents in American Indian History , Da Capo Press , 1995 ISBN 0 @-@ 306 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Peter J. Powell , Sweet Medicine : The Continuing Role of the Sacred Arrows , the Sun Dance , and the Sacred Buffalo Hat in Northern Cheyenne History , Volume 1 , University of Oklahoma Press , 1998 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Charles M. Robinson , A Good Year to Die : The Story of the Great Sioux War , Random House , 1995 ISBN 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Charles M. Robinson , The Plains Wars , 1757 – 1900 , Taylor & Francis , 2003 ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Douglas D. Scott , Archaeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn , University of Oklahoma Press , 2000 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Richard Scott , Eyewitness to the Old West : First @-@ Hand Accounts of Exploration , Adventure , and Peril , Roberts Rinehart Publishers , 2004 ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 426 @-@ 3 . 
 Sherry L. Smith , Sagebrush Soldier : Private William Earl Smith 's View of the Sioux War of 1876 , University of Oklahoma Press , 2001 ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 John Stands In Timber , Margot Liberty , Cheyenne Memories , Yale University Press , 1998 ISBN <unk> 
 Robert Marshall Utley , The Lance and the Shield : The Life and Times of Sitting Bull , Ballantine Books , 1994 ISBN 0 @-@ 345 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Robert M. Utley , Sitting Bull : The Life and Times of an American Patriot , Henry Holt and Co . , 2008 ISBN 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Paul Robert Walker , Remember Little Bighorn : Indians , Soldiers , and Scouts Tell Their Stories , National Geographic Society , 2006 ISBN 0 @-@ 7922 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 James Welch , Paul <unk> , Killing Custer : The Battle of Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains Indians , W.W. Norton , 2007 ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 James <unk> , Little Big Horn Diary : A Chronicle of the 1876 Indian War , Upton , 1997 ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 27 @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 Rosemary <unk> and Joseph <unk> , " Resurrecting History 's Forgotten Women : A Case Study from the Cheyenne Indians " , Frontiers : A Journal of Women Studies , <unk> , no.3 ( Autumn , 1981 ) , pp. 8 – 16 , University of Nebraska Press . ( subscription required ) 
 Michael Allen and Lawrence <unk> , " Enhancing Middle Grades Social Studies through Biography " , The Clearing House , <unk> , no.2 ( October , 1980 ) , pp. 71 – 74 , <unk> Publications . ( subscription required ) 
 Robert Anderson , " The Buffalo Men , a Cheyenne Ceremony of Petition Deriving from the <unk> " , Southwestern Journal of Anthropology , <unk> , no.1 ( Spring , 1956 ) , pp. 92 – 104 , University of New Mexico . ( subscription required ) 
 Beth <unk> , " Sanctuary : Native Border Crossings and the North American West " , American Review of Canadian Studies , <unk> , <unk> & 2 June 2001 , pp. 25 – 42 , doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . ( subscription required ) 
 John H. Moore , " The Developmental Cycle of Cheyenne Polygyny " , American Indian Quarterly , <unk> , 1991 , pp. 311 – 325 . ( subscription required ) 
 John H. Moore , " Cheyenne Political History , 1820 – 1894 " , Ethnohistory , <unk> , <unk> ( Autumn , 1974 ) , pp. 329 – 359 , Duke University Press . ( subscription required ) 
 David D. Smits , " " Fighting Fire with Fire " : The Frontier Army 's Use of Indian Scouts and Allies in the Trans @-@ Mississippi Campaigns , 1860 – 1890 " , American Indian Culture and Research Journal , <unk> , no.1 ( 1998 ) , pp. 73 – 116 , UCLA American Indian Studies Center , ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> . ( subscription required ) 
 Anna Lee <unk> , " American Indian Culture : Promises , Problems , and Possibilities " , The English Journal , <unk> , no.9 ( December , 1971 ) , pp. 1195 – 1200 , National Council of Teachers of English . ( subscription required ) 
 Bill <unk> , Sherri Deaver , Halcyon La Point , " A new way to study cultural landscapes : the Blue Earth Hills assessment " , Landscape and Urban Planning , <unk> , no.2 ( November , 1996 ) , pp. 125 – 133 , ISSN <unk> @-@ 2046 , doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> @-@ 2046 ( 96 ) <unk> @-@ 0 . ( subscription required ) 
 = Acoustic Hearts of Winter = 
 Acoustic Hearts of Winter is a Christmas album and the second studio album by American pop duo Aly & AJ . The album was released on September 26 , 2006 in the United States , via Hollywood Records . The album was conceived as a project after completing the deluxe edition of their debut album , Into the Rush ( 2005 ) . All production of the album was done by Antonia Armato and Tim James . The majority of songs are cover versions of religious Christmas carols or contemporary classics . Two originals appear on the set , which were written by Aly & AJ with Armato and James . Musically , the album has an instrument @-@ driven acoustic feel , primarily by guitar . It utilizes pop music influences on Christmas music . The album sold 110 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 The album received generally positive reviews , with critics complimenting the lyrical content of the original songs and the overall sound . Acoustic Hearts of Winter debuted on the US Billboard 200 at 78 , and peaked on the Top Holiday Albums chart at 14 . It was the second best @-@ selling holiday album of 2006 . The sole single from the album , " Greatest Time of Year " , used to promote The Santa Clause 3 : The Escape Clause , peaked at 96 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Aly & AJ promoted the album mainly on CD USA and at the 2006 Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade . In 2007 , the album was re @-@ released with three new traditional cover songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the summer of 2006 , after wrapping up the production and recording of their debut album , Into the Rush , Aly & AJ began recording their first Christmas album . Antonina Armato and Tim James who worked on the duo 's debut album and several other Disney @-@ related acts , were recruited to executive produce the effort . They anticipated finishing the album by the end of the summer , in order for it to be released for the holiday season . Aly & AJ thought it ironic that they were prepping a Christmas album during the hottest days of the year . Alyson Michalka told the Saginaw News that producers Armato and James filled the studio with Christmas decorations , Christmas cookies , and a tree with gifts to open after they were done , in order for them to get in the Christmas spirit . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Acoustic Hearts of Winter is musically based on Christmas music with pop , pop rock and teen pop inclinations . All songs were produced by Antonina Armato and Tim James . Aly & AJ , along with executive producers Armato and James , adapted and arranged most of the cover songs on the album . Many of the songs incorporate heavy instrumentation , such as guitar , cello , percussion , bass , and piano . The album is mainly composed of cover versions of Christmas carols and contemporary holiday classics , while two original numbers are included . " Joy to the World " , " We Three Kings " , " The First Noel " , " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " , and " Silent Night " are religious traditional carols . Also included are the traditional " Deck the Halls " , as well as " I 'll Be Home for Christmas " , " The Little Drummer Boy " , originally performed by Harry Simeone and " Let It Snow " , notably performed by Vaughan Monroe . 
 The album 's opening number " Greatest Time of Year " , the first of the album 's two originals , was written by Aly & AJ , Armato , and James . The second original and closing track , " Not This Year " is a reflection about past Christmases , and how the current is different . According to the duo , the song is dedicated to their grandmother Carmen , who died on Christmas Eve a few years previous . On the 2007 edition of the album exclusively available at retailer Target , the <unk> " We Wish You a Merry Christmas " and " Winter Wonderland " were bonus tracks , as well as " Rockin ' Around the Christmas Tree " , originally performed by Brenda Lee . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Matt Collar of Allmusic complimented the classic Christmas songs composed in a " light , contemporary pop fashion , " noting Aly & AJ 's original songs as standouts on the album . Logan <unk> of Jesus Freak Hideout commended Aly & AJ 's " powerhouse " vocals on the tracks , but said carols such as " The First Noel " and " Deck the Halls " were a bit boring , due to the acoustic feel of the set . Overall , <unk> said " This album has its good share of standout tracks that are sure to satisfy any fan of modern Christmas music . " He specifically pointed out " Little Drummer Boy " and the impressive lyrical content of " Not This Year . Tampa Bay Times critic Sean Daly praised the duo 's original songs , on which they " ditch the wispy routine " . On the other hand , he viewed the rest of the album as " flat and forgettable " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the chart dated December 2 , 2006 , nearly two months after initial release , Acoustic Hearts of Winter debuted at number 78 on the Billboard 200 , where it peaked . It remained inside the top half of the chart for three weeks , and maintained a position inside the top 200 albums for seven weeks . On the Billboard Top Holiday Albums chart , on the chart issued November 25 , 2006 , the album debuted at number 20 . A week later , it moved up to number 14 , where it peaked , and spent 14 weeks on the chart . Acoustic Hearts of Winter was the second best @-@ selling Holiday album of the 2006 holiday season . During the 2007 and 2008 holiday seasons , the album re @-@ entered the Holiday Albums chart at 45 and 28 , respectively . The album had sold 110 @,@ 000 copies in the United States to date . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " Greatest Time of Year " was used to promote the Disney @-@ affiliated film , The Santa Clause 3 : The Escape Clause . On November 21 , 2006 , it was released as a single on the iTunes Store in conjunction with Radio Disney , as the song was packaged with an interview with the duo on the station . The song first appeared on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart on the December 2 , 2006 issue . Propelled by its debut at number 67 on the Hot Digital Songs chart , " Greatest Time of Year " debuted at number 96 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Additionally , it peaked at number 72 on the Pop 100 . Two music videos were developed for the song , one that is intercut with scenes from the film , and a second , which solely features the sisters . 
 The duo performed the " Greatest Time of Year " live on CD USA . Additionally they performed it at the 2006 Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade , and in 2007 on tour as an opening act for Miley Cyrus on The Best of Both Worlds Tour . Also in 2007 , the album was re @-@ released as a deluxe edition by Target , and included covers of the traditional Christmas song " We Wish You a Merry Christmas " as well as " Winter Wonderland " and " Rockin ' Around the Christmas Tree . " Variations of " Greatest Time of Year " are also included on the Walt Disney Records compilation albums Disney Channel Holiday ( 2007 ) , and All Wrapped Up ( 2008 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sig Mejdal = 
 Sig Mejdal ( born December 31 , 1965 ) is an American sabermetrics analyst for the Houston Astros and a former NASA engineer . He previously helped the St. Louis Cardinals make draft picks . Mejdal turned his personal interest in baseball into a career after being inspired by Moneyball in 2003 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Sig Mejdal grew up in San Jose , California . His mother was a nurse and his father was a career army officer . In his youth , Mejdal played little league baseball for six years . He was a fan of the Oakland A 's and a member of the Society for American Baseball Research . According to UC Davis magazine , Sig Mejdal was " fascinated with the stats on the backs of baseball cards . " Mejdal graduated from University of California , Davis with bachelor 's degrees in mechanical engineering and aeronautical engineering . He later earned master 's degrees in operations research and cognitive psychology from San Jose State University . While attending college in the late 1980s , he worked as a blackjack dealer at High Sierra in Lake Tahoe . 
 After graduating from UC Davis in 1989 , Mejdal worked for Lockheed Martin 's satellite operations unit at the Onizuka Air Force Station . Mejdal 's interest in baseball was recreational until 2003 , when Moneyball inspired him to consider pursuing a career in sabermetrics . He attended the Winter Meetings in search for a job in baseball , but ended up working for NASA as a <unk> in the Fatigue Countermeasures Group . Mejdal studied sleep patterns of astronauts on the International Space Station in order to optimize their sleep schedules . 
 While working for NASA , Mejdal had a side job as the chief quantitative analyst for Sam Walker 's fantasy baseball team <unk> Baseball Club , which was participating in the Tout Wars competition 's " Battle of the Experts . " The fantasy team would later become the subject of Walker 's book : Fantasyland : A Sportswriter 's Obsessive Bid to Win the World 's Most Ruthless Fantasy Baseball . 
 In 2005 , Sig Mejdal was recruited to do sabermetrics for the St. Louis Cardinals ' new analytics department . He took 22 months of data from college baseball games and ran it through an algorithm to determine the likely performance and stats baseball players would achieve . According to Sports Illustrated , " [ o ] ver the next seven seasons the Cardinals would draft more players who became big leaguers than any other organization . " He was promoted to senior quantitative analyst in 2008 and director of amateur draft analysis in January 2011 . Mejdal created a formula to predict the risk of injury to baseball players and contributed a section on injury probability to The Bill James Handbook . 
 In 2012 , Mejdal became the Director of Decision Sciences for the Houston Astros , where he supported recruitment decisions based on physical tests and historical player performance . Hiring Mejdal to apply an analytics @-@ based decision tree on their player choices was part of the effort to revitalize the team and address performance issues in prior seasons . He helped the team create the <unk> system , named after the combination of " stat " and " scout , " for making player choices . The system was criticized for de @-@ humanizing players , but after trading off some players and making new recruits , the Astro 's farm system became ranked among the best in baseball . The Astros also used analytics to persuade players that were uncomfortable with non @-@ traditional positions on the field to embrace shifts , which the team now uses very heavily . 
 In 2015 , Mejdal was one of the team 's advisers whose login credentials were believed to have been used to hack into the team 's database . 
 = Since I Left You ( song ) = 
 " Since I Left You " is a song by Australian electronic dance music group The Avalanches . It was released as the third single from the group 's debut studio album of the same name on 5 February 2001 . Produced by group members Robbie Chater and Darren Seltmann , " Since I Left You " utilizes numerous samples of other artists ' material . The song 's chorus is a prominent vocal sample of The Main Attraction 's " Everyday " ( 1967 ) . 
 The song was positively reviewed by music critics , who praised its sample @-@ based production and upbeat atmosphere ; several publications named it one of the best singles of 2001 . " Since I Left You " also placed in the singles charts of Australia and several European countries . A surrealistic music video for the song was directed by Rob Leggatt and Leigh Marling , and depicts two miners who find a mysterious passage into a dance studio . It won the group an MTV Europe Music Award for Best Video . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The Avalanches started working on their debut album in 1999 . Production was handled by group members Robbie Chater and Darren Seltmann , who composed the album 's songs by sampling music from vinyl records and manipulating them using Yamaha Promix 01 and Akai <unk> samplers . The song " Since I Left You " was recorded by the group at Soft Light Bistro . Its final mixing process was carried out at the Sing Sing recording studio by Chater , Seltmann and Tony Espie . 
 A dance song of four minutes and twenty @-@ two seconds in length , " Since I Left You " is primarily sample @-@ based . The track features doo @-@ wop vocal harmonies and employs various pieces of instrumentation , including organs , flutes and acoustic guitars . Its chorus , sampled from " Everyday " by The Main Attraction , features a woman singing about leaving her lover . The " Everyday " sample was the final element of " Since I Left You " to be added by Chater and Seltmann , and the former stated that its addition was a moment when they " really succeeded in writing a pop song . " The original song described a woman 's happiness after meeting a man , but Chater and Seltmann re @-@ arranged various vocals to make the final sample appear to describe a break @-@ up . Other sample sources include Rose Royce 's " Daddy Rich " , Tony Mottola 's " <unk> e core " and " By the Time I Get to Phoenix " , The <unk> ' " The Sky 's the Limit " , Lamont Dozier 's " Take Off Your Make @-@ Up " and Klaus Wunderlich 's " Let 's Do the Latin Hustle " . 
 = = Release = = 
 A demo version of " Since I Left You " was included on a mixtape sold by The Avalanches at their gigs in mid @-@ 2000 in an attempt to prevent spreading of bootlegged copies of an unfinished version of the group 's debut album – the tape was re @-@ released with the title <unk> later that year . The finished version of the track was included on their debut album Since I Left You and subsequently released as its third single on 5 February 2001 . The CD single contained the non @-@ album track " Everyday " and a remix by English electronic musician Andy <unk> of a previously released B @-@ side , " Thank You Caroline " . Remixes of " Since I Left You " by alternative music band Stereolab and producers Prince Paul and Cornelius were created for the single 's American release . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Since I Left You " entered the Australian national singles chart at number 67 on the week ending 19 February 2001 , spending an additional week on the chart before dropping out . The track entered and peaked at number 16 on the UK Singles Chart on the issue dated 7 April 2001 , spending a total of seven weeks on the chart . In the Netherlands , it charted for one week at number 97 . " Since I Left You " debuted at its peak position of 29 in Ireland and remained on the singles chart for five weeks . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Since I Left You " received widespread critical acclaim . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine gave the song a positive review , praising it for " allow [ ing ] the sampled performances to truly glisten . " Allmusic 's MacKenzie Wilson also spoke favourably of " Since I Left You " , remarking that it " leaves listeners spellbound and in a summer dreamscape of lushness and simplicity . " Matt LeMay of Pitchfork Media wrote that the " beauty " of the song " lies in the way that The Avalanches turn obvious sonic mismatches into something all their own " . Playlouder named " Since I Left You " the twenty @-@ ninth best single of 2001 , calling it " <unk> gorgeous " and " much greater than the sum of its parts , and the parts were pretty good to start with . " NME and <unk> both included the track in their respective year @-@ end best single lists . 
 Pitchfork Media placed " Since I Left You " at number 40 on their list of the best singles of the 2000s . The song also ranked number 69 on Stylus Magazine 's decade @-@ end list , with writer Ally Brown commenting : " A decade in , nothing 's come close to matching ' Since I Left You ' ' s distillation of pure joy from a hundred different songs . " Q included " Since I Left You " in their lists of the Ultimate Music Collection and the 1 @,@ 001 Best Songs Ever . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Since I Left You " was directed by Rob Leggatt and Leigh Marling , both members of the Blue Source video direction team . It follows the story of two miners in a black @-@ and @-@ white world who find a passage into a dance studio situated in a colour world . The majority of the video consists of the miners dancing with two ballerinas , ending with one of the miners fading back into black @-@ and @-@ white . The Avalanches had originally envisioned a video concept involving synchronized swimmers on an ocean cruise liner , but their record company rejected it . 
 The clip later won Best Video at the 2001 MTV Europe Music Awards . Pitchfork Media placed it at number four on their list of the Top 50 Music Videos of the 2000s , with writer Scott Plagenhoef noting that the video " transform [ s ] the disparate and the out @-@ of @-@ place into something new and joyful , and it does that with the right blend of heart and surrealism . " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Since I Left You " adapted from CD single and Since I Left You album liner notes . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Soft Light Bistro . 
 Final mix at Sing Sing . 
 Personnel 
 Robbie Chater – arrangement , mixing , production , sampling , songwriting 
 Tony <unk> – songwriting 
 Edward Drennen – songwriting ( " Let 's Do the Latin Hustle " sample ) 
 Tony Espie – mixing 
 Gordon <unk> – piano , percussion , songwriting 
 Darren Seltmann – arrangement , mixing , production , sampling , songwriting 
 Jeanne Salo – songwriting ( " Everyday " sample ) 
 Jimmy Webb – songwriting ( " By the Time I Get to Phoenix " sample ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Short @-@ tail stingray = 
 The short @-@ tail stingray or smooth stingray ( Dasyatis brevicaudata ) is a common species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . It occurs off southern Africa , typically offshore at a depth of 180 – 480 m ( 590 – 1 @,@ 570 ft ) , and off southern Australia and New Zealand , from the intertidal zone to a depth of 156 m ( 512 ft ) . It is mostly bottom @-@ dwelling in nature and can be found across a range of habitats from estuaries to reefs , but also frequently swims into open water . The largest stingray in the world , this heavy @-@ bodied species grows upwards of 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) across and 350 kg ( 770 lb ) in weight . Its plain @-@ colored , diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc is characterized by a lack of dermal denticles even in adults , and white pores beside the head on either side . Its tail is usually shorter than the disc and thick at the base . It is armed with large tubercles and a midline row of large thorns in front of the stinging spine which has the dorsal and ventral fin folds behind . 
 The diet of the short @-@ tail stingray consists of invertebrates and bony fishes , including burrowing and midwater species . It tends to remain within a relatively limited area throughout the year , preferring deeper waters during the winter , and is not known to perform long migrations . Large aggregations of rays form seasonally at certain locations , such as in the summer at the Poor Knight Islands off New Zealand . Both birthing and mating have been documented within the aggregations at Poor Knights . This species is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos sustained by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother ; the litter size is 6 – 10 . The short @-@ tail stingray is not aggressive but is capable of inflicting a potentially lethal wound with its long , venomous sting . It is caught incidentally by commercial and recreational fisheries throughout its range , usually surviving to be released . Because its population does not appear threatened by human activity , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The original description of the short @-@ tail stingray was made by Frederick Wollaston Hutton , Curator of the Otago Museum , from a female specimen 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) across caught off Dunedin in New Zealand . He published his account in an 1875 issue of the scientific journal Annals and Magazine of Natural History , in which he named the new species Trygon brevicaudata , derived from the Latin brevis ( " short " ) and cauda ( " tail " ) . Subsequent authors have assigned this species to the now @-@ obsolete genus <unk> , and then to Dasyatis . The short @-@ tail stingray may also be referred to as giant black ray , giant stingray , New Zealand short @-@ tail stingaree , <unk> ray , short @-@ tailed stingaree , <unk> black stingray , and smooth short @-@ tailed stingray . It is closely related to the similar @-@ looking but smaller pitted stingray ( Dasyatis <unk> ) of the northwestern Pacific . 
 = = Description = = 
 Heavily built and characteristically smooth , the pectoral fin disc of the short @-@ tail stingray has a rather angular , rhomboid shape and is slightly wider than long . The leading margins of the disc are very gently convex , and converge on a blunt , broadly triangular snout . The eyes are small and immediately followed by much larger spiracles . The widely spaced nostrils are long and narrow ; between them is a short , skirt @-@ shaped curtain of skin with a fringed posterior margin . The modestly sized mouth has an evenly arched lower jaw , prominent grooves at the corners , and 5 – 7 papillae ( nipple @-@ like structures ) on the floor . Additional , tiny papillae are scattered on the nasal curtain and outside the lower jaw . The teeth are arranged with a quincunx pattern into flattened surfaces ; each tooth is small and blunt , with a roughly diamond @-@ shaped base . There are 45 – 55 tooth rows in either jaw . The pelvic fins are somewhat large and rounded at the tips . 
 The tail is usually shorter than the disc and bears one , sometimes two serrated stinging spines on the upper surface , about halfway along its length . It is broad and flattened until the base of the sting ; after , it tapers rapidly and there is a prominent ventral fin fold running almost to the sting tip , as well as a low dorsal ridge . Dermal denticles are only found on the tail , with at least one thorn appearing on the tail base by a disc width of 45 cm ( 18 in ) . Adults have a midline row of large , backward @-@ pointing , spear @-@ like thorns or flattened tubercles in front of the sting , as well as much smaller , conical thorns behind the sting covering the tail to the tip . The dorsal coloration is grayish brown , darkening towards the tip of the tail and above the eyes , with a line of white pores flanking the head on either side . The underside is whitish , darkening towards the fin margins and beneath the tail . Albino individuals have been reported . The short @-@ tail stingray is the largest stingray species , known to reach at least 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) in width , 4 @.@ 3 m ( 14 ft ) in length , and 350 kg ( 770 lb ) in weight . Reliable observers off New Zealand have reported sighting individuals almost 3 m ( 10 ft ) across . Mature females are about a third larger than mature males . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The short @-@ tail stingray is common and widely distributed in the temperate waters of the Southern Hemisphere . Off southern Africa , it has been reported from Cape Town in South Africa to the mouth of the Zambezi River in Mozambique . Along the southern Australian coast , it is found from Shark Bay in Western Australia to Maroochydore in Queensland , including Tasmania . In New Zealand waters , it occurs off North Island and the Chatham Islands , and rarely off South Island and the Kermadec Islands . Records from northern Australia and Thailand likely represent misidentifications of Himantura fai and D. <unk> respectively . Over the past few decades , its range and numbers off southeastern Tasmania have grown , possibly as a result of climate change . 
 Off southern Africa , the short @-@ tail stingray is rare in shallow water and most often found over offshore banks at a depth of 180 to 480 m ( 590 to 1 @,@ 570 ft ) . On the other hand , off Australia and New Zealand it is found from the intertidal zone to no deeper than 156 m ( 512 ft ) . Australian and New Zealand rays are most abundant in the shallows during the summer . A tracking study conducted on two New Zealand rays suggests that they shift to deeper waters during the winter , but do not undertake long @-@ distance migrations . The short @-@ tail stingray is mainly bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , inhabiting a variety of environments including brackish estuaries , sheltered bays and inlets , sandy flats , rocky reefs , and the outer continental shelf . However , it also makes regular forays upward into the middle of the water column . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The short @-@ tail stingray is usually slow @-@ moving but can achieve sudden bursts of speed , flapping its pectoral fins with enough force to <unk> the water and create an audible " bang " . It is known to form large seasonal aggregations ; a well @-@ known example occurs every summer ( January to April ) at the Poor Knights Islands off New Zealand , particularly under the rocky archways . In some areas it moves with the rising tide into very shallow water . Individual rays tend to stay inside a relatively small home range with a radius of under 25 km ( 16 mi ) . Captive experiments have shown it capable of detecting magnetic fields via its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini , which in nature may be employed for navigation . 
 The short @-@ tail stingray forages for food both during the day and at night . It feeds primarily on benthic bony fishes and invertebrates , such as molluscs and crustaceans . The lateral line system on its underside allows it to detect the minute water jets produced by buried bivalves and spoon worms , which are then extracted via suction ; the excess water is expelled through the spiracles . Fishes and invertebrates from open water , including salps and hyperiid amphipods , are also eaten in significant quantities . Off South Africa , this ray has been observed patrolling the egg beds of the chokka squid ( Loligo vulgaris <unk> ) during mass spawnings , capturing squid that descend to the bottom to spawn . The short @-@ tail stingray has few predators due to its size ; these include the copper shark ( Carcharhinus brachyurus ) , the smooth hammerhead ( Sphyrna zygaena ) , the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) , and the killer whale ( Orcinus orca ) . When threatened , it raises its tail <unk> over its back like a scorpion . Smaller fishes have been observed using swimming rays for cover while hunting their own prey . Known parasites of this species include the nematode Echinocephalus overstreeti , and the monogeneans Heterocotyle <unk> and Dendromonocotyle sp . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The summer aggregations of the short @-@ tail stingray at the Poor Knights Islands seem to at least partly serve a reproductive purpose , as both mating and birthing have been observed among the gathered rays . Courtship and mating take place in mid @-@ water , and it has been speculated that the rising current flowing continuously through the narrow archways aids the rays in maintaining their position . Each receptive female may be followed by several males , who attempt to bite and grip her disc . One or two males may be dragged by the female for hours before she accedes ; the successful male flips upside @-@ down beneath her , inserting one of his claspers into her vent and rhythmically waving his tail from side to side . Copulation lasts 3 – 5 minutes . Females in captivity have been observed mating with up to three different males in succession . 
 Like other stingrays , the short @-@ tail stingray is aplacental viviparous : once the developing embryos exhaust their yolk supply , they are provisioned with histotroph ( " uterine milk " , enriched with proteins , lipids and mucus ) produced by the mother and delivered through specialized extensions of the uterine epithelium called " trophonemata " . Females bear litters of 6 – 10 pups in the summer ; males appear to assist in the process by nudging the female 's abdomen with their snouts . Females are ready to mate again shortly after giving birth . Newborns measure 32 – 36 cm ( 13 – 14 in ) across . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Curious and unaggressive , the short @-@ tail stingray may approach humans and can be trained to be hand @-@ fed . At Hamelin Bay in Western Australia , many short @-@ tail stingrays , <unk> stingrays ( D. <unk> ) , and Australian bull rays ( Myliobatis australis ) regularly gather to be hand @-@ fed fish scraps ; the number of visitors has steadily increased in recent years , and there is interest in developing the site as a permanent tourist attraction . However , if startled or harassed this species is capable of inflicting a serious , even fatal wound with its sting . The sting can measure over 30 cm ( 12 in ) long and penetrate most types of footwear , including kevlar <unk> ; its mucous sheath contains a toxin that causes necrosis . The most dangerous injuries involve damage to a vital organ , massive blood loss , and / or secondary septicemia or tetanus . There have been cases where a startled ray had jumped out of the water and pierced a wader 's chest cavity . This species is responsible for the majority of stingray injuries off New Zealand . 
 Throughout its range , the short @-@ tail stingray is caught incidentally by various commercial fisheries using trawls , Danish and purse seines , longlines and set lines , and drag and set nets . It is also caught by recreational fishers using hook @-@ and @-@ line ( from boats or the shore ) , spears , and harpoons . Most individuals caught are released alive ; often fishers cut off their tails beforehand for safety , though this practice does not seem to have a significant impact on the rays ' long @-@ term survival . Sport fishers occasionally keep captured rays for meat or angling competitions ; a small number are also kept for display in public aquariums , and it has reproduced in captivity . As it survives fishing activities well and remains common throughout its range , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the short @-@ tail stingray as Least Concern . Within most of this species ' range off New Zealand , targeting it commercially is prohibited . 
 = Magnificat ( Rutter ) = 
 The Magnificat by John Rutter is a musical setting of the biblical canticle Magnificat , completed in 1990 . The extended composition in seven movements " for soprano or mezzo @-@ soprano solo , mixed choir , and orchestra ( or chamber ensemble ) " is based on the Latin text , interspersed with " Of a Rose , a lovely Rose " , an anonymous English poem on Marian themes , the beginning of the Sanctus and a prayer to Mary . The music includes elements of Latin American music . 
 The composer conducted the first performance in Carnegie Hall on 26 May 1990 , and the first recording with the Cambridge Singers and the City of London Sinfonia . Oxford University Press published Magnificat in 1991 and Of a Rose , a lovely Rose separately in 1998 . 
 While the canticle Magnificat was often set to music , being a regular part of Catholic vespers and Anglican evensong , Rutter 's work is one of few extended settings , along with Bach 's composition . Critical reception has been mixed , appreciating that the " orchestration is brilliant and very colourful " and " the music weaves a magical spell of balm and peace " , but also experiencing a " virtual encyclopedia of musical cliches , a … predictable exercise in glitzy populism " . 
 = = History and text = = 
 The Magnificat or Song of Mary is one of the three New Testament canticles , the others being Nunc dimittis and Benedictus . Mary sings the song on the occasion of her visit to Elizabeth , as narrated in the Gospel of Luke ( Luke 1 : 39 – 56 ) . It is a daily part in Catholic vesper services and Anglican Evening Prayer . 
 Rutter followed the tradition of setting it to music , especially the work by Johann Sebastian Bach which also structures the text in movements of different character . Magnificat was composed on a commission by <unk> Productions , a concert organisation in New York performing in Carnegie Hall with a choir of about 200 voices selected in the United States . Rutter was inspired by " jubilant celebrations of Mary in Hispanic cultures " and conceived the work as a " bright Latin @-@ flavoured fiesta " . In addition to the liturgical Latin text , he chose a 15th @-@ century poem , which compares Mary to a rose . In the third movement , the beginning of the Sanctus is inserted after the mentioning of " sanctum nomen eius " ( his holy name ) . The text of the doxology in the last movement is interspersed with a prayer to Mary , " Sancta Maria , <unk> <unk> " ( Holy Mary , help those in need ) . Rutter supplied a singing version in English for the complete work . 
 = = Music and scoring = = 
 The composer wrote : 
 The … Magnificat – a poetic outpouring of praise , joy and trust in God , ascribed by Luke to the Virgin Mary on learning that she was to give birth to Christ – has always been one of the most familiar and well @-@ loved of scriptural texts , not least because of its inclusion as a canticle in the Catholic office of Vespers and in Anglican Evensong . Musical settings of it abound , though surprisingly few of them since J.S. Bach 's time give the text extended treatment . I had long wished to write an extended Magnificat , but was not sure how to approach it until I found my starting point in the association of the text with the Virgin Mary . In countries such as Spain , Mexico and Puerto Rico , feast days of the Virgin are joyous opportunities for people to take to the streets and celebrate with singing , dancing and processions . These images of outdoor celebration were , I think , somewhere in my mind as I wrote , though I was not fully conscious of the fact till afterwards . I was conscious of following Bach 's example in adding to the liturgical text – with the lovely old English poem ' Of a Rose ' and the prayer ' Sancta Maria ' ( both of which strengthen the Marian connection ) and with the interpolated ' Sanctus ' , sung to the Gregorian chant of the Missa cum <unk> in the third movement . The composition of Magnificat occupied several hectic weeks early in 1990 , and the première took place in May of that year in Carnegie Hall , New York . 
 Musicologist John <unk> notes that Rutter 's work has several features in common with Bach 's setting : both repeat material of the first movement in the last , use chant melodies , devote " more reflective verses " to a soloist , and insert additional text , in Bach 's work texts related to Christmas . 
 Rutter scored the work for a female soloist , soprano or mezzo @-@ soprano , who at times represents Mary , and a mixed choir , usually SATB , but sometimes with divided parts . He offers two versions , for orchestra or chamber ensemble . The orchestra consists of 
 woodwind : 2 flutes , 2 oboes , 2 clarinets , 2 bassoons 
 brass : 4 horns , 3 trumpets , 3 trombones , tuba 
 percussion : timpani , percussion ( glockenspiel , snare drum , crash cymbals , suspended cymbal , tambourine , bongos ) 
 strings : harp , strings 
 The chamber version replaces the brass mostly by the organ and uses only one each of flute , oboe , clarinet and horn . Timpani , percussion and harp are the same as in the orchestra version , and for the strings , a minimum of two first violins , two second violins , two violas , one cello and one double bass required . 
 = = Movements = = 
 The following table shows the title , Tempo marking , voices , time , key and text sources for the seven movements . The information is given for the beginning of the movements . Rutter frequently shifts tempo , key and time . The source for the details is the vocal score , unless otherwise noted . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
