 The work opens with a short instrumental introit in G major , marked " Bright and joyful " , alternating between 3 / 8 and 3 / 4 time . Simple polyrhythms are achieved by dividing the 3 / 4 measure in two for the orchestra and in three for the chorus . While Bach structured the first verses of the canticle in several movements of different scoring , Rutter unites the first three verses in one choral movement , treating the different ideas to different motifs and setting , and repeating the first verse at the end as a recapitulation . 
 The soprano and alto enter in unison Magnificat anima mea ( My soul doth magnify [ the Lord ] ) . The vocal motif of Magnificat leaps up a major sixth and rises even higher . It is repeated several times in different combinations of voices , always in homophony . The second verse , Et exultavit spiritus meus ( And my spirit hath rejoiced ) , is sung first by soprano and alto in third parallels . The men repeat it similarly and continuo in Deo ( in God ) , Deo accented by the characteristic figure of a lower <unk> , which is repeated throughout the whole work , often when God is mentioned . The conclusion of the idea , in Deo <unk> <unk> ( in God my saviour ) , is expressed by a descending line , alternating the rhythm , one measure in 3 / 4 , one 6 / 8 , and alternating the women 's voices in sequences . A short recapitulation of Magnificat anima mea marks the end of the second verse . 
 The beginning of the third verse , Quia respexit <unk> ( For he hath regarded the low estate [ of his handmaiden ] ) , is rendered even simpler : the sequences are repeated in even rhythm , then broadened and coloured by parallel triads . The continuation , Ecce enim ( for , behold , [ from henceforth … shall call me blessed ] ) , builds in similar fashion , with all parts divided , to the climax of the first movement on the word beatam ( " blessed " or " happy " ) , marked " f dolce " . The text omnes generationes ( all generations ) is again given in sequences of descending lines , now alternating one measure of 6 / 8 and one of 4 / 4 . While the bass sings the line first , the tenor adds a sequence of sustained notes rising step by step one fifth . In Bach 's treatment of the same text , each entry of a fugue theme is one step , covering an octave in measures 15 to 20 of Omnes <unk> A repeat of the text and the motifs of verse 1 concludes the movement , ending on Magnificat , without retard , with accents on each syllable and cut short . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 Rutter inserted an anonymous English poem from the 15th century , Of a Rose , a lovely Rose , as the second movement . Marked " Tranquil and flowing " , it imitates chant singing , with flexible times and in doric mode . The poet imagines Jesus as a rose springing from Mary , comparable to " Es ist ein Ros <unk> " . She is seen as a rose bush with five branches : the Annunciation , the Star of <unk> , the three Kings , the fall of the devil 's power , and heaven . The last stanza asks Mary to “ shield us from the <unk> bond ” . The eight stanzas , in four lines of which three rhyme , are set as variations of an old tune . The short refrain is first sung by the soprano alone , immediately repeated by soprano , alto and tenor , the voices in unison but for triads on " lovely " . It is repeated after the first stanza by soprano and tenor in unison . After the fourth stanza , it appears again , now in three different parts , and a last time before the final prayer , again slightly different . The first stanza ( " ... this rose began to spring ... " ) is sung by the bass , the second ( " ... out of her bosom ... " ) by the alto , the third ( " ... an angel from heaven 's tower ... " ) by two sopranos and alto , the fourth ( " ... star shone over Bethlehem ... " ) by tenor and bass , the fifth ( " ... three <unk> ... " ) by the bass , the sixth ( " ... sprang to hell ... " ) by four parts SATB , the seventh ( " ... sprang to heaven ... " ) by soprano and alto , the final prayer ( " Pray we to her ... " ) by four parts again but mostly in unison . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 Quia fecit mihi magna ( For he [ that is mighty ] hath done to me great things ) , concentrates on two ideas from the canticle verse . Marked " Andante <unk> " , the choral movement in D major opens with solemn dotted rhythms , features of the French overture . A motiv of four measures is repeated three times , interrupted by fanfares . Then it is repeated five times , beginning with only the basses , marked piano , adding the motif in a higher part each time , with two sopranos , and increasing volume and intensity . 
 The second idea of the verse , Et sanctum nomen eius ( And holy is his name ) , builds similarly . The alto begins , marked " dolce and tranquillo " ( sweet and calm ) a melody of ten measures , beginning like the first motiv but more flowing . The alto keeps singing sustained notes , while first soprano and tenor sing the melody in a canon one measure apart , then bass and soprano sing it in a canon , one measure apart and the soprano a fifth higher . Finally the sustained notes are sung by the bass , while the other three voices continue the imitation . The movement is closed by a chant @-@ like accompanied Sanctus , taken from the Missa cum <unk> . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 Et misericordia ( And his mercy [ is on them that fear him from generation to generation ] ) is sung by the soprano soloist first , repeated by the choir . A motif alternating a measure of six undulating eighth @-@ notes and a measure of one long note dominates the movement . In a middle section , the chorus continues the material , while the soloist picks up the first Magnificat in text and motif . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 Fecit potentiam ( He hath shewed strength ) begins with irregular energetic rhythms . The basses sing a short call which dominates the movement , first marked " pp <unk> " . The other voices join from the lowest to the highest , only then is the thought continued in <unk> suo [ with his arm ) . In a process similar to movement 3 , the voices build bass to divided soprano . <unk> <unk> ( he hath scattered the proud [ in the imagination of their hearts ] ) is presented in fast 3 / 8 movement , while Deposuit potentes de sede ( He hath put down the mighty from their seats ) is rendered on a steady monotone beat by bass , then tenor , then alto . In great contrast , the soprano begins softly a rising melody on et exaltavit humiles ( and exalted them of low degree ) , joined by all other voices . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The last movement devoted to the canticle summarizes the rest of the text in Esurientes ( [ He hath filled ] the hungry ) , sung again by the soloist , supported by continuous eighth @-@ notes in 12 / 8 time in the orchestra and answered by the chorus . 
 = = = 7 = = = 
 The composition is closed with the doxology Gloria Patri ( Glory be to the Father ) . The music is based on movement 3 , repeating the dotted rhythm and the building from bass to two sopranos . A prayer addressing Mary interrupts the doxology : Sancta Maria , asking " for support of humanity , including the needy , the timid , the clergy , women , and the laity " . It is sung by the soloist on sustained chords in the orchestra . The final Sicut erat in principio ( As it was in the beginning ) , repeats , as often , material from the very beginning of the work , the initial Magnificat motif , and the descending lines ending on a <unk> on Amen . 
 = = Performance , recording and publishing = = 
 The first performance , conducted by the composer , was on 26 May 1990 in Carnegie Hall , with soloist Maria <unk> and the Manhattan Chamber Orchestra . Rutter also conducted a recording with soloist Patricia Forbes , the Cambridge Singers and the City of London Sinfonia . A performance lasts about 40 minutes . Timothy Mangan reviewed the reportedly first performance on the West Coast with the Master Chorale of Orange County conducted by William Hall . He described the piece as a " virtual encyclopedia of musical cliches , a long @-@ winded , tamely tonal , predictable exercise in glitzy populism . " He heard influence of composers such as Aaron Copland , Igor Stravinsky and Vaughan Williams . 
 The work was published by Oxford University Press in 1991 . The composer provided an optional English singable version of the Latin parts . Of a Rose , a lovely Rose was published individually in 1998 . 
 A reviewer notes that Rutter " emphasises the joy experienced by a … soon to be mother " , with " a good balance between the extrovert and intimate " , and singable melodies with an understanding for the voice . He ends : " The orchestration is brilliant and very colourful , with lots of trumpet fanfares complementing the festive spirit of the music . " Nick Barnard , reviewing a 2006 recording of the chamber version with the Choirs of St. Albans Cathedral conducted by Andrew Lucas , summarizes that " the faster dynamic sections rely too heavily on formulaic use of ostinato rhythms and Rutter fingerprint instrumental colours . Set against this many of the lyrical passages are amongst his finest . " More specifically he notes that in the Esurientes " the music weaves a magical spell of balm and peace – for me the highlight of the entire disc and one of Rutter 's moments of greatest inspiration in any work . " 
 = U.S. Route 130 = 
 U.S. Route 130 ( US 130 ) is a north – south U.S. Highway completely within the state of New Jersey . It runs 83 @.@ 46 mi ( 134 @.@ 32 km ) from Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) and US 40 at Deepwater in Pennsville Township , Salem County , where the road continues south as Route 49 , north to US 1 in North Brunswick Township , Middlesex County , where Route 171 continues north into New Brunswick . The route briefly runs concurrent with its parent US 30 near Camden , about one @-@ third of the way to New Brunswick . The road runs within a close distance of I @-@ 295 south of Bordentown and a few miles from the New Jersey Turnpike for its entire length , serving as a major four- to six @-@ lane divided local road for most of its length . US 130 passes through several towns including Penns Grove , Bridgeport , Westville , Camden , Pennsauken , Burlington , Bordentown , and Hightstown . 
 In 1916 , pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 was designated to run along the present US 130 between the Camden area and Bordentown while pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 was to follow the current route between Robbinsville and New Brunswick . The current route between Penns Grove and Westville was to become pre @-@ 1927 Route 17S in 1923 . In 1926 , US 130 was designated to run from US 30 in Camden to US 1 in Trenton along the alignment of pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 . A year later , the alignment of US 130 became Route 25 between Camden and Bordentown , Route 39 between Bordentown and White Horse , and Route 37 between White Horse and Trenton . US 130 was extended to Pennsville in 1938 along Route 45 and Route 44 while it was realigned to follow Route 25 and Route 25M between Bordentown and Route 27 in New Brunswick by the 1940s . In 1953 , the state highways running concurrent with US 130 were removed . Around the time of the renumbering , limited @-@ access bypasses for US 130 were built around Carneys Point and between Bridgeport and Westville ; the former alignments eventually became Route 44 . In the 1960s , I @-@ 295 was designated onto most of these freeway alignments of US 130 , which was moved back to its original route in Carneys Point . In 1969 , the north end of US 130 was cut back to its current location , with the old road into New Brunswick becoming Route 171 . The Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission had proposed a US 130 freeway between Camden and Burlington , but it was never built . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Salem County = = = 
 US 130 's south end is in Pennsville Township , Salem County at the east end of the Delaware Memorial Bridge , which carries I @-@ 295 and US 40 . The New Jersey Turnpike begins at this interchange , and Route 49 heads south . From here , the route heads northeast on Shell Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road , passing development before entering Carneys Point Township . In Carneys Point Township , the road intersects the west end of Route 140 before passing to the east of a DuPont plant and a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad yard near wooded areas . US 130 makes a turn to the north into more residential development , crossing into Penns Grove , where the route turns northeast again as Virginia Avenue and intersects the western terminus of Route 48 . Past the Route 48 intersection , the road enters Carneys Point Township again and crosses a Conrail Shared Assets Operations line before continuing through a mix of agricultural and industrial areas . Upon entering Oldmans Township , US 130 heads through more rural areas as Bridgeport @-@ Penns Grove Road . 
 = = = Gloucester County = = = 
 After crossing Oldmans Creek on a drawbridge , the route enters Logan Township , Gloucester County and becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway called Crown Point Road . It heads east @-@ northeast through <unk> before continuing through marshland and woodland . After crossing Raccoon Creek on another drawbridge , the road passes some homes in Bridgeport before reaching a cloverleaf interchange that provides access to US 322 / CR 536 and the Commodore Barry Bridge . At this point , a freeway section of US 130 begins . The freeway heads east to its first interchange after US 322 , a right @-@ in right @-@ out at Barker Avenue , with an overpass just to the west at Springers Road . Barker Avenue leads east to the south end of Route 44 . The next interchange provides direct access to Route 44 . After Route 44 is the last interchange , with Cedar Swamp Road , before US 130 merges into I @-@ 295 for a concurrency . 
 Along I @-@ 295 , the route is a six @-@ lane freeway , coming to an exit for CR 684 . Continuing east , the freeway crosses into Greenwich Township and has an interchange with CR 607 . After passing near Greenwich Lake , there are exits for CR 653 and CR 673 within a short distance of each other . I @-@ 295 / US 130 reaches an interchange with CR 680 on the border of Greenwich Township and East Greenwich Township . The road runs through a portion of East Greenwich Township before crossing back into Greenwich Township and coming to an interchange with CR 678 and CR 667 on the border of Greenwich Township and Paulsboro . Past this point , the freeway runs through marshy areas of Mantua Creek and continues into West Deptford Township . Here , there is an exit for CR 656 . Passing near more industrial areas , I @-@ 295 / US 130 has an interchange with the Mid @-@ Atlantic Parkway , which provides access to Route 44 as well as to CR 643 and CR 660 . Continuing northeast , the freeway reaches an interchange with Route 44 and CR 640 . At this point , Route 44 begins to parallel I @-@ 295 / US 130 on its northwest side as the two roads cross the Woodbury Creek . Route 44 ends at a cul @-@ de @-@ sac that has a ramp from the southbound direction of I @-@ 295 / US 130 prior to another interchange that provides access to CR 644 . The freeway passes near some homes before US 130 splits from I @-@ 295 . 
 After splitting from I @-@ 295 , US 130 continues northeast as a four @-@ lane divided road called Crown Point Avenue . The route passes past an oil refinery before forming the border between West Deptford Township to the north and Westville to the south , where it begins to pass residences along the south side of the road . The road fully enters Westville before encountering the northern terminus of Route 45 at a Y @-@ intersection . Past this intersection , the lanes of US 130 split briefly before rejoining . 
 = = = Camden County = = = 
 Upon crossing Big Timber Creek , the route enters Brooklawn , Camden County , where the name becomes Crescent Boulevard and it comes to a traffic circle with CR 551 . Here , US 130 and CR 551 head concurrent to the east , passing under the Conrail Vineland Secondary , and come to another traffic circle . At this circle , Route 47 and CR 551 head south while US 130 continues east on Crescent Boulevard , lined with suburban shopping centers . After CR 551 Spur heads east , US 130 makes a turn to the northeast , widening into a six @-@ lane highway with many intersections controlled by jughandles and crossing Little Timber Creek into Gloucester City . In <unk> City , the median of the route widens as it interchanges with I @-@ 76 at a partial interchange . From this interchange , the road continues north @-@ northeast and crosses Newton Creek into Haddon Township . US 130 comes to an interchange with Route 76C that has access towards I @-@ 76 , I @-@ 676 , and the Walt Whitman Bridge to and from the northbound direction of US 130 . The highway continues to a channelized intersection with Route 168 . Following this intersection , US 130 continues through urban areas , passing through a small corner of Camden before entering Collingswood . In <unk> , the road is lined with suburban businesses again prior to meeting US 30 at the former Collingswood Circle . 
 At this point , US 30 forms a concurrency with US 130 and the two routes head north , passing under the PATCO Speedline before meeting CR 561 at an interchange . Past CR 561 , the road passes to the east of Harleigh Cemetery prior to crossing Cooper River into Pennsauken Township . In Pennsauken , US 30 / US 130 comes to the Airport Circle . Airport Circle is an intersection with several flyovers ; US 30 splits to the west , while Route 38 heads east , soon splitting with Route 70 . US 130 , meanwhile , continues northeast through more commercial areas . The road briefly enters Camden again right before an interchange with CR 537 . The route crosses under New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line before coming to a large interchange with Route 90 that provides access to the Betsy Ross Bridge . Within this interchange , the lanes of US 130 split . A short distance later , the route reaches an interchange with Route 73 , which runs to the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge . 
 = = = Burlington County = = = 
 A short distance after the Route 73 interchange , US 130 crosses North Branch of Pennsauken Creek into Cinnaminson Township , Burlington County and continues northeast . The route turns to the east @-@ northeast and enters Delran Township , where there is an interchange with CR 613 . Immediately after this interchange , the road crosses Rancocas Creek and forms the border between <unk> Township to the northwest and Willingboro Township to the southeast as it passes a couple of lakes . US 130 continues along the border of Edgewater Park Township and Willingboro Township . After briefly forming the border between Burlington Township and Willingboro Township , the road entirely enters Burlington Township . The route forms a concurrency with CR 543 prior to entering Burlington . A bypass takes US 130 and CR 543 around the downtown area of Burlington . The road comes to an intersection with Route 413 , which provides access to the Burlington @-@ Bristol Bridge . Past this intersection , US 130 / CR 543 turns east , with the median widening to include businesses . Along this portion of road , there is an intersection with the northern terminus of CR 541 . The six @-@ lane section of US 130 decreases to four lanes as it crosses Assicunk Creek , where the median also narrows . The road turns northeast into a residential area , and CR 543 splits from US 130 by heading to the east . 
 Past this intersection , US 130 passes some businesses and crosses back into Burlington Township , where it runs a short distance to the southeast of New Jersey Transit ’ s River Line . The road enters less dense commercial and industrial development , along with some farmland and woodland , as it continues into Florence Township . An interchange with the Pennsylvania Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) is present in Florence Township . Following this interchange , US 130 continues through development before crossing Crafts Creek into Mansfield Township Here , the surroundings become more wooded with a few areas of agriculture . The route continues into Bordentown Township , where the road widens to six lanes as it has a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 295 . From this point , US 130 continues to an intersection with CR 545 , where it narrows back to four lanes . The surroundings become more developed as US 130 merges with US 206 at an interchange , bypassing Bordentown to the east . The two routes continue north on a six @-@ lane divided highway , briefly skirting the eastern edge of Bordentown as the road crosses CR 528 . After entering Bordentown Township again , US 130 splits from US 206 by heading to the northeast at an interchange . Upon splitting , the route becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway again , passing homes and businesses with areas of woods . 
 = = = Mercer County = = = 
 After crossing Crosswicks Creek , US 130 continues into Hamilton Township , Mercer County , where Route 156 splits to the west to parallel US 130 as it bypasses Yardville to the east . The route intersects several roads at northbound @-@ only interchanges , including CR 609 , CR 672 ( South Broad Street ) , and CR 524 ( <unk> Allentown Road ) ; Route 156 provides southbound access . Past these interchanges , the road passes some homes before Route 156 merges back into it . From this point , US 130 runs through commercial areas , where it has a brief six @-@ lane segment prior to reaching a cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 195 . Following this interchange , the road enters Robbinsville Township . In Robbinsville , the route forms a short concurrency with CR 526 . At the point CR 526 turns east , Route 33 joins US 130 from the west . US 130 and Route 33 run together through rural areas with some development . The road bypasses Windsor to the east prior to entering East Windsor Township . Here , the road widens to six lanes and Route 33 splits from US 130 , heading east into Hightstown . US 130 narrows back to four lanes and runs around the commercial west side of Hightstown , crossing CR 571 . Shortly after this intersection , the route has a partial cloverleaf interchange with Route 133 . 
 = = = Middlesex County = = = 
 US 130 crosses Millstone River into Cranbury Township , Middlesex County , where it has an intersection with the northern terminus of CR 539 . From this point , the route heads north through a mix of rural surroundings and inhabited neighborhoods , bypassing downtown Cranbury to the east and crossing CR 615 . Past this intersection , the road continues into development , crossing Brainerd Lake before forming a short concurrency with CR 535 . US 130 briefly forms the border between South Brunswick Township to the west and Cranbury Township to the east before fully entering South Brunswick Township as the road runs through a mix of rural areas and business parks . The road comes to a directional Y @-@ intersection with the western terminus of Route 32 , which provides access to the New Jersey Turnpike and Monroe Township . Following Route 32 , US 130 crosses over a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line before coming to an interchange with CR 522 . At this point , CR 522 forms a brief concurrency with US 130 before splitting to the west . After the CR 522 concurrency , the route continues north into mostly forested areas , crossing <unk> Mill Pond before continuing into North Brunswick Township . In North Brunswick Township , the road heads northeast through increasing development as the route starts to turn more to the north . US 130 comes to an end at an interchange with US 1 , where the road continues north as Route 171 ( locally known as Georges Road ) into New Brunswick . 
 = = History = = 
 The entire length of US 130 follows a part of the Ocean Highway , a coastal highway that ran from New Brunswick south to Jacksonville , Florida . The current route was designated as portions of three state routes prior to 1927 . In 1916 , the road between the Camden area and Bordentown was legislated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 while the current US 130 north of Robbinsville was to become a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 . In addition , pre @-@ 1927 Route 17S was legislated to run from Penns Grove northeast to Westville in 1923 ; the only portion of road built ran from Pennsville south to Salem . When the U.S. Highway System was established in 1926 , US 130 was designated to connect US 30 in Camden to US 1 in Trenton , following pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 . In the 1927 renumbering a year later , the US 130 alignment was designated Route 25 from Camden to Bordentown , Route 39 from Bordentown to White Horse , and Route 37 from White Horse to Trenton . 
 By 1938 , US 130 was extended south along Route 45 and Route 44 to end at US 40 in Pennsville where the connection to Hook Road now hits Route 49 . By the 1940s , it was rerouted to follow Route 25 and Route 25M from Bordentown to Route 27 in New Brunswick The former US 130 between Bordentown and Trenton was designated as a part of US 206 . During the 1940s , a new alignment for US 130 was built through South Brunswick Township . After the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened in 1951 , the south end of US 130 was moved to its current location . Shortly before the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , US 130 was aligned to bypass Yardville with the old route becoming Route 156 in 1953 . Also , prior to 1953 , US 130 had been aligned to bypass Carneys Point and a stretch of Route 44 between Bridgeport and Westville . 
 In the 1953 renumbering , US 130 replaced Route 44 and parts of Route 45 and Route 25 , as well as the short Route 25M into New Brunswick . With the 1953 renumbering freeing up the Route 44 designation , that number was eventually assigned to the two sections of old road . In the 1960s , I @-@ 295 was built through Salem and Gloucester counties , following a portion of the US 130 freeway bypass of Carneys Point as well as the freeway portion of the route from north of Bridgeport to Westville . As a result of this construction , US 130 was moved back to its original alignment in Carneys Point , replacing that portion of Route 44 . US 130 was cut back to its current north end at US 1 in 1969 , and the continuation into New Brunswick was assigned Route 171 . 
 In the late 1960s , a freeway was proposed by the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission to alleviate traffic on US 130 between Camden and Burlington . This freeway was originally planned as a parkway between the two cities in 1932 that never materialized . The proposed freeway , which was to connect the Ben Franklin Bridge to I @-@ 295 near the Assicunk Creek , was to cost $ 53 million and mostly follow a Conrail railroad line between the two cities . However , the NJDOT never followed through with the proposal . In 2009 , the Collingswood Circle at the southern terminus of the US 30 concurrency was replaced with an at @-@ grade intersection with jughandles . 
 In 2013 the road was one of three that tied for the # 1 ranking on the Tri @-@ State Transportation Campaign 's list of the top ten most dangerous roads for pedestrians in New Jersey , New York and Connecticut . The route , along with U.S. Route 40 / U.S. Route 322 in Atlantic County and U.S. Route 1 in Middlesex County , were so ranked due to the nine pedestrian deaths that occurred on each of those roads from 2009 to 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Dennō Senshi Porygon = 
 " Dennō Senshi Porygon " ( <unk> , Dennō Senshi <unk> , translated as " Cyber Soldier Porygon " , although more commonly " Electric Soldier Porygon " ) is the thirty @-@ eighth episode of the Pokémon anime 's first season . Its only broadcast was in Japan on December 16 , 1997 . In the episode , Ash and his friends find at the local Pokémon Center that there is something wrong with the Poké Ball transmitting device . To find out what is wrong , they must go inside the machine . 
 The episode is infamous for certain repetitive visual effects which induced photosensitive epileptic seizures in a substantial number of Japanese viewers , an incident referred to as the " Pokémon Shock " ( <unk> , Pokemon <unk> ) by the Japanese press . As a result of the seizures 685 viewers were taken to hospitals ; 2 people remained hospitalized for more than two weeks . Due to this , the episode has not been rebroadcast worldwide . After the incident , the Pokémon anime went into a four @-@ month hiatus , and it returned on TV Tokyo in April 16 , 1998 , thus making the episode perhaps the most controversial episode of the entire Pokémon series . Since then , the episode has been parodied and referenced in cultural media , including The Simpsons and South Park . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ash , Misty , Brock and Pikachu discover that the system used to transfer Pokémon from one Pokémon Center to the other is malfunctioning . On Nurse Joy 's request , they go to Professor Akihabara , the one who created the Poké Ball transfer system . He tells them that Team Rocket stole his prototype Porygon , a digital Pokémon that can exist in cyberspace , and is using it to steal trainers ' Pokémon from inside the computer system . 
 Akihabara sends Ash , Misty , Brock , Pikachu and his second Porygon into the system to stop Team Rocket , whom they learn have set up a blockade that stops Pokéballs from traveling the network . Porygon is able to defeat Team Rocket 's Porygon , but Nurse Joy , monitoring the situation and unaware that Ash and the others are inside , has sent an anti @-@ virus program into the system to combat what she thinks is a computer virus . Pikachu uses a Thunderbolt attack on the program , which manifests as " vaccine missiles " , which causes an explosion . The group and Team Rocket successfully escape the computer , and with Team Rocket 's blockade removed , the system returns to normal . 
 = = Reception and controversy = = 
 " Dennō Senshi Porygon " aired in Japan on December 16 , 1997 at 6 : 30 PM Japan Standard Time ( 09 : 30 UTC ) . The episode , which was broadcast over thirty @-@ seven TV stations that Tuesday night , held the highest ratings for its time slot , and was watched by approximately 4 @.@ 6 million households . 
 Twenty minutes into the episode , there is a scene in which Pikachu stops " vaccine " missiles with its Thunderbolt attack , resulting in a huge explosion that flashes red and blue lights . Although there were similar parts in the episode with red and blue flashes , two anime techniques , " <unk> <unk> " and " flash " made this scene extremely intense . These flashes were bright strobe lights , with blinks at a rate of about 12 Hz for approximately six seconds . 
 At this point , viewers started to complain of blurred vision , headaches , dizziness and nausea . Some experienced seizures , blindness , convulsions and loss of consciousness . Japan 's Fire Defense Agency reported that a total of 685 viewers – 310 boys and 375 girls – were taken to hospitals by ambulances . Although many victims recovered during the ambulance trip , more than 150 of them were admitted to hospitals . Two people remained hospitalized for more than two weeks . Some other people had seizures when parts of the scene were rebroadcast during news reports on the seizures . Only a small fraction of the 685 children treated were diagnosed with photosensitive epilepsy . This phenomenon was later called " Pokémon Shock " . 
 Later studies showed that 5 – 10 % of the viewers had mild symptoms that did not need hospital treatment . Twelve thousand children who did not get sent to hospital by ambulance reported mild symptoms of illness ; however , their symptoms more closely resembled mass hysteria than a grand mal seizure . A study following 103 patients over three years after the event found that most of them had no further seizures . Scientists believe that the flashing lights triggered photosensitive seizures in which visual stimuli such as flashing lights can cause altered consciousness . Although approximately 1 in 4 @,@ 000 people are susceptible to these types of seizures , the number of people affected by this Pokémon episode was unprecedented . 
 An article in USA Today reassured parents that " American children aren 't likely to suffer seizures provoked by TV cartoons " , because U.S. networks " don 't air the graphic Japanese cartoons known as ' anime ' " with their " fast @-@ paced style of animation " , although anime has become more prevalent on American television since then . The incident , which was referred to as the " Pokémon Shock " ( <unk> , Pokemon <unk> ) by the Japanese press , was included in the 2004 edition and the 2008 Gamer 's Edition of the Guinness World Records book , with the honor of holding the record for " Most <unk> Epileptic Seizures Caused by a Television Show " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 News of the incident spread quickly through Japan . The following day the television station that had originated the lone broadcast of that episode , TV Tokyo , issued an apology to the Japanese people , suspended the program , and said it would investigate the cause of the seizures . Officers from Atago Police stations were ordered by Japan 's National Police Agency to question the anime 's producers about the show 's contents and production process . An emergency meeting was held by the Ministry of Health , Labour and Welfare , in which the case was discussed with experts and information collected from hospitals . Video retailers all over Japan removed the Pokémon anime from their rental shelves . 
 Reaction was swift on the Tokyo Stock Exchange , and Nintendo 's shares went down 400 yen ( almost 5 % ) the following morning to 12 @,@ 200 yen as news of the incident spread . Nintendo produces the game upon which the Pokémon anime series is based . Then @-@ president of Nintendo , Hiroshi Yamauchi , said at a press conference the day after the episode had aired that the video game company was not responsible since the original Pokémon game for its Game Boy product was presented in black and white . 
 After the airing of " Dennō Senshi Porygon " , the Pokémon anime went into a four @-@ month hiatus until it returned in April 16 , 1998 with airing of " Pikachu 's Goodbye " and " The Battling <unk> Brothers " . After the hiatus , the time slot changed from Tuesday to Thursday . The opening theme was also redone , and black screens showing various Pokémon in spotlights were broken up into four images per screen . Before the seizure incident , the opening was originally one Pokémon image per screen . Before the resumption of broadcast , " Problem Inspection Report on Pocket Monster Animated Series " ( アニメ <unk> , Anime Poketto Monsutā <unk> Kenshō <unk> ) was shown . Broadcast in Japan on April 16 , 1998 , host Miyuki <unk> went over the circumstances of the program format and the on @-@ screen advisories at the beginning of animated programs , as well as showing letters and fan drawings sent in by viewers , most of whom were concerned that the incident would lead to the anime being cancelled . Many Japanese television broadcasters and medical officials came together to find ways to make sure the incident was not repeated . They established a series of guidelines for future animated programs , including : 
 Flashing images , especially those with red , should not flicker faster than three times per second . If the image does not have red , it still should not flicker faster than five times per second . 
 Flashing images should not be displayed for a total duration of more than two seconds . 
 Stripes , whirls and concentric circles should not take up a large part of the television screen . 
 This episode kept the episodes " <unk> 's Christmas " ( " Holiday Hi @-@ Jynx " ) and " <unk> as a Bivouac " ( " Snow Way Out ! " ) off their original broadcast date in Japan following the incident . Those two episodes were about to air after " Dennō Senshi Porygon " on December 23 , 1997 and January 6 , 1998 respectively . They were eventually only aired on October 5 , 1998 as an hour @-@ long special . Airing out of order caused confusion to viewers because Ash still had a Charmander instead of Charizard , and Misty did not have <unk> yet , but Starmie and <unk> . Also , a New Year special was about to air between these episodes on December 30 , 1997 , but it was cancelled after TV Tokyo pulled any mention of Pokémon from their channel following the incident . 
 To prevent any similar incidents from reoccurring , Nintendo quickly ordered the episode pulled , and it has not aired since , not even outside Japan . Maddie Blaustein , the English dub voice of Meowth , has said twice on the <unk> forums that this episode was dubbed in the United States by 4Kids Entertainment . On the other hand , Veronica Taylor , the English voice of Ash , claimed that this episode was never dubbed and will not be dubbed . Regardless , any plans to release this episode outside Japan were abandoned after Nintendo objected , and it was never broadcast anywhere else in the world . Coincidentally , the episode aired around the same time Pokémon was being adapted for American audiences . 4Kids Entertainment took extra precaution in bright and flashing lights in the show , altering lighting and the frequency of flashing lights for earlier episodes of their American release . 
 In an effort to put the event out of the public 's minds and prevent trauma , the anime has not featured Porygon in any subsequent episodes . As a consequence of this , the popularity of Porygon and its <unk> among the fans of the series has suffered . However , <unk> and Porygon @-@ Z were featured during ' World of Pokémon ' opening of Pokémon Movie 15 . <unk> has also appeared in the opening song of English dubbed version of Pokémon Chronicles and <unk> GS , which includes all Generation II Pokémon excluding Celebi . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The " Pokémon Shock " incident has been parodied many times in popular culture , including an episode of The Simpsons entitled " Thirty Minutes over Tokyo " . In the episode , the Simpson family travels to Japan . When they arrive at their hotel in Tokyo , Bart is seen watching an anime entitled Battling Seizure Robots featuring robots with flashing eye lasers , and asks : " Isn 't this that cartoon that causes seizures ? " , and the flashing eyes cause him to have a seizure . Marge and Lisa are also affected and Homer walks in seeing them all convulsing on the floor and joins in . 
 An episode of South Park that first aired in November 1999 , called " Chinpokomon " , revolves around a Pokémon @-@ like phenomenon , called Chinpokomon , with which the children of South Park become obsessed . Chinpokomon toys and video games are sold to American children in South Park by a Japanese company . The company 's president , Mr. Hirohito , uses the toys to brainwash the American children , making them into his own army to topple the " evil " American " empire " . These toys included a video game in which the player attempts to bomb Pearl Harbor . While playing this game , Kenny has an epileptic seizure and later dies , in reference to the Pokémon seizure incident . 
 In the pilot episode of Drawn Together , Ling @-@ Ling , who is a parody of Pikachu , states that his goal in the Drawn Together house is to " destroy all , and give children seizures " . There follows a scene with flashing lights , a direct reference to this episode . In So Yesterday , a novel by Scott <unk> , this episode is mentioned and shown to one of the characters . The flashing red light that caused the seizure is also used in the story telling elements . 
 = Ferris Bueller 's Day Off = 
 Ferris Bueller 's Day Off is a 1986 American teen comedy film written , co @-@ produced and directed by John Hughes , and co @-@ produced by Tom Jacobson . The film stars Matthew Broderick as Ferris Bueller , a high @-@ school slacker who spends a day off from school , with Mia Sara and Alan Ruck . Ferris regularly breaks character to explain techniques and inner thoughts . 
 Hughes wrote the screenplay in less than a week and shot the film over three months in 1985 . Featuring many landmarks , notably the Sears Tower and the Art Institute of Chicago , the film was Hughes ' love letter to Chicago : " I really wanted to capture as much of Chicago as I could . Not just in the architecture and landscape , but the spirit . " 
 Released by Paramount Pictures on June 11 , 1986 , the film became one of the top @-@ grossing films of the year , receiving $ 70 @.@ 1 million over a $ 5 @.@ 8 million budget , and was enthusiastically acclaimed by critics and audiences alike . In 2014 , the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry as per being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " In 2016 , Paramount , Turner Classic Movies , and Fathom Events re @-@ released the film and Pretty in Pink to celebrate its 30th anniversary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In <unk> Chicago , high school senior Ferris Bueller fakes sickness to stay home . Ferris frequently breaks character , giving the audience advice on how to skip school . His younger sister Jeannie is less @-@ convinced , but goes to school anyway . Dean of Discipline Edward Rooney notes and suspects Ferris absence and commits to catching him . However , Ferris uses a computer to alter the school 's records to indicate his absences from 9 to 2 . Ferris convinces his friend Cameron Frye , who is also absent , to report that his girlfriend Sloane Peterson 's grandmother has died . Rooney doubts this , but they succeed as planned . 
 Borrowing Cameron 's father 's prized 1961 Ferrari 250 GT California Spyder against Cameron 's instinct , Ferris , Cameron , and Sloane drive into Chicago to sightsee . Leaving the car with two parking attendants , who promptly joyride it unknowingly to them , the trio visit the Art Institute of Chicago , Sears Tower , Chicago Mercantile Exchange , and Wrigley Field . They then go to a French restaurant for lunch where Ferris poses as the " Sausage King of Chicago " , Abe Froman , while narrowly avoiding his father , who is eating lunch at the restaurant . Meanwhile , after humiliatingly failing to find Ferris , Rooney visits the Bueller residence and fails to enter , being attacked by the family <unk> as his car is towed . Jeannie , skipping class , returns home and discovers her brother 's ruse , but encounters Rooney snooping . She kicks him and calls the police , who arrest her for false reporting after Rooney leaves . While at the station , Jeannie meets a juvenile delinquent , who advises her not to worry about Ferris . 
 After a cab ride where Cameron exclaims disinterest , Ferris impromptu joins a parade float during the Von Steuben Day parade and lip @-@ syncs Wayne Newton 's cover of " Danke Schoen " , as well as a rendition of The Beatles ' " Twist and Shout " that gets the entire crowd dancing . Just as things shine bright , they retrieve the car and notice that , due to the attendants ' joyride , over 100 miles have been added . The revelation shocks Cameron into a state of self @-@ analysis , realizing his life is controlled by his father 's figure . After coming sane , they return the car to Cameron 's garage and try to unsuccessfully run it backwards to remove the miles ; Ferris suggests that they crack it open and turn it back manually . Cameron refuses and vents anger towards his father , kicking , severely denting , and leaning on the car , which falls off the jack and flies out the back , crashing into a ravine behind . Despite Ferris ' insistence , Cameron decides to take blame for the car 's destruction . At the police station , Mrs. Bueller picks up Jeannie , who she finds kissing the delinquent . 
 Ferris returns Sloane home , but realizes he only has a limited time to return home to avoid trouble . He rushes back to the house , but is spotted by Jeannie driving their mother home , and tries to run him down . Ferris avoids being noticed by Mrs. and Mr. Bueller , who is coming from another direction . They make it home at the same time , but Rooney catches Ferris trying to enter the back door and rhetorically asks if he would like to spend another year under supervision . However , Jeannie discovers his wallet on the kitchen floor as proof he broke in , and she has a change of heart , letting Ferris in and telling Rooney he was hospitalized – indicating awareness of the break @-@ in . She slams the door , and their dog attacks Rooney again . Ferris leaps into his bed at the last second , assuring his parents don 't suspect a thing . As they leave , Ferris reminds the audience , " Life moves pretty fast . If you don 't stop and look around once in a while , you could miss it . " Ferris then smiles at the camera before fading to black . 
 As the credits roll , the defeated Rooney heads home and is picked up by a school bus , further humiliated by the students , one offering him a gummy bear . In a post @-@ credits scene , Ferris emerges from his room and bids everyone that " It 's over . " and to go home . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Matthew Broderick as Ferris Bueller , a good @-@ hearted , streetwise and troublemaking kid who wants to skip school and have a day with his friends before his life changes . 
 Alan Ruck as Cameron Frye , Ferris ' depressive friend 
 Mia Sara as Sloane Peterson , Ferris ' younger , lovely girlfriend 
 Jeffrey Jones as Edward R. Rooney , Dean of Students 
 Jennifer Grey as Jeannie Bueller 
 Lyman Ward as Tom Bueller 
 Cindy Pickett as Katie Bueller 
 Edie McClurg as Grace 
 Ben Stein as Economics Teacher 
 Del Close as English Teacher 
 Virginia Capers as Florence Sparrow 
 Charlie Sheen as Garth <unk> , the boy in the police station 
 Richard Edson as Parking Garage Attendant 
 Larry " Flash " Jenkins as Attendant 's Co @-@ Pilot 
 Kristy Swanson as Simone <unk> , the Economics student 
 Jonathan <unk> as Maitre 'd of Chez Quis 
 Stephanie Blake as Singing Nurse 
 Dee Dee Rescher as Bus Driver 
 = = Production = = 
 As he was writing the film in 1985 , John Hughes kept track of his progress in a spiral @-@ bound logbook . He noted that the basic storyline was developed on February 25 . It was successfully pitched the following day to Paramount Studios chief Ned Tanen . Tanen was intrigued by the concept , but wary that the Writers Guild of America was hours away from picketing the studio . Hughes wrote the screenplay in less than a week , as his logbook notes : " 2 – 26 Night only 10 pages ... 2 – 27 26 pages ... 2 – 28 19 pages ... 3 – 1 9 pages ... 3 – 2 20 pages ... 3 – 3 24 pages . " Editor Paul Hirsch explained that Hughes had a trance @-@ like concentration to his script @-@ writing process , working for hours on end , and would later shoot the film on essentially what was his first draft of the script . " The first cut of Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ended up at two hours , 45 minutes . The shortening of the script had to come in the cutting room " , said Hirsch . " Having the story episodic and taking place in one day ... meant the characters were wearing the same clothes . I suspect that Hughes writes his scripts with few , if any costume changes just so he can have that kind of freedom in the editing . " Hughes intended the movie to be more focused on the characters rather than the plot . " I know how the movie begins , I know how it ends " , said Hughes . " I don 't ever know the rest , but that doesn 't seem to matter . It 's not the events that are important , it 's the characters going through the event . Therefore , I make them as full and real as I can . This time around , I wanted to create a character who could handle everyone and everything . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Hughes said that he had Broderick in mind when he wrote the screenplay , saying Broderick was the only actor he could think of who could pull the role off , calling him clever and charming . " Certain guys would have played Ferris and you would have thought , ' Where 's my wallet ? ' " Hughes said . " I had to have that look ; that charm had to come through . Jimmy Stewart could have played Ferris at 15 ... I needed Matthew . " Other actors who were considered for the role included Jim Carrey , John Cusack , Tom Cruise and Michael J. Fox . 
 Sara surprised Hughes when she auditioned for the role of Sloane Peterson . " It was funny . He didn 't know how old I was and said he wanted an older girl to play the 17 @-@ year @-@ old . He said it would take someone older to give her the kind of dignity she needed . He almost fell out of his chair when I told him I was only 18 . " Molly Ringwald had also wanted to play Sloane , but according to Ringwald , " John wouldn 't let me do it : he said that the part wasn 't big enough for me . " 
 Ruck had previously auditioned for the Bender role in The Breakfast Club which went to Judd Nelson , but Hughes remembered Ruck and cast him as the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Cameron Frye . According to Hughes , the character of Cameron was based , in large part , on a friend of his in high school . " He was sort of a lost person . His family neglected him , so he took that as license to really pamper himself . When he was legitimately sick , he actually felt good , because it was difficult and tiring to have to invent diseases but when he actually had something , he was relaxed . " Ruck said the role of Cameron had originally been offered to Emilio Estevez who turned it down . " Every time I see Emilio , I want to kiss him " , said Ruck . " Thank you ! " Ruck , then 29 , worried about the age difference . " I was worried that I 'd be 10 years out of step , and I wouldn 't know anything about what was cool , what was hip , all that junk . But when I was going to high school , I didn 't know any of that stuff then , either . So I just thought , well , hell — I 'll just be me . The character , he 's such a loner that he really wouldn 't give a damn about that stuff anyway . He 'd feel guilty that he didn 't know it , but that 's it . " Ruck wasn 't surprised to find himself cast young . " No , because , really , when I was 18 , I sort of looked 12 " , he said . " Maybe it 's a genetic imbalance . " 
 Ruck and Broderick had previously acted together in the Broadway production of Biloxi Blues . Cameron 's Mr. Peterson voice was an in @-@ joke imitation of their former director Gene Saks . Ruck felt at ease working with Broderick , often crashing in his trailer . " We didn 't have to invent an instant friendship like you often have to do in a movie " , said Ruck . " We were friends . " 
 Jones was cast as Rooney based on his role in Amadeus , where he played the emperor ; Hughes thought that character 's modern equivalent was Rooney . " My part was actually quite small in the script , but what seemed to be the important part to me was that I was the only one who wasn 't swept along by Ferris " , recalls Jones . " So I was the only one in opposition , which presented a lot of opportunities , some of which weren 't even in the script or were expanded on . John was receptive to anything I had to offer , and indeed got ideas along the way himself . So that was fun , working with him . " " Hughes told me at the time — and I thought he was just blowing his own horn — he said , ' You are going to be known for this for the rest of your life . ' And I thought , ' Sure ' ... but he was right . " 
 Stein says he got the role of Bueller 's Economics teacher through six degrees of separation . " Richard Nixon introduced me to a man named Bill Safire , who 's a New York Times columnist . He introduced me to a guy who 's an executive at Warner Brothers . He introduced me to a guy who 's a casting director . He introduced me to John Hughes . John Hughes and I are among the only Republicans in the picture business , and John Hughes put me in the movie " , Stein said . Hughes said that Stein was an easy and early choice for the role of the teacher : " He wasn 't a professional actor . He had a flat voice , he looked like a teacher . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " Chicago is what I am , " said Hughes . " A lot of Ferris is sort of my love letter to the city . And the more people who get upset with the fact that I film there , the more I 'll make sure that 's exactly where I film . It 's funny — nobody ever says anything to Woody Allen about always filming in New York . America has this great reverence for New York . I look at it as this decaying horror pit . So let the people in Chicago enjoy Ferris Bueller . " 
 For the film , Hughes got the chance to take a more expansive look at the city he grew up in . " We took a helicopter up the Chicago River . This is the first chance I 'd really had to get outside while making a movie . Up to this point , the pictures had been pretty small . I really wanted to capture as much of Chicago as I could , not just the architecture and the landscape , but the spirit . " Shooting began in Chicago on Monday , September 9 , 1985 . In late October 1985 , the production moved to Los Angeles ; shooting ended on Friday , November 22 . The Von Steuben Day Parade scene was filmed on Saturday , September 28 . Scenes were filmed at several locations in downtown Chicago and Winnetka ( Ferris 's home , his mother 's real estate office , etc . ) . Many of the other scenes were filmed in Northbrook , Illinois , including at Glenbrook North High School , on School Drive , the long , curvy street on which Glenbrook North and neighboring Maple Middle School are situated . The exterior of Ferris 's house is located at <unk> Country Club Drive , Long Beach , California . 
 The modernist house of Cameron Frye is located at 370 Beech Street , Highland Park , Illinois , known as Ben Rose House designed by architects A. James Speyer , who designed the main building in 1954 , and David Haid , who designed the pavilion in 1974 , and once owned by photographer Ben Rose . Ben Rose had a car collection in the pavilion , as Cameron 's father has the Ferrari 250 GT California in the same pavilion in the movie . According to Lake Forest College art professor Franz Shulze , during the filming of the scene where the Ferrari crashes out of the window , Haid explained to Hughes that he could prevent the car from damaging the rest of the pavilion . Haid fixed connections in the wall and the building remained intact . Haid said to Hughes afterward , " You owe me $ 25 @,@ 000 " , which Hughes paid . Other scenes were shot in Chicago , River Forest , Oak Park , Northbrook , Highland Park , Glencoe and Winnetka , Lake Forest and Long Beach , California . After Ben Rose 's death in 2009 the house came up for sale and was sold in 2014 . 
 According to Hughes , the scene at the Art Institute of Chicago was " a self @-@ indulgent scene of mine — which was a place of refuge for me , I went there quite a bit , I loved it . I knew all the paintings , the building . This was a chance for me to go back into this building and show the paintings that were my favorite . " The museum had not been shot in , until the producers of the film approached them . " I remember Hughes saying , ' There are going to be more works of art in this movie than there have ever been before , ' " recalled Jennifer Grey . 
 According to editor Paul Hirsch , in the original cut , the museum scene fared poorly at test screenings until he switched sequences around and Hughes changed the soundtrack . 
 The piece of music I originally chose was a classical guitar solo played on acoustic guitar . It was <unk> with a lot of rubato . I cut the sequence to that music and it also became <unk> and irregular . I thought it was great and so did Hughes . He loved it so much that he showed it to the studio but they just went " <unk> . " Then after many screenings where the audience said " The museum scene is the scene we like least " , he decided to replace the music . We had all loved it , but the audience hated it . I said , ' I think I know why they hate the museum scene . It 's in the wrong place . ' Originally , the parade sequence came before the museum sequence , but I realized that the parade was the highlight of the day , there was no way we could top it , so it had to be the last thing before the three kids go home . So that was agreed upon , we reshuffled the events of the day , and moved the museum sequence before the parade . Then we screened it and everybody loved the museum scene ! My feeling was that they loved it because it came in at the right point in the sequence of events . John felt they loved it because of the music . Basically , the bottom line is , it worked . 
 The music used for the final version of the museum sequence is an instrumental cover version of The Smiths ' " Please , Please , Please , Let Me Get What I Want " , performed by The Dream Academy . A passionate Beatles fan , Hughes makes multiple references to them and John Lennon in the script . During filming , Hughes " listened to The White Album every single day for fifty @-@ six days " . Hughes also pays tribute to his childhood hero Gordie Howe with Cameron 's Detroit Red Wings jersey . " I sent them the jersey " , said Howe . " It was nice seeing the No. 9 on the big screen . " 
 = = = = Car = = = = 
 In the film , Ferris convinces Cameron to borrow his father 's rare 1961 Ferrari GT California . " The insert shots of the Ferrari were of the real 250 GT California " , Hughes explains in the DVD commentary . " The cars we used in the wide shots were obviously reproductions . There were only 100 of these cars , so it was way too expensive to destroy . We had a number of replicas made . They were pretty good , but for the tight shots I needed a real one , so we brought one in to the stage and shot the inserts with it . " 
 Prior to filming , Hughes learned about Modena Design and Development who produced the Modena Spyder California , a replica of the Ferrari 250 GT . This prototype is now offered for US $ 79 @,@ 900 @.@ 00 on <unk> . Hughes saw a mention of the company in a car magazine and decided to research them . Neil <unk> recalls the day Hughes contacted him to ask about seeing the Modena Spyder : 
 The first time he called I hung up on him because I thought it was a friend of mine who was given to practical jokes . Then he called back and convinced me it really was him , so Mark and I took the car to his office . While we were waiting outside to meet Hughes this scruffy @-@ looking fellow came out of the building and began looking the car over ; we thought from his appearance he must have been a janitor or something . Then he looked up at a window and shouted , ' This is it ! ' and several heads poked out to have a look . That scruffy @-@ looking fellow was John Hughes , and the people in the window were his staff . Turned out it was between the Modena Spyder and a Porsche Turbo , and Hughes chose the Modena . 
 Automobile restorationist Mark Goyette designed the kits for three reproductions used in the film and chronicled the whereabouts of the cars today : 
 " Built by Goyette and leased to Paramount for the filming . It 's the one that jumps over the camera , and is used in almost every shot . At the end of filming , Paramount returned it to Goyette , with the exhaust crushed and cracks in the body . " There was quite a bit of superficial damage , but it held up amazingly well " , he said . He rebuilt it , and sold it to a young couple in California . The husband later ran it off the road , and Goyette rebuilt the front end for him . That owner sold it in the mid @-@ 90s , and it turned up again around 2000 , but hasn 't emerged since . " 
 " Sold to Paramount as a kit for them to assemble as their stunt car , they did such a poor job that it was basically unusable , aside from going backwards out the window of Cameron 's house . Rebuilt , it ended up at Planet Hollywood in Minneapolis and was moved to Planet Hollywood in Cancun when this one was closed . " 
 " Another kit , supposed to be built as a shell for the out the window scene , it was never completed at all , and disappeared after the film was completed . Goyette thinks he once heard it was eventually completed and sold off , but it could also still be in a back lot at Paramount . " 
 One of the " <unk> " was sold by Bonhams on April 19 , 2010 at the Royal Air Force Museum at Hendon , United Kingdom for £ 79 @,@ 600 . 
 The " <unk> " was " universally hated by the crew " , said Ruck . " It didn 't work right . " The scene in which Ferris turns off the car to leave it with the garage attendant had to be shot a dozen times because it would not start . The car was built with a real wheel base , but used a Ford V8 engine instead of a V12 . At the time of filming , the original 250 GT California model was worth $ 350 @,@ 000 . Since the release of the film , it has become one of the most expensive cars ever sold , going at auction in 2008 for $ 10 @,@ 976 @,@ 000 and more recently in 2015 for $ 16 @,@ 830 @,@ 000 . The vanity plate of Cameron 's dad 's Ferrari spells <unk> and the other plates seen in the film are homages to Hughes 's earlier works , <unk> ( National Lampoon 's Vacation ) , TBC ( The Breakfast Club ) , <unk> ( Mr. Mom ) , as well as <unk> ( Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ) . 
 = = = = Economic lecture = = = = 
 Ben Stein 's famous monotonous lecture about the Smoot @-@ Hawley Tariff Act was not originally in Hughes 's script . Stein , by happenstance , was lecturing off @-@ camera to the amusement of the student cast . " I was just going to do it off camera , but the student extras laughed so hard when they heard my voice that ( Hughes ) said do it on camera , improvise , something you know a lot about . When I gave the lecture about supply @-@ side economics , I thought they were applauding . Everybody on the set applauded . I thought they were applauding because they had learned something about supply @-@ side economics . But they were applauding because they thought I was boring ... It was the best day of my life " , Stein said . 
 = = = = Parade scene = = = = 
 The parade scene took multiple days of filming ; Broderick spent some time practicing the dance moves . " I was very scared " , Broderick said . " Fortunately , the sequence was carefully choreographed beforehand . We worked out all the moves by rehearsing in a little studio . It was shot on two Saturdays in the heart of downtown Chicago . The first day was during a real parade , and John got some very long shots . Then radio stations carried announcements inviting people to take part in ' a John Hughes movie ' . The word got around fast and 10 @,@ 000 people showed up ! For the final shot , I turned around and saw a river of people . I put my hands up at the end of the number and heard this huge roar . I can understand how rock stars feel . That kind of reaction feeds you . " 
 Broderick 's moves were choreographed by Kenny Ortega ( later , of Dirty Dancing fame ) . Much of it had to be scrapped though as Broderick had injured his knee badly during the scenes of running through neighbors ' backyards . " I was pretty sore " , Broderick said . " I got well enough to do what you see in the parade there , but I couldn 't do most of Kenny Ortega 's knee spins and things like that that we had worked on . When we did shoot it , we had all this choreography and I remember John would yell with a megaphone , ' Okay , do it again , but don 't do any of the choreography , ' because he wanted it to be a total mess . " " Danke Schoen " was somewhat choreographed but for " Twist and Shout " , Broderick said , " we were just making everything up " . Hughes explained that much of the scene was spontaneously filmed . " It just happened that this was an actual parade , which we put our float into — unbeknownst to anybody , all the people on the reviewing stand . Nobody knew what it was , including the governor . " 
 = = = = Wrigley Field = = = = 
 Wrigley Field is featured in two interwoven and consecutive scenes . In the first scene , Rooney is looking for Ferris at a pizza joint while the voice of Harry Caray announces the action of a ballgame that is being shown on TV . From the play @-@ by @-@ play descriptions , the uniforms , and the player numbers , this game has been identified as the June 5 , 1985 , game between the Atlanta Braves and the Chicago Cubs . A foul ball is ripped into the left field stands , and as Rooney looks away from the TV briefly , there is a close up of Ferris a moment after catching it . The scene in the pizza joint continues as Rooney tries to banter about the game with the guy behind the counter . 
 In the next scene , Sloane , Cameron , and Ferris are in the left field stands inside Wrigley . Ferris flexes his hand in pain after supposedly catching the foul ball . During this scene , the characters enjoy the game and joke about what they would be doing if they had played by the rules . All these " in the park " shots , including the one from the previous scene where Ferris catches the foul ball on TV , were filmed on September 24 , 1985 at a game between the Montreal Expos and the Cubs . During the 1985 season , the Braves and the Expos both wore powder blue uniforms during their road games . And so , with seamless editing by Hughes , it is difficult to distinguish that the game being seen and described in the pizza joint is not only a different game but also a different Cubs ' opponent than the one filmed inside the stadium . 
 John Hughes had originally wanted to film the scene at the baseball game at Comiskey Park , as Hughes was a Chicago White Sox fan . However , due to time constraints , the location was moved to Wrigley Field at the last minute . 
 On October 1 , 2011 , Wrigley Field celebrated the 25th anniversary of the film by showing it on three giant screens on the infield . 
 = = = Deleted scenes = = = 
 Several scenes were cut from the final film ; one lost scene entitled " The Isles of Langerhans " has the three teenagers trying to order in the French restaurant , shocked to discover pancreas on the menu ( although in the finished film , Ferris still says , " We ate pancreas " , while recapping the day ) . This is featured on the Bueller , Bueller Edition DVD . Other scenes were never made available on any DVD version . These scenes included additional screen time with Jeanie in a locker room , Ferris ' younger brother and sister ( both of whom were completely removed from the film ) , and additional / alternate lines of dialogue throughout the film , all of which can be seen in the original theatrical trailer . Hughes had also wanted to film a scene where Ferris , Sloane , and Cameron go to a strip club . Paramount executives told him there were only so many shooting days left , so the scene was scrapped . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Limited edition fan club soundtrack = = = 
 No official soundtrack was ever released for the film , as director John Hughes felt the songs would not work well together as a continuous album . However , according to an interview with Lollipop Magazine , Hughes noted that he had sent 100 @,@ 000 7 " vinyl singles containing two songs featured in the film to members of his fan mailing list . 
 Hughes gave further details about his refusal to release a soundtrack in the Lollipop interview : 
 The only official soundtrack that Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ever had was for the mailing list . A & M was very angry with me over that ; they begged me to put one out , but I thought " who 'd want all of these songs ? " I mean , would kids want " Danke Schoen " and " Oh Yeah " on the same record ? They probably already had " Twist and Shout " , or their parents did , and to put all of those together with the more contemporary stuff , like the ( English ) Beat — I just didn 't think anybody would like it . But I did put together a seven @-@ inch of the two songs I owned the rights to — " Beat City " on one side , and ... I forget , one of the other English bands on the soundtrack ... and sent that to the mailing list . By ' 86 , ' 87 , it was costing us $ 30 a piece to mail out 100 @,@ 000 packages . But it was a labor of love . 
 = = = Songs in the film = = = 
 Songs featured in the film include : 
 " Love Missile F1 @-@ 11 " ( Extended Version ) by Sigue Sigue Sputnik 
 " Jeannie " ( Theme from I Dream of Jeannie ) 
 " Beat City " by The <unk> Men 
 " Main Title / Rebel Blockade Runner " by John Williams ( From Star Wars ) 
 " Please , Please , Please , Let Me Get What I Want " ( instrumental ) by The Dream Academy ( a cover of a song by The Smiths ) 
 " The Celebrated Minuet " by Luigi Boccherini ( Performed by the Zagreb Philharmonic Chamber Studio ) 
 " Danke Schoen " by Wayne Newton 
 " Twist and Shout " by The Beatles 
 " Radio People " by Zapp 
 " I 'm Afraid " by Blue Room 
 " Taking the Day Off " by General Public 
 " The Edge of Forever " by The Dream Academy 
 " March of the <unk> " ( a remix of " Rotating Heads " ) by The ( English ) Beat 
 " Oh Yeah " by Yello 
 " BAD " by Big Audio Dynamite 
 " Go Down Moses " credited to the Fisk Jubilee Singers in 1871 ( The dirge @-@ like song that Cameron sings to himself while lying in his sick bed ) 
 " Danke Schoen " is one of the recurring motifs in the film and is sung by Ferris , Ed Rooney , and Jeanie . Hughes called it the " most awful song of my youth . Every time it came on , I just wanted to scream , claw my face . I was taking German in high school — which meant that we listened to it in school . I couldn 't get away from it . " According to Broderick , Ferris 's singing " Danke Schoen " in the shower was his idea . " Although it 's only because of the brilliance of John 's deciding that I should sing " Danke Schoen " on the float in the parade . I had never heard the song before . I was learning it for the parade scene . So we 're doing the shower scene and I thought , ' Well , I can do a little rehearsal . ' And I did something with my hair to make that Mohawk . And you know what good directors do : they say , ' Stop ! Wait till we roll . ' And John put that stuff in . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 The film received widely positive reviews from critics . It has a " Certified Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , having an aggregated critical film review score of 80 % . The site 's consensus reads " Matthew Broderick charms in Ferris Bueller 's Day Off , a light and irrepressibly fun movie about being young and having fun " . Roger Ebert gave it three out of four stars , calling it " one of the most innocent movies in a long time " , and " a sweet , warm @-@ hearted comedy " . Richard Roeper called Ferris " one of my favorite movies of all time . It has one of the highest ' <unk> ' factors of any film I 've ever seen ... I can watch it again and again . There 's also this , and I say it in all sincerity : Ferris Bueller 's Day Off is something of a suicide prevention film , or at the very least a story about a young man trying to help his friend gain some measure of self @-@ worth ... Ferris has made it his mission to show Cameron that the whole world in front of him is passing him by , and that life can be pretty sweet if you wake up and embrace it . That 's the lasting message of Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . " Roeper 's license plate , " <unk> " , also pays homage to the film . Conservative columnist George Will hailed Ferris as " the <unk> movie " , a film " most true to the general spirit of the movies , the spirit of effortless escapism " . 
 Essayist Steve Almond called Ferris " the most sophisticated teen movie ( he ) had ever seen " , adding that while Hughes had made a lot of good movies , Ferris was the " one film ( he ) would consider true art , ( the ) only one that reaches toward the ecstatic power of <unk> and , at the same time , exposes the true , piercing woe of that age " . Almond also applauded Ruck 's performance , going so far as saying he deserved the Best Supporting Actor Academy Award of 1986 : " His performance is what elevates the film , allows it to assume the power of a modern parable . " The New York Times reviewer Nina Darnton critiqued Mia Sara 's portrayal of Sloane as " played without the specific detail that characterized the adolescent characters in Hughes 's other films , and has therefore created a basically stable but forgettable character " . Conversely , Darnton praised Ruck and Grey 's performances : " The two people who grow in the movie — Cameron , played with humor and sensitivity by Alan Ruck , and Ferris 's sister Jeanie , played with appropriate self @-@ pity by Jennifer Grey — are the most authentic . Grey manages to play an insufferably sulky teen @-@ ager who is still attractive and likable . " 
 National Review writer Mark Hemingway lauded the film 's celebration of liberty . " If there 's a better celluloid expression of ordinary American freedom than Ferris Bueller 's Day Off , I have yet to see it . If you could take one day and do absolutely anything , piling into a convertible with your best girl and your best friend and taking in a baseball game , an art museum , and a fine meal seems about as good as it gets " , wrote Hemingway . 
 Ben Stein was exceptionally moved by the film , calling it " the most life @-@ affirming movie possibly of the entire post @-@ war period " . " This is to comedies what Gone with the Wind is to epics " , Stein added . " It will never die , because it responds to and calls forth such human emotions . It isn 't dirty . There 's nothing mean @-@ spirited about it . There 's nothing sneering or sniggering about it . It 's just wholesome . We want to be free . We want to have a good time . We know we 're not going to be able to all our lives . We know we 're going to have to buckle down and work . We know we 're going to have to eventually become family men and women , and have responsibilities and pay our bills . But just give us a couple of good days that we can look back on . " 
 Others were not as enamored with Ferris , many taking issue with the film 's " rebel without a cause " hedonism . David Denby of New York Magazine , called the film " a nauseating distillation of the slack , greedy side of Reaganism " . Author Christina Lee agreed , adding it was a " splendidly ridiculous exercise in unadulterated indulgence " , and the film " encapsulated the Reagan era 's near solipsist worldview and insatiable appetite for immediate gratification — of living in and for the moment ... " Gene Siskel panned the film from a Chicago @-@ centric perspective saying " Ferris Bueller doesn 't do anything much fun ... They don 't even sit in the bleachers where all the kids like to sit when they go to Cubs games . " ( Incidentally , Hughes revealed in the DVD commentary that he was not a Cubs fan . ) Siskel did enjoy the chemistry between Jennifer Grey and Charlie Sheen . Ebert thought Siskel was too eager to find flaws in the film 's view of Chicago . Broderick was nominated for a Golden Globe Award in 1986 for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . 
 American Film Institute recognition : 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes " Life moves pretty fast . If you don 't stop and look around once in a while , you could miss it . " - Nominated . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film opened in 1 @,@ 330 theaters in the United States and had a total weekend gross of $ 6 @,@ 275 @,@ 647 , opening at # 2 . Ferris Bueller 's Day Off 's total gross in the United States was approximately $ 70 @,@ 136 @,@ 369 , making it a box office success . It subsequently became the 10th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 1986 . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 As an influential and popular film , Ferris Bueller 's Day Off has been included in many film rating lists . The film is number 54 on Bravo 's " 100 Funniest Movies " , came 26th in the British 50 Greatest Comedy Films and ranked number 10 on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the " 50 Best High School Movies " . The film was featured in the VH1 television show I Love the 80s , which aired in 2002 . In 2000 , readers of Total Film magazine voted Ferris Bueller 's Day Off the 23rd @-@ greatest comedy film of all time , and in 2005 an Empire magazine article declared Ferris Bueller 's Day Off the number @-@ one teen film of all time . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 First Lady Barbara Bush paraphrased the film in her 1990 commencement address at Wellesley College : " Find the joy in life , because as Ferris Bueller said on his day off , ' Life moves pretty fast ; if you don 't stop and look around once in a while , you could miss it ! ' " Responding to the audience 's enthusiastic applause , she added " I 'm not going to tell George ya clapped more for Ferris than ya clapped for George . " 
 Other phrases from Ferris Bueller 's Day Off such as Stein 's nasally @-@ voiced " Bueller ? ... Bueller ? ... Bueller ? " ( while taking roll call in class ) , and " Anyone ? Anyone ? " ( trying to probe the students for answers ) as well as Kristy Swanson 's cheerful " No problem whatsoever ! " also permeated popular culture . Stein 's monotone performance actually launched his acting career . 
 Broderick said of the Ferris Bueller role , " It eclipsed everything , I should admit , and to some degree it still does . " Later at the 2010 Oscar tribute to Hughes , he said , " For the past 25 years , nearly every day someone comes up to me , taps me on the shoulder and says , ' Hey , Ferris , is this your day off ? ' " 
 Ruck says that with Cameron Frye , Hughes gave him " the best part I ever had in a movie , and any success that I 've had since 1985 is because he took a big chance on me . I 'll be forever grateful . " " While we were making the movie , I just knew I had a really good part " , Ruck says . " My realization of John 's impact on the teen @-@ comedy genre crept in sometime later . Teen comedies tend to dwell on the ridiculous , as a rule . It 's always the preoccupation with sex and the self @-@ involvement , and we kind of hold the kids up for ridicule in a way . Hughes added this element of dignity . He was an advocate for teenagers as complete human beings , and he honored their hopes and their dreams . That 's what you see in his movies . " 
 Lyman Ward and Cindy Pickett , who play the parents , met on the set in 1986 and were married a short time after that . The two again played parents in the 1992 horror film Sleepwalkers . 
 Broderick starred in a television advertisement prepared by Honda promoting its CR @-@ V for the 2012 Super Bowl XLVI . The ad pays homage to Ferris Bueller , featuring Broderick ( as himself ) faking illness to skip out of work to enjoy sightseeing around Los Angeles . Several elements , such as the use of the song " Oh Yeah " , and a valet monotonously calling for " Broderick ... Broderick ... " , appear in the ad . A teaser for the ad had appeared two weeks prior to the Super Bowl , which had created rumors of a possible film sequel . It was produced by Santa Monica @-@ based RPA and directed by Todd Phillips . <unk> 's Tim Nudd called the ad " a great homage to the original 1986 film , with Broderick this time calling in sick to a film shoot and enjoying another day of slacking . " On the other hand , Jalopnik 's Matt <unk> called the spot " sacrilegious " . 
 The 2016 movie Deadpool 's post @-@ credit scene is an homage to Ferris Bueller 's post @-@ credit scene . Deadpool is dressed in a robe and talks directly to the audience in a hallway that looks similar to the one in the movie . Similar to Ferris , Deadpool says " You 're still here ? It 's over . Go home . " At the end of the scene , Deadpool leans back into the frame from behind a doorway , and makes the " <unk> @-@ <unk> " sound from Ferris Bueller . 
 An episode titled ' Brian Finch ’ s Black Op ' of the 2016 TV series Limitless paid homage to the movie . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 The film 's influence in popular culture extends beyond the film itself to how musical elements of the film have been received as well , for example , Yello 's song " Oh Yeah " . As Jonathan Bernstein explains , " Never a hit , this slice of Swiss @-@ made tomfoolery with its <unk> vocal effects and driving percussion was first used by John Hughes to illustrate the mouthwatering must @-@ <unk> of Cameron 's dad 's Ferrari . Since then , it has become synonymous with avarice . Every time a movie , TV show or commercial wants to underline the jaw @-@ dropping impact of a hot babe or sleek auto , that synth @-@ drum starts popping and that deep voice rumbles , ' Oh yeah . . . ' " Concerning the influence of another song used in the film , Roz Kaveney writes that some " of the finest moments in later teen film draw on Ferris 's blithe Dionysian fervour — the elaborate courtship by song in 10 Things I Hate About You ( 1999 ) draws usefully on the ' Twist and Shout ' sequence in Ferris Bueller 's Day Off " . The bands Save Ferris and Rooney were named in allusion to Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . 
 " Twist and Shout " charted again , 16 years after the Beatles broke up , as a result of its prominent appearance in both this film and Back To School ( where Rodney Dangerfield performs a cover version ) which was released the same weekend as Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . The re @-@ released single reached # 23 in the U.S ; a US @-@ only compilation album containing the track The Early Beatles , re @-@ entered the album charts at # 197 . The version heard in the film includes brass overdubbed onto the Beatles ' original recording , which did not go down well with Paul McCartney . " I liked ( the ) film but they overdubbed some lousy brass on the stuff ! If it had needed brass , we 'd had stuck it on ourselves ! " Upon hearing McCartney 's reaction , Hughes felt bad for " offend ( ing ) a Beatle . But it wasn 't really part of the song . We saw a band and we needed to hear the instruments . " 
 = = = = Sequel = = = = 
 Broderick and Hughes stayed in touch for a while after production . " We thought about a sequel to Ferris Bueller , where he 'd be in college or at his first job , and the same kind of things would happen again . But neither of us found a very exciting hook to that . The movie is about a singular time in your life . " " Ferris Bueller is about the week before you leave school , it 's about the end of school — in some way , it doesn 't have a sequel . It 's a little moment and it 's a lightning flash in your life . I mean , you could try to repeat it in college or something but it 's a time that you don 't keep . So that 's partly why I think we couldn 't think of another " , Broderick added . " But just for fun " , said Ruck , " I used to think why don 't they wait until Matthew and I are in our seventies and do Ferris Bueller Returns and have Cameron be in a nursing home . He doesn 't really need to be there , but he just decided his life is over , so he committed himself to a nursing home . And Ferris comes and breaks him out . And they go to , like , a <unk> bar and all this ridiculous stuff happens . And then , at the end of the movie , Cameron dies . " 
 = = Academic analysis = = 
 Many scholars have discussed at length the film 's depiction of academia and youth culture . For Martin Morse Wooster , the film " portrayed teachers as humorless buffoons whose only function was to prevent teenagers from having a good time " . Regarding not specifically teachers , but rather a type of adult characterization in general , Art Silverblatt asserts that the " adults in Ferris Bueller 's Day Off are irrelevant and impotent . Ferris 's nemesis , the school disciplinarian , Mr. Rooney , is obsessed with ' getting Bueller . ' His obsession emerges from envy . Strangely , Ferris serves as Rooney 's role model , as he clearly possesses the imagination and power that Rooney lacks . ... By capturing and disempowering Ferris , Rooney hopes to ... reduce Ferris 's influence over other students , which would reestablish adults , that is , Rooney , as traditional authority figures . " Nevertheless , Silverblatt concludes that " Rooney is essentially a comedic figure , whose bumbling attempts to discipline Ferris are a primary source of humor in the film " . Thomas Patrick Doherty writes that " the adult villains in <unk> such as ... Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ( 1986 ) are overdrawn caricatures , no real threat ; they 're played for laughs " . Yet Silverblatt also remarks that casting " the principal as a comic figure questions the competence of adults to provide young people with effective direction — indeed , the value of adulthood itself " . 
 Of course , adults are not the stars or main characters of the film , and Roz Kaveney notes that what " Ferris Bueller brings to the teen genre , ultimately , is a sense of how it is possible to be cool and popular without being rich or a sports hero . Unlike the heroes of Weird Science , Ferris is computer savvy without being a nerd or a geek — it is a skill he has taken the trouble to learn . " 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film was first released on VHS and Laserdisc in 1987 , and then re @-@ released on VHS in 1996 . The film has been released on DVD three times ; including the original DVD release in 1999 , the " Bueller ... Bueller " edition in 2006 , and the " I Love the ' 80s " edition in 2008 . The original DVD , like most Paramount Pictures films released on DVD for the first time , has very few bonus features , but it does feature a commentary by Hughes . Though this is no longer available for sale , the director 's commentary is available here . The " Bueller ... Bueller " re @-@ release has several more bonus features , but does not contain the commentary track of the original DVD release . The " I Love the ' 80s " edition is identical to the first DVD release ( no features aside from commentary ) , but includes a bonus CD with songs from the 1980s . The songs are not featured in the film . The " Bueller ... Bueller " edition has multiple bonus features such as interviews with the cast and crew , along with a clip of Stein 's commentaries on the film 's philosophy and impact . The Blu @-@ ray Disc release ( which is a part of the " Bueller ... Bueller " edition , with the same bonus material ) was first released on May 5 , 2009 . A 25th anniversary edition for DVD and Blu @-@ ray were both released on August 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Television series = = 
 In 1990 , a series called Ferris Bueller started for NBC , starring Charlie Schlatter as Ferris Bueller , Jennifer Aniston as Jeanie Bueller , and Ami Dolenz as Sloane Peterson . The series served as a prequel to the film . In the pilot episode , the audience sees Schlatter cutting up a cardboard cutout of Matthew Broderick , saying that he hated Broderick 's performance as him . It was produced by <unk> , Ltd . Productions in association with Paramount Television . In part because of competition of the similar series on the Fox Television Network , Parker Lewis Can 't Lose , the series was canceled after the first thirteen episodes aired . Both Schlatter and Aniston later had success on other TV shows , Schlatter on Diagnosis : Murder and Aniston on Friends . 
 = Mezhyhirya Monastery = 
 The Mezhyhirya Savior @-@ Transfiguration Monastery ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ) was an Eastern Orthodox female monastery that was located in the neighborhood of <unk> . 
 The monastery served as a historic Princely residency of Rurik dynasty during the Medieval times located just 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to the north of Vyshhorod . Today , the territory is part of the Vyshhorod Raion , Kiev Oblast ( province ) in northern Ukraine . The location is situated in the Mezhyhirya ravine , on the right bank of the Dnieper River in close proximity to the Kiev water reservoir . 
 Founded in 988 AD , the Mezhyhirya Monastery was one of the first monasteries established in the East Slavic state of Kievan Rus ' . Throughout its existence , it was destroyed , and then restored numerous times , yet it was not spared destruction by Soviet authorities in 1935 . At the time of its height , the Mezhyhirya Monastery was considered a spiritual center of Rus royal Rurikid house and later Cossacks . Currently , the area of the former monastery is located on a fenced @-@ in woodland territory next to Novi Petrivtsi village and is directly connected with a private residence for Ukrainian government officials . 
 As an important monastery of the Zaporozhian Host , the Mezhyhirya Monastery left a rich legacy behind it . The monastery was mentioned in one of Taras Shevchenko 's poems , " <unk> , " written in 1847 , and was the subject of a drawing by him . Nikolai Gogol 's novel , " Taras Bulba , " published in 1835 , also mentions the monastery . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and early history = = = 
 The monastery is mentioned for the first time in the early 14th century , although Yevgeniy <unk> claimed that it had been founded by the first Metropolitan of Kiev , Michael , along with Greek monks arriving from Byzantium in 988 AD . The claim is likely spurious , since Mezhyhirya is not listed by modern authors among the monasteries of Kievan Rus . 
 In 1154 , the Prince of Vladimir @-@ Suzdal Yuri Dolgoruki divided the territory surrounding the monastery 's grounds amongst his sons . His son Andrei I Bogolyubsky received the lands nearest to the monastery , now the city of Vyshhorod . Not too long afterwards , he is alleged to have moved the monastery to its current location in the hills of the Dnieper , giving the monastery its name , " Mezhyhirya . " Bogolyubsky despised the city of Kiev , therefore moving to Suzdal , in modern @-@ day Russia . On his trip , he took with him the " Theotokos of Vladimir " icon , a gift from Constantinople Patriarch Luke <unk> to Dolgoruki . The icon is one of the most venerated Orthodox icons , now located in the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow . 
 With the Mongol invasion of Rus ' by Batu Khan in 1237 @-@ 40 , the monastery is supposed to have been completely destroyed . These legends were written down much later . The monastery is known to have existed in the 14th century , though . In 1482 , it was attacked by the Crimean Tatars under Meñli I Giray . Reconstruction on the monastery began only 40 years later . In 1523 , the monastery was transferred to the King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania Sigismund I. In addition , the monastery was given a full reign over its territory . In 1555 , the complex consisted of four churches , including and one cave church . 
 = = = Cossack monastery = = = 
 During the 16th century , the monastery frequently lost and regained its ownership rights . On the funds of the monastery 's new hegumen <unk> ( a protégé of prince Konstanty <unk> Ostrogski ) , the monastery 's old buildings were demolished , and new ones were built in their place . In 1604 , the Gate Church of Ss . Peter and Paul was constructed , in 1609 - the <unk> Refectory , and the Transfiguration Cathedral in 1609 @-@ 1611 . Under his rule , the monastery was considered as the second <unk> ( cave monastery ) in Ukraine . 
 After its reconstruction , the Mezhyhirya Monastery became a regional center of the Zaporozhian Host , serving the host as a military monastery . In 1610 , the monastery received the status of a <unk> monastery ( orthodox church autonomy ) , under the Patriarch of Constantinople . The universal ( act ) of Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky issued on May 21 , 1656 transferred the neighboring settlements of Vyshhorod , Novi Petrivtsi , and <unk> under control of the Mezhyhirya Monastery . In effect , the universal made Khmelnytsky the monastery 's <unk> . After the destruction of the <unk> Monastery by a Polish szlachta army , the Mezhyhirya Monastery replaced it as the main cossack military monastery . As a military monastery , retired and elderly cossacks from the Zaporozhian Host would now come to the monastery to retire and live in until the end of their lives . At that time , the monastery 's expenses were paid off with the help of the cossack 's Sich Host . 
 In 1676 , the area was burned down after a fire started in the wooden Transfiguration Cathedral . With the help of Ivan <unk> , a monk who lived in the monastery and later became a Patriarch of Moscow , the complex was reconstructed . Two years later , with the help of the cossack community , the Annunciation Church was constructed near the monastery 's hospital . 
 In 1683 , the Sich Rada voted that the ministers in the Sich 's <unk> Cathedral ( the main cathedral of the sich ) should be only from the Mezhyhirya Monastery . In 1691 , monasteries located near the Sich were placed under the Mezhyhirya Monastery 's authority . Under hegumen <unk> at the end of the 17th century , considered as a period of prosperity , the Mezhyhirya Monastery became one of the largest monastery 's in Ukraine . 
 At the request of Peter I of Russia , the <unk> status of the monastery was revoked ; it was later reinstated in 1710 . In 1717 , a large fire destroyed a large portion of the monastery 's buildings . The monastery 's " military " status was reconfirmed by cossacks in 1735 . In 1774 , with the funds of the last <unk> <unk> Petro <unk> , the Ss . Peter and Paul Church was reconstructed . Ukrainian architect Ivan <unk> @-@ <unk> designed some of the buildings , including the monk 's residence . 
 = = = Decline and Soviet demolition = = = 
 A period of decline began with the abolition of the Zaporozhian Host by Catherine II of Russia . In 1786 the Russian Imperial government closed the monastery and confiscated its valuable treasures . The remaining Zaporozhian Cossacks soon afterwards left Zaporizhia , and moved to the Kuban region . There they founded the Kuban Cossack Host , which still exists to this day . The cossacks were able to leave with some of the monastery 's manuscripts , some of which are now kept in the Krasnodar Krai Archive . 
 In 1787 , Catherine II of Russia came to Kiev ( Kyiv ) for a visit and wished to see the Mezhyhirya Monastery . She never got to see it , because the monastery mysteriously burned down the night before her arrival . 
 In 1796 , a German engineer found that the area had suitable clay for the making of faience , and two years later , founded the Mezhyhirya Faience Factory , the first one in Ukraine , at the site of the unused monastery . By 1852 , the faience factory had become the largest industrial complex in Kiev . During its existence , the factory produced a variety of crockery and ornamental vases and figurines . In 1884 , the faience factory was closed down after it failed to bring any profit . 
 In 1894 , the Mezhyhirya Monastery was rebuilt and transformed into a women 's monastery . After its reconstruction , the monastery was transferred to the authority of the <unk> of the Saints Monastery in Kiev . 
 After the Russian Revolution , the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 's capital moved from Kharkiv to Kiev in 1934 , and the city was in need of a suburban residence for government officials . Mezhyhirya was chosen as the site of the new government residence . The decision of the Politburo in April 1935 ordered the demolition of the whole complex . Before the scheduled demolition in 1936 , the architecture and buildings of the monastic complex were photographed . During the demolition , an underground library was discovered , full of handwritten manuscripts . There are speculations that the discovered books belonged to the lost library of Yaroslav the Wise , or perhaps of a later period , during the times of the Zaporozhian Host . The only thing that remains now of the monastic complex is a water well . 
 During Soviet times , the area served as a residence for Leonid Brezhnev and Volodymyr <unk> , who worked in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 's government at the time . During this period , its location was concealed from the public . 
 = = Ownership controversy = = 
 In 2008 the Mezhyhirya residence was amid an ownership controversy between the former Ukrainian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych and the new Ukrainian government , led by Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko . The transfer of the 1 @.@ 4 km ² Mezhyhirya official residence in Novi Petrivtsi , Vyshhorod Raion ( district ) to the " Nadra Ukraine " firm on July 11 , 2007 by Viktor Yanukovych pulled the territory from under government ownership . 
 = = = Private residence of Viktor Yanukovych = = = 
 On July 9 , 2007 , President Viktor Yushchenko signed a secret presidential decree # 148 , according to the local business newspaper Delo which referred to the information of the State Directorate of Affairs . The document states : " The government dacha on the territory of the recreational complex " Pushcha @-@ Vodytsia " is presented for a use to the head of <unk> , Viktor Yanukovych . " Later the document has never appeared on the website of the head of state nor in any other open source of information . A single official confirmation of it was given to the newspaper by the State Directorate of Affairs . The directorate explained that the recreational complex " Pushcha @-@ Vodytsia " includes the recreational resort " Pushcha @-@ Vodytsia " and the Mezhyhirya residency . The residency that is located in the village of Novi Petrivtsi was occupied by Yanukovych in the last several years . 
 The newspaper notes that at the same time , July 9 , at the website of the President appeared another document - an order in which he obliged the prime @-@ minister to execute the decision of the <unk> and secure the financing of early elections . The newspaper speculated that it was a trade exchange of power for the state dacha . In the late February 2008 Yanukovych confirmed that he indeed possesses a dacha in the Mezhyhirya residency awarded by a presidential decree . According to the data of the State Directorate of Affairs , the territory of residency occupies 136 @.@ 8 hectares ( 338 acres ) . It is enclosed in perimeter by a five @-@ meter [ tall ] iron fence and inside it is secured by operatives of " Titan " . Yanukovych claimed that he only uses one of the houses which has an area of 250 square metres ( 2 @,@ 700 sq ft ) and after which is secured 1 @.@ 5 hectares ( 3 @.@ 7 acres ) of land . Yanukovych also stated that with help of the State Directorate of Affairs he was able to conduct a substantial renovations of the property and confirms that in 2007 some area was bought by some private entity after which he had to pay monthly 11 @,@ 000 hryvnias for rent . In interview to BBC he acknowledged that lives at the Mezhyhirya 's cottage sometime since 1999 or 2000 . 
 = = = Further developments = = = 
 On July 11 , 2007 , Yanukovych issued a government order # 521 , according to which the National Joint @-@ Stock Company " Nadra Ukrainy " received the state residency and a territory of 137 ha in Mezhyhirya . Soon " Nadra Ukrainy " concluded a barter with another company " Medinvesttreid " ( <unk> ) after which the above @-@ mentioned government assigned residence was exchanged for two properties at <unk> <unk> ( Park alley ) in Kiev . " Medinvesttreid " , in its turn , sold the newly acquired property of " Nadra Ukrainy " to some other company " <unk> " . Since May 2008 the Ministry of the Interior was conducting a search for the director of " Medinvesttreid " , <unk> <unk> , who in their opinion was involved in a scheme to get the former state residence out of state property . On February 12 , 2008 Yushchenko signed a decree for relieving a state property security personnel from duties at the State cottages area in Mezhyhirya . His decree canceled the previous presidential decree of January 12 , 2006 where the security personnel was assigned to properties at <unk> , instead of <unk> and Mezhyhirya . 
 Subsequently , Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych privatized the complex , already residing there while prime minister . At the time , the property 's price was estimated at around 1 billion hryvnias ( $ 200 million ) . After Yulia Tymoshenko 's election , her cabinet annulled the decree which transferred the property to the " Nadra Ukraine " firm , and again placed the territory under government control . However , on July 28 , 2008 , the Economic Court of Kiev City annulled the Cabinet 's decision and returned the Mezhyhirya residence back under Yanukovych 's ownership . 
 = Cowboy Bebop : The Movie = 
 Cowboy Bebop : The Movie , known in Japan as Cowboy Bebop : Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> : <unk> no Tobira , lit . Cowboy Bebop : Heaven 's Door ) , is a 2001 Japanese animated space Western action film based on the 1998 anime series Cowboy Bebop created by Hajime Yatate . Multiple staff from the original series worked on the film , including director Shinichirō Watanabe , writer Keiko Nobumoto , character designer Toshihiro Kawamoto , and animation director Hiroshi Osaka , and composer Yoko Kanno . The original English and Japanese voice cast also reprised their roles . 
 Cowboy Bebop : The Movie is set between episodes 22 and 23 of the original series . The plot centers on a mysterious terrorist planning to destroy the human population on Mars using an unknown pathogen . The bounty hunter crew of the spaceship Bebop work to find the terrorist and discover the source of the pathogen before the attack can take place . 
 The film was conceived by Watanabe as an extension of his work on the television series , which he treated as a series of miniature films . So as not to alienate fans of the series , a large amount of aesthetic material was incorporated , while also adjusting it to make it accessible to newcomers . Increased budget and production facilities enabled the use of filming styles associated with live @-@ action films and a higher animation quality than the series . Arabic thematic elements were incorporated to contrast against the series , which entailed Watanabe traveling to Morocco for research . The Arabic atmosphere was also used in Kanno 's music . 
 The film was produced by studios Sunrise , which had previously developed the original series , Bones , a later studio founded by former Sunrise staff , and Bandai Visual . Cowboy Bebop : The Movie was released to theaters in Japan on September 1 , 2001 and in the United States on August 11 , 2002 . It went on to gross over $ 3 million worldwide , and when released on DVD , it ranked high on Japanese and US charts . The film received generally positive reviews from mainstream and anime critics and was nominated for the Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Animated Film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cowboy Bebop : The Movie is set on Mars in <unk> , 49 years after Earth was mostly abandoned after a catastrophe . Humanity has settled on other planets and moons in the solar system . The film 's protagonists are legalized bounty hunters who travel together on the spaceship Bebop . They are Spike Spiegel , a former associate of the Red Dragon crime syndicate ; Jet Black , a former police officer and owner of the Bebop ; Faye Valentine , a woman who was once a fugitive from bounty hunters ; Edward Wong Hau Pepelu <unk> IV ( Ed for short ) , a girl with genius computer skills ; and Ein , an artificially enhanced " data dog " with human @-@ level intelligence . 
 Days before Halloween , a man explodes a truck in Mars ' capital city , spreading what is assumed to be a new pathogen that kills or sickens over three hundred people . In response , the Mars government issues a record bounty of 300 million <unk> for the culprit 's capture . Faye , who was pursuing Lee Sampson , a hacker that was apparently driving the truck , sees the terrorist and the Bebop crew decide to take on the bounty . Each follows different lines of inquiry . Ed , using a tattoo on the attacker 's wrist , manages to identify him as Vincent Volaju , a former member of a military squad apparently killed in the Titan War . In reality , Vincent was the only survivor of a test involving the pathogen , having been immunized with a test vaccine : made an amnesic , he suffers from hallucinations , and his inability to tell dreams from reality eventually drove him insane . 
 Jet learns that the truck was the property of Cherious Medical Pharmaceutical Company , who illegally manufactured the pathogen as a biological weapon . Looking for information on the pathogen , Spike is given a sample by a man named Rashid , who was the former lead on its development . Spike also encounters Elektra Ovirowa , an agent of Cherious Medical . Upon examination , the " pathogen " proves to be a type of protein @-@ based nanomachine that mimic human lymphocytes then break down into protein after death , making them undetectable . Attempting to infiltrate Cherious Medical , Spike fights with Elektra , planting a listening device on her . Elektra , who is sent by Cherious Medical to kill Vincent , is tailed by Spike , who attempts to take down Vincent on a train . Vincent easily defeats Spike , severely wounding him and throwing him from the train before releasing another cloud of the nanomachines : everyone in the train dies except Elektra , who had been in a relationship with Vincent prior to the test on Titan and was accidentally immunized . She secretly gives a friend in the company a sample of her blood to prepare a stock of vaccine . During this time , Faye relocates Sampson , who has been working with Vincent , but fails to catch him . Ein and Ed manage to find him again , but the two run off before Faye can get there . She arrives just as Vincent breaks one of the nanomachine containers with him , killing Sampson . Although Faye is also infected , Vincent gives her some of his blood through a kiss , immunizing her . 
 After Spike recovers and has a final talk with Rashid , he and Elektra are captured by Cherious Medical , who want to suppress all knowledge of the nanomachines ' existence . The two escape from Cherious Medical , grabbing the newly produced vaccine on the way . In turn , Faye escapes after Vincent goes to trigger an attack on the city that will eventually kill everyone on Mars . After the group reunites , it is determined that Vincent will spread the nanomachines by exploding the giant jack @-@ o ' -lantern balloons used in the Halloween parade : Jet has a troop of old aircraft spread the antibodies over the city while Faye heads for the weather control center and causes it to rain on the city , aiding the spread of the vaccine . Spike and Elektra separately head to confront Vincent . Spike arrives first and the two battle to a standstill , then the nanomachines are released and Spike is temporarily weakened by them . As Vincent prepares to kill him , Elektra arrives and shoots Vincent . Having wanted to die since Titan , Vincent does not defend himself and thanks Elektra for their time together before dying . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 = = Development = = 
 The idea for a film was in the mind of director Shinichirō Watanabe during the development of the original Cowboy Bebop series , which he had originally envisioned as a film . Watanabe treated each episode of the series as a miniature film , so to progress onto a feature @-@ length film seemed natural to him . So as not to disappoint fans , the film incorporated as much of the series as possible while making it accessible to newcomers . He had thought up some of the story and the character of Vincent during the production of the series . After the series ended and there was worldwide demand for a continuation , the decision was made by the series creators to make a film . Watanabe was aiming towards a live @-@ action look for the film despite its medium , using camera tricks , visual effects and character expression impossible in the series while keeping " the Bebop flavor " . According to Kōichi Yamadera , the Japanese voice actor for Spike , the only real changes made by the team in the portrayal were to show off the characters , including Spike , in different ways : Spike , in particular , displayed more of his inner thoughts and showed a gentler side than he did in the series , as there was more time available to express such details . Watanabe personally chose the voice actors for Elektra and Vincent . Vincent was partially intended as a type of villain that could not be done in the series , even though Watanabe felt he was not " particularly unique " . 
 Because of increased running time , budget and facilities , the team were able to include more cels in animations , as well as longer and more intricate action sequences . The film included difficult sequences that Watanabe could not do along with the rest of the film , so two guest directors were brought in for them : Hiroyuki Okiura , who handled the opening sequence , and Tensai Okamura , who created a cinematic Western shown at a drive @-@ in theater during the film . Watanabe wanted to give the film an Arabic feel , in contrast to the series which often used New York and Hong Kong for inspiration . To this end , Watanabe went on a research trip to Morocco . The character Rashid was based on the guide who had shown the research team round the city . Working on the film was different for Watanabe when compared to the series in a positive way : while he had to put the entire story in a twenty @-@ minute episode for the series , the team were able to create a longer , more detailed narrative . 
 Cowboy <unk> : The Movie was first announced in September 1999 : the majority of the series ' staff were carried over along with Watanabe , including producer Masahiko Minami , animation director Hiroshi Osaka , character designer Toshihiro Kawamoto , and writer Keiko Nobumoto . The original Japanese cast also returned . The writing process was finished and production began in July 2000 . It was produced by the studios Sunrise , Bones and Bandai Visual . While Sunrise worked on the original series , Bones was founded in 1998 after the series ' completion by Minami , Kawamoto and Osaka . The length of the film 's production allowed the team to ensure its high quality . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Cowboy Bebop : The Movie was composed by Yoko Kanno , composer for the original series , and performed by her band <unk> . She used the same mixture of music genres ( western , opera , jazz ) as with the TV series , but also added Arabic elements in keeping with the film 's thematic feel . She used Arabic and English for the music lyrics . Alongside these , the soundtrack made use of a large amount of rock instruments . Five tracks from the film were released on the <unk> mini @-@ album Ask DNA , released on July 25 , 2001 . The soundtrack 's official release , Cowboy Bebop : Knockin ' On Heaven 's Door OST Future Blues , was released on August 22 , 2001 . Both these albums were reissued in December 2012 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Cowboy Bebop : The Movie was first released in cinemas in Japan on September 1 , 2001 . After the film 's international release , this date was subject to debate in the western fanbase due to its proximity to the September 11 attacks . It was first shown to the west at the 2002 <unk> , where it was announced that the original English cast would reprise their roles . Its Japanese subtitle , " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " , was changed for the western release due to sharing its name with the 1973 Bob Dylan song of the same name . Instead of creating a new subtitle , the team settled with using " The Movie " . During its initial screening at the event , it sold out completely , prompting a second screening later in the event . The film received a limited theatrical release in the United States , opening on April 4 , 2003 . During its opening weekend , it reached 19th place in the box office chart , bringing in $ 12 @,@ 338 per screening . The film 's total gross in America was $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 045 . Its worldwide gross totals $ 3 @,@ 007 @,@ 903 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reception of the film has been positive , earning a 64 % critic score and 90 % audience score on Rotten Tomatoes . Fellow aggregate site Metacritic gave the film a score of 61 / 100 based on 23 critic reviews indicating " generally positive reviews " . The film was nominated at the Online Film Critics Society Awards 2003 in the Best Animated Film category , though it lost the award to Finding Nemo . Helen McCarthy in 500 Essential Anime Movies praised the music of the movie , calling it " the show 's secret weapon " , and stated that " the movie 's only real fault is that it 's about half an hour too long " . After being polled in 2013 for WatchMojo.com 's " Top 10 Anime Movies " list , the film reached sixth place . 
 Critic reviews have generally been positive . Andy Patrizio of IGN gave the film a score of 9 of 10 , saying that the developers " did a superb job of fleshing out the story " , as well as praising it for " not succumbing to melodrama like many of its live @-@ action counterparts . " He also commented that the film 's subject matter of terrorism in the face of the September 11 attacks " smacked way too close to home . " The music also received praise . Mike Crandol of Anime News Network echoed many of these sentiments . His main criticism stemmed from the fact that Jet , Faye and Ed were relegated to supporting roles , and that it was difficult getting them all into the story . He also said that the team had outdone themselves with the animation quality in a few scenes , such as the final fight between Spike and Vincent . Robert Koehler of Variety , reviewing an undubbed subtitled release , praised the visuals and writing , although he found some sections a little long . 
 Lawrence van Gelder of New York Times was a little more mixed , enjoying the experience , but finding it a little frivolous when compared to both its subject matter and events at the time . His ultimate impression from the English @-@ dubbed version was that the film could easily have been set in present @-@ day New York . Chris Beveridge of Mania.com said that the film " [ played ] out like a much expanded episode but without feeling like its being padded to do so . " , generally praising the plot along with Vincent 's characterization and Spike 's expanded portrayal . Jamie Russell , writing for the BBC , gave it 4 out of 5 stars , saying it was " good enough to deserve mention in the same breath as Akira , Ghost in the Shell , and Spirited Away . " The most praise went to the use of live @-@ action camera angles . Though he found the film 's story sometimes slowed noticeably , the soundtrack and visual references to other notable action films made it " an example of anime at its very best . " Other newspapers of the time , including the Los Angeles Times , Toronto Star , Chicago Tribune and web magazine Salon generally shared opinions with other reviewers : several praised the plot and animation , while others were mixed . Others , including the Toronto Star and Newark Star @-@ Ledger , noted its connection to science fiction films . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD in Japan on February 7 , 2002 , immediately reaching the top of the DVD / VHS charts . Sunrise and Bandai Visual underestimated the possible sales , with the first print being used up soon after release , prompting a second print for mid @-@ February . The DVD distribution rights in the west were acquired by Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment . In 2006 , it was ranked as the sixth best @-@ selling anime DVD in the United States . It did not receive a theatrical release in the United Kingdom , instead being released as a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD feature . It was released in the UK on June 27 , 2003 . The film was later released on Blu @-@ ray disc in Japan on July 25 , 2008 . It was released in North America on June 28 , 2011 . 
 Beveridge generally praised the DVD 's quality and extras were generally praised , summing it up as a " top notch release " . Alex Brotman of <unk> , reviewing the Japanese DVD release , called the film great , but was disappointed in the lack of special features for the DVD , particularly citing the lack of interviews with cast and crew members , and not being able to view the storyboards , in contrast to the DVD release of the original series . Patrizio was highly positive about the North American release , calling the video transfer " excellent " , the Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 sound setup " just super " , and praised the extra features . 
 = Occupiers ' Liability Act 1957 = 
 The Occupiers ' Liability Act 1957 ( c . 31 ) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that covers occupiers ' liability . The result of the Third Report of the Law Reform Committee , the Act was introduced to Parliament as the Occupiers ' Liability Bill and granted the Royal Assent on 6 June 1957 , coming into force on 1 January 1958 . The Act unified several classes of visitors to property and the duty of care owed to them by the occupier , as well as codifying elements of the common law relating to this duty of care . It also covered the duty owed to parties to a contract entering the property and ways of excluding the liability for visitors . The Act introduced an element of liability for landlords who failed to maintain their properties and were as a result responsible for the injury of a non @-@ tenant , something counter to the previous common law rule in English law . The Act is still valid law , and forms much of the law relating to occupiers ' liability in English law along with the Occupiers ' Liability Act 1984 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to 1957 , visitors to a property were classified in different ways , and this classification determined the duty of care an owner or tenant had to them . These were " contractors " such as hotel guests ( the highest level of duty ; a duty to ensure that the premises were fit for the purposes of the contract ) , " invitees " , such as a customer in a shop ( owed a less onerous duty ; a duty to take reasonable care to prevent damage from an unusual danger ) , " licensees " , such as a friend invited to a party ( a less onerous duty ; a duty to warn of any concealed danger or trap of which the occupier knew ) and " uninvited persons " such as trespassers ( who were owed no duty of care , except to refrain from deliberately or recklessly causing them harm ) . 
 The Third Report of the Law Reform Committee recommended changing this system , and the Occupiers ' Liability Bill was given its second reading on 6 March 1957 by Sir Harry Hylton @-@ Foster , the Solicitor @-@ General , and the Royal Assent on 6 June 1957 . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act first identifies the occupier . Section 1 ( 2 ) identifies the occupier as the person occupying or in control of the premises , not necessarily the owner , with the underlying premise being that the person liable should be the person most likely to have been able to prevent the harm ; the person occupying the premises , not necessarily the owner of those premises . The Act does not define occupier , but provides that the person to be treated as the occupier is the person who would be considered an occupier under common law rules . In Wheat v E <unk> & Co Ltd [ 1966 ] 1 All ER 582 it was established that more than one person can be an occupier . In Harris v Birkenhead Corporation [ 1976 ] it was held that it was possible to be an occupier without having physical possession of the house if the " occupier " has legal control of the property . Section 1 ( 3 ) extends the standards set by the Act not only to land but to any fixed or movable structure , which includes ships and aircraft . 
 = = = Common duty of care = = = 
 The Act next establishes a uniform duty towards all lawful visitors , thus abolishing the distinction between contractors , invitees and licensees . Section 2 provides that the occupier extend a " common duty of care " to all lawful visitors , although it keeps the low duty of care towards unlawful visitors such as trespassers . This duty is described as " a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there " . The Act allows the occupier to set limits on where the visitor is allowed to go or how long they are allowed to be there , an extension of the common law judgment made by Scrutton LJ in The <unk> [ 1927 ] , when he said that " when you invite a person into your house to use the staircase , you do not invite him to slide down the <unk> , you invite him to use the staircase in the ordinary way in which it is used " . 
 = = = = Exceptions = = = = 
 Exceptions are made for children and a person " in the exercise of his calling " ( a professional person or somebody exercising a trade or skill ) . With children , occupiers must " be prepared for children to be less careful than adults " ; a warning notice , for example , would normally be good enough to alert adults to a potential danger , but not to alert children . This is another extension of a common law principle ; in Glasgow Corporation v Taylor [ 1922 ] 1 AC 44 , a seven @-@ year @-@ old child died after eating poisonous berries from a bush in a park . The berries , which looked like cherries or blackcurrants , were found by the House of Lords to constitute an " <unk> " to the child , who found Glasgow Corporation , which owned the park , liable . However , the situation is different if the child has a guardian with him , who one would expect to appreciate any obvious dangers , as in Phipps v Rochester Corporation [ 1955 ] 1 QB 450 . This was essentially the same as the existing common law ; indeed , " It is doubtful whether the Act alters the law at all on this point " . 
 An occupier has a less onerous duty towards a person " in the exercise of his calling " , such as a professional or somebody exercising a trade . Section 2 ( 3 ) ( b ) of the Act provides that such a person " will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incidental to [ his calling ] , so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so " . In Roles v Nathan 2 All ER 908 a pair of chimney sweeps were called to clean the flues of a boiler . The engineer warned them about the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning if the chimney sweeps cleaned the flues with the fires still lit , but they disregarded his warning and continued until they were overwhelmed by carbon monoxide and died . The Court of Appeal held that the occupier was not liable , because the chimney sweeps had been warned and a householder who calls in a specialist to deal with defective property can reasonably expect the specialist to guard against any obvious dangers . 
 = = = = Warnings = = = = 
 A warning of danger is to be taken into account when working out if the common duty of care has been breached . Section 2 ( 4 ) a says that " where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been warned by the occupier , the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability , unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe " . Warning may discharge the common duty of care , as in Roles v Nathan , this is not enough unless the visitor can still be reasonably safe . In Rae v Mars ( UK ) Ltd [ 1990 ] it was held that where danger is extreme or unusual , it not enough for there to be a warning ; a barrier or additional notice should be placed . Staples v West Dorset District Council [ 1995 ] established that where a danger is obvious and the visitor is able to appreciate it , there is no need for a warning sign . 
 = = = = Independent contractors = = = = 
 Section 2 ( 4 ) ( b ) establishes that " where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger due to the faulty execution of any work of construction , maintenance or repair by an independent contractor employed by the occupier , the occupier is not to be treated without more as answerable for the danger if in all the circumstances he had acted reasonably in entrusting the work to an independent contractor and had taken such steps ( if any ) as he reasonably ought in order to satisfy himself that the contractor was competent and that the work had been properly done " . This accords with the previous general rule that an occupier cannot be held vicariously liable for the negligence of an independent contractor . When a visitor does suffer harm from the work of an independent contractor , the question is instead whether the occupier has taken reasonable steps to establish if the contractor is competent , and , if the job permits , whether the occupier has checked that the work has been properly done . 
 The application of this rule differs depending on the technical nature of the job and the competencies on the occupier . <unk> v CA Daw & Son Ltd [ 1941 ] established that the more technical a job is , the more reasonable it is to entrust it to an independent contractor , while in Woodward v The Mayor of Hastings [ 1945 ] the court held that an occupier is not always absolved from liability if they have entrusted the job to a competent person ; an occupier is required to take the kind of care that a reasonable man in his place would take . 
 If an occupier allows an extremely dangerous activity to take place on his land without taking precautions to ensure the contractor has liability insurance and a safety plan , he may be held liable . In Bottomley v Todmorden Cricket Club [ 2003 ] the Court of Appeal held that , where the defendant had allowed an independent contractor to set up a pyrotechnic display on their land without checking for public liability insurance , they were liable for the injuries suffered by the claimant . The extent to which one has to check for public liability insurance is weak ; in Gwilliam v West Hertfordshire Hospital NHS Trust [ 2002 ] the Court of Appeal held that where the contractor 's insurance had expired a few days before the event , the occupier was not liable . In Naylor v <unk> the occupier was not liable for failing to check public liability , since he had checked the contractor was accredited under the police and local government schemes required , and the contractor had been employed for 18 months before the case during which there were no reasons to doubt his competency . The Court of Appeal also held that , except in special circumstances , there was no " free @-@ standing duty " to take reasonable steps to ensure an independent contractor was insured . 
 = = = Excluding liability = = = 
 Section 2 ( 5 ) of the Act provides that there is no liability for " risks willingly accepted as his by the visitor " , an application of <unk> non fit injuria . An occupier can also restrict or exclude liability via a notice providing warnings and conditions of entry , although under section 65 of the Consumer Rights Act 2015 ( CRA ) this cannot exclude liability for death or personal injury due to negligence where the premises are occupied for the business purposes of the occupier . Before CRA it was treated differently ; in Ashdown v Samuel Williams & Sons Ltd [ 1957 ] 1 QB 409 the Court of Appeal held that an occupier could exclude liability by displaying a notice disclaiming as such , even if the claimant had not read the notice . This provision of the Act has been heavily criticised by commentators . 
 = = = Second and third parties to a contract entering the property = = = 
 Section 3 of the Act provides that , where the occupier is bound by contract to allow third parties into his property , " the duty of care which he owes to them as his visitors cannot be restricted or excluded by that contract , but ( subject to any provision of the contract to the contrary ) shall include the duty to perform his obligations under the contract , whether undertaken for their protection or not , in so far as those obligations go beyond the obligations otherwise involved in that duty " . Existing common law rules imply , however , that while he could not exclude liability based on the contract , he could exclude liability with a sign disclaiming such , as with other visitors to the property . 
 Section 5 extends the common duty of care to those people entering , using , bringing or sending goods to the property under the terms of a contract . 
 = = = Landlord 's liability = = = 
 Section 4 covers the liability of landlords to visitors injured by the breach of his obligation to repair and maintain the property . Under common law , the landlord was not liable ; the Act changes this . Section 4 ( 1 ) provides that , when a tenant is occupying the premises in such a way as to impose an obligation on the landlord to maintain the property , the same duty that the landlord owes to the tenant is extended to anybody whose goods may be on the property " from time to time " . Where premises are occupied under a sub @-@ tenancy agreement , the same obligation extends to the tenant leasing the property . Section 4 was repealed by Section 6 ( 4 ) of the Defective Premises Act 1972 . 
 = SM UB @-@ 46 = 
 SM UB @-@ 46 was a Type UB II submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. UB @-@ 46 operated in the Mediterranean and the Black Seas , and was sunk by a mine in December 1916 . 
 UB @-@ 46 was ordered in July 1915 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in September . UB @-@ 46 was a little more than 121 feet ( 37 m ) in length and displaced between 270 and 305 tonnes ( 266 and 300 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She was equipped to carry a complement of four torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and had an 5 @-@ centimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun . As part of a group of six submarines selected for Mediterranean service , UB @-@ 46 was broken into railcar sized components and shipped to Pola where she was assembled and launched in May 1916 , and commissioned in June . 
 In early December 1916 , during the submarine 's fifth patrol , UB @-@ 46 struck a mine in the Black Sea a short distance from the north entrance to the Bosphorus and sank with all hands . In her six @-@ month career , UB @-@ 46 sank four ships of 8 @,@ 099 gross register tons ( GRT ) . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The German UB II design improved upon the design of the UB I boats , which had been ordered in September 1914 . In service , the UB I boats were found to be too small and too slow . A major problem was that , because they had a single propeller shaft / engine combo , if either component failed , the U @-@ boat became almost totally disabled . To rectify this flaw , the UB II boats featured twin propeller shafts and twin engines ( one shaft for each engine ) , which also increased the U @-@ boat 's top speed . The new design also included more powerful batteries , larger torpedo tubes , and a deck gun . As a UB II boat , U @-@ 47 could also carry twice the torpedo load of her UB I counterparts , and nearly ten times as much fuel . To contain all of these changes the hull was larger , and the surface and submerged displacement was more than double that of the UB I boats . 
 The Imperial German Navy ordered UB @-@ 46 from AG Weser on 31 July 1915 as one of a series of six UB II boats ( numbered from UB @-@ 42 to UB @-@ 47 ) . UB @-@ 46 was 36 @.@ 90 metres ( 121 ft 1 in ) long and 4 @.@ 37 metres ( 14 ft 4 in ) abeam . She had a single hull with saddle tanks and had a draught of 3 @.@ 68 metres ( 12 ft 1 in ) when surfaced . She displaced 305 tonnes ( 300 long tons ) while submerged but only 272 tonnes ( 268 long tons ) on the surface . 
 The submarine was equipped with twin Daimler diesel engines and twin Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motors — for surfaced and submerged running , respectively . UB @-@ 46 had a surface speed of up to 8 @.@ 82 knots ( 16 @.@ 33 km / h ; 10 @.@ 15 mph ) and could go as fast as 6 @.@ 22 knots ( 11 @.@ 52 km / h ; 7 @.@ 16 mph ) while underwater . The U @-@ boat could carry up to 27 tonnes ( 27 long tons ) of diesel fuel , giving her a range of 6 @,@ 940 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 850 km ; 7 @,@ 990 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . Her electric motors and batteries provided a range of 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) while submerged . 
 UB @-@ 46 was equipped with two 50 @-@ centimeter ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry four torpedoes . The U @-@ boat was also armed with one 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) Uk L / 30 deck gun . 
 UB @-@ 46 was laid down by AG Weser at its Bremen shipyard on 4 September 1915 . As one of six U @-@ boats selected for service in the Mediterranean while under construction , UB @-@ 46 was broken into railcar @-@ sized components and shipped overland to the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pola . Shipyard workers from Weser assembled the boat and her five sisters at Pola , where she was launched on 17 June . 
 = = Service career = = 
 SM UB @-@ 46 was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy on 12 June 1916 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Cäsar Bauer . UB @-@ 46 , Bauer 's third U @-@ boat command , was assigned to the Navy 's Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) . Although the flotilla was based in Pola , the site of the main Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy base , boats of the flotilla operated out of the Austro @-@ Hungarian base at Cattaro which was located farther south and closer to the Mediterranean . German U @-@ boats typically returned to Pola only for repairs . After a month at the helm of UB @-@ 46 , Bauer was promoted to Kapitänleutnant . 
 On 2 August , Bauer achieved his first success in command of UB @-@ 46 when the Japanese steamer <unk> Maru was sunk off Alexandria just short of her destination of Port Said . A week later the U @-@ boat sank the Greek sailing vessel <unk> which was headed back to the Adriatic from Egypt . On 2 October , Bauer torpedoed <unk> which was carrying hay to Salonica , and took the ship 's master prisoner . The 4 @,@ 331 gross register tons ( GRT ) British steamer was the largest ship sunk by UB @-@ 46 . 
 After Germany 's conquest of Romania ( see Romania during World War I ) , the German Imperial Navy had sufficient fuel oil for submarines located in the Black Sea . UB @-@ 46 and three of her sister ships in the Pola Flotilla were ordered to Constantinople and , en route , had to navigate through the Dardanelles , which had been heavily mined by the Allies in the middle of 1916 . UB @-@ 46 joined the Constantinople Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote der Mittelmeerdivision in Konstantinopal ) on 7 October . 
 The German submarines in the Black Sea accomplished little , sinking only six ships between August and the end of the year . UB @-@ 46 sank one of the six ships when she sent down the 116 @-@ ton Russian ship Melanie north of Cape Tarkhan on 7 November . Melanie was the last ship sunk by UB @-@ 46 . By early December , UB @-@ 46 was based out of Varna , Bulgaria . 
 = = Fate = = 
 On 7 December 1916 , the stern of UB @-@ 46 struck a Russian mine 300 metres ( 980 ft ) off the shore of the Turkish village of <unk> , approximately 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north @-@ west of the entrance to the Bosphorus . The vessel 's entire complement ( reported by <unk> as 20 ) perished in the sinking . 
 A 16 metres ( 52 ft ) portion of the wreck comprising the forward section of the torpedo room and battery compartment was located in 1993 during coal extraction operations and was salvaged by the Turkish navy ; the remainder of the vessel could not be located . She was put on display in an outdoor exhibit at the Turkish Naval Museum in Istanbul . The wreckage was transferred to the Dardanelles Naval Museum at Çanakkale in 2008 , where the remains of the vessel are currently on display . 
 = = Ships sunk = = 
 = George V = 
 George V ( George Frederick Ernest Albert ; 3 June 1865 – 20 January 1936 ) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions , and Emperor of India , from 6 May 1910 until his death in 1936 . 
 He was the second son of Albert Edward , Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII ) , and the grandson of the reigning British monarch , Queen Victoria . From the time of his birth , he was third in the line of succession behind his father and his elder brother , Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale . From 1877 to 1891 , George served in the Royal Navy , until the unexpected death of his elder brother in early 1892 put him directly in line for the throne . On the death of his grandmother in 1901 , George 's father became King @-@ Emperor of the British Empire , and George was created Prince of Wales . He succeeded his father in 1910 . He was the only Emperor of India to be present at his own Delhi Durbar . 
 His reign saw the rise of socialism , communism , fascism , Irish republicanism , and the Indian independence movement , all of which radically changed the political landscape . The Parliament Act 1911 established the supremacy of the elected British House of Commons over the unelected House of Lords . As a result of the First World War ( 1914 – 18 ) the empires of his first cousins Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany fell while the British Empire expanded to its greatest effective extent . In 1917 , George became the first monarch of the House of Windsor , which he renamed from the House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha as a result of anti @-@ German public sentiment . In 1924 he appointed the first Labour ministry and in 1931 the Statute of Westminster recognised the dominions of the Empire as separate , independent states within the Commonwealth of Nations . He was plagued by illness throughout much of his later reign and at his death was succeeded by his eldest son , Edward VIII . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 George was born on 3 June 1865 , in Marlborough House , London . He was the second son of the Prince and Princess of Wales , Albert Edward and Alexandra . His father was the eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert , and his mother was the eldest daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark . As a son of the Prince of Wales , George was styled His Royal Highness Prince George of Wales at birth . He was baptised at Windsor Castle on 7 July 1865 by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Charles Longley . 
 As a younger son of the Prince of Wales , there was little expectation that George would become king . He was third in line to the throne , after his father and elder brother , Prince Albert Victor . George was only 17 months younger than Albert Victor , and the two princes were educated together . John Neale Dalton was appointed as their tutor in 1871 . Neither Albert Victor nor George excelled intellectually . As their father thought that the navy was " the very best possible training for any boy " , in September 1877 , when George was 12 years old , both brothers joined the cadet training ship HMS Britannia at Dartmouth , Devon . 
 For three years from 1879 , the royal brothers served on HMS Bacchante , accompanied by Dalton . They toured the colonies of the British Empire in the Caribbean , South Africa and Australia , and visited Norfolk , Virginia , as well as South America , the Mediterranean , Egypt , and East Asia . In 1881 on a visit to Japan , George had a local artist tattoo a blue and red dragon on his arm , and was received in an audience by the Emperor Meiji ; George and his brother presented Empress Haruko with two wallabies from Australia . Dalton wrote an account of their journey entitled The Cruise of HMS Bacchante . Between Melbourne and Sydney , Dalton recorded a sighting of the Flying Dutchman , a mythical ghost ship . When they returned to Britain , Queen Victoria complained that her grandsons could not speak French or German , and so they spent six months in Lausanne in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to learn another language . After Lausanne , the brothers were separated ; Albert Victor attended Trinity College , Cambridge , while George continued in the Royal Navy . He travelled the world , visiting many areas of the British Empire . During his naval career he commanded Torpedo Boat 79 in home waters then HMS Thrush on the North America station , before his last active service in command of HMS Melampus in 1891 – 92 . From then on , his naval rank was largely honorary . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 As a young man destined to serve in the navy , Prince George served for many years under the command of his uncle , Prince Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh , who was stationed in Malta . There , he grew close to and fell in love with his uncle 's daughter , his first cousin , Marie of Edinburgh . His grandmother , father and uncle all approved the match , but the mothers — the Princess of Wales and the Duchess of Edinburgh — both opposed it . The Princess of Wales thought the family was too pro @-@ German , and the Duchess of Edinburgh disliked England . Marie 's mother was the only daughter of Tsar Alexander II of Russia . She resented the fact that , as the wife of a younger son of the British sovereign , she had to yield precedence to George 's mother , the Princess of Wales , whose father had been a minor German prince before being called unexpectedly to the throne of Denmark . Guided by her mother , Marie refused George when he proposed to her . She married Ferdinand , the heir to the King of Romania , in 1893 . 
 In November 1891 , George 's elder brother Albert Victor became engaged to his second cousin once removed , Princess Victoria Mary of Teck . She was known within the family as " May " , nicknamed after her birth month . May 's father , Prince Francis , Duke of Teck , belonged to a morganatic , cadet branch of the house of Württemberg . Her mother , Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge , was a male @-@ line granddaughter of King George III and a first cousin of Queen Victoria . 
 On 14 January 1892 , six weeks after the formal engagement , Albert Victor died of pneumonia , leaving George second in line to the throne , and likely to succeed after his father . George had only just recovered from a serious illness himself , after being confined to bed for six weeks with typhoid fever , the disease that was thought to have killed his grandfather Prince Albert . Queen Victoria still regarded Princess May as a suitable match for her grandson , and George and May grew close during their shared period of mourning . A year after Albert Victor 's death , George proposed to May and was accepted . They married on 6 July 1893 at the Chapel Royal in St James 's Palace , London . Throughout their lives , they remained devoted to each other . George was , on his own admission , unable to express his feelings easily in speech , but they often exchanged loving letters and notes of endearment . 
 = = Duke of York = = 
 The death of his elder brother effectively ended George 's naval career , as he was now second in line to succeed to the throne , after his father . George was created Duke of York , Earl of Inverness and Baron Killarney by Queen Victoria on 24 May 1892 , and received lessons in constitutional history from J. R. Tanner . After George 's marriage to May , she was styled Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York . 
 The Duke and Duchess of York lived mainly at York Cottage , a relatively small house in Sandringham , Norfolk , where their way of life mirrored that of a comfortable middle @-@ class family rather than royalty . George preferred a simple , almost quiet , life in marked contrast to the lively social life pursued by his father . His official biographer , Harold Nicolson , later despaired of George 's time as Duke of York , writing : " He may be all right as a young midshipman and a wise old king , but when he was Duke of York ... he did nothing at all but kill [ i.e. shoot ] animals and stick in stamps . " George was an avid stamp collector , which Nicolson disparaged , but George played a large role in building the Royal Philatelic Collection into the most comprehensive collection of United Kingdom and Commonwealth stamps in the world , in some cases setting record purchase prices for items . 
 George and May had five sons and a daughter . Randolph Churchill claimed that George was a strict father , to the extent that his children were terrified of him , and that George had remarked to Edward Stanley , 17th Earl of Derby : " My father was frightened of his mother , I was frightened of my father , and I am damned well going to see to it that my children are frightened of me . " In reality , there is no direct source for the quotation and it is likely that George 's parenting style was little different from that adopted by most people at the time . 
 In October 1894 , George 's uncle @-@ by @-@ marriage , Tsar Alexander III , died and his cousin , Tsar Nicholas II , ascended the Russian throne . At the request of his father , " out of respect for poor dear Uncle Sasha 's memory " , George joined his parents in St. Petersburg for the funeral . George and his parents remained in Russia for the wedding a week later of Nicholas to another one of George 's first cousins , Princess Alix of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt , who Queen Victoria had once hoped would marry George 's elder brother . 
 = = Prince of Wales = = 
 As Duke and Duchess of York , George and May carried out a wide variety of public duties . On the death of Queen Victoria on 22 January 1901 , George 's father ascended the throne as King Edward VII . George inherited the titles of Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay , and for much of the rest of that year , he was styled His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall and York . 
 In 1901 , George and May toured the British Empire . Their tour included Gibraltar , Malta , Port Said , Aden , Ceylon , Singapore , Australia , New Zealand , Mauritius , South Africa , Canada , and the Colony of Newfoundland . The tour was designed by Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain with the support of Prime Minister Lord Salisbury to reward the Dominions for their participation in the South African War of 1899 – 1902 . George presented thousands of specially designed South African War medals to colonial troops . In South Africa , the royal party met civic leaders , African leaders , and Boer prisoners , and was greeted by elaborate decorations , expensive gifts , and fireworks displays . Despite this , not all residents responded favourably to the tour . Many white Cape Afrikaners resented the display and expense , the war having weakened their capacity to reconcile their Afrikaner @-@ Dutch culture with their status as British subjects . Critics in the English @-@ language press decried the enormous cost at a time when families faced severe hardship . 
 In Australia , the Duke opened the first session of the Australian Parliament upon the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia . In New Zealand , he praised the military values , bravery , loyalty , and obedience to duty of New Zealanders , and the tour gave New Zealand a chance to show off its progress , especially in its adoption of up @-@ to @-@ date British standards in communications and the processing industries . The implicit goal was to advertise New Zealand 's attractiveness to tourists and potential immigrants , while avoiding news of growing social tensions , by focusing the attention of the British press on a land few knew about . On his return to Britain , in a speech at London 's Guildhall , George warned of " the impression which seemed to prevail among [ our ] brethren across the seas , that the Old Country must wake up if she intends to maintain her old position of pre @-@ eminence in her colonial trade against foreign competitors . " 
 On 9 November 1901 , George was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester . King Edward wished to prepare his son for his future role as king . In contrast to Edward himself , whom Queen Victoria had deliberately excluded from state affairs , George was given wide access to state documents by his father . George in turn allowed his wife access to his papers , as he valued her counsel and she often helped write her husband 's speeches . As Prince of Wales , George supported reforms in naval training , including cadets being enrolled at the ages of twelve and thirteen , and receiving the same education , whatever their class and eventual assignments . The reforms were implemented by the then Second ( later First ) Sea Lord , Jacky Fisher . 
 From November 1905 to March 1906 , George and May toured British India , where he was disgusted by racial discrimination and campaigned for greater involvement of Indians in the government of the country . The tour was almost immediately followed by a trip to Spain for the wedding of King Alfonso XIII to Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg , a first cousin of George , at which the bride and groom narrowly avoided assassination . A week after returning to Britain , George and May travelled to Norway for the coronation of King Haakon VII , George 's cousin , and Queen Maud , George 's sister . 
 = = King and Emperor = = 
 On 6 May 1910 , King Edward died , and George became king . He wrote in his diary , " I have lost my best friend and the best of fathers ... I never had a [ cross ] word with him in my life . I am heart @-@ broken and overwhelmed with grief but God will help me in my responsibilities and darling May will be my comfort as she has always been . May God give me strength and guidance in the heavy task which has fallen on me " . 
 George had never liked his wife 's habit of signing official documents and letters as " Victoria Mary " and insisted she drop one of those names . They both thought she should not be called Queen Victoria , and so she became Queen Mary . Later that year , a radical propagandist , Edward Mylius , published a lie that George had secretly married in Malta as a young man , and that consequently his marriage to Queen Mary was bigamous . The lie had first surfaced in print in 1893 but George had shrugged it off as a joke . In an effort to kill off rumours , Mylius was arrested , tried and found guilty of criminal libel , and was sentenced to a year in prison . 
 George objected to the anti @-@ Catholic wording of the Accession Declaration that he would be required to make at the opening of his first parliament . He made it known that he would refuse to open parliament unless it was changed . As a result , the Accession Declaration Act 1910 shortened the declaration and removed the most offensive phrases . 
 George and Mary 's coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 22 June 1911 , and was celebrated by the Festival of Empire in London . In July , the King and Queen visited Ireland for five days ; they received a warm welcome , with thousands of people lining the route of their procession to cheer . Later in 1911 , the King and Queen travelled to India for the Delhi Durbar , where they were presented to an assembled audience of Indian dignitaries and princes as the Emperor and Empress of India on 12 December 1911 . George wore the newly created Imperial Crown of India at the ceremony , and declared the shifting of the Indian capital from Calcutta to Delhi . They travelled throughout the sub @-@ continent , and George took the opportunity to indulge in big game hunting in Nepal , shooting 21 tigers , 8 rhinoceroses and a bear over 10 days . He was a keen and expert marksman . On 18 December 1913 , he shot over a thousand pheasants in six hours at the home of Lord Burnham , although even he had to acknowledge that " we went a little too far " that day . 
 = = = National politics = = = 
 George inherited the throne at a politically turbulent time . Lloyd George 's People 's Budget had been rejected the previous year by the Conservative and Unionist @-@ dominated House of Lords , contrary to the normal convention that the Lords did not veto money bills . Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith had asked the previous king to give an undertaking that he would create sufficient Liberal peers to force the budget through the House . Edward had reluctantly agreed , provided the Lords rejected the budget after two successive general elections . After a general election in January 1910 , the Conservative peers allowed the budget , for which the government now had an electoral mandate , to pass without a vote . 
 Asquith attempted to curtail the power of the Lords through constitutional reforms , which were again blocked by the Upper House . A constitutional conference on the reforms broke down in November 1910 after 21 meetings . Asquith and Lord Crewe , Liberal leader in the Lords , asked George to grant a dissolution , leading to a second general election , and to promise to create sufficient Liberal peers if the Lords blocked the legislation again . If George refused , the Liberal government would otherwise resign , which would have given the appearance that the monarch was taking sides – with " the peers against the people " – in party politics . The King 's two private secretaries , Lords Knollys and Stamfordham , gave George conflicting advice . Knollys , who was Liberal , advised George to accept the Cabinet 's demands , while Stamfordham , who was Unionist , advised George to accept the resignation . Like his father , George reluctantly agreed to the dissolution and creation of peers , although he felt his ministers had taken advantage of his inexperience to browbeat him . After the December 1910 election , the Lords let the bill pass on hearing of the threat to swamp the house with new peers . The subsequent Parliament Act 1911 permanently removed – with a few exceptions – the power of the Lords to veto bills . The King later came to feel that Knollys had withheld information from him about the willingness of the opposition to form a government if the Liberals had resigned . 
 The 1910 general elections had left the Liberals as a minority government dependent upon the support of Irish Nationalists . As desired by the Nationalists , Asquith introduced legislation that would give Ireland Home Rule , but the Conservatives and Unionists opposed it . As tempers rose over the Home Rule Bill , which would never have been possible without the Parliament Act , relations between the elderly Knollys and the Conservatives became poor , and he was pushed into retirement . Desperate to avoid the prospect of civil war in Ireland between Unionists and Nationalists , George called a meeting of all parties at Buckingham Palace in July 1914 in an attempt to negotiate a settlement . After four days the conference ended without an agreement . On 18 September 1914 , the King – having considered vetoing the legislation – gave his assent to the Home Rule Bill after it had been passed by Westminster , but its implementation was postponed by a Suspensory Act due to the outbreak of the First World War . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 From 1914 to 1918 , Britain and its allies were at war with the Central Powers , led by the German Empire . The German Kaiser Wilhelm II , who for the British public came to symbolise all the horrors of the war , was the King 's first cousin . The King 's paternal grandfather was Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ; consequently , the King and his children bore the titles Prince and Princess of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha and Duke and Duchess of Saxony . Queen Mary , although British like her mother , was the daughter of the Duke of Teck , a descendant of the German Dukes of Württemberg . The King had brothers @-@ in @-@ law and cousins who were British subjects but who bore German titles such as Duke and Duchess of Teck , Prince and Princess of Battenberg , and Prince and Princess of Schleswig @-@ Holstein . When H. G. Wells wrote about Britain 's " alien and uninspiring court " , George famously replied : " I may be uninspiring , but I 'll be damned if I 'm alien . " 
 On 17 July 1917 , George appeased British nationalist feelings by issuing a royal proclamation that changed the name of the British royal house from the German @-@ sounding House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha to the House of Windsor . He and all his British relatives relinquished their German titles and styles , and adopted British @-@ sounding surnames . George compensated his male relatives by creating them British peers . His cousin , Prince Louis of Battenberg , who earlier in the war had been forced to resign as First Sea Lord through anti @-@ German feeling , became Louis Mountbatten , 1st Marquess of Milford Haven , while Queen Mary 's brothers became Adolphus Cambridge , 1st Marquess of Cambridge , and Alexander Cambridge , 1st Earl of Athlone . George 's cousins Princess Marie Louise and Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig @-@ Holstein dropped their territorial designations . 
 In Letters Patent gazetted on 11 December 1917 the King restricted the style " His ( or Her ) Royal Highness " and the titular dignity of " Prince ( or Princess ) of Great Britain and Ireland " to the children of the Sovereign , the children of the sons of the Sovereign and the eldest living son of the eldest living son of a Prince of Wales . The Letters Patent also stated that " the titles of Royal Highness , Highness or Serene Highness , and the titular dignity of Prince and Princess shall cease except those titles already granted and remaining <unk> " . George 's relatives who fought on the German side , such as Prince Ernst August of Hanover , 3rd Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale ( the senior male @-@ line great @-@ grandson of George III ) and Prince Carl Eduard , Duke of Albany and reigning Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ( a male @-@ line grandson of Queen Victoria ) , had their British peerages suspended by a 1919 Order in Council under the provisions of the Titles Deprivation Act 1917 . Under pressure from his mother , Queen Alexandra , George also removed the Garter flags of his German relations from St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle . 
 When Tsar Nicholas II of Russia , George 's first cousin ( their mothers were sisters ) , was overthrown in the Russian Revolution of 1917 , the British government offered political asylum to the Tsar and his family , but worsening conditions for the British people , and fears that revolution might come to the British Isles , led George to think that the presence of the Russian royals would be seen as inappropriate . Despite the later claims of Lord Mountbatten of Burma that Prime Minister Lloyd George was opposed to the rescue of the Russian imperial family , the letters of Lord Stamfordham suggest that it was George V who opposed the idea against the advice of the government . Advanced planning for a rescue was undertaken by <unk> , a branch of the British secret service , but because of the strengthening position of the Bolshevik revolutionaries and wider difficulties with the conduct of the war , the plan was never put into operation . The Tsar and his immediate family remained in Russia , where they were killed by Bolsheviks in 1918 . The following year , Nicholas 's mother ( George 's aunt ) Maria Feodorovna ( Dagmar of Denmark ) and other members of the extended Russian imperial family were rescued from the Crimea by British ships . 
 Two months after the end of the war , the King 's youngest son , John , died at the age of 13 after a lifetime of ill health . George was informed of his death by Queen Mary , who wrote , " [ John ] had been a great anxiety to us for many years ... The first break in the family circle is hard to bear but people have been so kind & sympathetic & this has helped us much . " 
 In May 1922 , the King toured Belgium and northern France , visiting the First World War cemeteries and memorials being constructed by the Imperial War Graves Commission . The event was described in a poem , The King 's Pilgrimage by Rudyard Kipling . The tour , and one short visit to Italy in 1923 , were the only times George agreed to leave the United Kingdom on official business after the end of the war . 
 = = = Reign after the Great War = = = 
 Before the First World War , most of Europe was ruled by monarchs related to George , but during and after the war , the monarchies of Austria , Germany , Greece , and Spain , like Russia , fell to revolution and war . In March 1919 , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Edward Lisle Strutt was dispatched on the personal authority of the King to escort the former Emperor Charles I of Austria and his family to safety in Switzerland . In 1922 , a Royal Navy ship was sent to Greece to rescue his cousins , Prince and Princess Andrew . Prince Andrew was a nephew of Queen Alexandra through her brother King George I of Greece , and Princess Andrew was a daughter of Prince Louis of Battenberg , one of the German princes granted a British peerage in 1917 . Their children included Prince Philip , who would later marry George 's granddaughter , Elizabeth II . The Greek monarchy was restored again shortly before George 's death . 
 Political turmoil in Ireland continued as the Nationalists fought for independence ; George expressed his horror at government @-@ sanctioned killings and reprisals to Prime Minister David Lloyd George . At the opening session of the Parliament of Northern Ireland on 22 June 1921 , the King , in a speech part drafted by Lloyd George and General Jan Smuts , appealed for conciliation . A few weeks later , a truce was agreed . Negotiations between Britain and the Irish secessionists led to the signing of the Anglo @-@ Irish Treaty . By the end of 1922 , Ireland was partitioned , the Irish Free State was established , and Lloyd George was out of office . 
 The King and his advisers were concerned about the rise of socialism and the growing labour movement , which they mistakenly associated with republicanism . The socialists no longer believed in their anti @-@ monarchical slogans and were ready to come to terms with the monarchy if it took the first step . George adopted a more democratic , inclusive stance that crossed class lines and brought the monarchy closer to the public and the working class — a dramatic change for the King , who was most comfortable with naval officers and landed gentry . He cultivated friendly relations with moderate Labour party politicians and trade union officials . His abandonment of social aloofness conditioned the royal family 's behaviour and enhanced its popularity during the economic crises of the 1920s and for over two generations thereafter . 
 The years between 1922 and 1929 saw frequent changes in government . In 1924 , George appointed the first Labour Prime Minister , Ramsay MacDonald , in the absence of a clear majority for any one of the three major parties . George 's tactful and understanding reception of the first Labour government ( which lasted less than a year ) allayed the suspicions of the party 's sympathisers . During the General Strike of 1926 the King advised the government of Conservative Stanley Baldwin against taking inflammatory action , and took exception to suggestions that the strikers were " revolutionaries " saying , " Try living on their wages before you judge them . " 
 In 1926 , George hosted an Imperial Conference in London at which the Balfour Declaration accepted the growth of the British Dominions into self @-@ governing " autonomous Communities within the British Empire , equal in status , in no way subordinate one to another " . In 1931 , the Statute of Westminster formalised George 's position as " the symbol of the free association of the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations " . The Statute established " that any alteration in the law touching the Succession to the Throne or the Royal Style and Titles " would require the assent of the Parliaments of the Dominions as well as the Parliament at Westminster , which could not legislate for the Dominions , except by consent . 
 In the wake of a world financial crisis , the King encouraged the formation of a National Government in 1931 led by MacDonald and Baldwin , and volunteered to reduce the civil list to help balance the budget . He was concerned by the rise to power in Germany of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party . In 1934 , the King bluntly told the German ambassador Leopold von <unk> that Germany was now the peril of the world , and that there was bound to be a war within ten years if she went on at the present rate ; he warned the British ambassador in Berlin Eric Phipps to be suspicious of the Nazis . 
 In 1932 , George agreed to deliver a Royal Christmas speech on the radio , an event that became annual thereafter . He was not in favour of the innovation originally but was persuaded by the argument that it was what his people wanted . By the silver jubilee of his reign in 1935 , he had become a well @-@ loved king , saying in response to the crowd 's adulation , " I cannot understand it , after all I am only a very ordinary sort of fellow . " 
 George 's relationship with his eldest son and heir , Edward , deteriorated in these later years . George was disappointed in Edward 's failure to settle down in life and appalled by his many affairs with married women . In contrast , he was fond of his second eldest son , Prince Albert ( later George VI ) , and doted on his eldest granddaughter , Princess Elizabeth ; he nicknamed her " Lilibet " , and she affectionately called him " Grandpa England " . In 1935 , George said of his son Edward : " After I am dead , the boy will ruin himself within 12 months " , and of Albert and Elizabeth : " I pray to God my eldest son will never marry and have children , and that nothing will come between Bertie and Lilibet and the throne . " 
 = = = Declining health and death = = = 
 The First World War took a toll on George 's health : he was seriously injured on 28 October 1915 when thrown by his horse at a troop review in France , and his heavy smoking exacerbated recurring breathing problems . He suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and pleurisy . In 1925 , on the instruction of his doctors , he was reluctantly sent on a recuperative private cruise in the Mediterranean ; it was his third trip abroad since the war , and his last . In November 1928 , he fell seriously ill with septicaemia , and for the next two years his son Edward took over many of his duties . In 1929 , the suggestion of a further rest abroad was rejected by the King " in rather strong language " . Instead , he retired for three months to <unk> House , <unk> , in the seaside resort of Bognor , Sussex . As a result of his stay , the town acquired the suffix " Regis " , which is Latin for " of the King " . A myth later grew that his last words , upon being told that he would soon be well enough to revisit the town , were " Bugger Bognor ! " 
 George never fully recovered . In his final year , he was occasionally administered oxygen . The death of his favourite sister Victoria in December 1935 depressed him deeply . On the evening of 15 January 1936 , the King took to his bedroom at Sandringham House complaining of a cold ; he remained in the room until his death . He became gradually weaker , drifting in and out of consciousness . Prime Minister Baldwin later said : 
 each time he became conscious it was some kind inquiry or kind observation of someone , some words of gratitude for kindness shown . But he did say to his secretary when he sent for him : " How is the Empire ? " An unusual phrase in that form , and the secretary said : " All is well , sir , with the Empire " , and the King gave him a smile and relapsed once more into unconsciousness . 
 By 20 January , he was close to death . His physicians , led by Lord Dawson of Penn , issued a bulletin with words that became famous : " The King 's life is moving peacefully towards its close . " Dawson 's private diary , unearthed after his death and made public in 1986 , reveals that the King 's last words , a mumbled " God damn you ! " , were addressed to his nurse , Catherine Black , when she gave him a sedative on the night of 20 January . Dawson wrote that he hastened the King 's death by injecting him with a lethal combination of morphine and cocaine . Dawson noted that he acted to preserve the King 's dignity , to prevent further strain on the family , and so that the King 's death at 11 : 55 p.m. could be announced in the morning edition of The Times newspaper rather than " less appropriate ... evening journals " . 
 The German composer Paul Hindemith went to a BBC studio on the morning after the King 's death and in six hours wrote <unk> ( Mourning Music ) . It was performed that same evening in a live broadcast by the BBC , with Adrian Boult conducting the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the composer as soloist . 
 At the procession to George 's lying in state in Westminster Hall , part of the Imperial State Crown fell from on top of the coffin and landed in the gutter as the cortège turned into New Palace Yard . The new king , Edward VIII , saw it fall and wondered whether it was a bad omen for his new reign . As a mark of respect to their father , George 's four surviving sons , Edward , Albert , Henry , and George , mounted the guard , known as the Vigil of the Princes , at the catafalque on the night before the funeral . The vigil was not repeated until the death of George 's daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother , in 2002 . George V was interred at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , on 28 January 1936 . Edward abdicated before the year was out , leaving his brother Albert , Duke of York , to ascend the throne ( taking the regnal name George VI ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 George preferred to stay at home pursuing his hobbies of stamp collecting and game shooting , and lived a life that later biographers would consider dull because of its conventionality . He was not an intellectual : on returning from one evening at the opera he wrote , " Went to Covent Garden and saw Fidelio and damned dull it was . " Nonetheless , he was earnestly devoted to Britain and its Commonwealth . He explained , " it has always been my dream to identify myself with the great idea of Empire . " He appeared hard @-@ working and became widely admired by the people of Britain and the Empire , as well as " The Establishment " . In the words of historian David Cannadine , George V and Queen Mary were an " inseparably devoted couple " who upheld " character " and " family values " . George established a standard of conduct for British royalty that reflected the values and virtues of the upper middle @-@ class rather than upper @-@ class lifestyles or vices . He was by temperament a traditionalist who never fully appreciated or approved the revolutionary changes under way in British society . Nevertheless , he invariably wielded his influence as a force of neutrality and moderation , seeing his role as mediator rather than final decision maker . 
 Numerous statues of King George V include one by Bertram <unk> outside the Flower Poll Bazaar Police Station in Madras , and one by William Reid Dick outside Westminster Abbey , London . Other memorials include the King George V Playing Fields in the United Kingdom . The many places named after him include a reservoir and a dock in London ; King George V Park in St. John 's , Newfoundland ; King George V Memorial Hospital in Sydney , Australia and King George 's Medical University , India ; Stade George V in Curepipe , Mauritius ; major thoroughfares in both Jerusalem and Tel Aviv ; an avenue , a hotel and an underground station in Paris ; King George V School , Seremban , Malaysia ; and a school and two parks in Hong Kong . Two Royal Navy battleships were named HMS King George V in his honour , one in 1911 and her successor in 1939 . George V gave both his name and donations to many charities , including King George 's Fund for Sailors ( later known as Seafarers UK ) . 
 = = = On @-@ screen portrayals = = = 
 On screen , George has been portrayed by : 
 Henry Warwick in the 1918 silent film Why America Will Win 
 William Gaffney in the 1919 silent film The Great Victory , Wilson or the Kaiser ? The Fall of the Hohenzollerns 
 Derek Erskine in the 1925 silent film The Scarlet Woman : An Ecclesiastical Melodrama 
 Carleton Hobbs in the 1965 film A King 's Story 
 Michael Osborne in the 1975 ATV drama series Edward the Seventh 
 Marius Goring in the 1978 Thames Television series Edward & Mrs. Simpson 
 Keith <unk> in the 1978 LWT drama series Lillie 
 Rene Aranda in the 1980 film The Fiendish Plot of Dr. Fu Manchu 
 Guy <unk> in the 1981 Southern Television drama series Winston Churchill : The Wilderness Years 
 Andrew Gilmour in the 1985 Australian miniseries A Thousand Skies 
 David Ravenswood in the 1990 Australian TV miniseries The Great Air Race 
 John Warner in the 1991 RTÉ TV drama The Treaty 
 David Troughton in the 1999 BBC TV drama All the King 's Men 
 Rupert Frazer in the 2002 TV miniseries Shackleton 
 Alan Bates in the 2002 Carlton Television drama Bertie and Elizabeth 
 Tom Hollander in the 2003 BBC miniseries The Lost Prince 
 Clifford Rose in the 2005 TV drama Wallis & Edward 
 Andrew Pritchard in the 2005 British TV drama documentary The First Black Britons 
 Julian Wadham in the 2007 TV drama My Boy Jack 
 Michael Gambon in the 2010 film The King 's Speech 
 James Fox in the 2011 film W.E. 
 Guy Williams in the 2013 Christmas episode of Downton Abbey 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 3 June 1865 – 24 May 1892 : His Royal Highness Prince George of Wales 
 24 May 1892 – 22 January 1901 : His Royal Highness The Duke of York 
 22 January 1901 – 9 November 1901 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall and York 
 9 November 1901 – 6 May 1910 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales 
 in Scotland : His Royal Highness The Duke of Rothesay 
 6 May 1910 – 20 January 1936 : His Majesty The King 
 His full style as king was " His Majesty George V , by the Grace of God , of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas , King , Defender of the Faith , Emperor of India " until the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 , when it changed to " His Majesty George V , by the Grace of God , of Great Britain , Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas , King , Defender of the Faith , Emperor of India " . 
 = = = British honours = = = 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 4 August 1884 
 KT : Knight of the Thistle , 5 July 1893 
 KP : Knight of St Patrick , 20 August 1897 
 <unk> : Knight Grand Commander of the Star of India , 28 September 1905 
 GCMG : Knight Grand Cross of St Michael and St George , 9 March 1901 
 <unk> : Knight Grand Commander of the Indian Empire , 28 September 1905 
 GCVO : Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order , 30 June 1897 
 ISO : Imperial Service Order , 31 March 1903 
 Royal Victorian Chain , 1902 
 PC : Privy Counsellor , 18 July <unk> Counsellor ( Ireland ) , 20 August 1897 
 Queen Victoria Golden Jubilee Medal , with 1897 bar 
 After his accession to the throne in 1910 , George became sovereign of all the orders awarded by the British Empire and ( later ) Commonwealth , including those awarded him prior to his accession . 
 = = = = Military appointments = = = = 
 September 1877 : Cadet , HMS Britannia 
 8 January 1880 : Midshipman , HMS Bacchante and the corvette HMS Canada 
 3 June 1884 : Sub @-@ Lieutenant , Royal Navy 
 8 October 1885 : Lieutenant , HMS Thunderer ; HMS Dreadnought ; HMS Alexandra ; HMS Northumberland 
 21 June 1887 : Personal Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the Queen 
 July 1889 I / C HMS Torpedo Boat 79 
 By May 1890 I / C the gunboat HMS Thrush 
 24 August 1891 : Commander , I / C HMS Melampus 
 2 January 1893 : Captain , Royal Navy 
 1 January 1901 : Rear @-@ Admiral , Royal Navy 
 25 February 1901 : Personal Naval Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the King 
 26 June 1903 : Vice @-@ Admiral , Royal Navy 
 1 March 1907 : Admiral , Royal Navy 
 1910 : Admiral of the Fleet , Royal Navy 
 1910 : Field Marshal , British Army 
 1919 : Chief of the Royal Air Force ( title not rank ) 
 1 January 1901 : Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Royal Marine Forces 
 29 November 1901 : Honorary Colonel of the 4th County of London Yeomanry Regiment ( King ′ s Colonials ) 
 21 December 1901 : Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Royal Welsh Fusiliers 
 = = = Foreign honours = = = 
 Knight of the Order of the Elephant ( Denmark ) , 11 October 1885 
 Grand Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog ( Denmark ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Seraphim ( Sweden ) , 14 June 1905 
 Collar of the Order of Charles III ( Spain ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece ( Spain ) 
 Knight of the Order of Saint Hubert ( Bavaria ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation ( Italy ) 
 Grand Commander of the House Order of Hohenzollern ( Hohenzollern ) 
 Grand Cross of the House Order of the Wendish Crown ( Mecklenburg ) 
 Member 1st Class with <unk> of the Order of Osmanieh ( Ottoman Empire ) , 
 Knight of the Order of St. Andrew ( Russian Empire ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle ( Prussia ) 
 Grand Cross of the Saxe @-@ Ernestine House Order ( Saxon duchies ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Rue Crown ( Saxony ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Red Eagle ( Prussia ) , 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the White Falcon ( Saxe @-@ Weimar @-@ Eisenach ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer ( Greece ) 
 King Christian IX Jubilee Medal ( Denmark ) 
 King Christian IX and Queen Louise of Denmark Golden Wedding Commemorative Medal ( Denmark ) 
 Cross of Liberty , 1st class ( Estonia ) , 17 June 1925 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Colonial Empire ( Portugal ) , 19 February 1934 
 = = = = Honorary foreign military appointments = = = = 
 1 February 1901 : À la suite of the German Navy 
 26 January 1902 : Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Rhenish Cuirassier Regiment " Count <unk> " No. 8 ( Prussia ) 
 Honorary Colonel of the Infantry Regiment " Zamora " No. 8 ( Spain ) 
 = = = Honorary degrees and offices = = = 
 8 June 1893 : Royal Fellow of the Royal Society , installed 6 February 1902 
 1899 : Doctor of Laws ( LLD ) , University of the Cape of Good Hope 
 1901 : Doctor of Laws ( LLD ) , University of Sydney 
 1901 : Doctor of Laws ( LLD ) , University of Toronto 
 1901 : Doctor of Civil Law ( DCL ) , Queen 's University , Ontario 
 1902 : Doctor of Laws ( LLD ) , University of Wales 
 1901 : Chancellor of the University of Cape Town 
 1901 – 1912 : Chancellor of the University of the Cape of Good Hope 
 1902 – 1910 : Chancellor of the University of Wales 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 As Duke of York , George 's arms were the royal arms , with an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony , all differenced with a label of three points argent , the centre point bearing an anchor azure . As Prince of Wales the centre label lost its anchor . As King , he bore the royal arms . In 1917 , he removed , by warrant , the Saxony inescutcheon from the arms of all male @-@ line descendants of the Prince Consort domiciled in the United Kingdom ( although the royal arms themselves had never borne the shield ) . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Benjamín Galván Gómez = 
 Benjamín Galván Gómez ( 10 June 1972 – 28 February 2014 ) was a Mexican businessman and politician of the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) . He was the mayor of Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , from 1 January 2011 to 30 September 2013 . His political projects focused on promoting education , improving the standards of living , and in bringing back a sense of public security to the citizens of the city . He also owned the newspapers Primera Hora and <unk> Hora . During his mayoral administration in Nuevo Laredo , Galván received numerous threats from organized crime . Five months after his term , he was kidnapped and killed by alleged members of the Los Zetas crime syndicate . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Benjamín Galván Gómez was born in Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , Mexico , on 10 June 1972 . His parents were Benjamín Galván <unk> and Martha Graciela Gómez . He was married to Martha Alicia <unk> Campos and had three children . Galván graduated from the Autonomous University of Tamaulipas ( <unk> ) in 1993 with a degree in Accounting , as well as from the Universidad Valle del Bravo with a degree in Law in 1997 . 
 As a businessman , Galván was the general @-@ director and owner of the newspapers Primera Hora and <unk> Hora . He also taught as a professor at the <unk> and served as president of the Cruz Roja and Casa del <unk> in Nuevo Laredo . In politics , Galván held the following positions : head of the Fiscal Office of Tamaulipas in Nuevo Laredo , director of Protección Civil y <unk> , director and delegate of the Tamaulipas Department of Tourism , member of the Binational Committee of Tourism , and leader of Frente Juvenil . 
 = = Mayoralty = = 
 From 1 January 2011 to 30 September 2013 , Galván served as the municipal president ( mayor ) of Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , a border city on the U.S.-Mexico border . Sponsored by the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) , Galván had won the mayoral election with 73 % of the votes , succeeding former Nuevo Laredo mayor Ramón Garza Barrios ( 2008 – 2010 ) . The PRI created a party coalition known as " Todos Tamaulipas " ( All Tamaulipas ) with the Ecologist Green Party of Mexico and the New Alliance Party . Galván won with 83 @,@ 250 votes in favor , while the runner @-@ up contender José Salvador Rosas Quintanilla of the National Action Party ( PAN ) received 22 @,@ 330 votes . The other candidates that ran for office were <unk> Quiroz Torres of the Party of the Democratic Revolution , who received 3 @,@ 917 votes ; Angélica López Quiroz of the Labor Party , who received 1 @,@ 138 ; and Jorge Alejandro García Amador of Convergence , who received 963 . Galván 's mayor pro tempore was Delfino Eduardo González Muñoz . 
 During his administration Galván said his projects were based on three main pillars : bringing back tranquility to <unk> ( citizens of Nuevo Laredo ) ; improving employment and the standard of living ; and working to promote education . In his first annual government speech after a year in office , Galván talked about the administration 's projects in security , financing , and public works . He stated that by the end of 2011 , the Nuevo Laredo municipal government managed to reduce its debt by 600 million pesos ( equivalent to US $ 45 @,@ 826 @,@ 200 ) . In coordination with the state government and federal authorities , he emphasized the importance of Operation Security Tamaulipas for crime prevention in Nuevo Laredo . In his second annual speech , he talked about the projects carried out in his administration , recognizing that public debt and security were the biggest challenges and priorities in his term . In his third and final annual speech , Galván talked about the city 's advances in infrastructure and other public works . City officials , including politicians from other parties and the mayor of Laredo , Texas , Raul G. Salinas , graded Galván 's term as " Good " . 
 In his term Galván inaugurated the Dr. Rodolfo Torre Cantú Auditorium with a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat capacity and the future home stadium of the Toros de Nuevo Laredo basketball team ; the Unidad Deportiva Benito Juárez ( Benito Juárez Sport Complex ) , the home stadium of the <unk> de Nuevo Laredo football club ; Nuevo Laredo 's first aquarium in Parque <unk> and its first amusement park with mechanical dinosaurs and other educational attractions at Park <unk> Mendoza , as well as the reconstruction of other installations for social events . In the last year of his administration , however , the Superior Audit Office of Mexico , the audit office of the Mexican federal government , discovered two irregularities in the city 's spending and budget . 
 On 30 September 2013 , at the end of his mayoral administration , Galván was succeeded by Carlos Enrique <unk> Villarreal of the PAN . 
 = = = Threats from organized crime = = = 
 During his tenure as mayor , Galván received death threats from organized crime . Nuevo Laredo has been the battleground among Mexico 's drug trafficking organizations given its proximity to the U.S – Mexico border and Interstate 35 , a lucrative route where most of the cocaine , marijuana and methamphetamine that reaches the United States are smuggled through . In May 2012 , alleged organized crime members left the headless corpses of 14 men inside a vehicle near the Nuevo Laredo city hall . Alongside the corpses was a written message reportedly from the Sinaloa Cartel that accused Galván and other city officials of working for Los Zetas ( such accusations between gangsters and local officials are common in Mexico ) . In June 2012 , a car bomb detonated outside the Nuevo Laredo city hall at Galván 's parking area , injuring several bystanders . On February 2013 , the Nuevo Laredo police chief Roberto Alejandro <unk> Garza was kidnapped and his two brothers were found dead . He had been appointed by Galván as head of the police in 2011 following the murder of Manuel Farfán <unk> , the former police chief of Nuevo Laredo . 
 In an interview held in 2013 , Galván said that Nuevo Laredo , aside from the violence generated by organized crime , was plagued with extortions , armed robberies , car hijackings , and regular thefts . He recognized that restoring public safety was possible , but reiterated that it was a difficult and long process for all branches of the government . Among the solutions he proposed was the reconstruction of Nuevo Laredo 's social fiber , since he believed that that would keep the younger generations and those suffering from poverty away from the lure of organized crime . Galván admitted that the Nuevo Laredo police force was composed entirely of members of the Mexican Armed Forces , the Federal Police , and Tamaulipas state law enforcement and not by municipal police officers , who had all been suspended for investigation and training . However , he said that the military had a role to play , but that he wanted to see civilian forces step up to the job in the future . 
 = = Kidnapping and death = = 
 As Galván left a <unk> Guadalajara drugstore near his home in Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , on the evening of 27 February 2014 , he was kidnapped along with businessman Miguel Ángel Ortiz . His vehicle was discovered abandoned with open doors in the pharmacy 's parking lot by his wife . The following day , a disfigured corpse found in the trunk of a pickup truck in the town of García , Nuevo León , was taken to the hospital of the Autonomous University of Nuevo León . After more than a month of forensic examination , experts officially identified the corpse as that of Galván on 31 March 2014 . Post @-@ mortem reports concluded that Galván had been tortured before being killed with a coup de grâce . The exact location of Galván 's murder remains unknown , although authorities tend to believe he was most likely killed in Tamaulipas . 
 On 11 March 2014 , Mexican authorities arrested Carlos Pérez González , a former member of the Mexican Army Special Forces and ex @-@ policeman from Nuevo León , for his involvement in Galván 's murder . Pérez González confessed following his arrest , alleging that Los Zetas had recruited him . The police reported that unidentified gangsters ordered Pérez González and <unk> Enrique Medina Rangel ( alias " El Trompas " ) to transport the former mayor 's corpse through Nuevo León and into Coahuila state . But because of law enforcement surveillance on their planned route , they abandoned the truck with Galván 's corpse in García , Nuevo León . For disobeying those orders , organized crime members killed " El Trompas " and dumped his body in Salinas Victoria . 
 On 17 March 2014 , José Isidro Cruz Villarreal ( alias " El <unk> " ) was arrested for his involvement in the murder . Investigators believe he was one of the men in charge of ordering Pérez González and " El Trompas " to transport the body to Coahuila . " El <unk> " , who had escaped from prison during the Apodaca prison riot in 2012 , was arrested following information provided by Pérez González . On 12 April 2014 , Pérez González was stabbed to death by unknown assailants in the restroom area at the Topo Chico prison in Monterrey . 
 The kidnapping and murder of the former mayor came as a surprise to some law enforcement authorities given the fact that Galván was living a seemingly ordinary life as a citizen of Laredo – Nuevo Laredo border area . " He didn 't have to worry about anything and then he gets kidnapped " , said Webb County Sheriff Martin Cuellar . The authorities believe that the attack was perpetrated by Los Zetas , but the motives behind the incident remain unknown . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Hundreds of people , including family members , friends , local citizens , and politicians , attended Galván 's funeral at the Catholic Catedral del Espíritu Santo in Nuevo Laredo on 4 April 2014 . Nuevo Laredo bishop Gustavo Rodríguez Vega and Laredo , Texas bishop James Anthony Tamayo jointly conducted the mass , assisted by 12 priests . Following the ceremony , the former mayor was buried at the Panteón de Los Ángeles cemetery . 
 = Chicago Pile @-@ 1 = 
 Chicago Pile @-@ 1 ( CP @-@ 1 ) was the world 's first nuclear reactor to achieve criticality . Its construction was part of the Manhattan Project , the Allied effort to create atomic bombs during World War II . It was built by the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago , under the west viewing stands of the original Stagg Field . The first man @-@ made self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction was initiated in CP @-@ 1 on 2 December 1942 , under the supervision of Enrico Fermi , who described the apparatus as " a crude pile of black bricks and wooden timbers " . 
 The reactor was assembled in November 1942 , by a team that included Fermi , Leo Szilard , discoverer of the chain reaction , and Herbert L. Anderson , Walter Zinn , Martin D. Whitaker , and George Weil . It contained 45 @,@ 000 graphite blocks weighing 400 short tons ( 360 t ) used as a neutron moderator , and was fueled by 6 short tons ( 5 @.@ 4 t ) of uranium metal and 50 short tons ( 45 t ) of uranium oxide . In the pile , some of the free neutrons produced by the natural decay of uranium were absorbed by other uranium atoms , causing nuclear fission of those atoms , and the release of additional free neutrons . Unlike most subsequent nuclear reactors , it had no radiation shield or cooling system as it only operated at very low power . The shape of the pile was intended to be roughly spherical , but as work proceeded Fermi calculated that critical mass could be achieved without finishing the entire pile as planned . 
 In 1943 , CP @-@ 1 was moved to Red Gate Woods , and reconfigured to become Chicago Pile @-@ 2 ( CP @-@ 2 ) . There , it was operated until 1954 , when it was dismantled and buried . The stands at Stagg Field were demolished in August 1957 , but the site is now a National Historic Landmark and a Chicago Landmark . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The idea of chemical chain reactions was first put forth in 1913 by the German chemist Max Bodenstein for a situation in which two molecules react to form not just the molecules of the final reaction products , but also some unstable molecules which can further react with the parent molecules to cause more molecules to react . The concept of a nuclear chain reaction was first hypothesized by the Hungarian scientist Leo Szilard on 12 September 1933 . Szilard realized that if a nuclear reaction produced neutrons or <unk> , which then caused further nuclear reactions , the process might be self @-@ perpetuating . Szilard proposed using mixtures of lighter known isotopes which produced neutrons in copious amounts , although he did entertain the possibility of using uranium as a fuel . He filed a patent for his idea of a simple nuclear reactor the following year . The discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , followed by its theoretical explanation ( and naming ) by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch , opened up the possibility of creating a nuclear chain reaction with uranium or indium , but initial experiments were unsuccessful . 
 In order for a chain reaction to occur , additional neutrons had to be emitted from fissioning uranium atoms . At Columbia University in New York , Enrico Fermi , John Dunning , Herbert L. Anderson , Eugene T. Booth , G. Norris <unk> , and Francis G. Slack conducted the first nuclear fission experiment in the United States on 25 January 1939 . Subsequent work confirmed that fast neutrons were indeed produced by fission . Szilard obtained permission from the head of the Physics Department at Columbia , George B. Pegram , to use a laboratory for three months , and persuaded Walter Zinn to become his collaborator . They conducted a simple experiment on the seventh floor of Pupin Hall at Columbia , using a radium @-@ beryllium source to bombard uranium with neutrons . They discovered significant neutron multiplication in natural uranium , proving that a chain reaction might be possible . 
 As a neutron moderator , Szilard suggested Fermi use carbon in the form of graphite . Szilard felt he would need about 50 tonnes ( 49 long tons ; 55 short tons ) of graphite and 5 tonnes ( 4 @.@ 9 long tons ; 5 @.@ 5 short tons ) of uranium . As a back @-@ up plan , he also considered where to find a few tons of heavy water ; deuterium would not absorb neutrons like ordinary hydrogen , and was a better moderator than carbon , but was difficult and expensive to produce . Fermi and Szilard still believed that enormous quantities of uranium would be required for an atomic bomb , and therefore concentrated on producing a controlled chain reaction . Fermi determined that a fissioning uranium atom produced 1 @.@ 73 neutrons on average . It was enough , but a careful design was called for to minimize losses . 
 Fermi and Szilard met with representatives of National Carbon Company , who manufactured the graphite , and Szilard made another important discovery . By quizzing them about impurities in their graphite , he found that it contained boron , a neutron absorber . He then had graphite manufacturers produce boron @-@ free graphite . Had he not done so , they might have concluded , as the Germans did , that graphite was unsuitable for use as a neutron moderator . 
 = = Government support = = 
 Szilard drafted a confidential letter to the President , Franklin D. Roosevelt , explaining the possibility of nuclear weapons , warning of a German nuclear weapon project , and encouraging the development of a program that could result in their creation . With the help of Eugene Wigner and Edward Teller , he approached his old friend and collaborator Albert Einstein in August 1939 , and convinced him to sign the letter , lending his fame to the proposal . The Einstein – Szilard letter resulted in the establishment of research into nuclear fission by the U.S. government . An Advisory Committee on Uranium was formed under Lyman J. Briggs , a scientist and the director of the National Bureau of Standards . Its first meeting on 21 October 1939 , was attended by Szilard , Teller and Wigner , who persuaded the Army and Navy to provide $ 6 @,@ 000 for Szilard to purchase supplies for experiments — in particular , more graphite . 
 In April 1941 , the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , created a special project headed by physicist , Arthur Compton , a Nobel @-@ Prize @-@ winning professor at the University of Chicago , to report on the uranium program . Compton 's report , submitted in May 1941 , foresaw the prospects of developing radiological weapons , nuclear propulsion for ships , and nuclear weapons using uranium @-@ 235 or the recently discovered plutonium . In October he wrote another report on the practicality of an atomic bomb . For this report , he worked with Fermi on calculations of the critical mass of uranium @-@ 235 . He also discussed the prospects for uranium enrichment with Harold Urey . 
 Niels Bohr and John Wheeler had theorized that heavy isotopes with odd atomic numbers were fissile . If so , then plutonium @-@ 239 was likely to be . In May 1941 , Emilio Segrè and Glenn Seaborg at the University of California produced 28 μg of plutonium in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron there , and found that it had 1 @.@ 7 times the thermal neutron capture cross section of uranium @-@ 235 . At the time only such minute quantities of plutonium @-@ 239 had been produced , in cyclotrons , and it was not possible to produce a sufficiently large quantity that way . Compton discussed with Wigner how plutonium might be produced in a nuclear reactor , and with Robert Serber about how the plutonium produced in a reactor might be separated from uranium . His report , submitted in November , stated that a bomb was feasible . 
 The final draft of Compton 's November 1941 report made no mention of using plutonium , but after discussing the latest research with Ernest Lawrence , Compton became convinced that a plutonium bomb was also feasible . In December , Compton was placed in charge of the plutonium project . Its objectives were to produce reactors to convert uranium to plutonium , to find ways to chemically separate the plutonium from the uranium , and to design and build an atomic bomb . It fell to Compton to decide which of the different types of reactor designs that the scientists should pursue , even though a successful reactor had not yet been built . He proposed a schedule to achieve a controlled nuclear chain reaction by January 1943 , and to have an atomic bomb by January 1945 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In a nuclear reactor , criticality is achieved when the rate of neutron production is equal to the rate of neutron losses , including both neutron absorption and neutron leakage . Thus , in the simplest case of a bare , homogeneous , steady state nuclear reactor , the neutron leakage and neutron absorption must be equal to neutron production in order to reach criticality . The critical radius of an <unk> , homogeneous , spherical reactor was calculated to be : 
 <formula> 
 where M is the migration area and k is the medium neutron multiplication factor . The first generation of the reaction will produce k neutrons , the second will produce k2 , the third k3 and so on . In order for a self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction to occur , k must be greater than 1 . For a practical reactor configuration , it needs to be at least 3 or 4 percent more . 
 Fermi christened his apparatus a " pile " . Emilio Segrè later recalled that : 
 I thought for a while that this term was used to refer to a source of nuclear energy in analogy with Volta 's use of the Italian term pila to denote his own great invention of a source of electrical energy . I was disillusioned by Fermi himself , who told me that he simply used the common English word pile as synonymous with heap . To my surprise , Fermi never seemed to have thought of the relationship between his pile and Volta 's . 
 Another grant , this time of $ 40 @,@ 000 , was obtained from the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee to purchase more materials , and in August 1941 Fermi began to plan for a new test . The pile he proposed to build was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) long , 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide and 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) high . This was too large to fit in the Pupin Physics Laboratories . Fermi recalled that : 
 We went to Dean Pegram , who was then the man who could carry out magic around the University , and we explained to him that we needed a big room . He scouted around the campus and we went with him to dark corridors and under various heating pipes and so on , to visit possible sites for this experiment and eventually a big room was discovered in Schermerhorn Hall . 
 The pile was built in September 1941 from 4 @-@ by @-@ 4 @-@ by @-@ 12 @-@ inch ( 10 by 10 by 30 cm ) graphite blocks and <unk> iron cans of uranium oxide . The cans were 8 @-@ by @-@ 8 @-@ by @-@ 8 @-@ inch ( 20 by 20 by 20 cm ) cubes . When filled with uranium oxide , each weighed about 60 pounds ( 27 kg ) . There were 288 cans in all , and each was surrounded by graphite blocks so the whole would form a lattice structure . The uranium oxide was heated to remove moisture , and packed into the cans while still hot on a shaking table . The cans were then soldered shut . For a workforce , Pegram secured the services of Columbia 's football team . It was the custom at the time for football players to perform odd jobs around the university . They were able to manipulate the heavy cans with ease . The final result was a disappointing k of 0 @.@ 87 . 
 Compton felt that having teams at Columbia University , Princeton University , the University of Chicago and the University of California was creating too much duplication and not enough collaboration , and he resolved to concentrate the work in one location . Nobody wanted to move , and everybody argued in favor of their own location . In January 1942 , soon after the United States entered World War II , Compton decided on his own location , the University of Chicago , where he knew he had the unstinting support of university administration . Other factors in the decision were that scientists , technicians and facilities were more readily available in the Midwest , where war work had not yet taken them away , and Chicago 's central location . In contrast , Columbia University was engaged in uranium enrichment efforts under Harold Urey and John Dunning , and was hesitant to add a third secret project . 
 Before leaving for Chicago , Fermi 's team made one last attempt to build a working pile at Columbia . Since the cans had absorbed neutrons , they were dispensed with . Instead , the uranium oxide , heated to 480 ° F ( 249 ° C ) to dry it out , was pressed into cylindrical holes 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) long and 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) in diameter drilled into the graphite . The entire pile was then canned by soldering sheet metal around it , and the contents heated above the boiling point of water to remove moisture . The result was a k of 0 @.@ 918 . 
 = = Choice of site = = 
 In Chicago , Samuel K. Allison had found a suitable space 60 feet ( 18 m ) long , 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide and 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) high , sunk slightly below ground level , in a space under the stands at Stagg Field originally built as a rackets court . Stagg Field had been largely unused since the University of Chicago had given up playing American football in 1939 , but the rackets courts under West Stands were still used for playing squash and handball . Leona Woods and Anthony L. <unk> played squash there in 1940 . Being intended for strenuous exercise , the area was unheated . The nearby North Stands had a pair of ice skating rinks on the ground floor , which although <unk> , seldom melted in winter . Allison used the rackets court area to construct a 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) experimental pile before Fermi 's group arrived in 1942 . 
 The United States Army Corps of Engineers assumed control of the nuclear weapons program in June 1942 , and Compton 's Metallurgical Laboratory became part of what came to be called the Manhattan Project . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr. became director of the Manhattan Project on 23 September 1942 . He visited the Metallurgical Laboratory for the first time on 5 October . Between 15 September and 15 November 1942 , groups under Herbert Anderson and Walter Zinn constructed 16 experimental piles under the Stagg Field stands . 
 Fermi designed a new pile , which would be spherical to maximize k , which was predicted to be around 1 @.@ 04 , thereby achieving criticality . Leona Woods completed her doctoral thesis and then was detailed to build boron trifluoride neutron detectors . She also helped Anderson locate the large number of 4 @-@ by @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 10 by 15 cm ) timbers required at lumber yards in Chicago 's south side . Shipments of high @-@ purity graphite arrived , mainly from National Carbon , and high @-@ purity uranium dioxide from Mallinckrodt in St Louis , which was now producing 30 short tons ( 27 t ) a month . Metallic uranium also began arriving in larger quantities , the product of newly developed techniques . 
 On 25 June , the Army and the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) had selected a site in the Argonne Forest near Chicago for a plutonium pilot plant . This became known as Site A. 1 @,@ 025 acres ( 415 ha ) were leased from Cook County in August , but by September it was apparent that the proposed facilities would be too extensive for the site , and it was decided to build the pilot plant elsewhere . The subcritical piles posed little danger , but Groves felt that it would be prudent to locate a critical pile — a fully functional nuclear reactor — at a more remote site . A building at Argonne to house Fermi 's experimental pile was commenced , with its completion scheduled for 20 October . Due to industrial disputes , construction fell behind schedule , and it became clear the materials for Fermi 's new pile would be on hand before the new structure was completed . In early November , Fermi came to Compton with a proposal to build the experimental pile under the stands at Stagg Field . 
 The safety of building an operational reactor running at criticality in a populated area was a significant issue . However , the physics of the system suggested that the pile could be safely shut down even in the event of a runaway reaction . When a fuel atom undergoes fission , it releases neutrons that strike other fuel atoms and leads to the chain reaction . The time between absorbing the neutron and undergoing fission is measured in nanoseconds , often using a convenient unit for this purpose , the shake . Szilard had noted that this reaction leaves behind fission products that may also release neutrons , but do so over much longer periods , from microseconds to as long as minutes . In a slow reaction like the one in a pile where the fission products build up , these neutrons account for about three percent of the total flux . 
 Fermi argued that by using these delayed neutrons , and by carefully controlling the reaction rates as the power is ramped up , a pile can reach criticality at fission rates slightly below that of a chain reaction relying solely on the prompt neutrons from the fission reactions . Since the rate of release of these neutrons depends on fission events taking place some time earlier , there is a delay between any power spikes and the later criticality event . This time gives the operators leeway ; if a spike in the prompt neutron flux is seen , they have several minutes before this causes a runaway reaction . If a neutron absorber , or neutron poison , is injected at any time during this period , the reactor will shut down . Compton felt this delay was enough to provide a critical margin of safety , and allowed Fermi to build Chicago Pile @-@ 1 at Stagg Field . There was a fear of a catastrophic nuclear meltdown blanketing one of the United States ' major urban areas in radioactive fission products . 
 Compton later explained that : 
 As a responsible officer of the University of Chicago , according to every rule of organizational protocol , I should have taken the matter to my superior . But this would have been unfair . President Hutchins was in no position to make an independent judgment of the hazards involved . Based on considerations of the University 's welfare , the only answer he could have given would have been — no . And this answer would have been wrong . 
 Compton informed Groves of his decision at the 14 November meeting of the S @-@ 1 Executive Committee . Although Groves " had serious misgivings about the wisdom of Compton 's suggestion " , he did not interfere . James Bryant Conant , the chairman of the NDRC , was reported to have turned white . But because of the urgency and their confidence in Fermi ’ s calculations , no one objected . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Chicago Pile 1 was encased within a balloon so that the air inside could be replaced by carbon dioxide . Anderson had a dark gray balloon manufactured by Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company . A 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) cube @-@ shaped balloon was somewhat unusual , but the Manhattan Project 's AAA priority rating ensured prompt delivery with no questions asked . A block and tackle was used to haul it into place , with the top secured to the ceiling and three sides to the walls . The remaining side , the one facing the balcony from which Fermi directed the operation , was furled like an awning . A circle was drawn on the floor , and the stacking of graphite blocks began on the morning of 16 November 1942 . The first layer placed was made up entirely of graphite blocks , with no uranium . Layers without uranium were alternated with two layers containing uranium , so the uranium was enclosed in graphite . Unlike later reactors , it had no radiation shielding or cooling system , as it was only intended to be operated at very low power . 
 The work was carried out in twelve @-@ hour shifts , with a day shift under Zinn and a night shift under Anderson . For a work force they hired thirty high school dropouts that were eager to earn a bit of money before being drafted into the Army . They machined 45 @,@ 000 graphite blocks enclosing 19 @,@ 000 pieces of uranium metal and uranium oxide . The graphite arrived from the manufacturers in 4 @.@ 25 @-@ by @-@ 4 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 10 @.@ 8 by 10 @.@ 8 cm ) bars of various lengths . They were cut into standard lengths of 16 @.@ 5 inches ( 42 cm ) , each weighing 19 pounds ( 8 @.@ 6 kg ) . A lathe was used to drill 3 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 8 @.@ 3 cm ) holes in the blocks for the control rods and the uranium . A hydraulic press was used to shape the uranium oxide into " <unk> " , cylinders with rounded ends . Drill bits had to be sharpened after each 60 holes , which worked out to be about once an hour . Graphite dust soon filled the air and made the floor slippery . 
 Another group , under Volney C. Wilson , was responsible for instrumentation . They also fabricated the control rods , which were cadmium sheets nailed to flat wooden strips , cadmium being a potent neutron absorber , and the scram line , a Manila rope that when cut would drop a control rod into the pile and stop the reaction . Richard Fox , who made the control @-@ rod mechanism for the pile , remarked that the manual speed control that the operator had over the rods was simply a variable resistor , controlling an electric motor that would spool the " clothesline " wire over a pulley that also had two lead weights attached to ensure it would ' fail @-@ safe " and return to its zero position when released . 
 About two layers were laid per shift . Woods ' boron trifluoride neutron counter was inserted at the 15th layer . Thereafter , readings were taken at the end of each shift . Fermi divided the square of the radius of the pile by the intensity of the radioactivity to obtain a metric that counted down to one as the pile approached criticality . At the 15th layer , it was 390 ; at the 19th it was 320 ; at the 25th it was 270 and by the 36th it was only 149 . The original design was for a spherical pile , but as work proceeded , it became clear that this would not be necessary . The graphite was now more pure than hitherto , and 6 short tons ( 5 @.@ 4 t ) of very pure metallic uranium began to arrive from the Ames Project at Iowa State University , where a team under Frank Spedding had developed a new process to produce uranium metal . Westinghouse Lamp Plant supplied 3 short tons ( 2 @.@ 7 t ) , which it produced in a rush with a makeshift process . 
 The 2 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 7 cm ) metallic uranium cylinders , known as " Spedding 's eggs " , were dropped in the holes in the graphite in lieu of the uranium oxide <unk> . The process of filling the balloon with carbon dioxide would not be necessary , and twenty layers could be dispensed with . According to Fermi 's new calculations , the countdown would reach 1 between the 56th and 57th layers . The resulting pile was therefore flatter on the top than on the bottom . Anderson called a halt after the 57th layer was placed . When completed , the wooden frame supported an elliptical @-@ shaped structure , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide at the ends and 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) across the middle . It contained 6 short tons ( 5 @.@ 4 t ) of uranium metal , 50 short tons ( 45 t ) of uranium oxide and 400 short tons ( 360 t ) of graphite , at an estimated cost of $ 2 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = First nuclear chain reaction = = 
 The next day , 2 December 1942 , everybody assembled for the experiment . There were 49 scientists present . Although most of the S @-@ 1 Executive Committee was in Chicago , only Crawford Greenewalt was present , at Compton 's invitation . Other dignitaries present included Szilard , Wigner and Spedding . Fermi , Compton , Anderson and Zinn gathered around the controls on the balcony , which was originally intended as a viewing platform . Samuel Allison stood ready with a bucket of concentrated cadmium nitride , which he was to throw over the pile in the event of an emergency . The start up began at 09 : 54 . Walter Zinn removed the zip , the emergency control rod , and secured it . Norman Hilberry stood ready with an axe to cut the scram line , which would allow the zip to fall under the influence of gravity . While Leona Woods called out the count from the boron trifluoride detector in a loud voice , George Weil , the only one on the floor , withdrew all but one of the control rods . At 10 : 37 Fermi ordered Weil to remove all but 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) of the last control rod . Weil withdrew it 6 inches ( 15 cm ) at a time , with measurements being taken at each step . 
 The process was abruptly halted by the automatic control rod <unk> itself , due to its trip level being set too low . At 11 : 25 , Fermi ordered the control rods reinserted . He then announced that it was lunch time . 
 The experiment resumed at 14 : 00 . Weil worked the final control rod while Fermi carefully monitored the neutron activity . Fermi announced that the pile had gone critical ( reached a self @-@ sustaining reaction ) at 15 : 25 . Fermi switched the scale on the recorder to accommodate the rapidly increasing electrical current from the beryllium trifluoride detectors . He wanted to test the control circuits but after 28 minutes , the alarm bells went off to notify everyone that the neutron flux had passed the preset safety level , and he ordered Zinn to release the zip . The reaction rapidly halted . The pile had run for about 4 @.@ 5 minutes at about 0 @.@ 5 watts . Wigner opened a bottle of Chianti , which they drank from paper cups . 
 Compton notified Conant by telephone . The conversation was in an impromptu code : 
 Compton : The Italian navigator has landed in the New World . 
 Conant : How were the natives ? 
 Compton : Very friendly . 
 = = Later operation = = 
 On 12 December 1942 CP @-@ 1 's power output was increased to 200 W , enough to power a light bulb ; but lacking shielding of any kind , it was a radiation hazard for everyone in the vicinity . Thereafter , testing was continued , but at 0 @.@ 5 W. Operation was terminated on 28 February 1943 , and the pile was dismantled and moved to Site A in the Argonne Forest , now known as Red Gate Woods . There the original materials were used to build Chicago Pile @-@ 2 ( CP @-@ 2 ) . Instead of being spherical , the new reactor was built in a cube @-@ like shape , about 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) tall with a base approximately 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) square . It was surrounded by concrete walls 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) thick that acted as a radiation shield , with overhead protection from 6 inches ( 15 cm ) of lead and 50 inches ( 130 cm ) of wood . More uranium was used , so it contained 52 short tons ( 47 t ) of uranium and 472 short tons ( 428 t ) of graphite . No cooling system was provided as it only ran at a few kilowatts . CP @-@ 2 became operational in March 1943 , with a k of 1 @.@ 055 . During the war Zinn allowed CP @-@ 2 to be run around the clock , and its design made it easy to conduct experiments . CP @-@ 2 was joined by Chicago Pile @-@ 3 , the first heavy water reactor , which went critical on 15 May 1944 . 
 The reactors were used to undertake research related to weapons , such as investigations of the properties of tritium . Wartime experiments included measuring the neutron absorption cross @-@ section of elements and compounds . Albert Wattenberg recalled that about 10 elements were studied each month , and 75 over the course of a year . An accident involving radium and beryllium powder caused a dangerous drop in his white blood cell count that lasted for three years . As the dangers of things such as inhaling uranium oxide became more apparent , experiments were conducted on the effects of radioactive substances on laboratory test animals . 
 The Red Gate Woods later became the original site of Argonne National Laboratory , which replaced the Metallurgical Laboratory on 1 July 1946 , with Zinn as its first director . CP @-@ 2 and CP @-@ 3 operated for ten years before they outlived their usefulness , and Zinn ordered them shut down on 15 May 1954 . Their remaining usable fuel was transferred to Chicago Pile @-@ 5 at the Argonne National Laboratory 's new site in DuPage County , and the CP @-@ 2 and CP @-@ 3 reactors were dismantled in 1955 and 1956 . High @-@ level nuclear waste such as fuel and heavy water were shipped to Oak Ridge , Tennessee , for disposal . The rest was encased in concrete and buried in a 40 @-@ foot @-@ deep ( 12 m ) trench in what is now known as the Site A / Plot M Disposal Site . It is marked by a commemorative boulder . 
 By the 1970s there was increased public concern about the levels of radioactivity at the site , which was used by the local residents for recreational purposes . Surveys conducted in the 1980s found strontium @-@ 90 in the soil at Plot M , trace amounts of tritium in nearby wells , and plutonium , technetium , cesium , and uranium in the area . In 1994 , the United States Department of Energy and the Argonne National Laboratory yielded to public pressure and earmarked $ 24 @.@ 7 million and $ 3 @.@ 4 million respectively to rehabilitate the site . As part of the clean up , 500 cubic yards ( 380 m3 ) of radioactive waste was removed and sent to the Hanford Site for disposal . By 2002 , the Illinois Department of Public Health had determined that the remaining materials posed no danger to public health . 
 = = Significance and commemoration = = 
 A commemorative plaque was unveiled at Stagg Field on 2 December 1952 , the occasion of the tenth anniversary of CP @-@ 1 going critical . It read : 
 On December 2 , 1942 man achieved here the first self @-@ sustaining chain reaction and thereby initiated the controlled release of nuclear energy . 
 The plaque was saved when the West Stands were demolished in August 1957 . The site of CP @-@ 1 was designated as a National Historic Landmark on 18 February 1965 . When the National Register of Historic Places was created in 1966 , it was immediately added to that as well . The site was also named a Chicago Landmark on 27 October 1971 . 
 Today the site of the old Stagg Field is occupied by the University 's Regenstein Library , which was opened in 1970 , and the Joe and Rika Mansueto Library , which was opened in 2011 . A Henry Moore sculpture , Nuclear Energy , stands in a small quadrangle just outside the Regenstein Library . It was dedicated on 2 December 1967 , to commemorate the 25th anniversary of CP @-@ 1 going critical . The commemorative plaques from 1952 , 1965 and 1967 are nearby . A graphite block from CP @-@ 1 can be seen at the Bradbury Science Museum in Los Alamos , New Mexico ; another is on display at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago . 
 = 7th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 7th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . Raised in 1914 as part of the Australian Imperial Force during the First World War , the battalion was completely recruited from the state of Victoria and formed the 2nd Brigade , 1st Division . The battalion served during the Gallipoli campaign where it had the distinction of having four of its members awarded the Victoria Cross . In 1916 , it was transferred to Europe , fighting in the trenches along the Western Front for the next two and a half years . 
 Although disbanded in 1919 following the end of hostilities , it was re @-@ raised in 1921 in the Citizens Force ( later known as the Militia ) as a part @-@ time infantry battalion based in Victoria . However , due to lack of funding following the Great Depression and a shortage of manpower following the suspension of the compulsory training scheme in 1929 , the battalion was amalgamated with the 38th Battalion as the 7th / 38th Battalion , although it was delinked again in 1936 when the Army was expanded due to rising tensions in Europe . 
 During the Second World War , the 7th Battalion served primarily in a garrison role , firstly being used to defend the Australian mainland before deploying late in the war to take part in the Bougainville campaign in 1944 – 45 . On Bougainville , as part of the 23rd Brigade , they took part in the fighting in the central sector of the island in the last months of the war . Following the end of hostilities , the battalion was once again used in the garrison role before being returned to Australia and disbanding in early 1946 . 
 In 1948 , the battalion was re @-@ raised as an amalgamated unit with the 8th Battalion when the Citizens Military Force was reformed . Today , it exists as the 8th / 7th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War , the Australian government decided to raise an all volunteer force for overseas service due to the provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) which precluded sending the Militia outside of Australian territory to fight . While this force would draw from the military forces that already existed — the part @-@ time Citizens Force and the Permanent Military Force — it would be largely be made up from recruits not currently serving . Known as the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) , initially it was to consist of 20 @,@ 000 men , comprising one infantry division and a light horse brigade . Recruitment for the first intake began on 10 August 1914 , and the 7th Battalion was among the first units raised , forming less than a fortnight after the declaration of war . 
 Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Harold Elliot , the battalion was brigaded with the 5th , 6th and 8th Battalions to form the 2nd Brigade under Brigadier James Whiteside McCay . Elliott took personal control over the recruitment process , selecting only those officers that he had known from his service in the Citizens Forces as his company commanders , who he in turn entrusted with choosing their own subordinates . Recruitment was conducted over a period of three weeks and by the end of the period the process had been so successful that the battalion was over establishment . Initially , the battalion was organised into eight companies , designated ' A ' to ' H ' , while recruitment and initial training was undertaken at Broadmeadows , however , this was later reduced to the standard four companies , designated ' A ' to ' D ' . 
 = = = = Gallipoli = = = = 
 In September the battalion marched through the city of Melbourne and a fortnight later they embarked upon HMT Hororata bound for the Middle East . They arrived in Egypt on 2 December 1914 after which they undertook further training before being called to undertake defensive duties along the Suez Canal following the failed Turkish First Suez Offensive in February 1915 . However the battalion did not take part in direct combat , and during this time a number of the its non commissioned officers were allowed to apply for commissions in British Army units . 
 In early April the battalion was moved to Alexandria and from there on to Lemnos Island . On the morning of 25 April 1915 , the battalion took part in the Landing at Anzac Cove , coming ashore as part of the second wave . Over the course of the first week the battalion was involved in establishing the beachhead and suffered heavily , losing five officers and 179 men killed or died of wounds . This was higher than any other subsequent battle that the battalion fought during the war . On 29 April , the 2nd Brigade was relieved by the 12th ( Deal ) Battalion and in early May the battalion was able to reorganise itself after its baptism of fire . The respite did not last long , however , for only ten days after the landing at Anzac Cove , the 2nd Brigade was transferred to Cape Helles in order to take part in an attack on Krithia on 8 May 1915 . The attack was a very costly failure , with the battalion losing a further six officers and 87 men killed . Nevertheless , they were involved in what is believed to be the first brigade @-@ level attack conducted by an Australian force against an entrenched enemy and the attack earned the Victorians many plaudits . 
 After the attack the battalion was given a weeks rest at Cape Helles , where it received a number of reinforcements before being sent back to the lodgement at Anzac Cove , where a stalemate situation had developed . In an effort to break this deadlock , the Allies launched an offensive in August and the battalion took part in the Battle of Lone Pine . After taking over positions that had been captured by the 1st Brigade , the battalion defended the trenches against repeated Turkish counterattacks and , in the process , four of its members performed acts of gallantry that later led to them receiving the Victoria Cross ( VC ) , the nation 's highest military decoration . These men were : Corporal Alexander Stewart Burton , Corporal William Dunstan , Lieutenant William John Symons and Captain Frederick Harold Tubb . During this fighting , the 7th Battalion lost 87 men killed . 
 Despite the battalion 's success in holding the trenches at Lone Pine , the August Offensive failed to break the deadlock as setbacks elsewhere resulted in continued stalemate and for the rest of the campaign the fighting was relatively static . Finally , in December the decision was made to evacuate the Allied force from the peninsula . During the evacuation , two of the battalion 's soldiers , William Scurry and Alfred ' <unk> ' Lawrence played a significant part through their invention of a self @-@ firing rifle , which assisted in making the Turks believe that there were still men manning the trenches even as they were being evacuated . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 After Gallipoli the 7th Battalion was withdrawn to Egypt , where the AIF underwent a period of reorganisation and expansion prior to being transferred to Europe . The 7th Battalion was split to provide a cadre for the 59th Battalion which was being raised as part of the doubling of the Australian forces . In March 1916 , they sailed to France where for the next two and half years they would take part in the fighting in the trenches along the Western Front . Upon arrival , the battalion was sent to the Somme , where its first major action came in July during the Battle of Pozières . Throughout July and into August , the battalion was committed to the fighting twice , losing 55 men killed in the first battle and another 83 in the second . 
 In late August , the 7th Battalion , with a frontage equal to just over half its authorised strength , was transferred to Ypres , in Belgium , where they manned trenches near the Ypres – Commines canal . During this time they were not involved in any major attacks , however , each night they sent patrols out into no man 's land and established listening posts to gather intelligence . On 30 September , the 7th Battalion , along with its sister battalion , the 8th Battalion , mounted a raid on the German line at Hollebeke with a force roughly equivalent to two platoons . The raid was a great success , with the Australians overwhelming the defenders and capturing a section of the German line and killing up to 13 Germans , before withdrawing . 
 In October , the battalion returned to the Somme where they spent the winter months manning trenches and training . In early 1917 , precipitated by the loss of the high ground around Pozières , the Germans withdrew back to the Hindenburg Line in order to shorten their defensive line and to straighten a salient that had developed . In February , the German withdrawal was discovered and the Allies , finding an open battlefield for the first time since 1914 and believing that the German Army was suffering from limited manpower , began an advance to follow them up . On the night of 26 / 27 February , the 7th Battalion launched what was meant to be a trench raid , but turned into an open advance , seeing them extend their lines by 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) . The Allied advance , however , was brief as the Germans had established themselves in strength , and was halted at Bullecourt . 
 In May the battalion was withdrawn from the front line for re @-@ organisation and training . It did not return until the Third Battle of Ypres in September and October 1917 , when they were committed to the fighting first at Menin Road . The 7th Battalion had 57 men killed in this phase , and then later at Broodseinde another 98 were killed . Following these battles , the 7th Battalion was withdrawn from the front line once more in December . In March 1918 , however , following the start of the German Spring Offensive , the battalion was called back to help stem the tide of the German advance . As the German offensive ran out of momentum , the battalion kept up the pressure on the German line through a series of peaceful penetrations , before subsequently taking part in the Allied Hundred Days Offensive , which was launched near Amiens on 8 August 1918 . As a part of this offensive , the battalion fought major actions at Lihons on 9 – 11 August where they captured a number of German mortars and <unk> Woods on 23 August . They continued operations until late September 1918 when they were withdrawn with a strength of just 410 men and it was out of the line when the armistice came into effect in November . Shortly afterwards the demobilisation process began and as the battalion 's numbers fell as men were repatriated back to Australia , it was amalgamated with 6th Battalion . This battalion was amalgamated with another , formed from the 5th and 8th Battalions , to form the 2nd Brigade Battalion . 
 Throughout their service during the war , the battalion suffered 1 @,@ 045 killed and 2 @,@ 076 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : four VCs , one Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George ( CMG ) , two Distinguished Service Orders ( DSOs ) , 20 Military Crosses ( MCs ) with two bars , 31 Distinguished Conduct Medals ( DCMs ) with one bar , 100 Military Medals ( MMs ) with five bars , six Meritorious Service Medals ( MSMs ) , 37 Mention in Despatches ( MIDs ) and six foreign awards . The battalion received a total of 26 battle honours for its service during the war . 
 = = = Inter war years = = = 
 In 1921 , the decision was made to perpetuate the battle honours and traditions of the AIF battalions that had served during World War I by reorganising the Citizens Force along AIF lines , with previously existing part @-@ time units adopting the numerical designations of the AIF units that had been drawn from their traditional recruitment territories . In May 1921 , the 7th Battalion was reformed in regional Victoria around a headquarters in Mildura , with depots at <unk> , Wentworth and Red Cliffs . At this time , the battalion drew its personnel from the 2nd Battalion , 7th Infantry Regiment , and the 2nd Battalion , 21st Infantry Regiment . Through its link with these units , the battalion inherited the battle honour of " South Africa 1899 – 102 " . In 1927 , when territorial titles were introduced into the Militia , the battalion adopted the title of the " Mount Alexander Regiment " . It was also granted the motto <unk> Nullius at this time . 
 In 1929 , however , the compulsory training scheme was suspended by the newly elected Scullin Labor government . In its place a voluntary system was established and the Citizens Force renamed the " Militia " . The end of compulsory training , coupled with low levels of defence spending and economic hardships brought about by the Great Depression greatly reduced the manpower available to many Militia units at this time and as a result a number of units were disbanded or amalgamated at this time . The 7th Battalion was also affected and on 1 July 1929 it was amalgamated with the 38th Battalion to form the 7th / 38th Battalion . The two battalions remained linked until 9 November 1936 when , following concerns about growing tensions in Europe , it was decided to <unk> them in order to double the size of the <unk> as the prospect of another war became apparent . In 1937 , the battalion 's designation was changed to the " North Murray Borderers " . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , the Australian government once again decided to raise an all volunteer force for service overseas as the legal restrictions on employing the Militia outside of Australia still applied . Regardless a number of Militia units attempted to join up en masse as already formed units and the 7th Battalion was one of these units . However , as they were required to remain in Australia to provide home defence in the case of war spreading to the Pacific this did not occur . In October 1939 , the Militia was mobilised in stages to undertake a short period of 30 days continuous training and this was undertaken again in 1940 , but for a period of 90 days instead . The compulsory training scheme was also reintroduced and the 7th Battalion 's ranks were filled out with national servicemen . 
 Throughout 1940 and 1941 the battalion undertook a number of training camps in Victoria . In December 1941 , with Japan 's entry into the war following the attacks on Malaya and Pearl Harbor , the battalion was mobilised for war service and tasked with defending the Dandenong area . In 1942 , however , it received orders to move north to Darwin , where it carried out garrison duties to defend the town and experienced a number air raids from Japanese aircraft . During this time also , the battalion was transferred to the 23rd Brigade . Originally the 23rd Brigade had been part of the 8th Division and made up of Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) battalions , however , after these units were captured or destroyed on Rabaul , Ambon and Timor , it had been rebuilt using Militia battalions and placed under the command of Brigadier Arnold Potts , and assigned to the 12th Division . 
 They remained in Darwin for 18 months before being relieved and sent back to Melbourne in April 1943 . After taking leave , the 7th Battalion was sent to the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland for a period of intensive pre @-@ deployment training in November . In 1944 the 23rd Brigade had been attached to the II Corps , which was tasked with taking over from the Americans and launching a renewed offensive on Bougainville . The 23rd Brigade was given the task of relieving the garrisons in the outer islands and the 7th Battalion was primarily responsible for Mono island , although one company was detached to Munda , arriving there in October 1944 . Tasked with defending the airfield from a Japanese attack that was at best remote , some members of the battalion sought to enliven their existence by acting as crews on US Navy PT boats carrying out raids on New Britain and New Ireland . 
 In April 1945 , after months of lobbying by Potts — who was keen to get back into action himself after having been relieved of his previous command during the Kokoda campaign — the 7th Battalion was transferred to Torokina on Bougainville Island , where the Japanese garrison was still holding out . In June they moved up the Numa Numa Trail to Pearl Ridge in the central sector of the island where they relieved the 27th Battalion . Almost immediately they began aggressive patrols in order to dominate the Japanese in their area of operations and were tasked with the capture of several key positions including <unk> 's Hill , Base Point 3 , <unk> and <unk> and to establish a forward position in the <unk> Valley . Over the course of the next three months until the end of the war , the battalion captured 25 positions and killed around 200 Japanese soldiers . 
 Following the end of hostilities the battalion moved to the island of <unk> to guard Japanese prisoners of war . As the demobilisation process began , members of the battalion were slowly repatriated to Australia , while others were transferred to other units for further service elsewhere . By March 1946 the last of the battalion 's personnel had been returned to Australia and on 10 May 1946 , the 7th Battalion was formally disbanded . During its service throughout the war the battalion lost 25 men killed or died on active service , with a further 50 men wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one DSO , one MC , one MM and 16 MIDs . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the completion of the demobilisation process , the Citizens Military Force was reformed in 1948 , albeit on a reduced scale . At this time , the 7th Battalion was not re @-@ raised in its own right , although an amalgamated unit known as the 8th / 7th Battalion ( North Western Victorian Regiment ) was formed in order to perpetuate the two rural Victorian battalions . Today the honours and traditions of the 7th Battalion are maintained by the 8th / 7th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment , an infantry battalion of the Australian Army Reserve , that was formed in 1960 as the 2nd Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment , following the introduction of the Pentropic organisation , but which was later redesignated 8 / 7 RVR . The 7th Battalion 's battle honours include those of the 2nd AIF 's 2 / 7th Battalion , which were entrusted to the 7th in 1961 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following is a list of officers that served as the 7th Battalion 's commanding officer during the two World Wars : 
 First World War : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Harold Edward Elliott ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alfred Jackson ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Carl Herman Jess ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ernest Edward <unk> . 
 Second World War : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Marcell Conran ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Howard Leslie <unk> Dunkley ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Frederick Thomas Henry Goucher ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Moore Norris ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Rupert Markham Sadler ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Peter Glynn Clifton Webster ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Alfred Wilmoth . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 7th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 South Africa 1899 – 1902 . 
 First World War : Landing at Anzac , Defence at Anzac , Helles , Krithia , Anzac , Suvla , Sari Bair – Lone Pine , Gallipoli 1915 , Egypt 1915 – 16 , Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Lys , Hazebrouck , Amiens , Albert 1918 ( Chuignes ) , Hindenburg Line , Epehy , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , Suez Canal . 
 Second World War : North Africa 1940 – 41 , Bardia 1941 , Capture of Tobruk , Greece 1941 , Middle East 1941 , Crete , Canea , 42nd Street , Withdrawal to Sphakia , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 45 , Wau , Mubo I , Bobdubi II , Komiatum , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Maprik , Yamil – Ulupu , Kaboibus – Kiarivu . 
 = Bernard Fanning = 
 Bernard Fanning ( born 15 August 1969 ) is an Australian musician and singer @-@ songwriter . He is best known as the lead singer and frontman of Australian alternative rock band Powderfinger from its formation in 1989 to its dissolution in 2010 . 
 Born and raised in Toowong , Brisbane , Fanning was taught the piano by his mother at an early age . At the age of 12 , while attending St Joseph 's College , Gregory Terrace , he began writing music , and upon graduating from St. Joseph 's , moved on to the University of Queensland , where he studied journalism for a short time . He dropped out to pursue a music career , after meeting Ian Haug in an economics class . Fanning joined Haug , John Collins , and Steven Bishop , who had recently formed Powderfinger , and took the role of lead singer . After Bishop left and guitarist Darren Middleton joined , the band released five studio albums in fifteen years and achieved mainstream success in Australia . During Powderfinger 's hiatus in 2005 , Fanning began his solo music career with the studio album Tea & Sympathy . Powderfinger then reunited in 2007 and released two more albums before disbanding in late 2010 . 
 While Powderfinger 's style focuses on alternative rock , Fanning 's solo music is generally described as a mixture of blues and acoustic folk . Fanning plays guitar , piano , keyboards and harmonica , both when performing solo and also with Powderfinger . Often speaking out against Australian political figures , Fanning has donated much of his time to philanthropic causes . He is an advocate for Aboriginal justice in Australia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fanning was born in Brisbane on 15 August 1969 . He was raised , alongside two brothers and a sister , in the inner Brisbane suburb of Toowong . The death of one of Fanning 's brothers to cancer would be the inspiration for Vulture Street 's " Since You 've Been Gone " . Fanning 's mother began teaching him to play piano as a young child , although his siblings were not interested in music . 
 Fanning attended St. Joseph 's College , Gregory Terrace and began writing his own music at the age of 15 . Fanning has described these early works as " terrible " , but notes that he enjoyed writing and arranging them . After graduating from St Joseph 's , Fanning entered the University of Queensland to study journalism ; however , he was equally interested in pursuing a music career . He left university at the age of 19 to pursue a music career . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = Powderfinger era ( 1989 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Fanning first met Powderfinger guitarist Ian Haug in a University of Queensland economics class in 1989 . At the time of the meeting , Haug had recently formed Powderfinger with high school friends John Collins and Steven Bishop , who would become the band 's foundational bass guitarist and drummer , respectively . Haug was the lead guitarist and lead singer . On discovering Fanning 's singing abilities , Haug replaced himself with Fanning as lead singer and frontman . Haug stated that " It was a big thing to convince the others that we needed a singer . They were like , ' You 're OK , ' and I was like , ' No I 'm not . We can do better than that . ' " 
 In 1992 , current guitarist Darren Middleton was invited to join Powderfinger by Fanning and Haug , after they were impressed by his work in Brisbane band Pirate . Middleton accepted the offer and became the fifth member , joining Jon Coghill who had replaced Bishop as drummer . The line @-@ up of Fanning , Middleton , Haug , Collins , and Coghill has since remained unchanged . 
 Throughout the late 1990s , Powderfinger rose to prominence throughout Australia , receiving several accolades and achieving highly successful record and concert ticket sales . As the most vocal and prominent member of the band , the popularity for the group elevated Fanning as a powerful individual in the public view of the Australian music industry . Fanning was called upon by film @-@ maker Gregor Jordan in 2003 to perform the folk song " Moreton Bay " ( named after the bay of the same name in the Brisbane area ) and his own original composition " Shelter for My Soul " in Jordan 's film Ned Kelly . Fanning then enlisted Jordan to film Powderfinger 's first live DVD , These Days : Live in Concert . 
 = = = Solo venture ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = 
 On 31 October 2005 , Fanning released his debut solo album entitled Tea & Sympathy . The album debuted at No. 1 on the Australian ARIA Albums chart , and spent 58 weeks in the top 50 . It peaked at No. 11 during its 18 @-@ week stay on the New Zealand albums chart . 
 Tea & Sympathy comprised songs Fanning had written in his time with Powderfinger , as well as new content written after the band went on hiatus . Most of the writing was done in what Fanning described as a " creative burst " between March and May 2005 . Much of the inspiration for the work on the album came from Fanning 's reaction to the death of his brother in 2002 , and to the ending of a 12 @-@ year relationship with his girlfriend , Philippa <unk> . The majority of the album was recorded at Real World Studios with Tchad Blake in June 2005 , except for " Not Finished Just Yet " , " Believe " , " Wash Me Clean " , and " Hope & Validation " , which were recorded at Fanning 's Brisbane home . Fanning was supported by Brisbane musicians Jerry Marotta , Keith Duffy , and John <unk> , who also formed part of his live band . The album was developed in a relaxed manner , with Fanning stating , " We had a ball putting the songs together . " 
 Three singles were released from the album . The most successful of these was the lead single , " Wish You Well " , shortly followed by " Songbird " . These releases were only sold as digital download singles . The third single from the album , " Watch Over Me " , was the only to be released as a CD single and achieved minor success on the Australian singles chart . It entered the chart on 9 July 2006 at No. 16 , and spent eight weeks in the top 50 . On 26 January 2006 , " Wish You Well " was voted No. 1 for the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2005 . Following " Watch Over Me " , Fanning digitally released a fourth single " Weekend of Mystery " , which was not officially on the album , except for those who purchased the album from the iTunes Store . Fanning also took home the award for Best Music Video at the 2006 ARIA Awards for the iconic ' Wish You Well ' clip . 
 On 2 December 2005 , Fanning announced a nationwide Which Way Home Concert Tour , named after the song on the album of the same name . Fanning played seven shows between 25 February and 10 March 2006 , in all of Australia 's major capital cities . He was supported by Perth band The Panics and Brisbane singer Andrew Morris . He followed this with the " Yesterday 's Gone " tour , announced on 11 August 2006 , and concluding with Powderfinger re @-@ uniting and returning to the recording studio — Fanning later stated that while he enjoyed making Tea & Sympathy , " Powderfinger is my real job " . 
 = = = Powderfinger return ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Throughout 2006 , Fanning had hinted towards Powderfinger ceasing their hiatus to release a sixth studio album . Recorded in Los Angeles , Dream Days at the Hotel Existence was released on 2 June 2007 . The title of the album came from a chapter of Brooklyn Follies by Paul Auster , a book that Fanning had read during recording . The album debuted at No. 1 on the Australian ARIA Albums chart . 
 Powderfinger toured around Australia and New Zealand with Silverchair on the Across the Great Divide tour in 2007 . The tour 's aim was to promote the efforts of Reconciliation Australia to reduce the 17 @-@ year life expectancy gap between Indigenous and Non @-@ Indigenous Australians . Fanning said of the tour , " The idea is to show both bands are behind the idea of reconciliation . " 
 = = = Return to Solo venture ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 After the disbanding of Powderfinger , Fanning moved to Spain with his family where he began writing and recording demos for his next solo album . In January 2013 Fanning announced on his website blog that he had been recording the follow up to 2005 's Tea and Sympathy in Los Angeles . In March 2013 he announced via his blog that recording had been completed and he had returned to Australia . The album " Departures " was released on the 7th of June with the first single " Battleships " released on the 22nd of April . 
 = = Style , technique , and influences = = 
 Fanning has been described as having a strong vocal range when singing , but has stated that he is not highly confident in his voice . In a 1998 interview , Fanning said , " I don 't think I have the perfect voice or anything " , and stated that delivering the message of the song was more important than " showing off [ his ] chops " . He noted he was not interested in singing for the purpose of singing alone , but rather because he enjoyed getting the purpose of the song across . Fanning has stated : " For me , writing songs comes from anywhere " , drawing inspiration from his experiences . 
 In his work on Tea & Sympathy , Fanning noted less of a collaborative song style , referring to his inability to play guitar solos as causing different elements to become a focus of the songs . In an interview , he said , " I wasn 't relying on solos to be big features because I simply can 't play them . " Fanning explained that the shorter length of songs was due to him not having " four other people " to back him up when producing independently . 
 Fanning has stated his favourite band is The Beatles . 
 = = Political and moral stances = = 
 Fanning has stated that although political messages may be common throughout his and Powderfinger 's music , it is not the central focus when writing songs : " A balance has to be struck in a lot of ways , in the sense that primarily I 'm a musician . I 'm not a political commentator . So if I write a song that has political content , then hopefully that song is a good enough song to make it onto my record . And if it 's not , then that 's just a song that I 've written . So I don 't think it necessarily needs to be that you 're definitively trying to make a political statement . " He has stated that he has no interest in " doing a ' Peter Garrett ' " , who entered politics after a successful Midnight Oil career . 
 On 8 July 2007 , Fanning wrote a piece for Adelaide 's Sunday Mail , telling of his recent trip to Uluru . In the piece , he criticised those who climbed the rock , stating that he was " appalled that kids were being taught to disrespect the wishes of Aboriginal people on their own land " . Upon returning from Uluru , Fanning wrote " Black Tears " , which intended to " document a relationship gone wrong " . In his piece , Fanning also criticised the 17 @-@ year life expectancy gap between Aboriginal and non @-@ Aboriginal Australians , and encouraged all to join a conversation on reconciliation . 
 Fanning takes a left @-@ leaning political stance , although he claims he is not fond of discussing the issue . Rather , he attempts to discuss the issues through his songs ; " I approach writing a song about something like [ Aboriginal affairs ] the same way I would approach writing a song about a relationship , because it 's something that I feel strongly about . " However , he has occasionally stated his views on social and political issues , giving The Dominion Post his stance on Aboriginal affairs in light of the Across the Great Divide tour ; 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Fanning has performed numerous philanthropic tasks independently and with Powderfinger . The band played at the 2005 WaveAid concert to raise money for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , and the Across the Great Divide tour in 2007 to promote the efforts of Reconciliation Australia . Fanning has contributed to charities including " A Just Australia " and Youngcare Australia , and donates his time to youth detention centres in Brisbane by running songwriting workshops . In an uncharacteristic outburst , Fanning once referred to fellow Australian artist Ben Lee as " a precocious little cunt " , after Lee referred to himself as " the saviour of Australian music " . Fanning later apologised for the comment . 
 Fanning married Andrea Moreno in February 2007 in Brisbane , Australia . Moreno is from Spain , where the two met while Fanning was writing and recording Tea & Sympathy in Europe . This relationship followed a twelve @-@ year union Fanning had had with his previous girlfriend , and it was this break @-@ up ( along with the then @-@ recent death of his older brother ) which influenced much of the lyrical content and sombre atmospheric mood of Tea & Sympathy . Through Moreno , Fanning has learned to speak some of the Spanish language . Fanning and Moreno have performed together while Powderfinger was on hiatus and Fanning was touring as a solo artist . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = APRA Awards = = = 
 The APRA Awards are presented annually from 1982 by the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Edge of the Ocean = 
 " Edge of the Ocean " is a song recorded by American indie rock band Ivy . It was released as the third single from their third studio album , Long Distance ( 2000 ) . The single was made available as a CD single , 10 " , and 12 " single in the United States on July 10 , 2001 , before being reissued internationally on May 27 , 2002 . " Edge of the Ocean " was released alongside Ivy 's other single , " Disappointed " , on the same day . The track was written by Dominique Durand , Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase , while production was handled by the latter two . 
 The track received general acclaim from music critics who highlighted it as a " standout " track . Stylistically different from Ivy 's previous material , " Edge of the Ocean " is an indie pop and trip hop song with " romantic " lyrics . The song was featured on the soundtracks for several films , including Angel Eyes and Shallow Hal . The single was subsequently considered their signature song , including by Ivy themselves . A music video was filmed for " Edge of the Ocean " in 2001 , featuring lead singer Durand walking around the beach with her bandmates . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Edge of the Ocean " was written by Ivy band members Dominique Durand , Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase . Production of the track was handled by Schlesinger and Chase . In a 2011 interview with Magnet , Chase stated that while writing " Edge of the Ocean " , they tried " to go 100 percent " with creating a lyrical balance that " [ came ] from a specific place and yet remain [ ed ] general , even vague , enough that they can apply to anyone " . In a previous interview with <unk> , Chase and Durand said that they hoped that " Edge of the Ocean " would prove commercial enough to " mean the difference between making our next album or not " . 
 During recording sessions for Long Distance , Schlesinger and Chase played around with the idea of incorporating new genres into their music . In an interview with Billboard , Ivy stated " the first songs [ we ] recorded were jangly and simple and straight @-@ ahead " . They eventually began work on " the groovier , slightly more melancholy stuff " that " works well with Dominique 's voice " . Ivy agreed that along with the exploration came " more preferable " songs that were " less atmospheric " than those on their previous studio album , Apartment Life ( 1997 ) , but contained more " infectious melodies " . In Ivy 's extended biography on their official website , they called the single " one of [ their ] signature songs " . 
 = = Composition and release = = 
 Musically , " Edge of the Ocean " is an indie pop and trip hop song . Tom Topkoff , writing for Hybrid , called it a " captivating and escapist tune " . A reviewer from <unk> described the single as " romantic " . Chuck Campbell of The Daily News stated that " Durand 's childlike vocals are as inviting as the waves of an incoming tide " . " Edge of the Ocean " was released as Long Distance 's third single on July 10 , 2001 , and was serviced to adult alternative radio on the same day ; a CD sampler featuring the track and several other songs on Nettwerk was handed out during Coldplay 's world concert series , Parachutes Tour ( 2000 – 01 ) . The US release included two previously unissued tracks , " Hideaway " and " Only a Fool Would Say That " . The single was not released elsewhere until 2002 , when it was released as a CD single in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After its release , " Edge of the Ocean " received general acclaim from contemporary music critics . Jonathan Cohen from Billboard praised the track and commented that " Durand 's sensual vocals are beguiling as ever " . A reviewer from Resonance magazine also praised the track , calling the single " a cool summer song " . Noel Dix of Exclaim ! applauded it , thanking the band for " mak [ ing ] use of some exceptional loops that come across as genuine rather than a pop band trying to cross over to the electric scene " . In another positive review , a critic from Star @-@ News called the composition " haunting " . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 The official music video for " Edge of the Ocean " was filmed in 2001 ; however , the clip played during the video is considerably shorter than the album version . The video begins with Durand casually walking around near the ocean ; several shots of nearby boats , cliffs and landscape are interwoven as Durand mouths the song 's lyrics . Chase and Schlesinger also appear in the video . 
 The single was featured in several films and television series after its initial release . It was featured in the movies Angel Eyes , Music and Lyrics and Shallow Hal , as well as in the television series Grey 's Anatomy and Veronica Mars . The track was also remixed for the soundtrack album of Roswell . In addition , the single was featured in a television commercial for Holland America . The track was later joked about , with a reviewer noting that " chances are you 've heard it and didn 't even know it " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Long Distance liner notes and Andy Chase 's discography . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Stratosphere Sound , New York City and Sony Music Studios , New York City 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " Edge of the Ocean " was released on July 10 , 2001 in the United States as a 10 " single , an EP , and added to Adult alternative radio , while in the United Kingdom a 12 " promo single was liberated . On May 27 , 2002 a 12 " single , 12 " promo single with a mix made by <unk> Mix and a CD single were issued through Nettwerk Music Group . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Wanted ( 2008 film ) = 
 Wanted is a 2008 American @-@ German action thriller film based on the comic book miniseries of the same name by Mark Millar and J. G. Jones . The film , written by Chris Morgan , Michael Brandt , and Derek Haas and directed by Timur Bekmambetov stars James McAvoy , Morgan Freeman , and Angelina Jolie . The storyline follows Wesley Gibson ( McAvoy ) , a frustrated account manager who discovers that he is the son of a professional assassin and decides to join the Fraternity , a secret society in which his father worked . 
 Universal Studios acquired the adaptation rights from Millar in 2004 , and while the eventual script drifted from the comic book supervillain mythos in the original miniseries , Millar was content to see most of the comic 's darker content was retained . Production began in April 2007 , with filming in the Czech Republic , Budapest , and the story 's main setting , Chicago . Wanted was released in June 2008 to both critical and commercial success , with box office earnings of $ 341 million worldwide and reviews praising the fast pacing and stylized action scenes . A sequel was planned the same year as the film 's release , but ultimately stalled in the development phase . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Chicago , 24 @-@ year @-@ old Wesley Gibson ( James McAvoy ) works at a dead @-@ end desk job with an overbearing boss , takes anti @-@ anxiety medication for panic attacks , and has an unfaithful live @-@ in girlfriend who cheats on him with his friend and colleague , Barry ( Chris Pratt ) . One night at the pharmacy , Wesley is told by a woman named Fox ( Angelina Jolie ) that his recently murdered father was an assassin , and the killer , a man named Cross ( Thomas Kretschmann ) , is now hunting him . Cross and Fox engage in a shoot @-@ out with hi @-@ tech guns . Wesley panics and runs into the parking lot followed by Cross who steals a truck and attempts to run Wesley down . Fox flips Wesley into her car and then calmly executes a spectacular escape . 
 Wesley awakens in the headquarters of the Fraternity , a secret society of assassins . The group 's leader , Sloan ( Morgan Freeman ) , explains that Wesley 's panic attacks are actually the untrained expression of a rare ability that allows Wesley 's body to distribute massive amounts of adrenaline , granting superhuman strength , speed , and heightened perception . Sloan wants to teach him to control this ability , and to become an assassin and join their cause . 
 Wesley initially panics and returns to his former life . The next morning , he discovers that his bank account now contains several million dollars . The discovery changes his outlook on life , and during a tirade from his boss , Wesley snaps and delivers a public diatribe . Afterward , he picks up a keyboard and during his exit , hits Barry 's face with it . Fox arrives while Wesley is outside looking at newspaper headlines of the previous night 's events . 
 Wesley is trained for his new life and is soon shown the Loom of Fate , which gives the names of future targets through errors in the fabric . Those the Loom identifies will apparently cause problems in the future , but only Sloan can see and interpret the messages . Though Wesley is initially reluctant to kill , he is convinced when Fox tells him that , in her childhood , a hired killer who burned her father alive had been previously identified by The Loom , but efforts to kill him were unsuccessful . 
 After several missions , Wesley finally manages to leave his girlfriend . He soon has a shootout with Cross , wherein Wesley accidentally kills another Fraternity member . Cross shoots Wesley in the shoulder . Sloan grants Wesley 's wish to avenge his father and sends him after Cross — but then secretly gives Fox a mission to kill Wesley , saying that his name had come up in the Loom , as well . Analyzing the bullet that hit Wesley , it is discovered that it was manufactured by a man named Pekwarsky . Wesley and Fox capture Pekwarsky , who arranges a meeting with Cross . Wesley faces Cross alone on a moving train . Fox steals a car and crashes it into the train , causing a derailment . After Cross saves Wesley from falling into a ravine , Wesley fatally shoots him . Before dying , Cross reveals that he is Wesley 's real father . Fox confirms this , and explains that Wesley was recruited because he was the only person Cross would not kill . Fox points her gun at Wesley , but he shoots the glass under him and falls into the river . 
 Wesley is retrieved by Pekwarsky , who takes him to Wesley 's late father 's apartment ( which is located just opposite to his own ) and explains that Sloan started manufacturing targets for profit after discovering that he was targeted by the Loom of Fate , and he did not tell the Fraternity members that they were now nothing more than paid killers . Cross discovered the truth , went rogue , and started killing Fraternity members to keep them away from his son . Pekwarsky departs , stating that Wesley 's father wished him a life free of violence . Wesley , however , decides to kill Sloan after discovering a secret room containing all of his father 's weapons and maps . 
 After putting explosives on rats to access the Fraternity 's headquarters , Wesley kills nearly every Fraternity member . Upon entering Sloan 's office , he reveals Sloan 's deception to those present in the room . Sloan reveals that all of the assassins ' names had come up in the weaving , and that he had acted to protect them . He gives the members a choice : kill themselves , per the code ; or kill Wesley . The members are considering breaking the code and killing Wesley , but Fox , who believes more in the code , turns on her fellow assassins and curves a bullet that kills everyone but Sloan and Wesley . She throws her gun to distract Wesley , before being killed by her own bullet . Wesley pursues Sloan to the now destroyed Loom chamber , but Sloan manages to escape . 
 Afterwards , Wesley checks his bank account and sees that Sloan has seized his funds , leaving Wesley broke again . A man is seen at Wesley 's desk much later . Sloan appears and points a gun at the back of the man 's head . The man turns around and is revealed to be a decoy . Sloan is killed by Wesley using a long @-@ distance bullet . Wesley states his accomplishments , saying : " this is me taking control , from Sloan , from the Fraternity , from Janice , from billing reports , from ergonomic keyboards , from cheating girlfriends , and sack @-@ of @-@ shit best friends . This is me taking back control of my life " , and asks the audience : " What the fuck have you done lately ? " 
 = = Cast = = 
 James McAvoy as Wesley Gibson , a meek 24 @-@ year @-@ old who works in a cubicle , but learns he is heir to a career as an assassin . 
 Morgan Freeman as Sloan , leader of the Fraternity and partner of Wesley 's deceased father . 
 Angelina Jolie as Fox , an accomplished member of the Fraternity who mentors Wesley . 
 Thomas Kretschmann as Cross , a rogue assassin who has left the Fraternity , and later revealed to be Wesley 's real father . 
 Common as Earl Spellman a.k.a. " Gunsmith " , a professional gunman who trains others to use weapons . 
 Konstantin Khabensky as " The Exterminator " , an expert in explosives who makes bombs and attaches them to rats . One of Wesley 's only friends in the Fraternity . 
