 Marc Warren as " The <unk> " , an assassin who says he " breaks bad habits " by violently beating people . Trains Wesley in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and endurance . 
 Dato <unk> as " The Butcher " , a knife @-@ expert . Trains Wesley in knife fighting . 
 Terence Stamp as Pekwarsky , a master in the science of killing . Pekwarsky operates as a rogue agent outside of The Fraternity . He is also a craftsman who is able to build bullets both untraceable and capable of traversing long distances . One of Cross 's compatriots . 
 David O 'Hara as Mr. X , the first Fraternity member . Said to be the greatest assassin , and believed to be Wesley 's father . His murder is the catalyst for Wesley 's introduction into the Fraternity . He is killed by Cross . 
 Chris Pratt as Barry , Wesley 's co @-@ worker and best friend , who is having an affair with Wesley 's girlfriend . 
 Kristen Hager as Cathy , Wesley 's unfaithful and bickering girlfriend . 
 <unk> Haque as Puja 
 Lorna Scott as Janice , Wesley 's overbearing boss . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production and writing = = = 
 The 2003 @-@ 04 comic book miniseries Wanted , by Mark Millar and J. G. Jones , came to the attention of Universal Pictures through executive Jeff Kirschenbaum , a comic book fan who sought a film adaptation that would be considered a " hard @-@ R " and encouraged the studio to pick up the rights to the miniseries . By 2004 , producer Marc Platt had gotten the film rights , and lobbied the studio to get Russian @-@ Kazakh director Timur Bekmambetov , as Platt considered that the visual style and sensibility Bekmambetov showed in Night Watch and Day Watch fit Wanted as “ the comic is dark and edgy but it also has an ironic , comedic tone beneath its violent action ” . In December 2005 , Bekmambetov was hired to helm the project , his first English @-@ language film , and writers Derek Haas and Michael Brandt were assigned the script . Bekmambetov described the original comic as " risky and very provocative " , with " a twist and good characters " , and declared that the thing that attracted him the most in Wanted was how it went through various film genres in its plot : " It ’ s a comedy , a tragedy , a drama , a melodrama . Every scene , we change genres and that ’ s why our movie is different . ” 
 Universal was initially reluctant on giving a potentially lucrative action film to a filmmaker who had never made an English @-@ language film , but Platt convinced the studio that he could “ create an environment that would allow Timur to be himself as a filmmaker and exercise his creative muscles ” . 
 Millar did not like the first draft of the screenplay , considering that the approach was " too tame " and " a little bit Americanized " given he wanted " basically be the opposite of the Spider @-@ Man movie , the idea of someone getting powers and realizing they can do what they want , then choosing the dark path . " The author only started to support the direction the project was taking once Bekmambetov " came in with his Eastern European madness " and the intention of coming closer to the spirit of the book . Bekmambetov said that he would take liberty in adapting the comic book 's world : " It ’ s difficult for me to just follow . It ’ s interesting for me to create . I feel a little bit different how this world has to be executed " . In July 2006 , screenwriter Chris Morgan was hired to revise the third act of the Wanted script written by Haas and Brandt . Haas and Brandt returned to polish the character of Wesley Gibson , which they had established in their first draft . 
 Wanted co @-@ creator Mark Millar saw previsualized footage for the film and said that the footage had raised his expectations for the film adaptation . Millar described the first half of the film as being close to the graphic novel , and also said that the film 's ending was similar , though it was relocated elsewhere from the setting in the graphic novel . The superhero costumes in the series were also removed , with the exception of the leather attire worn by Wesley and Fox . Coincidentally , this had been Millar 's intent when writing the graphic novel , although he and artist J. G. Jones had forgotten to . He said , " I wanted them to have those powers and then just wear those costumes for the initiation , but just for one panel . And then I forgot . " Millar also stated that he would have liked to keep the supervillain mythos that dictates the original comic in the film . Millar was favorable to most of the changes in the storyline , including the story arc of the Fates issuing death orders in line with the series ' original theme of predestination . Angelina Jolie asked for Fox to get killed , saying that " [ i ] f [ Fox ] was to find out she had killed people unjustly and was a part of something that wasn 't fair , then she should take her own life . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 James McAvoy , who had screen @-@ tested for the role early in 2006 , was initially rejected because the studio was seeking an actor with conventional Hollywood leading man looks and physique . McAvoy was later recalled , being considered the " runt of the litter " of those who tested . According to McAvoy , " They [ ultimately ] wanted someone geeky . " McAvoy was cast in the role in October 2006 . The Scottish actor , who portrays an American in the film , worked out to improve his physique for the film 's action scenes , and suffered several injuries during shooting , including a twisted ankle and an injured knee . 
 Angelina Jolie was cast in March 2007 , after screenwriter Dean <unk> rewrote the screenplay to tailor the role of Fox for her . Mark Millar became much more enthusiastic about the project after learning that Jolie had accepted the role of Fox , saying " the only way they could have got a bigger star to play this role is if they 'd hired Tom Cruise in drag . " Jolie decided to make Fox seem " distant and unattainable " by having her silent in many scenes . She mentioned Clint Eastwood , who had recently directed her in the film Changeling , as a possible influence for this aspect of her performance . 
 Common became interested in the role due to both the script and the prospect of working with McAvoy , Jolie , and Morgan Freeman . Common learned a great deal about firearms as preparation for the role , but said he is not a strong supporter of guns in real life . Konstantin Khabensky , who starred in Bekmambetov 's Night Watch , was cast so that the director would have a familiar face around . British television veteran Marc Warren agreed to work in the film because he always wanted to be in a Hollywood blockbuster . Thomas Kretschmann originally intended to pick up the comic series after being cast , but Bekmambetov convinced him not to . He said that he " did excessive gun training " to " make sure I look good and I look like I know what I 'm doing " . Kristen Hager originally auditioned for Fox , but accepted the role of Cathy , considering it " fun to play " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Location plate shooting took place in Chicago in April 2007 . Several chase scenes , including one with a low flying helicopter , were shot in Chicago over two days , on Wacker Drive along the Chicago River , between Columbus Drive and LaSalle Street . The opening scene was filmed using the Carbide & Carbon Building . Production moved to the Czech Republic later in May , scheduled for 12 weeks of shooting . Using a former sugar factory in Prague , production designer John Myhre constructed a large textile factory as part of an industrial world , the setting of a mythological environment in which looms create fabrics that weavers interpret as assassination orders . Afterward , filming moved to Budapest , then returned to Chicago in August . While the actors performed many of their own stunts , with free running and parkour in some of the action scenes , and Angelina Jolie being actually strapped to the hood of a moving Dodge Viper , some of the especially high @-@ risk sequences required digital doubles instead . Two full @-@ sized train cars were built , a Chicago ' L ' for a training scene where Fox and Wesley run atop a train , and a Czech Pendolino for the derailment , which was stationed in a gimbal equipped with hydraulics to allow the car to tilt and roll as the train crashed . The film originally had both an alternate opening and an alternate ending . The alternate opening , a flashback to ancient times describing the history of the Fraternity and the Loom of Fate , is available on the special edition DVD and Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Eight visual effects companies worked on the film 's 800 effects shots , the majority of which was done by Bekmambetov 's company Bazelevs Production . The first effects supervisor , Jon Farhat , was forced to withdraw from the production due to illness and was replaced by Stefen Fangmeier , who accepted the task as Wanted would only require four months of work . Once Fangmeier visited Bazelevs in Moscow , the effects were behind schedule , with only 12 finished composites out of the planned 500 . <unk> then brought two other supervisors to assist him in finishing many shots per week , so the job could get done by the deadline , a process the supervisor described as " a creative challenge on one hand , but on the other also a significant production challenge . " Another major contributor was London @-@ based Framestore , responsible for the climactic train crash . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Danny Elfman wrote the film 's score , a job he accepted for being a fan of Bekmambetov 's previous films . Considering the film to be a " weird , twisted , sarcastic thing , " Elfman decided to make a guitar @-@ based soundtrack , with the " nastiest sounds " and a " heavy metal approach . " This included a rock song written and performed by Elfman , " The Little Things " , which is featured throughout the film and on the end credits . The film score has been released on June 24 , 2008 in North America by Lakeshore Records . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Wanted was initially set to be released in cinemas on March 28 , 2008 . However , in December 2007 , Universal Pictures announced that it would be pushing back the release date to June 27 , 2008 , as the studio considered that the film had the potential to stand among the blockbusters that would be released during the United States summer . The film 's world premiere happened at the Los Angeles Film Festival on June 19 , with Wanted acting as the festival opener . Given the Russian origin of the director , Universal released a specially localized version in Russia . The literary translation of the English dialog was written by the writer Sergey <unk> . Several texts appearing on the screen and important for the plot were translated using CGI , without using subtitles or a voice @-@ over translation . Several famous Russian actors , most of which were also in Bekmambetov 's Night Watch and Day Watch , dubbed the main characters , and Konstantin Khabensky dubbed himself as The Exterminator . James McAvoy also provided some words in Russian for Wesley Gibson . Danny Elfman 's song " The Little Things " received a version in Russian , performed by Elfman himself , and Bekmambetov also directed a music video for the band Delta as part of a viral marketing campaign in Russia . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Wanted debuted in 3 @,@ 185 theaters and earned $ 50 @,@ 927 @,@ 085 in its opening weekend , placing it at second place after WALL @-@ E. It was the best opening ever for an R @-@ rated film released in June , only surpassed four years later by both Prometheus and Ted . Internationally , the film grossed $ 33 million on its opening weekend , breaking records in Russia and South Korea . Wanted grossed $ 341 @,@ 433 @,@ 252 , of which $ 134 @,@ 508 @,@ 551 was from North America and $ 206 @,@ 924 @,@ 701 was from elsewhere . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Wanted was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on December 2 , 2008 in the U.S. Two versions were released , including a single @-@ disc DVD and a two @-@ disc edition of both the DVD and Blu @-@ ray . A collectible two @-@ disc gift @-@ set DVD also included collectible postcards , a lenticular film cel in an acrylic frame , and a photobook of the Assassins . The DVD debuted at second place on the charts ( behind The Chronicles of Narnia : Prince Caspian ) , and generated over $ 65 million in revenue by February 2009 . The Blu @-@ ray debuted at first place on the charts . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Sweden @-@ based developer <unk> AB launched a browser game based on Wanted on April 2008 . The Wanted " Fan Immersion Game " was a massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game where players took the roles of Fraternity hitmen , performing assassination missions , upgrading weapons and ammunition , and creating alliances or rivalries with other players . A video game sequel to the events of the film , Wanted : Weapons of Fate , was released on March 2009 . It was developed by <unk> , and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 72 % based on reviews from 200 critics , with a rating average of 6 @.@ 6 out of 10 . The site 's general consensus reads : " Wanted is stylish , energetic popcorn fare with witty performances from Angelina Jolie ( playing an expert assassin ) , James McAvoy , and Morgan Freeman that help to distract from its absurdly over @-@ the @-@ top plot . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating based on reviews from film critics , gives the film a score of 64 out of 100 , based on 38 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Roger Ebert of Ebert & Roeper said " Wanted slams the pedal to the metal and never slows down . Here 's an action picture that 's exhausting in its relentless violence and its ingenuity in inventing new ways to attack , defend , ambush and annihilate " . Richard Roeper said , " It 's made for fans of films that really just want to see some great visuals , some amazing sequences and some terrific performances . " 
 Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly encapsulated many critics ' views , saying that " Wanted is kind of unintelligible and idiotic . Also kind of nasty and brutish . And also undeniably kind of fun ... " Likewise , Tom Long of The Detroit News said , " Wanted may be the most absolutely stone bonkers , crazy @-@ good movie of the century . Or it may be a gargantuan piece of trash . Chances are it 's a combination of the two . But man , does it rock . " Claudia Puig of USA Today found the " thrilling stunts and hyperkinetic action scenes [ to be ] the undisputed stars of this surprisingly entertaining film . " 
 Conversely , John Rosenblatt of The Austin Chronicle denounced those same attributes , saying , " If Maxim magazine ever decides to branch out into filmmaking , Wanted is just the kind of ear @-@ throttling nonsense it 's bound to produce " . David Fear of Time Out New York called it " the cinematic equivalent of an energy drink . The film keeps artificially pumping your adrenal glands with mindless , <unk> sensations , only to leave you <unk> and cranky minutes later . ... [ T ] his exercise in ultraviolence then insults us by having a beaten , bloodied McAvoy inform viewers that he used to be a loser ' just like all of you . ' " Frank Lovece of Film Journal International , one of few mainstream critics to have read the comic @-@ book miniseries , said that the film compared poorly with the source material . Noting that the hero in the comic goes even further , " breaking the fourth wall and positioning himself so that he 's ' prison @-@ raping ' and taunting the reader for having liked the series " , Lovece found that , " [ w ] hile Millar may have contempt for his readers — and , by extension , the medium in which he works — at least he has his own vision , and gets it across with style and wit " ; qualities that , in Lovece 's opinion , the movie lacked . 
 In the comics press , Erik Amaya of Comic Book Resources said that " [ t ] he film 's biggest faults lie in how far it strays from the source " and that " [ i ] f you 've ever seen any movie about leather @-@ clad assassins , you already know how this film plays out . The speed and skill of the movie @-@ making balance out those faults , however . " Tom McLean of Newsarama noted that , while the story deviated strongly from the source , the movie " stands out as a highly entertaining action film that preserves the comic 's core premise and cheeky attitude while taking the story into very different but still satisfying territory . " 
 Among European critics , Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that the film " looks as if it has been written by a committee of 13 @-@ year @-@ old boys for whom penetrative sex is still only a rumour , and the resulting movie plays like a party political broadcast on behalf of the misogynist party " , concluding , " In an ideal world , the title would have the word ' Not ' tacked on to the front . " Kim Newman , writing in Empire , praised Bekmambetov as " the most exciting action @-@ oriented <unk> since John Woo " and commented that the film 's gruesome violence " hint [ s ] at the comic 's uncomfortable suggestion that escapism is merely a licence to become monstrous . " 
 Wanted won the Empire Award for Best Sci @-@ Fi / Superhero Movie of 2008 . The film was nominated for two Academy Awards ; for Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing ( Chris Jenkins , Frank A. Montaño , and Petr <unk> ) . It was also nominated for the Critics Choice Award for Best Action Movie , the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , three MTV Movie Awards , and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Even before the film 's release , Mark Millar announced director Timur Bekmambetov was planning a sequel , though Millar denied that he would write a sequel to the comic book . He was instead creating a story along with the producers , that would follow the first film 's idea of an international guild of assassins . Terence Stamp described Pekwarsky as " something that 's written for a sequel " , and Common expressed interest in a prequel , feeling that both The Gunsmith and Fox deserved more exposition . 
 Chris Morgan would return to write the sequel 's screenplay , but departed on April 2009 due to " excessive workload " , leaving the task to Evan Spiliotopoulos . On June 2009 , Bekmambetov said that pre @-@ production for Wanted 2 was about to get started , with filming scheduled to begin in late fall or winter . The film will have a reported budget of $ 150 million and will be shot in the United States , India , and Russia . He also added that some of the characters would resurrect , particularly Fox and The Exterminator . On September , the director added that even without a finished script Bazelevs had already done previsualization of the action scenes . In 2010 , after reports that Angelina Jolie had pulled out of the sequel , Millar said that the script would be rewritten to remove Fox 's return , so production could start that year for a late 2011 release . Eventually the production did not take off , leading Bekmambetov to work on Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter instead . 
 In a 2011 Q & A , producer Jim <unk> said that " Wanted 2 sounds like it will not happen any time soon if at all " . That same year , James McAvoy said , regarding the sequel , " I think the studio is keen to make it , and we really want to make it , but we want to make it if it 's right and when it 's right , and that might not be ever . " McAvoy also expressed interest in a sequel focusing on a character other than Wesley . Universal later brought Wanted screenwriters Michael Brandt and Derek Haas to write the sequel , which Haas described as happening " right after the events that just happened ; it 'll pick up Wesley a few years later and go back in for another round " , while also being " Fox @-@ less and loom @-@ less . " Haas would later detail that the script featured a new female protagonist , who Wesley would recruit " sort of in the Fox role . " Bekmambetov declared during the interviews for Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter that after many years of indecision as the Wanted sequel stalled in development , he proposed an idea to the screenwriters wherein the plot followed Wesley while featuring " a great twist . " 
 McAvoy declared that since he " had a blast making the first Wanted " , he would make a sequel regardless of the quality of the script ; however , he also acknowledged that the extended time the film spent in development " suggests to me that they 're not finding it very easy to come up with a story that they 're passionate about , so we 'll have to wait and see . " In 2014 , McAvoy acknowledged that a potential sequel has been in the talks , saying he " had a couple of versions of script thrown my way " while adding that Universal is still waiting for the right screenplay . 
 = Elvis Presley = 
 Elvis Aaron Presley ( January 8 , 1935 – August 16 , 1977 ) was an American musician and actor . Regarded as one of the most significant cultural icons of the 20th century , he is often referred to as " the King of Rock and Roll " , or simply , " the King " . 
 Presley was born in Tupelo , Mississippi , as a <unk> twin , and when he was 13 years old , he and his family relocated to Memphis , Tennessee . His music career began there in 1954 , when he recorded a song with producer Sam Phillips at Sun Records . Accompanied by guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black , Presley was an early popularizer of rockabilly , an uptempo , backbeat @-@ driven fusion of country music and rhythm and blues . RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker , who managed the singer for more than two decades . Presley 's first RCA single , " Heartbreak Hotel " , was released in January 1956 and became a number @-@ one hit in the United States . He was regarded as the leading figure of rock and roll after a series of successful network television appearances and chart @-@ topping records . His energized interpretations of songs and sexually provocative performance style , combined with a singularly potent mix of influences across color lines that coincided with the dawn of the Civil Rights Movement , made him enormously popular — and controversial . 
 In November 1956 , he made his film debut in Love Me Tender . In 1958 , he was drafted into military service . He resumed his recording career two years later , producing some of his most commercially successful work before devoting much of the 1960s to making Hollywood films and their accompanying soundtrack albums , most of which were critically derided . In 1968 , following a seven @-@ year break from live performances , he returned to the stage in the acclaimed televised comeback special Elvis , which led to an extended Las Vegas concert residency and a string of highly profitable tours . In 1973 , Presley was featured in the first globally broadcast concert via satellite , Aloha from Hawaii . Several years of prescription drug abuse severely damaged his health , and he died in 1977 at the age of 42 . 
 Presley is one of the most celebrated and influential musicians of the 20th century . Commercially successful in many genres , including pop , blues and gospel , he is the best @-@ selling solo artist in the history of recorded music , with estimated record sales of around 600 million units worldwide . He won three Grammys , also receiving the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at age 36 , and has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1935 – 53 : Early years = = = 
 = = = = Childhood in Tupelo = = = = 
 Presley was born on January 8 , 1935 , in Tupelo , Mississippi , the son of Gladys Love ( née Smith ; April 25 , 1912 – August 14 , 1958 ) and Vernon Elvis Presley ( April 10 , 1916 – June 26 , 1979 ) , in the two @-@ room shotgun house built by Vernon 's father in preparation for the child 's birth . Jesse Garon Presley , his identical twin brother , was delivered stillborn 35 minutes before him . As an only child , Presley became close to both parents and formed an especially close bond with his mother . The family attended an Assembly of God , where he found his initial musical inspiration . Although he was in conflict with the Pentecostal church in his later years , he never officially left it . Rev. Rex <unk> officiated at his funeral , as Presley had been an admirer of <unk> 's ministry . 
 Presley 's ancestry was primarily a Western European mix , including Scots @-@ Irish , Scottish , German , and some French Norman . Gladys 's great @-@ great @-@ grandmother , Morning Dove White , was possibly a Cherokee Native American . Gladys was regarded by relatives and friends as the dominant member of the small family . Vernon moved from one odd job to the next , evincing little ambition . The family often relied on help from neighbors and government food assistance . The <unk> survived the F5 tornado in the 1936 Tupelo – Gainesville tornado outbreak . In 1938 , they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of kiting a check written by the landowner , Orville S. Bean , the dairy farmer and cattle @-@ and @-@ hog broker for whom he then worked . He was jailed for eight months , and Gladys and Elvis moved in with relatives . 
 In September 1941 , Presley entered first grade at East Tupelo Consolidated , where his instructors regarded him as " average " . He was encouraged to enter a singing contest after impressing his schoolteacher with a rendition of Red Foley 's country song " Old Shep " during morning prayers . The contest , held at the Mississippi @-@ Alabama Fair and Dairy Show on October 3 , 1945 , was his first public performance : dressed as a cowboy , the ten @-@ year @-@ old Presley stood on a chair to reach the microphone and sang " Old Shep " . He recalled placing fifth . A few months later , Presley received his first guitar for his birthday ; he had hoped for something else — by different accounts , either a bicycle or a rifle . Over the following year , he received basic guitar lessons from two of his uncles and the new pastor at the family 's church . Presley recalled , " I took the guitar , and I watched people , and I learned to play a little bit . But I would never sing in public . I was very shy about it . " 
 Entering a new school , Milam , for sixth grade in September 1946 , Presley was regarded as a loner . The following year , he began bringing his guitar in on a daily basis . He played and sang during lunchtime , and was often teased as a " trashy " kid who played hillbilly music . The family was by then living in a largely African @-@ American neighborhood . A devotee of Mississippi Slim 's show on the Tupelo radio station <unk> , Presley was described as " crazy about music " by Slim 's younger brother , a classmate of Presley 's , who often took him into the station . Slim supplemented Presley 's guitar tuition by demonstrating chord techniques . When his protégé was 12 years old , Slim scheduled him for two on @-@ air performances . Presley was overcome by stage fright the first time , but succeeded in performing the following week . 
 = = = = Teenage life in Memphis = = = = 
 In November 1948 , the family moved to Memphis , Tennessee . After residing for nearly a year in rooming houses , they were granted a two @-@ bedroom apartment in the public housing complex known as the Lauderdale Courts . Enrolled at L. C. Humes High School , Presley received only a C in music in eighth grade . When his music teacher told him he had no aptitude for singing , he brought in his guitar the next day and sang a recent hit , " Keep Them Cold Icy Fingers Off Me " , in an effort to prove otherwise . A classmate later recalled that the teacher " agreed that Elvis was right when he said that she didn 't appreciate his kind of singing . " He was usually too shy to perform openly , and was occasionally bullied by classmates who viewed him as a " mama 's boy " . In 1950 , he began practicing guitar regularly under the tutelage of Jesse Lee Denson , a neighbor two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years his senior . They and three other boys — including two future rockabilly pioneers , brothers Dorsey and Johnny Burnette — formed a loose musical collective that played frequently around the Courts . That September , he began ushering at Loew 's State Theater . Other jobs followed , including Precision Tool , Loew 's again , and MARL Metal Products . 
 During his junior year , Presley began to stand out more among his classmates , largely because of his appearance : he grew out his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and Vaseline . In his free time , he would head down to Beale Street , the heart of Memphis 's thriving blues scene , and gaze longingly at the wild , flashy clothes in the windows of Lansky Brothers . By his senior year , he was wearing them . Overcoming his reticence about performing outside the Lauderdale Courts , he competed in Humes 's Annual " Minstrel " show in April 1953 . Singing and playing guitar , he opened with " Till I Waltz Again with You " , a recent hit for Teresa Brewer . Presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation : " I wasn 't popular in school ... I failed music — only thing I ever failed . And then they entered me in this talent show ... when I came onstage I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth , ' cause nobody knew I even sang . It was amazing how popular I became after that . " 
 Presley , who never received formal music training or learned to read music , studied and played by ear . He also frequented record stores with jukeboxes and listening booths . He knew all of Hank Snow 's songs , and he loved records by other country singers such as Roy Acuff , Ernest Tubb , Ted <unk> , Jimmie Rodgers , Jimmie Davis , and Bob Wills . The Southern gospel singer Jake Hess , one of his favorite performers , was a significant influence on his ballad @-@ singing style . He was a regular audience member at the monthly All @-@ Night <unk> downtown , where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the influence of African @-@ American spiritual music . He adored the music of black gospel singer Sister Rosetta Tharpe . Like some of his peers , he may have attended blues venues — of necessity , in the segregated South , on only the nights designated for exclusively white audiences . He certainly listened to the regional radio stations , such as <unk> @-@ AM , that played " race records " : spirituals , blues , and the modern , backbeat @-@ heavy sound of rhythm and blues . Many of his future recordings were inspired by local African @-@ American musicians such as Arthur Crudup and Rufus Thomas . B.B. King recalled that he had known Presley before he was popular , when they both used to frequent Beale Street . By the time he graduated from high school in June 1953 , Presley had already singled out music as his future . 
 = = = 1953 – 55 : First recordings = = = 
 = = = = Sam Phillips and Sun Records = = = = 
 In August 1953 , Presley walked into the offices of Sun Records . He aimed to pay for a few minutes of studio time to record a two @-@ sided acetate disc : " My Happiness " and " That 's When Your Heartaches Begin " . He would later claim that he intended the record as a gift for his mother , or that he was merely interested in what he " sounded like " , although there was a much cheaper , amateur record @-@ making service at a nearby general store . Biographer Peter Guralnick argues that he chose Sun in the hope of being discovered . Asked by receptionist Marion Keisker what kind of singer he was , Presley responded , " I sing all kinds . " When she pressed him on who he sounded like , he repeatedly answered , " I don 't sound like nobody . " After he recorded , Sun boss Sam Phillips asked Keisker to note down the young man 's name , which she did along with her own commentary : " Good ballad singer . Hold . " 
 In January 1954 , Presley cut a second acetate at Sun Records — " I 'll Never Stand In Your Way " and " It Wouldn 't Be the Same Without You " — but again nothing came of it . Not long after , he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet , the <unk> . He explained to his father , " They told me I couldn 't sing . " <unk> Jim Hamill later claimed that he was turned down because he did not demonstrate an ear for harmony at the time . In April , Presley began working for the Crown Electric company as a truck driver . His friend Ronnie Smith , after playing a few local gigs with him , suggested he contact Eddie Bond , leader of Smith 's professional band , which had an opening for a vocalist . Bond rejected him after a tryout , advising Presley to stick to truck driving " because you 're never going to make it as a singer " . 
 Phillips , meanwhile , was always on the lookout for someone who could bring to a broader audience the sound of the black musicians on whom Sun focused . As Keisker reported , " Over and over I remember Sam saying , ' If I could find a white man who had the Negro sound and the Negro feel , I could make a billion dollars . ' " In June , he acquired a demo recording of a ballad , " Without You " , that he thought might suit the teenage singer . Presley came by the studio , but was unable to do it justice . Despite this , Phillips asked Presley to sing as many numbers as he knew . He was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians , guitarist Winfield " Scotty " Moore and upright bass player Bill Black , to work something up with Presley for a recording session . 
 The session , held the evening of July 5 , 1954 , proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night . As they were about to give up and go home , Presley took his guitar and launched into a 1946 blues number , Arthur Crudup 's " That 's All Right " . Moore recalled , " All of a sudden , Elvis just started singing this song , jumping around and acting the fool , and then Bill picked up his bass , and he started acting the fool , too , and I started playing with them . Sam , I think , had the door to the control booth open ... he stuck his head out and said , ' What are you doing ? ' And we said , ' We don 't know . ' ' Well , back up , ' he said , ' try to find a place to start , and do it again . ' " Phillips quickly began taping ; this was the sound he had been looking for . Three days later , popular Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips played " That 's All Right " on his Red , Hot , and Blue show . Listeners began phoning in , eager to find out who the singer was . The interest was such that Phillips played the record repeatedly during the last two hours of his show . Interviewing Presley on @-@ air , Phillips asked him what high school he attended in order to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed he was black . During the next few days , the trio recorded a bluegrass number , Bill Monroe 's " Blue Moon of Kentucky " , again in a distinctive style and employing a jury @-@ rigged echo effect that Sam Phillips dubbed " <unk> " . A single was pressed with " That 's All Right " on the A side and " Blue Moon of Kentucky " on the reverse . 
 = = = = Early live performances and signing with RCA = = = = 
 The trio played publicly for the first time on July 17 at the Bon Air club — Presley still sporting his child @-@ size guitar . At the end of the month , they appeared at the Overton Park Shell , with Slim Whitman headlining . A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at playing before a large crowd led Presley to shake his legs as he performed : his wide @-@ cut pants emphasized his movements , causing young women in the audience to start screaming . Moore recalled , " During the instrumental parts , he would back off from the mike and be playing and shaking , and the crowd would just go wild " . Black , a natural showman , <unk> and rode his bass , hitting double licks that Presley would later remember as " really a wild sound , like a jungle drum or something " . Soon after , Moore and Black quit their old band to play with Presley regularly , and DJ and promoter Bob Neal became the trio 's manager . From August through October , they played frequently at the Eagle 's Nest club and returned to Sun Studio for more recording sessions , and Presley quickly grew more confident on stage . According to Moore , " His movement was a natural thing , but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction . He 'd do something one time and then he would expand on it real quick . " Presley made what would be his only appearance on Nashville 's Grand Ole Opry on October 2 ; after a polite audience response , Opry manager Jim Denny told Phillips that his singer was " not bad " but did not suit the program . Two weeks later , Presley was booked on Louisiana Hayride , the Opry 's chief , and more adventurous , rival . The Shreveport @-@ based show was broadcast to 198 radio stations in 28 states . Presley had another attack of nerves during the first set , which drew a muted reaction . A more composed and energetic second set inspired an enthusiastic response . House drummer D. J. Fontana brought a new element , complementing Presley 's movements with accented beats that he had mastered playing in strip clubs . Soon after the show , the Hayride engaged Presley for a year 's worth of Saturday @-@ night appearances . Trading in his old guitar for $ 8 ( and seeing it promptly dispatched to the garbage ) , he purchased a Martin instrument for $ 175 , and his trio began playing in new locales including Houston , Texas , and Texarkana , Arkansas . 
 By early 1955 , Presley 's regular Hayride appearances , constant touring , and well @-@ received record releases had made him a regional star , from Tennessee to West Texas . In January , Neal signed a formal management contract with Presley and brought the singer to the attention of Colonel Tom Parker , whom he considered the best promoter in the music business . Having successfully managed top country star Eddy Arnold , Parker was now working with the new number @-@ one country singer , Hank Snow . Parker booked Presley on Snow 's February tour . When the tour reached Odessa , Texas , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old Roy Orbison saw Presley for the first time : " His energy was incredible , his instinct was just amazing . ... I just didn 't know what to make of it . There was just no reference point in the culture to compare it . " Presley made his television debut on March 3 on the KSLA @-@ TV broadcast of Louisiana Hayride . Soon after , he failed an audition for Arthur Godfrey 's Talent Scouts on the CBS television network . By August , Sun had released ten sides credited to " Elvis Presley , Scotty and Bill " ; on the latest recordings , the trio were joined by a drummer . Some of the songs , like " That 's All Right " , were in what one Memphis journalist described as the " R & B idiom of negro field jazz " ; others , like " Blue Moon of Kentucky " , were " more in the country field " , " but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both " . This blend of styles made it difficult for Presley 's music to find radio airplay . According to Neal , many country @-@ music disc jockeys would not play it because he sounded too much like a black artist and none of the rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues stations would touch him because " he sounded too much like a hillbilly . " The blend came to be known as rockabilly . At the time , Presley was variously billed as " The King of Western Bop " , " The Hillbilly Cat " , and " The Memphis Flash " . 
 Presley renewed Neal 's management contract in August 1955 , simultaneously appointing Parker as his special adviser . The group maintained an extensive touring schedule throughout the second half of the year . Neal recalled , " It was almost frightening , the reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys . So many of them , through some sort of jealousy , would practically hate him . There were occasions in some towns in Texas when we 'd have to be sure to have a police guard because somebody 'd always try to take a crack at him . They 'd get a gang and try to waylay him or something . " The trio became a quartet when Hayride drummer Fontana joined as a full member . In mid @-@ October , they played a few shows in support of Bill Haley , whose " Rock Around the Clock " had been a number @-@ one hit the previous year . Haley observed that Presley had a natural feel for rhythm , and advised him to sing fewer ballads . 
 At the Country Disc Jockey Convention in early November , Presley was voted the year 's most promising male artist . Several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him . After three major labels made offers of up to $ 25 @,@ 000 , Parker and Phillips struck a deal with RCA Victor on November 21 to acquire Presley 's Sun contract for an unprecedented $ 40 @,@ 000 . Presley , at 20 , was still a minor , so his father signed the contract . Parker arranged with the owners of Hill and Range Publishing , Jean and Julian Aberbach , to create two entities , Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music , to handle all the new material recorded by Presley . Songwriters were obliged to forgo one third of their customary royalties in exchange for having him perform their compositions . By December , RCA had begun to heavily promote its new singer , and before month 's end had reissued many of his Sun recordings . 
 = = = 1956 – 58 : Commercial breakout and controversy = = = 
 = = = = First national TV appearances and debut album = = = = 
 On January 10 , 1956 , Presley made his first recordings for RCA in Nashville . Extending the singer 's by now customary backup of Moore , Black , and Fontana , RCA enlisted pianist Floyd Cramer , guitarist Chet Atkins , and three background singers , including first tenor Gordon Stoker of the popular Jordanaires quartet , to fill out the sound . The session produced the moody , unusual " Heartbreak Hotel " , released as a single on January 27 . Parker finally brought Presley to national television , booking him on CBS 's Stage Show for six appearances over two months . The program , produced in New York , was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey . After his first appearance , on January 28 , introduced by disc jockey Bill Randle , Presley stayed in town to record at RCA 's New York studio . The sessions yielded eight songs , including a cover of Carl Perkins ' rockabilly anthem " Blue Suede Shoes " . In February , Presley 's " I Forgot to Remember to Forget " , a Sun recording initially released the previous August , reached the top of the Billboard country chart . Neal 's contract was terminated and , on March 2 , Parker became Presley 's manager . 
 RCA Victor released Presley 's eponymous debut album on March 23 . Joined by five previously unreleased Sun recordings , its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety . There were two country songs and a bouncy pop tune . The others would centrally define the evolving sound of rock and roll : " Blue Suede Shoes " — " an improvement over Perkins ' in almost every way " , according to critic Robert Hilburn — and three R & B numbers that had been part of Presley 's stage repertoire for some time , covers of Little Richard , Ray Charles , and The Drifters . As described by Hilburn , these " were the most revealing of all . Unlike many white artists ... who watered down the gritty edges of the original R & B versions of songs in the ' 50s , Presley reshaped them . He not only injected the tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar , not piano , the lead instrument in all three cases . " It became the first rock @-@ and @-@ roll album to top the Billboard chart , a position it held for 10 weeks . While Presley was not an innovative guitarist like Moore or contemporary African American rockers Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry , cultural historian Gilbert B. Rodman argues that the album 's cover image , " of Elvis having the time of his life on stage with a guitar in his hands played a crucial role in positioning the guitar ... as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this new music . " 
 = = = = Milton Berle Show and " Hound Dog " = = = = 
 Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC 's Milton Berle Show on April 3 . His performance , on the deck of the USS Hancock in San Diego , prompted cheers and screams from an audience of sailors and their dates . A few days later , a flight taking Presley and his band to Nashville for a recording session left all three badly shaken when an engine died and the plane almost went down over Arkansas . Twelve weeks after its original release , " Heartbreak Hotel " became Presley 's first number @-@ one pop hit . In late April , Presley began a two @-@ week residency at the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip . The shows were poorly received by the conservative , middle @-@ aged hotel guests — " like a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party , " wrote a critic for Newsweek . Amid his Vegas tenure , Presley , who had serious acting ambitions , signed a seven @-@ year contract with Paramount Pictures . He began a tour of the Midwest in mid @-@ May , taking in 15 cities in as many days . He had attended several shows by Freddie Bell and the <unk> in Vegas and was struck by their cover of " Hound Dog " , a hit in 1953 for blues singer Big Mama Thornton by songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller . It became the new closing number of his act . After a show in La Crosse , Wisconsin , an urgent message on the letterhead of the local Catholic diocese 's newspaper was sent to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover . It warned that " Presley is a definite danger to the security of the United States . ... [ His ] actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth . ... After the show , more than 1 @,@ 000 teenagers tried to gang into Presley 's room at the auditorium . ... Indications of the harm Presley did just in La Crosse were the two high school girls ... whose abdomen and thigh had Presley 's autograph . " 
 The second Milton Berle Show appearance came on June 5 at NBC 's Hollywood studio , amid another hectic tour . Berle persuaded the singer to leave his guitar backstage , advising , " Let ' em see you , son . " During the performance , Presley abruptly halted an uptempo rendition of " Hound Dog " with a wave of his arm and launched into a slow , grinding version accentuated with energetic , exaggerated body movements . Presley 's gyrations created a storm of controversy . Newspaper critics were outraged : Jack Gould of The New York Times wrote , " Mr. Presley has no discernible singing ability . ... His phrasing , if it can be called that , consists of the stereotyped variations that go with a beginner 's aria in a bathtub . ... His one specialty is an accented movement of the body ... primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway . " Ben Gross of the New York Daily News opined that popular music " has reached its lowest depths in the ' grunt and groin ' antics of one Elvis Presley . ... Elvis , who rotates his pelvis ... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar , tinged with the kind of <unk> that should be confined to dives and bordellos " . Ed Sullivan , whose own variety show was the nation 's most popular , declared him " unfit for family viewing " . To Presley 's displeasure , he soon found himself being referred to as " Elvis the <unk> " , which he called " one of the most childish expressions I ever heard , comin ' from an adult . " 
 = = = = Steve Allen Show and first Sullivan appearance = = = = 
 The Berle shows drew such high ratings that Presley was booked for a July 1 appearance on NBC 's Steve Allen Show in New York . Allen , no fan of rock and roll , introduced a " new Elvis " in a white bow tie and black tails . Presley sang " Hound Dog " for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top hat and bow tie . As described by television historian Jake Austen , " Allen thought Presley was talentless and absurd ... [ he ] set things up so that Presley would show his contrition " . Allen , for his part , later wrote that he found Presley 's " strange , gangly , country @-@ boy charisma , his hard @-@ to @-@ define cuteness , and his charming eccentricity intriguing " and simply worked the singer into the customary " comedy fabric " of his program . Just before the final rehearsal for the show , Presley told a reporter , " I 'm holding down on this show . I don 't want to do anything to make people dislike me . I think TV is important so I 'm going to go along , but I won 't be able to give the kind of show I do in a personal appearance . " Presley would refer back to the Allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career . Later that night , he appeared on Hy Gardner Calling , a popular local TV show . Pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism to which he was being subjected , Presley responded , " No , I haven 't , I don 't feel like I 'm doing anything wrong . ... I don 't see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when it 's only music . ... I mean , how would rock ' n ' roll music make anyone rebel against their parents ? " 
 The next day , Presley recorded " Hound Dog " , along with " Any Way You Want Me " and " Don 't Be Cruel " . The Jordanaires sang harmony , as they had on The Steve Allen Show ; they would work with Presley through the 1960s . A few days later , the singer made an outdoor concert appearance in Memphis at which he announced , " You know , those people in New York are not gonna change me none . I 'm gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight . " In August , a judge in Jacksonville , Florida , ordered Presley to tame his act . Throughout the following performance , he largely kept still , except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order . The single pairing " Don 't Be Cruel " with " Hound Dog " ruled the top of the charts for 11 weeks — a mark that would not be surpassed for 36 years . Recording sessions for Presley 's second album took place in Hollywood during the first week of September . Leiber and Stoller , the writers of " Hound Dog , " contributed " Love Me . " 
 Allen 's show with Presley had , for the first time , beaten CBS 's Ed Sullivan Show in the ratings . Sullivan , despite his June pronouncement , booked the singer for three appearances for an unprecedented $ 50 @,@ 000 . The first , on September 9 , 1956 , was seen by approximately 60 million viewers — a record 82 @.@ 6 percent of the television audience . Actor Charles Laughton hosted the show , filling in while Sullivan recuperated from a car accident . Presley appeared in two segments that night from CBS Television City in Los Angeles . According to Elvis legend , Presley was shot from only the waist up . Watching clips of the Allen and Berle shows with his producer , Sullivan had opined that Presley " got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pants – so when he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock . ... I think it 's a Coke bottle . ... We just can 't have this on a Sunday night . This is a family show ! " Sullivan publicly told TV Guide , " As for his gyrations , the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots . " In fact , Presley was shown head @-@ to @-@ toe in the first and second shows . Though the camerawork was relatively discreet during his debut , with leg @-@ concealing closeups when he danced , the studio audience reacted in customary style : screaming . Presley 's performance of his forthcoming single , the ballad " Love Me Tender " , prompted a record @-@ shattering million advance orders . More than any other single event , it was this first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show that made Presley a national celebrity of barely <unk> proportions . 
 Accompanying Presley 's rise to fame , a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire and came to symbolize . <unk> the " biggest pop craze since Glenn Miller and Frank Sinatra ... Presley brought rock 'n'roll into the mainstream of popular culture " , writes historian Marty <unk> . " As Presley set the artistic pace , other artists followed . ... Presley , more than anyone else , gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generation — the first in America ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture . " 
 = = = = Crazed crowds and film debut = = = = 
 The audience response at Presley 's live shows became increasingly fevered . Moore recalled , " He 'd start out , ' You ain 't nothin ' but a Hound Dog , ' and they 'd just go to pieces . They 'd always react the same way . There 'd be a riot every time . " At the two concerts he performed in September at the Mississippi @-@ Alabama Fair and Dairy Show , 50 National Guardsmen were added to the police security to prevent crowd trouble . Elvis , Presley 's second album , was released in October and quickly rose to number one . The album includes " Old Shep " , which he sung at the talent show in 1945 , and which now marked the first time he played piano on an RCA session . According to Guralnick , one can hear " in the halting chords and the somewhat stumbling rhythm both the unmistakable emotion and the equally unmistakable valuing of emotion over technique . " Assessing the musical and cultural impact of Presley 's recordings from " That 's All Right " through Elvis , rock critic Dave Marsh wrote that " these records , more than any others , contain the seeds of what rock & roll was , has been and most likely what it may <unk> become . " 
 Presley returned to the Sullivan show at its main studio in New York , hosted this time by its namesake , on October 28 . After the performance , crowds in Nashville and St. Louis burned him in effigy . His first motion picture , Love Me Tender , was released on November 21 . Though he was not top billed , the film 's original title — The Reno Brothers — was changed to capitalize on his latest number one record : " Love Me Tender " had hit the top of the charts earlier that month . To further take advantage of Presley 's popularity , four musical numbers were added to what was originally a straight acting role . The film was panned by the critics but did very well at the box office . 
 On December 4 , Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis were recording and jammed with them . Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any Presley material , he made sure the session was captured on tape . The results became legendary as the " Million Dollar Quartet " recordings — Johnny Cash was long thought to have played as well , but he was present only briefly at Phillips ' instigation for a photo opportunity . The year ended with a front @-@ page story in The Wall Street Journal reporting that Presley merchandise had brought in $ 22 million on top of his record sales , and Billboard 's declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records were first charted . In his first full year at RCA , one of the music industry 's largest companies , Presley had accounted for over 50 percent of the label 's singles sales . 
 = = = = Leiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice = = = = 
 Presley made his third and final Ed Sullivan Show appearance on January 6 , 1957 — on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist . Some commentators have claimed that Parker orchestrated an appearance of censorship to generate publicity . In any event , as critic Greil Marcus describes , Presley " did not tie himself down . Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows , he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha , if not a harem girl . From the make @-@ up over his eyes , the hair falling in his face , the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth , he was playing Rudolph Valentino in The Sheik , with all stops out . " To close , displaying his range and defying Sullivan 's wishes , Presley sang a gentle black spiritual , " Peace in the Valley " . At the end of the show , Sullivan declared Presley " a real decent , fine boy " . Two days later , the Memphis draft board announced that Presley would be classified 1 @-@ A and would probably be drafted sometime that year . 
 Each of the three Presley singles released in the first half of 1957 went to number one : " Too Much " , " All Shook Up " , and " ( Let Me Be Your ) Teddy Bear " . Already an international star , he was attracting fans even where his music was not officially released . Under the headline " Presley Records a Craze in Soviet " , The New York Times reported that pressings of his music on discarded X @-@ ray plates were commanding high prices in Leningrad . Between film shoots and recording sessions , the singer also found time to purchase an 18 @-@ room mansion eight miles ( 13 km ) south of downtown Memphis for himself and his parents : Graceland . When he reported to the film studio for his second film , the Technicolor Loving You , released in July , " The makeup man said that with his eyes he should photograph well with black hair , so they dyed it . " Loving You , the accompanying soundtrack , was Presley 's third straight number one album . The title track was written by Leiber and Stoller , who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for Jailhouse Rock , Presley 's next film . The songwriting team effectively produced the Jailhouse sessions and developed a close working relationship with Presley , who came to regard them as his " good @-@ luck charm " . 
 Leiber remembered initially finding Presley " not quite authentic — after all , he was a white singer , and my standards were black . " According to Stoller , the duo was " surprised at the kind of knowledge that he had about black music . We figured that he had these remarkable pipes and all that , but we didn 't realize that he knew so much about the blues . We were quite surprised to find out that he knew as much about it as we did . He certainly knew a lot more than we did about country music and gospel music . " Leiber remembered the recording process with Presley , " He was fast . Any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes . " As Stoller recalled , Presley " was ' protected ' " by his manager and entourage . " He was removed . … They kept him separate . " 
 Presley undertook three brief tours during the year , continuing to generate a crazed audience response . A Detroit newspaper suggested that " the trouble with going to see Elvis Presley is that you 're liable to get killed . " Villanova students pelted him with eggs in Philadelphia , and in Vancouver , the crowd rioted after the end of the show , destroying the stage . Frank Sinatra , who had famously inspired the swooning of teenaged girls in the 1940s , condemned the new musical phenomenon . In a magazine article , he decried rock and roll as " brutal , ugly , degenerate , vicious . ... It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people . It smells phoney and false . It is sung , played and written , for the most part , by cretinous goons . ... This rancid @-@ smelling aphrodisiac I deplore . " Asked for a response , Presley said , " I admire the man . He has a right to say what he wants to say . He is a great success and a fine actor , but I think he shouldn 't have said it . ... This is a trend , just the same as he faced when he started years ago . " 
 Leiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of Elvis ' Christmas Album . Toward the end of the session , they wrote a song on the spot at Presley 's request : " Santa Claus Is Back In Town " , an innuendo @-@ laden blues . The holiday release stretched Presley 's string of number one albums to four and would eventually become the best selling Christmas album of all time . After the session , Moore and Black — drawing only modest weekly salaries , sharing in none of Presley 's massive financial success — resigned . Though they were brought back on a per diem basis a few weeks later , it was clear that they had not been part of Presley 's inner circle for some time . On December 20 , Presley received his draft notice . He was granted a deferment to finish the forthcoming King Creole , in which $ 350 @,@ 000 had already been invested by Paramount and producer Hal Wallis . A couple of weeks into the new year , " Don 't " , another Leiber and Stoller tune , became Presley 's tenth number one seller . It had been only 21 months since " Heartbreak Hotel " had brought him to the top for the first time . Recording sessions for the King Creole soundtrack were held in Hollywood mid @-@ January . Leiber and Stoller provided three songs and were again on hand , but it would be the last time they worked closely with Presley . A studio session on February 1 marked another ending : it was the final occasion on which Black was to perform with Presley . He died in 1965 . 
 = = = 1958 – 60 : Military service and mother 's death = = = 
 On March 24 , Presley was inducted into the U.S. Army as a private at Fort Chaffee , near Fort Smith , Arkansas . His arrival was a major media event . Hundreds of people descended on Presley as he stepped from the bus ; photographers then accompanied him into the fort . Presley announced that he was looking forward to his military stint , saying he did not want to be treated any differently from anyone else : " The Army can do anything it wants with me . " 
 Soon after Presley commenced basic training at Fort Hood , Texas , he received a visit from Eddie Fadal , a businessman he had met on tour . According to Fadal , Presley had become convinced his career was finished — " He firmly believed that . " But then , during a two @-@ week leave in early June , Presley recorded five songs in Nashville . In early August , his mother was diagnosed with hepatitis and her condition rapidly worsened . Presley , granted emergency leave to visit her , arrived in Memphis on August 12 . Two days later , she died of heart failure , aged 46 . Presley was devastated ; their relationship had remained extremely close — even into his adulthood , they would use baby talk with each other and Presley would address her with pet names . 
 After training , Presley joined the 3rd Armored Division in Friedberg , Germany , on October 1 . Introduced to amphetamines by a sergeant while on maneuvers , he became " practically evangelical about their benefits " — not only for energy , but for " strength " and weight loss , as well — and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging . The Army also introduced Presley to karate , which he studied seriously , later including it in his live performances . Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley 's wish to be seen as an able , ordinary soldier , despite his fame , and to his generosity . He donated his Army pay to charity , purchased TV sets for the base , and bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit . 
 While in Friedberg , Presley met 14 @-@ year @-@ old Priscilla Beaulieu . They would eventually marry after a seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year courtship . In her autobiography , Priscilla says that despite his worries that it would ruin his career , Parker convinced Presley that to gain popular respect , he should serve his country as a regular soldier rather than in Special Services , where he would have been able to give some musical performances and remain in touch with the public . Media reports echoed Presley 's concerns about his career , but RCA producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared for his two @-@ year hiatus . Armed with a substantial amount of unreleased material , they kept up a regular stream of successful releases . Between his induction and discharge , Presley had ten top 40 hits , including " Wear My Ring Around Your Neck " , the best @-@ selling " Hard Headed Woman " , and " One Night " in 1958 , and " ( Now and Then There 's ) A Fool Such as I " and the number one " A Big Hunk o ' Love " in 1959 . RCA also generated four albums compiling old material during this period , most successfully Elvis ' Golden Records ( 1958 ) , which hit number three on the LP chart . 
 = = = 1960 – 67 : Focus on films = = = 
 = = = = Elvis Is Back = = = = 
 Presley returned to the United States on March 2 , 1960 , and was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant on March 5 . The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was mobbed all the way , and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans . On the night of March 20 , he entered RCA 's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single , " Stuck on You " , which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number one hit . Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his best @-@ selling singles , the ballads " It 's Now or Never " and " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " , along with the rest of Elvis Is Back ! The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues " menace , driven by Presley 's own super @-@ miked acoustic guitar , brilliant playing by Scotty Moore , and demonic sax work from Boots Randolph . Elvis 's singing wasn 't sexy , it was pornographic . " As a whole , the record " conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things " , in the words of music historian John Robertson : " a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold ; a tempestuous , dangerous lover ; a gutbucket blues singer ; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer ; [ a ] raucous rocker " . 
 Presley returned to television on May 12 as a guest on The Frank Sinatra Timex Special — ironic for both stars , given Sinatra 's not @-@ so @-@ distant excoriation of rock and roll . Also known as Welcome Home Elvis , the show had been taped in late March , the only time all year Presley performed in front of an audience . Parker secured an unheard @-@ of $ 125 @,@ 000 fee for eight minutes of singing . The broadcast drew an enormous viewership . 
 G.I. Blues , the soundtrack to Presley 's first film since his return , was a number one album in October . His first LP of sacred material , His Hand in Mine , followed two months later . It reached number 13 on the U.S. pop chart and number 3 in the UK , remarkable figures for a gospel album . In February 1961 , Presley performed two shows for a benefit event in Memphis , on behalf of 24 local charities . During a luncheon preceding the event , RCA presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records . A 12 @-@ hour Nashville session in mid @-@ March yielded nearly all of Presley 's next studio album , Something for Everybody . As described by John Robertson , it exemplifies the Nashville sound , the restrained , cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the 1960s . <unk> much of what was to come from Presley himself over the next half @-@ decade , the album is largely " a pleasant , unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been Elvis 's birthright . " It would be his sixth number one LP . Another benefit concert , raising money for a Pearl Harbor memorial , was staged on March 25 , in Hawaii . It was to be Presley 's last public performance for seven years . 
 = = = = Lost in Hollywood = = = = 
 Parker had by now pushed Presley into a heavy film making schedule , focused on formulaic , modestly budgeted musical comedies . Presley at first insisted on pursuing more serious roles , but when two films in a more dramatic vein — Flaming Star ( 1960 ) and Wild in the Country ( 1961 ) — were less commercially successful , he reverted to the formula . Among the 27 films he made during the 1960s , there were few further exceptions . His films were almost universally panned ; critic Andrew Caine dismissed them as a " pantheon of bad taste " . Nonetheless , they were virtually all profitable . Hal Wallis , who produced nine of them , declared , " A Presley picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood . " 
 Of Presley 's films in the 1960s , 15 were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another 5 by soundtrack EPs . The films ' rapid production and release schedules — he frequently starred in three a year — affected his music . According to Jerry Leiber , the soundtrack formula was already evident before Presley left for the Army : " three ballads , one medium @-@ tempo [ number ] , one up @-@ tempo , and one break blues boogie " . As the decade wore on , the quality of the soundtrack songs grew " progressively worse " . Julie Parrish , who appeared in Paradise , Hawaiian Style ( 1966 ) , says that he hated many of the songs chosen for his films . The Jordanaires ' Gordon Stoker describes how Presley would retreat from the studio microphone : " The material was so bad that he felt like he couldn 't sing it . " Most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc <unk> and Mort Shuman . But by and large , according to biographer Jerry Hopkins , the numbers seemed to be " written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll . " Regardless of the songs ' quality , it has been argued that Presley generally sang them well , with commitment . Critic Dave Marsh heard the opposite : " Presley isn 't trying , probably the wisest course in the face of material like ' No Room to Rumba in a Sports Car ' and ' Rock @-@ a @-@ Hula Baby . ' " 
 In the first half of the decade , three of Presley 's soundtrack albums hit number one on the pop charts , and a few of his most popular songs came from his films , such as " Can 't Help Falling in Love " ( 1961 ) and " Return to Sender " ( 1962 ) . ( " Viva Las Vegas " , the title track to the 1964 film , was a minor hit as a B @-@ side , and became truly popular only later . ) But , as with artistic merit , the commercial returns steadily diminished . During a five @-@ year span — 1964 through 1968 — Presley had only one top @-@ ten hit : " Crying in the Chapel " ( 1965 ) , a gospel number recorded back in 1960 . As for non @-@ film albums , between the June 1962 release of Pot Luck and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback , only one LP of new material by Presley was issued : the gospel album How Great Thou Art ( 1967 ) . It won him his first Grammy Award , for Best Sacred Performance . As Marsh described , Presley was " arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time [ and ] really the last rock & roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality as his secular songs . " 
 Shortly before Christmas 1966 , more than seven years since they first met , Presley proposed to Priscilla Beaulieu . They were married on May 1 , 1967 , in a brief ceremony in their suite at the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas . The flow of formulaic films and assembly @-@ line soundtracks rolled on . It was not until October 1967 , when the Clambake soundtrack LP registered record low sales for a new Presley album , that RCA executives recognized a problem . " By then , of course , the damage had been done " , as historians Connie Kirchberg and Marc Hendrickx put it . " Elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a has @-@ been to all but his most loyal fans . " 
 = = = 1968 – 73 : Comeback = = = 
 = = = = Elvis : the ' 68 Comeback Special = = = = 
 Presley 's only child , Lisa Marie , was born on February 1 , 1968 , during a period when he had grown deeply unhappy with his career . Of the eight Presley singles released between January 1967 and May 1968 , only two charted in the top 40 , and none higher than number 28 . His forthcoming soundtrack album , Speedway , would die at number 82 on the Billboard chart . Parker had already shifted his plans to television , where Presley had not appeared since the Sinatra Timex show in 1960 . He maneuvered a deal with NBC that committed the network to both finance a theatrical feature and broadcast a Christmas special . 
 Recorded in late June in Burbank , California , the special , called simply Elvis , aired on December 3 , 1968 . Later known as the ' 68 Comeback Special , the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs performed with a band in front of a small audience — Presley 's first live performances since 1961 . The live segments saw Presley clad in tight black leather , singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock @-@ and @-@ roll days . Bill Belew , who designed this outfit , gave it a Napoleonic standing collar ( Presley customarily wore high collars because he believed his neck looked too long ) , a design feature that he would later make a major trademark of the outfits Presley wore on stage in his later years . Director and coproducer Steve Binder had worked hard to reassure the nervous singer and to produce a show that was far from the hour of Christmas songs Parker had originally planned . The show , NBC 's highest rated that season , captured 42 percent of the total viewing audience . Jon Landau of Eye magazine remarked , " There is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home . He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock ' n ' roll singers . He moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy . " Dave Marsh calls the performance one of " emotional grandeur and historical resonance . " 
 By January 1969 , the single " If I Can Dream " , written for the special , reached number 12 . The soundtrack album broke into the top ten . According to friend Jerry Schilling , the special reminded Presley of what " he had not been able to do for years , being able to choose the people ; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack . ... He was out of prison , man . " Binder said of Presley 's reaction , " I played Elvis the 60 @-@ minute show , and he told me in the screening room , ' Steve , it 's the greatest thing I 've ever done in my life . I give you my word I will never sing a song I don 't believe in . ' " 
 = = = = From Elvis In Memphis and the International = = = = 
 Buoyed by the experience of the Comeback Special , Presley engaged in a prolific series of recording sessions at American Sound Studio , which led to the acclaimed From Elvis in Memphis . Released in June 1969 , it was his first secular , non @-@ soundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in eight years . As described by Dave Marsh , it is " a masterpiece in which Presley immediately catches up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years . He sings country songs , soul songs and rockers with real conviction , a stunning achievement . " 
 Presley was keen to resume regular live performing . Following the success of the Comeback Special , offers came in from around the world . The London Palladium offered Parker $ 28 @,@ 000 for a one @-@ week engagement . He responded , " That 's fine for me , now how much can you get for Elvis ? " In May , the brand new International Hotel in Las Vegas , boasting the largest showroom in the city , announced that it had booked Presley , scheduling him to perform 57 shows over four weeks beginning July 31 . Moore , Fontana , and the Jordanaires declined to participate , afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville . Presley assembled new , top @-@ notch accompaniment , led by guitarist James Burton and including two gospel groups , The Imperials and The Sweet Inspirations . Nonetheless , he was nervous : his only previous Las Vegas engagement , in 1956 , had been dismal , and he had neither forgotten nor forgiven that failure . To revise his approach to performances , Presley visited Las Vegas hotel showrooms and lounges , at one of which , that of the Flamingo , he encountered Tom Jones , whose aggressive style was similar to his own 1950s approach ; the two became friends . Already studying karate at the time , Presley recruited Bill Belew to design variants of <unk> 's <unk> for him ; these , in jumpsuit form , would be his " stage uniforms " in his later years . Parker , who intended to make Presley 's return the show business event of the year , oversaw a major promotional push . For his part , hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian arranged to send his own plane to New York to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance . 
 Presley took to the stage without introduction . The audience of 2200 , including many celebrities , gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his performance . A third followed his encore , " Can 't Help Falling in Love " ( a song that would be his closing number for much of the 1970s ) . At a press conference after the show , when a journalist referred to him as " The King " , Presley gestured toward Fats Domino , who was taking in the scene . " No , " Presley said , " that 's the real king of rock and roll . " The next day , Parker 's negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five @-@ year contract for Presley to play each February and August , at an annual salary of $ 1 million . Newsweek commented , " There are several unbelievable things about Elvis , but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars . " Rolling Stone called Presley " supernatural , his own resurrection . " In November , Presley 's final non @-@ concert film , Change of Habit , opened . The double album From Memphis To Vegas / From Vegas To Memphis came out the same month ; the first LP consisted of live performances from the International , the second of more cuts from the American Sound sessions . " Suspicious Minds " reached the top of the charts — Presley 's first U.S. pop number one in over seven years , and his last . 
 Cassandra Peterson , later television 's Elvira , met Presley during this period in Las Vegas , where she was working as a showgirl . She recalls of their encounter , " He was so anti @-@ drug when I met him . I mentioned to him that I smoked marijuana , and he was just appalled . He said , ' Don 't ever do that again . ' " Presley was not only deeply opposed to recreational drugs , he also rarely drank . Several of his family members had been alcoholics , a fate he intended to avoid . 
 = = = = Back on tour and meeting Nixon = = = = 
 Presley returned to the International early in 1970 for the first of the year 's two month @-@ long engagements , performing two shows a night . Recordings from these shows were issued on the album On Stage . In late February , Presley performed six attendance @-@ record – breaking shows at the Houston Astrodome . In April , the single " The Wonder of You " was issued — a number one hit in the UK , it topped the U.S. adult contemporary chart , as well . MGM filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the International during August for the documentary Elvis : That 's the Way It Is . Presley was by now performing in a jumpsuit , which would become a trademark of his live act . During this engagement , he was threatened with murder unless $ 50 @,@ 000 was paid . Presley had been the target of many threats since the 1950s , often without his knowledge . The FBI took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next two shows . Presley went onstage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 pistol in his waistband , but the concerts went off without incident . 
 The album That 's the Way It Is , produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both studio and live recordings , marked a stylistic shift . As music historian John Robertson notes , " The authority of Presley 's singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively away from the American @-@ roots inspiration of the Memphis sessions towards a more middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road sound . With country put on the back burner , and soul and R & B left in Memphis , what was left was very classy , very clean white pop — perfect for the Las Vegas crowd , but a definite retrograde step for Elvis . " After the end of his International engagement on September 7 , Presley embarked on a week @-@ long concert tour , largely of the South , his first since 1958 . Another week @-@ long tour , of the West Coast , followed in November . 
 On December 21 , 1970 , Presley engineered a meeting with President Richard Nixon at the White House , where he expressed his patriotism and his contempt for the hippies , the growing drug culture , and the counterculture in general . He asked Nixon for a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge , to add to similar items he had begun collecting and to signify official sanction of his patriotic efforts . Nixon , who apparently found the encounter awkward , expressed a belief that Presley could send a positive message to young people and that it was therefore important he " retain his credibility " . Presley told Nixon that the Beatles , whose songs he regularly performed in concert during the era , exemplified what he saw as a trend of anti @-@ Americanism and drug abuse in popular culture . ( Presley and his friends had had a four @-@ hour get @-@ together with the Beatles five years earlier . ) On hearing reports of the meeting , Paul McCartney later said he " felt a bit betrayed " and commented : " The great joke was that we were taking [ illegal ] drugs , and look what happened to him " , a reference to Presley 's death , hastened by prescription drug abuse . 
 The U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Presley one of its annual Ten Most Outstanding Young Men of the Nation on January 16 , 1971 . Not long after , the City of Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located " Elvis Presley Boulevard " . The same year , Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award ( then known as the Bing Crosby Award ) by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences , the Grammy Award organization . Three new , non @-@ film Presley studio albums were released in 1971 , as many as had come out over the previous eight years . Best received by critics was Elvis Country , a concept record that focused on genre standards . The biggest seller was Elvis Sings the Wonderful World of Christmas , " the truest statement of all " , according to Greil Marcus . " In the midst of ten painfully genteel Christmas songs , every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility , one could find Elvis tom @-@ <unk> his way through six blazing minutes of ' Merry Christmas Baby , ' a raunchy old Charles Brown blues . " According to Guralnick , " the one real highlight " of one of the 1971 sessions were the recording of " I Will Be True , " " It 's Still Here , " and " I 'll Take You Home Again , Kathleen , " a trio of songs that Presley recorded in a rare solo set , sitting at the piano after everyone else had gone home : " Yearning , wistfulness , loneliness , need — all were communicated with a naked lack of adornment that Elvis was seeming to find increasingly difficult to display in the formal process of recording . " 
 = = = = Marriage breakdown and Aloha from Hawaii = = = = 
 MGM again filmed Presley in April 1972 , this time for Elvis on Tour , which went on to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Documentary Film that year . His gospel album He Touched Me , released that month , would earn him his second Grammy Award , for Best Inspirational Performance . A 14 @-@ date tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive sold @-@ out shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden . The evening concert on July 10 was recorded and issued in LP form a week later . Elvis : As Recorded at Madison Square Garden became one of Presley 's biggest @-@ selling albums . After the tour , the single " Burning Love " was released — Presley 's last top ten hit on the U.S. pop chart . " The most exciting single Elvis has made since ' All Shook Up ' " , wrote rock critic Robert Christgau . " Who else could make ' It 's coming closer , the flames are now licking my body ' sound like an assignation with James Brown 's backup band ? " 
 Presley and his wife , meanwhile , had become increasingly distant , barely cohabiting . In 1971 , an affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted — unbeknownst to him — in her pregnancy and an abortion . He often raised the possibility of her moving into Graceland , saying that he was likely to leave Priscilla . The <unk> separated on February 23 , 1972 , after Priscilla disclosed her relationship with Mike Stone , a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her . Priscilla relates that when she told him , Presley " grabbed ... and forcefully made love to " her , declaring , " This is how a real man makes love to his woman . " Five months later , Presley 's new girlfriend , Linda Thompson , a songwriter and one @-@ time Memphis beauty queen , moved in with him . Presley and his wife filed for divorce on August 18 . According to Joe <unk> of the Imperials , the failure of Presley 's marriage " was a blow from which he never recovered . " 
 In January 1973 , Presley performed two benefit concerts for the Kui Lee Cancer Fund in connection with a groundbreaking TV special , Aloha from Hawaii . The first show served as a practice run and backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later . Aired as scheduled on January 14 , Aloha from Hawaii was the first global concert satellite broadcast , reaching millions of viewers live and on tape delay . Presley 's costume became the most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latter @-@ day persona became closely associated . As described by Bobbie Ann Mason , " At the end of the show , when he spreads out his American Eagle cape , with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back , he becomes a god figure . " The accompanying double album , released in February , went to number one and eventually sold over 5 million copies in the United States . It proved to be Presley 's last U.S. number one pop album during his lifetime . 
 At a midnight show the same month , four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack . Security men leapt to Presley 's defense , and the singer 's karate instinct took over as he ejected one invader from the stage himself . Following the show , he became obsessed with the idea that the men had been sent by Mike Stone to kill him . Though they were shown to have been only <unk> fans , he raged , " There 's too much pain in me ... Stone [ must ] die . " His outbursts continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him , despite administering large doses of medication . After another two full days of raging , Red West , his friend and bodyguard , felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided , " Aw hell , let 's just leave it for now . Maybe it 's a bit heavy . " 
 = = = 1973 – 77 : Health deterioration and death = = = 
 = = = = Medical crises and last studio sessions = = = = 
 Presley 's divorce took effect on October 9 , 1973 . He was now becoming increasingly unwell . Twice during the year he overdosed on barbiturates , spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first incident . Toward the end of 1973 , he was hospitalized , <unk> from the effects of Demerol addiction . According to his main physician , Dr. George C. <unk> , Presley " felt that by getting [ drugs ] from a doctor , he wasn 't the common everyday junkie getting something off the street . " Since his comeback , he had staged more live shows with each passing year , and 1973 saw 168 concerts , his busiest schedule ever . Despite his failing health , in 1974 he undertook another intensive touring schedule . 
 Presley 's condition declined precipitously in September . Keyboardist Tony Brown remembers the singer 's arrival at a University of Maryland concert : " He fell out of the limousine , to his knees . People jumped to help , and he pushed them away like , ' Don 't help me . ' He walked on stage and held onto the mike for the first thirty minutes like it was a post . Everybody 's looking at each other like , Is the tour gonna happen ? " Guitarist John Wilkinson recalled , " He was all gut . He was slurring . He was so fucked up . ... It was obvious he was drugged . It was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body . It was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible . ... I remember crying . He could barely get through the introductions " . Wilkinson recounted that a few nights later in Detroit , Michigan , " I watched him in his dressing room , just draped over a chair , unable to move . So often I thought , ' Boss , why don 't you just cancel this tour and take a year off ... ? ' I mentioned something once in a guarded moment . He patted me on the back and said , ' It 'll be all right . Don 't you worry about it . ' " Presley continued to play to sellout crowds . 
 On July 13 , 1976 , Vernon Presley — who had become deeply involved in his son 's financial affairs — fired " Memphis Mafia " bodyguards Red West ( Presley 's friend since the 1950s ) , Sonny West , and David <unk> , citing the need to " cut back on expenses " . Presley was in Palm Springs at the time , and some suggest the singer was too cowardly to face the three himself . Another associate of Presley 's , John O 'Grady , argued that the bodyguards were dropped because their rough treatment of fans had prompted too many lawsuits . However , Presley 's stepbrother David Stanley has claimed that the bodyguards were fired because they were becoming more outspoken about Presley 's drug dependency . 
 RCA , which had enjoyed a steady stream of product from Presley for over a decade , grew anxious as his interest in spending time in the studio waned . After a December 1973 session that produced 18 songs , enough for almost two albums , he did not enter the studio in 1974 . Parker sold RCA on another concert record , Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis . Recorded on March 20 , it included a version of " How Great Thou Art " that would win Presley his third and final competitive Grammy Award . ( All three of his competitive Grammy wins — out of 14 total nominations — were for gospel recordings . ) Presley returned to the studio in Hollywood in March 1975 , but Parker 's attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful . In 1976 , RCA sent a mobile studio to Graceland that made possible two full @-@ scale recording sessions at Presley 's home . Even in that comfortable context , the recording process was now a struggle for him . 
 For all the concerns of his label and manager , in studio sessions between July 1973 and October 1976 , Presley recorded virtually the entire contents of six albums . Though he was no longer a major presence on the pop charts , five of those albums entered the top five of the country chart , and three went to number one : Promised Land ( 1975 ) , From Elvis Presley Boulevard , Memphis , Tennessee ( 1976 ) , and Moody Blue ( 1977 ) . The story was similar with his singles — there were no major pop hits , but Presley was a significant force in not just the country market , but on adult contemporary radio as well . Eight studio singles from this period released during his lifetime were top ten hits on one or both charts , four in 1974 alone . " My Boy " was a number one adult contemporary hit in 1975 , and " Moody Blue " topped the country chart and reached the second spot on the adult contemporary chart in 1976 . Perhaps his most critically acclaimed recording of the era came that year , with what Greil Marcus described as his " apocalyptic attack " on the soul classic " Hurt " . " If he felt the way he sounded " , Dave Marsh wrote of Presley 's performance , " the wonder isn 't that he had only a year left to live but that he managed to survive that long . " 
 = = = = Final year and death = = = = 
 Presley and Linda Thompson split in November 1976 , and he took up with a new girlfriend , Ginger Alden . He proposed to Alden and gave her an engagement ring two months later , though several of his friends later claimed that he had no serious intention of marrying again . Journalist Tony Scherman writes that by early 1977 , " Presley had become a grotesque caricature of his sleek , energetic former self . Hugely overweight , his mind dulled by the pharmacopoeia he daily ingested , he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts . " In Alexandria , Louisiana , the singer was on stage for less than an hour and " was impossible to understand " . Presley failed to appear in Baton Rouge ; he was unable to get out of his hotel bed , and the rest of the tour was cancelled . Despite the accelerating deterioration of his health , he stuck to most touring commitments . In Rapid City , South Dakota , " he was so nervous on stage that he could hardly talk " , according to Presley historian Samuel Roy , and unable to " perform any significant movement . " Guralnick relates that fans " were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment , but it all seemed to go right past Elvis , whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books . " A cousin , Billy Smith , recalled how Presley would sit in his room and chat for hours , sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python sketches and his own past escapades , but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that reminded Smith of Howard Hughes . " Way Down " , Presley 's last single issued during his lifetime , came out on June 6 . On the next tour , CBS filmed two concerts for a TV Special , Elvis in Concert , to be aired in October . On the first of these , captured in Omaha on June 19 , Presley 's voice , Guralnick writes , " is almost unrecognizable , a small , childlike instrument in which he talks more than sings most of the songs , casts about uncertainly for the melody in others , and is virtually unable to articulate or project . " He did better on the second night , two days later in Rapid City , Iowa : " He looked healthier , seemed to have lost a little weight , and sounded better , too " , though his appearance was still a " face framed in a helmet of blue @-@ black hair from which sweat sheets down over pale , swollen cheeks . " His final concert was held in Indianapolis , Indiana at Market Square Arena , on June 26 . 
 The book Elvis : What Happened ? , cowritten by the three bodyguards fired the previous year , was published on August 1 . It was the first exposé to detail Presley 's years of drug misuse . He was devastated by the book and tried unsuccessfully to halt its release by offering money to the publishers . By this point , he suffered from multiple ailments : glaucoma , high blood pressure , liver damage , and an enlarged colon , each aggravated — and possibly caused — by drug abuse . Genetic analysis of a hair sample in 2014 found evidence of genetic variants that could have caused his glaucoma , migraines and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . 
 Presley was scheduled to fly out of Memphis on the evening of August 16 , 1977 , to begin another tour . That afternoon , Ginger Alden discovered him unresponsive on his bathroom floor . Attempts to revive him failed , and death was officially pronounced at 3 : 30 pm at Baptist Memorial Hospital . 
 President Jimmy Carter issued a statement that credited Presley with having " permanently changed the face of American popular culture " . Thousands of people gathered outside Graceland to view the open casket . One of Presley 's cousins , Billy Mann , accepted $ 18 @,@ 000 to secretly photograph the corpse ; the picture appeared on the cover of the National Enquirer 's biggest @-@ selling issue ever . Alden struck a $ 105 @,@ 000 deal with the Enquirer for her story , but settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement . Presley left her nothing in his will . 
 Presley 's funeral was held at Graceland , on Thursday , August 18 . Outside the gates , a car plowed into a group of fans , killing two women and critically injuring a third . Approximately 80 @,@ 000 people lined the processional route to Forest Hill Cemetery , where Presley was buried next to his mother . Within a few days , " Way Down " topped the country and UK pop charts . 
 Following an attempt to steal the singer 's body in late August , the remains of both Presley and his mother were reburied in Graceland 's Meditation Garden on October 2 . 
 Since his death , there have been numerous alleged sightings of Presley . A long @-@ standing theory among some fans is that he faked his death . Fans have noted alleged discrepancies in the death certificate , reports of a wax dummy in his original coffin and numerous accounts of Presley planning a diversion so he could retire in peace . 
 = = = Questions over cause of death = = = 
 " Drug use was heavily implicated " in Presley 's death , writes Guralnick . " No one ruled out the possibility of anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills ... to which he was known to have had a mild allergy . " A pair of lab reports filed two months later each strongly suggested that <unk> was the primary cause of death ; one reported " fourteen drugs in Elvis ' system , ten in significant quantity . " Forensic historian and pathologist Michael Baden views the situation as complicated : " Elvis had had an enlarged heart for a long time . That , together with his drug habit , caused his death . But he was difficult to diagnose ; it was a judgment call . " 
 The competence and ethics of two of the centrally involved medical professionals were seriously questioned . Before the autopsy was complete and toxicology results known , medical examiner Dr. Jerry Francisco declared the cause of death as cardiac arrhythmia , a condition that can be determined only in someone who is still alive . Allegations of a cover @-@ up were widespread . While Presley 's main physician , Dr. <unk> , was exonerated of criminal liability for the singer 's death , the facts were startling : " In the first eight months of 1977 alone , he had [ prescribed ] more than 10 @,@ 000 doses of sedatives , amphetamines and narcotics : all in Elvis 's name . " His license was suspended for three months . It was permanently revoked in the 1990s after the Tennessee Medical Board brought new charges of over @-@ prescription . 
 Amidst mounting pressure in 1994 , the Presley autopsy was reopened . Coroner Dr. Joseph Davis declared , " There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs . In fact , everything points to a sudden , violent heart attack . " Whether or not combined drug intoxication was in fact the cause , there is little doubt that <unk> contributed significantly to Presley 's premature death . 
 = = = Since 1977 = = = 
 Between 1977 and 1981 , six posthumously released singles by Presley were top ten country hits . Graceland was opened to the public in 1982 . Attracting over half a million visitors annually , it is the second most @-@ visited home in the United States , after the White House . It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2006 . 
 Presley has been inducted into five music halls of fame : the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ( 1986 ) , the Country Music Hall of Fame ( 1998 ) , the Gospel Music Hall of Fame ( 2001 ) , the Rockabilly Hall of Fame ( 2007 ) , and the Memphis Music Hall of Fame ( 2012 ) . In 1984 , he received the W. C. Handy Award from the Blues Foundation and the Academy of Country Music 's first Golden Hat Award . In 1987 , he received the American Music Awards ' Award of Merit . 
 A Junkie XL remix of Presley 's " A Little Less Conversation " ( credited as " Elvis Vs <unk> " ) was used in a Nike advertising campaign during the 2002 FIFA World Cup . It topped the charts in over 20 countries , and was included in a compilation of Presley 's number one hits , <unk> , that was also an international success . In 2003 , a remix of " <unk> ' " , a 1969 recording of Presley 's , topped the U.S. sales chart , as did a 50th @-@ anniversary re @-@ release of " That 's All Right " the following year . The latter was an outright hit in the UK , reaching number three on the pop chart . 
 In 2005 , another three reissued singles , " Jailhouse Rock " , " One Night " / " I Got Stung " , and " It 's Now or Never " , went to number one in the United Kingdom . A total of 17 Presley singles were reissued during the year ; all made the British top five . For the fifth straight year , Forbes named Presley the top @-@ earning deceased celebrity , with a gross income of $ 45 million . He placed second in 2006 , returned to the top spot the next two years , and ranked fourth in 2009 . The following year , he was ranked second , with his highest annual income ever — $ 60 million — spurred by the celebration of his 75th birthday and the launch of Cirque du Soleil 's Viva Elvis show in Las Vegas . In November 2010 , Viva Elvis : The Album was released , setting his voice to newly recorded instrumental tracks . As of mid @-@ 2011 , there were an estimated 15 @,@ 000 licensed Presley products . He was again the second @-@ highest @-@ earning deceased celebrity . 
 Presley holds the records for most songs charting in Billboard 's top 40 and top 100 : chart statistician Joel Whitburn calculates the respective totals as 104 and 151 ; Presley historian Adam Victor gives 114 and 138 . Presley 's rankings for top @-@ ten and number @-@ one hits vary depending on how the double @-@ sided " Hound Dog / Don 't Be Cruel " and " Don 't / I Beg of You " singles , which precede the inception of Billboard 's unified Hot 100 chart , are analyzed . According to Whitburn 's analysis , Presley and Madonna share the record for most top ten hits with 38 ; per Billboard 's current assessment , he ranks second with 36 . Whitburn and Billboard concur that the Beatles hold the record for most number @-@ one hits with 20 , and that Mariah Carey is second with 18 . Whitburn has Presley also with 18 , and thus tied for second ; Billboard has him third with 17 . Presley retains the record for cumulative weeks at number one : alone at 80 , according to Whitburn and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ; tied with Carey at 79 , according to Billboard . He holds the records for most British number @-@ one hits with 21 , and top @-@ ten hits with 76 . 
 In 2008 , an 1800 @-@ year @-@ old Roman bust described as bearing a " striking " resemblance to Elvis was displayed ahead of an intended auction . A spokesman for the auctioneers said that fans could " be forgiven for thinking that their idol may well have lived a previous life in Rome . " 
 On the anniversary date of his death , every year since 1997 , thousands of people gather at his home in Memphis to celebrate his memory , during a candlelight ritual . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Presley 's earliest musical influence came from gospel . His mother recalled that from the age of two , at the Assembly of God church in Tupelo attended by the family , " he would slide down off my lap , run into the aisle and scramble up to the platform . There he would stand looking at the choir and trying to sing with them . " In Memphis , Presley frequently attended all @-@ night gospel <unk> at the Ellis Auditorium , where groups such as the Statesmen Quartet led the music in a style that , Guralnick suggests , sowed the seeds of Presley 's future stage act : 
 The Statesmen were an electric combination ... featuring some of the most thrillingly emotive singing and daringly unconventional showmanship in the entertainment world ... dressed in suits that might have come out of the window of Lansky 's . ... Bass singer Jim Wetherington , known universally as the Big Chief , maintained a steady bottom , ceaselessly jiggling first his left leg , then his right , with the material of the pants leg ballooning out and shimmering . " He went about as far as you could go in gospel music , " said Jake Hess . " The women would jump up , just like they do for the pop shows . " Preachers frequently objected to the lewd movements ... but audiences reacted with screams and swoons . 
 As a teenager , Presley 's musical interests were wide @-@ ranging , and he was deeply informed about African American musical idioms as well as white ones ( see " Teenage life in Memphis " ) . Though he never had any formal training , he was blessed with a remarkable memory , and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings in 1954 at the age of 19 . When Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller met him two years later , they were astonished at his encyclopedic understanding of the blues . At a press conference the following year , he proudly declared , " I know practically every religious song that 's ever been written . " 
 = = = Musical style and genres = = = 
 Presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly , according to music historians . Katherine Charlton even calls him " rockabilly 's originator " , though Carl Perkins has explicitly stated that " [ Sam ] Phillips , Elvis , and I didn 't create rockabilly . " and , according to Michael Campbell , " Bill Haley recorded the first big rockabilly hit . " " It had been there for quite a while " , says Scotty Moore . " Carl Perkins was doing basically the same sort of thing up around Jackson , and I know for a fact Jerry Lee Lewis had been playing that kind of music ever since he was ten years old . " However , " Rockabilly crystallized into a recognizable style in 1954 with Elvis Presley 's first release , on the Sun label " , writes Craig Morrison . Paul Friedlander describes the defining elements of rockabilly , which he similarly characterizes as " essentially ... an Elvis Presley construction " : " the raw , emotive , and slurred vocal style and emphasis on rhythmic feeling [ of ] the blues with the string band and strummed rhythm guitar [ of ] country " . In " That 's All Right " , the Presley trio 's first record , Scotty Moore 's guitar solo , " a combination of Merle Travis – style country finger @-@ picking , double @-@ stop slides from acoustic boogie , and blues @-@ based bent @-@ note , single @-@ string work , is a microcosm of this fusion . " 
 At RCA , Presley 's rock and roll sound grew distinct from rockabilly with group chorus vocals , more heavily amplified electric guitars and a tougher , more intense manner . While he was known for taking songs from various sources and giving them a rockabilly / rock and roll treatment , he also recorded songs in other genres from early in his career , from the pop standard " Blue Moon " at Sun to the country ballad " How 's the World Treating You ? " on his second LP to the blues of " Santa Claus Is Back In Town " . In 1957 , his first gospel record was released , the four @-@ song EP Peace in the Valley . Certified as a million seller , it became the top @-@ selling gospel EP in recording history . Presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life . 
 After his return from military service in 1960 , Presley continued to perform rock and roll , but the characteristic style was substantially toned down . The reason why the music from this period lacks the drama from his Fifties recordings , critic Dave Marsh writes , is " because what we 're hearing is not genius discovering itself but the sound of genius at work . " His first post @-@ Army single , the number one hit " Stuck on You " , is typical of this shift . RCA publicity materials referred to its " mild rock beat " ; discographer Ernst Jorgensen calls it " upbeat pop " . The modern blues / R & B sound captured so successfully on Elvis Is Back ! was essentially abandoned for six years until such 1966 – 67 recordings as " Down in the Alley " and " Hi @-@ Heel Sneakers " , though Marsh holds that while he may have recorded few blues songs in the early to middle Sixties , " blues informs almost everything here . " The singer 's output during most of the 1960s emphasized pop music , often in the form of ballads such as " Are You Lonesome Tonight ? " , a number one in 1960 . While that was a dramatic number , most of what Presley recorded for his film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein . Notable numbers in other genres are the No. 1 hits " It 's Now or Never " of 1960 , based on the Italian aria " O Sole Mio " and concluding with a " full @-@ voiced operatic cadence , " and the 1962 hit " She 's Not You " which " integrates the Jordanaires so completely , it 's practically doo @-@ wop . " 
 While Presley performed several of his classic ballads for the ' 68 Comeback Special , the sound of the show was dominated by aggressive rock and roll . He would record few new straight @-@ ahead rock and roll songs thereafter ; as he explained , they were " hard to find " . A significant exception was " Burning Love " , his last major hit on the pop charts . Like his work of the 1950s , Presley 's subsequent recordings reworked pop and country songs , but in markedly different permutations . His stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk . Much of Elvis In Memphis , as well as " Suspicious Minds " , cut at the same sessions , reflected his new rock and soul fusion . In the mid @-@ 1970s , many of his singles found a home on country radio , the field where he first became a star . 
 = = = Vocal style and range = = = 
 The general development of Presley 's voice is described by critic Dave Marsh as " A voice , high and thrilled in the early days , lower and perplexed in the final months . " Marsh credits Presley with the introduction of the " vocal stutter " on 1955 's " Baby Let 's Play House . " When on " Don 't Be Cruel " Presley " slides into a ' <unk> ' that marks the transition between the first two verses , " he shows " how masterful his relaxed style really is . " Marsh describes the singing on " Can 't Help Falling in Love " to be of " gentle insistence and delicacy of phrasing , " with the line " ' Shall I stay ' " pronounced as if the words are fragile as crystal . " On the operatic " It 's Now or Never " Presley " was reaching for something more than he had ever attempted before , " and , according to discographer Jorgensen , later the same year the melody to " Surrender " , a number also based on an Italian original , " Torna A Sorrento " , " required an even greater demonstration of vocal powers . " 
 Jorgensen calls the 1966 recording of " How Great Thou Art " " an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions , " as Presley had " crafted for himself an ad @-@ hoc arrangement in which he took every part of the four @-@ part vocal , from [ the ] bass intro to the soaring heights of the song 's operatic climax , " in the process becoming " a kind of one @-@ man quartet . " Guralnick finds " Stand By Me " from the same sessions " a beautifully articulated , almost nakedly yearning performance , " but , by contrast , feels that Presley reaches beyond his powers on " Where No One Stands Alone " on which " he was reduced to a kind of inelegant bellowing to push out a sound " that Jake Hess would have no problem with . Hess himself thought that while others may have a voice as great or greater than Presley 's , " he had that certain something that everyone searches for all during their lifetime . " Guralnick attempts to pinpoint that something : " The warmth of his voice , his controlled use of both vibrato technique and natural falsetto range , the subtlety and deeply felt conviction of his singing were all qualities recognizably belonging to his talent but just as recognizably not to be achieved without sustained dedication and effort . " 
 Presley 's singing to his own " necessarily limited , both rhythmically and melodically , " piano accompaniment , such as can be heard on the 1967 recording of " You 'll Never Walk Alone " , for Guralnick are always special occasions , because " it was always a measure of his engagement when he sat down at the keyboard to play . " Describing his piano technique as " staccato style , " Jorgensen finds that on " Without Love " from the 1969 sessions , " his gospel @-@ flavored treatment took it to a level of spirituality rarely matched in his career . " Presley also played the instrument on the " impassioned version " of the sessions 's next song , " I 'll Hold You in My Heart , " of which Guralnick writes that " there is something magical about the moment that only the most inspired singing can bring about , as Elvis loses himself in the music , words no longer lend themselves to literal translation , and singer and listener both are left emotionally wrung out by the time the song finally limps to an end . " 
 Marsh praises his 1968 reading of " U.S. Male " , " bearing down on the hard guy lyrics , not sending them up or overplaying them but tossing them around with that astonishingly tough yet gentle assurance that he brought to his Sun records . " The performance on " In the Ghetto " is , according to Jorgensen , " devoid of any of his characteristic vocal tricks or mannerisms , " instead relying on " the astonishing clarity and sensitivity of his voice . " Guralnick describes the tenderness in the singing of the same song of " such unassuming , almost translucent eloquence , it is so quietly confident in its simplicity " that one is reminded of the Sun period , " offering equal parts yearning and social compassion . " On " Suspicious Minds " from the same sessions Guralnick hears essentially the same " remarkable mixture of tenderness and poise , " but supplemented with " an expressive quality somewhere between stoicism ( at suspected infidelity ) and anguish ( over impending loss ) . " 
 Music critic Henry Pleasants observes that " Presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor . An extraordinary compass ... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion . " He identifies Presley as a high baritone , calculating his range as two octaves and a third , " from the baritone low G to the tenor high B , with an upward extension in falsetto to at least a D @-@ flat . Presley 's best octave is in the middle , D @-@ flat to D @-@ flat , granting an extra full step up or down . " In Pleasants ' view , his voice was " variable and unpredictable " at the bottom , " often brilliant " at the top , with the capacity for " full @-@ voiced high Gs and As that an opera baritone might envy " . Scholar Lindsay Waters , who figures Presley 's range as 2 ¼ octaves , emphasizes that " his voice had an emotional range from tender whispers to sighs down to shouts , grunts , grumbles and sheer gruffness that could move the listener from calmness and surrender , to fear . " Presley was always " able to duplicate the open , hoarse , ecstatic , screaming , shouting , wailing , reckless sound of the black rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues and gospel singers , " writes Pleasants , and also demonstrated a remarkable ability to assimilate many other vocal styles . 
 = = Public image = = 
 = = = Racial issues = = = 
 When Dewey Phillips first aired " That 's All Right " on Memphis radio , many listeners who contacted the station by phone and telegram to ask for it again assumed that its singer was black . From the beginning of his national fame , Presley expressed respect for African American performers and their music , and disregard for the norms of segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the South . Interviewed in 1956 , he recalled how in his childhood he would listen to blues musician Arthur Crudup — the originator of " That 's All Right " — " bang his box the way I do now , and I said if I ever got to the place where I could feel all old Arthur felt , I 'd be a music man like nobody ever saw . " The Memphis World , an African American newspaper , reported that Presley , " the rock ' n ' roll phenomenon " , " cracked Memphis 's segregation laws " by attending the local amusement park on what was designated as its " colored night " . Such statements and actions led Presley to be generally hailed in the black community during the early days of his stardom . By contrast , many white adults , according to Billboard 's Arnold Shaw , " did not like him , and condemned him as depraved . Anti @-@ negro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism . Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase ' rock ' n ' roll ' , Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex . " 
 Despite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans , a rumor spread in mid @-@ 1957 that he had at some point announced , " The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes . " A journalist with the national African American weekly Jet , Louie Robinson , pursued the story . On the set of Jailhouse Rock , Presley granted Robinson an interview , though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press . He denied making such a statement or holding in any way to its racist view : " I never said anything like that , and people who know me know that I wouldn 't have said it … A lot of people seem to think I started this business . But rock ' n ' roll was here a long time before I came along . Nobody can sing that kind of music like colored people . Let 's face it : I can 't sing like Fats Domino can . I know that . " Also , Red Robinson stated , " Take a look at the things that are only publicized now , of how he 'd be driving down the street and see a destitute black woman with a little child . He went and bought her a Cadillac . Now if this guy hated blacks , he wouldn ’ t even have gone near them " . Robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made , and on the contrary elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that Presley was anything but racist . Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter , who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland one evening , reported of Presley , " He showed me every courtesy , and I think he 's one of the greatest . " Dudley Brooks , an African @-@ American composer and studio musician who worked with Presley during the 1950s and 1960s , also disputed allegations that Presley was a racist . Though the rumored remark was wholly discredited at the time , it was still being used against Presley decades later . The identification of Presley with racism — either personally or symbolically — was expressed most famously in the lyrics of the 1989 rap hit " Fight the Power " , by Public Enemy : " Elvis was a hero to most / But he never meant shit to me / Straight @-@ up racist that sucker was / Simple and plain " . 
 The persistence of such attitudes was fueled by resentment over the fact that Presley , whose musical and visual performance idiom owed much to African American sources , achieved the cultural acknowledgement and commercial success largely denied his black peers . Into the 21st century , the notion that Presley had " stolen " black music still found adherents . Notable among African American entertainers expressly rejecting this view was Jackie Wilson , who argued , " A lot of people have accused Elvis of stealing the black man 's music , when in fact , almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from Elvis . " And throughout his career , Presley plainly acknowledged his debt . Addressing his ' 68 Comeback Special audience , he said , " Rock ' n ' roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues , or it sprang from that . People have been adding to it , adding instruments to it , experimenting with it , but it all boils down to [ that ] . " Nine years earlier , he had said , " Rock ' n ' roll has been around for many years . It used to be called rhythm and blues . " 
 = = = Sex symbol = = = 
 Presley 's physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged . " He was once beautiful , astonishingly beautiful " , in the words of critic Mark Feeney . Television director Steve Binder , no fan of Presley 's music before he oversaw the ' 68 Comeback Special , reported , " I 'm straight as an arrow and I got to tell you , you stop , whether you 're male or female , to look at him . He was that good looking . And if you never knew he was a superstar , it wouldn 't make any difference ; if he 'd walked in the room , you 'd know somebody special was in your presence . " His performance style , as much as his physical beauty , was responsible for Presley 's eroticized image . Writing in 1970 , critic George Melly described him as " the master of the sexual simile , treating his guitar as both phallus and girl . " In his Presley obituary , Lester Bangs credited him as " the man who brought overt blatant vulgar sexual frenzy to the popular arts in America . " Ed Sullivan 's declaration that he perceived a soda bottle in Presley 's trousers was echoed by rumors involving a similarly positioned toilet roll tube or lead bar . 
 While Presley was marketed as an icon of heterosexuality , some cultural critics have argued that his image was ambiguous . In 1959 , Sight and Sound 's Peter John Dyer described his onscreen persona as " aggressively bisexual in appeal " . Brett Farmer places the " orgasmic gyrations " of the title dance sequence in Jailhouse Rock within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a " spectacular eroticization , if not <unk> , of the male image " . In the analysis of Yvonne Tasker , " Elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised , objectifying version of white working @-@ class masculinity as aggressive sexual display . " 
 Reinforcing Presley 's image as a sex symbol were the reports of his dalliances with various Hollywood stars and starlets , from Natalie Wood in the 1950s to Connie Stevens and Ann @-@ Margret in the 1960s to Candice Bergen and Cybill Shepherd in the 1970s . June Juanico of Memphis , one of Presley 's early girlfriends , later blamed Parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind . Presley never grew comfortable with the Hollywood scene , and most of these relationships were insubstantial . 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 Presley was known for a life of luxury and excess , as exemplified by his estate at Graceland . He owned a number of expensive cars , including three pink Cadillacs , immortalized in his version of the song " Baby , Let 's Play House " , in which Presley replaced the line " you may get religion " with " you may have a Pink Cadillac " . 
 A number of stories , both real and exaggerated , detail Presley 's appetite for rich or heavy food . He was said to enjoy the Southern cuisine of his upbringing , including chicken @-@ fried steak and biscuits and gravy . Presley is commonly associated with rich sandwiches , including the Fool 's Gold Loaf and peanut butter , banana and bacon sandwiches , now commonly called an " Elvis sandwich " . 
 = = Associates = = 
 = = = Colonel Parker and the <unk> = = = 
 Once he became Presley 's manager , Colonel Tom Parker insisted on exceptionally tight control over his client 's career . Songwriter Robert B. Sherman ( of the Sherman Brothers ) bore witness to the deal being forged between Hill and Range co @-@ owner Jean Aberbach and The Colonel in 1955 . Early on , " The Colonel " and his Hill and Range allies , the brothers Jean and Julian Aberbach , perceived the close relationship that developed between Presley and songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller as a serious threat to that control . Parker effectively ended the relationship , deliberately or not , with the new contract he sent Leiber in early 1958 . Leiber thought there was a mistake — the sheet of paper was blank except for Parker 's signature and a line on which to enter his . " There 's no mistake , boy , just sign it and return it , " Parker directed . " Don 't worry , we 'll fill it in later . " Leiber declined , and Presley 's fruitful collaboration with the writing team was over . Other respected songwriters lost interest in or simply avoided writing for Presley because of the requirement that they surrender a third of their usual royalties . 
 By 1967 , Parker 's contracts with Presley gave him 50 percent of most of the singer 's earnings from recordings , films , and merchandise . Beginning in February 1972 , he took a third of the profit from live appearances ; a January 1976 agreement entitled him to half of that as well . Priscilla Presley noted that , " Elvis detested the business side of his career . He would sign a contract without even reading it . " Presley 's friend Marty Lacker regarded Parker as a " hustler and a con artist . He was only interested in ' now money ' — get the buck and get gone . " 
 Lacker was instrumental in convincing Presley to record with Memphis producer Chips Moman and his handpicked musicians at American Sound Studio in early 1969 . The American Sound sessions represented a significant departure from the control customarily exerted by Hill and Range . Moman still had to deal with the publisher 's staff on site , whose song suggestions he regarded as unacceptable . He was on the verge of quitting , until Presley ordered the Hill and Range personnel out of the studio . Although RCA executive Joan Deary was later full of praise for the producer 's song choices and the quality of the recordings , Moman , to his fury , received neither credit on the records nor royalties for his work . 
 Throughout his entire career , Presley performed in only three venues outside the United States — all of them in Canada , during brief tours there in 1957 . Rumors that he would play overseas for the first time were fueled in 1974 by a million @-@ dollar bid for an Australian tour . Parker was uncharacteristically reluctant , prompting those close to Presley to speculate about the manager 's past and the reasons for his apparent unwillingness to apply for a passport . Parker ultimately squelched any notions Presley had of working abroad , claiming that foreign security was poor and the venues unsuitable for a star of his magnitude . 
 Parker arguably exercised tightest control over Presley 's film career . In 1957 , Robert Mitchum asked Presley to costar with him in Thunder Road , on which Mitchum was writer and producer . According to George Klein , one of his oldest friends , Presley was offered starring roles in West Side Story and Midnight Cowboy . In 1974 , Barbra Streisand approached Presley to star with her in the remake of A Star is Born . In each case , any ambitions the singer may have had to play such parts were thwarted by his manager 's negotiating demands or flat refusals . In Lacker 's description , " The only thing that kept Elvis going after the early years was a new challenge . But Parker kept running everything into the ground . " The prevailing attitude may have been summed up best by the response Leiber and Stoller received when they brought a serious film project for Presley to Parker and the Hill and Range owners for their consideration . In Leiber 's telling , Jean Aberbach warned them to never again " try to interfere with the business or artistic workings of the process known as Elvis Presley . " 
 = = = Memphis Mafia = = = 
 In the early 1960s , the circle of friends with whom Presley constantly surrounded himself until his death came to be known as the " Memphis Mafia " . " Surrounded by the [ ir ] parasitic presence " , as journalist John Harris puts it , " it was no wonder that as he slid into addiction and torpor , no @-@ one raised the alarm : to them , Elvis was the bank , and it had to remain open . " Tony Brown , who played piano for Presley regularly in the last two years of the singer 's life , observed his rapidly declining health and the urgent need to address it : " But we all knew it was hopeless because Elvis was surrounded by that little circle of people ... all those so @-@ called friends " . In the Memphis Mafia 's defense , Marty Lacker has said , " [ Presley ] was his own man . ... If we hadn 't been around , he would have been dead a lot earlier . " 
 Larry Geller became Presley 's hairdresser in 1964 . Unlike others in the Memphis Mafia , he was interested in spiritual questions and recalls how , from their first conversation , Presley revealed his secret thoughts and anxieties : " I mean there has to be a purpose ... there 's got to be a reason ... why I was chosen to be Elvis Presley . ... I swear to God , no one knows how lonely I get . And how empty I really feel . " Thereafter , Geller supplied him with books on religion and mysticism , which the singer read voraciously . Presley would be preoccupied by such matters for much of his life , taking <unk> of books with him on tour . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Presley 's rise to national attention in 1956 transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture . As the catalyst for the cultural revolution that was rock and roll , he was central not only to defining it as a musical genre but in making it a touchstone of youth culture and rebellious attitude . With its racially mixed origins — repeatedly affirmed by Presley — rock and roll 's occupation of a central position in mainstream American culture facilitated a new acceptance and appreciation of black culture . In this regard , Little Richard said of Presley , " He was an integrator . Elvis was a blessing . They wouldn 't let black music through . He opened the door for black music . " Al Green agreed : " He broke the ice for all of us . " President Jimmy Carter remarked on his legacy in 1977 : " His music and his personality , fusing the styles of white country and black rhythm and blues , permanently changed the face of American popular culture . His following was immense , and he was a symbol to people the world over of the vitality , rebelliousness , and good humor of his country . " Presley also heralded the vastly expanded reach of celebrity in the era of mass communication : at the age of 21 , within a year of his first appearance on American network television , he was one of the most famous people in the world . 
 Presley 's name , image , and voice are instantly recognizable around the globe . He has inspired a legion of impersonators . In polls and surveys , he is recognized as one of the most important popular music artists and influential Americans . " Elvis Presley is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century " , said composer and conductor Leonard Bernstein . " He introduced the beat to everything and he changed everything — music , language , clothes . It 's a whole new social revolution — the sixties came from it . " Bob Dylan described the sensation of first hearing Presley as " like busting out of jail " . 
 On the 25th anniversary of Presley 's death , The New York Times observed , " All the talentless impersonators and appalling black velvet paintings on display can make him seem little more than a perverse and distant memory . But before Elvis was camp , he was its opposite : a genuine cultural force . ... Elvis 's breakthroughs are underappreciated because in this rock @-@ and @-@ roll age , his hard @-@ rocking music and sultry style have triumphed so completely . " Not only Presley 's achievements , but his failings as well , are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy , as in this description by Greil Marcus : 
 Elvis Presley is a supreme figure in American life , one whose presence , no matter how banal or predictable , brooks no real comparisons . ... The cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day , but also patriotic recitals , pure country gospel , and really dirty blues . ... Elvis has emerged as a great artist , a great rocker , a great purveyor of schlock , a great heart throb , a great bore , a great symbol of potency , a great ham , a great nice person , and , yes , a great American . 
 = = Discography = = 
 A vast number of recordings have been issued under Presley 's name . The total number of his original master recordings has been variously calculated as 665 and 711 . His career began and he was most successful during an era when singles were the primary commercial medium for pop music . In the case of his albums , the distinction between " official " studio records and other forms is often blurred . For most of the 1960s , his recording career focused on soundtrack albums . In the 1970s , his most heavily promoted and best @-@ selling LP releases tended to be concert albums . This summary discography lists only the albums and singles that reached the top of one or more of the following charts : the main U.S. Billboard pop chart ; the Billboard country chart , the genre chart with which he was most identified ( there was no country album chart before 1964 ) ; and the official British pop chart . 
 The year given , in the table below , is the year the record first reached number one , rather than its original year of release . For instance : Elvis ' 40 Greatest , released in 1974 , a compilation on the budget Arcade label , was the fourth highest selling album of the year in the United Kingdom ; at the time , the main British chart did not rank such compilations , relegating them to a chart for <unk> and TV @-@ advertised albums , which Elvis ' 40 Greatest topped for 15 weeks . The policy was altered in 1975 , allowing the album to hit number one on the main chart in 1977 , following Presley 's death . 
 Before late 1958 , rather than unified pop and country singles charts , Billboard had as many as four charts for each , separately ranking records according to sales , jukebox play , jockey spins ( i.e. , airplay ) , and , in the case of pop , a general " Top 100 " . Billboard now regards the sales charts as definitive for the period . Widely cited chart statistician Joel Whitburn accords historical releases the highest ranking they achieved among the separate charts . Presley discographer Ernst Jorgensen refers only to the Top 100 chart for pop hits . All of the 1956 – 58 songs listed here as number one US pop hits reached the top of both the sales and with three exceptions , the Top 100 charts : " I Want You , I Need You , I Love You " ( three ) , " Hound Dog " ( two , behind its flip side , " Don 't Be Cruel " ) , and " Hard Headed Woman " ( two ) . 
 Several Presley singles reached number one in the United Kingdom as double A @-@ sides ; in the United States , the respective sides of those singles were ranked separately by Billboard . In the United States , Presley also had five or six number @-@ one R & B singles and seven number @-@ one adult contemporary singles ; in 1964 , his " Blue Christmas " topped the Christmas singles chart during a period when Billboard did not rank holiday singles in its primary pop chart . He also had number @-@ one hits in many countries beside the US and UK . 
 = = = Number one albums = = = 
 = = = Number one singles = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 TV concert specials 
 = Kanye Zone = 
 Kanye Zone is a browser game developed by Otter Spice Productions . It was released on March 9 , 2012 , and involves the player controlling a bumper in order to prevent an image of American musician Kanye West 's head from entering a circle of increasing size , referred to as his " zone " . The game incorporates sound clips from West 's song " Niggas in Paris " , and its premise is a parody of the song 's lyrics . 
 Created by roommates Michael Frederickson and Stephen Barlow and inspired by 1980s video games , Kanye Zone reached the front page of Reddit and received considerable media attention — Frederickson was interviewed by MTV , and several other news outlets reported on the game , some praising its simplicity and addictiveness . In May 2013 , a follow @-@ up game , titled Pitbull Party and based on the rapper Pitbull , was released . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player 's left and right arrow keys and space bar control a bumper that moves around a purple circle . Kanye West , represented by his head , attempts to enter the circle while repeatedly rapping " Don 't let me into my zone " , and the player must hit him with the bumper — this causes him to disappear in a burst of dollar signs , and the player is rewarded with cash , added to a total displayed on the webpage . A silhouette of Kanye 's head shows where he will next spawn , and an arrow inside it indicates what direction he will travel in . Play continues this way , with Kanye getting faster and the zone getting bigger , until the player fails to prevent Kanye from entering the zone , when they are presented with a message declaring they have lost ; an image of rapper Jay @-@ Z 's head joins that of West , and the lyric " I 'm definitely in my zone " is heard . If the player 's cash score is high enough , it is added to a leaderboard on the right of the page . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was created by roommates Michael Frederickson — a technical director at Pixar — and Stephen Barlow using HTML5 . The two heard Kanye West 's song " Niggas in Paris " and became " obsessed " with the lyric " Don 't let me into my zone " ( which is probably a reference to West 's " artistic zone " ) , and what it would mean to do so . It was inspired by 1980s games such as Pac @-@ Man , as well as the 1972 game Pong . They noted that although they tried to make the rest of the game " flashy " , the zone had to be " this unremarkable geometric form " so as not to be distracting . 
 Frederickson mused that the nature of Kanye 's zone is " the whole question of the game " , and agreed that it was " almost a philosophical question " . Frederickson called West , the inspiration for the game , an " arrogant man who purports to know everything " , and said that in the game he " [ admits ] some ignorance " as he " doesn 't know exactly what 'll happen if he gets in the zone . " The fact that the player begins the game with $ 50 @,@ 000 is a reference to the " Niggas in Paris " lyric " What 's 50 grand to a <unk> like me , can you please remind me " — the amount represents nothing . 
 = = Release = = 
 Kanye Zone was released on March 9 , 2012 by Otter Spice Productions , and Michael Frederickson promoted it at the Game Developers Conference . Following its release , Kanye Zone reached the front page of the social news website Reddit , causing its creators to lose approximately US $ 700 after lots of traffic was driven to the website , and necessitating the compression of its contents ; the next day , advertisements were added to the page . Although two million games had been played in under a month , the game was not very profitable , as the creators made only eight dollars off the game . The developers have since created a store selling various items adorned with a picture of the " zone " , which Frederickson describes as " purple circles on everything " . 
 Although Kanye West has not contacted him , Frederickson was interviewed about the game by MTV 's Hive , which said it is " the best video game ever created based on a pop song and / or artist " and compared it to other games based on the song " Margaritaville " and the band Grateful Dead — he described the interview " <unk> disproportionate to the interest of Kanye Zone " ; it even verged into the discussion of a film adaptation . He was also a guest on the British video gaming radio show One Life Left . Luke Plunkett of Kotaku called the game a " perversely addictive thing " , and Complex 's Jacob Moore said it is " as basic as it can get , but that won 't stop you from wasting hours of your day . " Metro dubbed Kanye Zone " the dumbest game you will spend 20 minutes playing " and " a hilarious low impact game in the tradition of early Atari " . 
 In March 2012 , Frederickson stated that he was not yet working on a sequel to the game ; however , on May 31 , 2013 , Pitbull Party , a follow @-@ up to Kanye Zone , was released . Based on Pitbull 's song " Don 't Stop the Party " and released by Otter Spice Productions , it involves maneuvering Pitbull 's head between scratches on turntable records . 
 = 1909 Monterrey hurricane = 
 The 1909 Monterrey hurricane was one of the deadliest Atlantic tropical cyclones on record , killing an estimated 4 @,@ 000 people throughout Mexico . Originating from a tropical storm east of the Leeward Islands on August 20 , the storm tracked west @-@ northwest , entering the Caribbean Sea as a minimal hurricane the next day . After striking Hispaniola on August 23 , the hurricane made another landfall in eastern Cuba before reentering the Caribbean . Once back over open water , the storm intensified into a Category 3 hurricane and moved across the northern tip of the Yucatán Peninsula . By August 26 , the storm had emerged into the Gulf of Mexico as a weakened , but regrouping system . It attained its peak winds of 120 mph ( 185 km / h ) that evening . Maintaining this intensity , the system made landfall in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas late on August 27 and rapidly dissipated the following afternoon . 
 Throughout its existence , the hurricane remained relatively close to land , so consequently its effects were felt in many areas . Much of the northern Caribbean received moderate to heavy rainfall along with gusty winds during its passage ; although only Haiti reported damage from it . Its effects were far more severe in Mexico where an estimated 4 @,@ 000 people were killed by record @-@ breaking floods triggered by the hurricane . The city of Monterrey received the worst damage : more than half of the structures in the city were flooded , hundreds were destroyed , and 20 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Damage from the storm in the country was estimated to have exceeded $ 50 million ( 1909 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 32 billion 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the hurricane are uncertain due to a lack of ship reports in the western Atlantic Ocean . According to the Atlantic hurricane database , it was first identifiable as a tropical storm on August 20 to the east of the Leeward Islands . Tracking to the west @-@ northwest , the storm quickly attained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , equivalent to Category 1 status on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . By the evening of August 21 , the storm entered the Caribbean Sea as it brushed the northern coast of Guadeloupe ; intensification of the hurricane over the northeastern Caribbean was slow . Early on August 23 , it made its first landfall with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) in San Cristóbal Province , Dominican Republic , just southwest of the country 's capital city of Santo Domingo . 
 The hurricane weakened slightly over the mountainous terrain of Hispaniola , although it is believed to have maintained winds of at least 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) based on damage reports in Haiti . Later on August 23 , the storm " jumped " northward before making another landfall in the Cuban province of Guantánamo . Continuing towards the west @-@ northwest , the hurricane regained strength as it moved over the northern Caribbean . During the afternoon of August 24 , the system attained winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , corresponding to a Category 2 hurricane . Early the following morning , it further intensified to a Category 3 major hurricane , defined as having winds in excess of 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) , before making landfall in the Yucatán Peninsula near the city of Cancún . The hurricane emerged into the Gulf of Mexico within 12 hours and quickly re @-@ intensified to attain its peak winds of 120 mph ( 185 km / h ) on August 26 . It soon slowed and turned due west , maintaining its intensity . Late on August 27 , the storm made its final landfall in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas . Rapid weakening took place as it drifted onshore , and it dissipated the following afternoon . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Prior to the hurricane 's devastating impacts in Mexico , it brought heavy rains and high winds to several of the northern Caribbean Islands . The first to be affected by the storm were the Leeward Islands ; however , no known damage resulted from its passage . Moderate rain and gusty winds were reported in Puerto Rico as well as the Dominican Republic and Jamaica . Despite being slightly weaker once over Haiti , severe damage was reported in many towns , with homes destroyed and many homeless . Much of Cuba was also impacted by the storm , with winds up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) being recorded as far north as Havana . During the hurricane 's second landfall in Mexico , it brought increased swells and gusty winds , recorded up to 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) to parts of southern Texas . Low @-@ lying areas north of Corpus Christi were inundated by 1 to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water and several piers were damaged . Overall damage in the state was minimal from the storm and no lives were lost . 
 Although a borderline Category 2 – 3 hurricane when it made landfall in the Yucatán Peninsula , little is known about the storm 's impact in the region . One ship situated about 25 mi ( 40 km ) offshore recorded winds up to 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) during its passage . However , following the hurricane 's second landfall , the resulting damage was catastrophic . During the overnight hours between August 27 and 28 , cities along the coastline of Tamaulipas likely sustained severe damage from the hurricane 's storm surge and high winds . Two villages along the coast were completely destroyed by the storm and communication with much of the region was crippled and not expected to be restored for more than a week . Nine bridges and roughly 50 mi ( 80 km ) of railroad tracks were destroyed in the state . 
 The worst of the damage took place further inland , within the state of Nuevo León . There , torrential rainfall triggered a flood even exceeding 100 @-@ year flood values . According to meteorologists in Mexico , the storm dropped 17 @.@ 5 in ( 440 mm ) of rain over a 40 ‑ hour span . Further rains fell for the following 32 hours , worsening the situation . According to Mexican officials , overnight on August 27 , the reservoir dam near Nuevo León 's capital city , Monterrey , burst , flooding more than half of the buildings in the city , as well as all of the nearby town of San <unk> . Steel works and smelters situated along the Santa Catarina River were destroyed after the river rose well over its banks . Hundreds of homes were destroyed throughout the city , leaving an estimated 20 @,@ 000 people homeless . According to the American Society of Civil Engineers , an enormous 235 @,@ 000 ft3 ( 6 @,@ 650 m3 ) of water was being moved per second during the height of the flood . 
 At the height of the floods , residents were forced to seek refuge on the roofs of two @-@ story buildings ; however , the Santa Catarina River was flowing at a very fast pace of 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . The force of the current led to most homes being taken off their foundations and sent downstream , resulting in the deaths of anyone inside . In one incident , 90 people died after seeking refuge in a school after their homes collapsed . However , not long after entering the building , flood waters inundated the structure and caused it to collapse . By the morning , survivors reported that the state of the city was " indescribable " . Damage from the hurricane was estimated to have been at least $ 50 million ( 1909 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 32 billion 2016 USD ) . Of this , roughly $ 20 million was attributed to railroad losses . Throughout Mexico , reports indicated that about 4 @,@ 000 people were killed as a result of the storm , making it one of the deadliest Atlantic hurricanes on record . Some estimates place the death toll as high as 5 @,@ 000 and others as low as 3 @,@ 000 . Of these fatalities , 800 are believed to have been in the south side of Monterrey where four blocks of the city were completely destroyed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately following the catastrophic flooding in Monterrey , an appeal was made to the United States and other nations for aid . Many residents and visitors in the city did all they could to help rescue those trapped in the flood waters and take care of the homeless . According to the New York Times , one person rescued 30 people stranded in flood waters . Numerous rescue operations were undertaken during the flood , saving many lives . However , survivors faced another issue after losing their homes : lack of food . Food was unavailable to most residents in the wake of the storm until August 31 when the first relief supplies arrived . Even then , most only received a small amount of bread and beans . Once the flood along the Santa Catarina River receded , searches were conducted to attempt to locate the bodies of victims . However , reports indicated that the river bed was similar to quicksand and most bodies on it were likely underground . 
 Days after the storm , fears of food shortages began to arise as railways , in which food would normally be able to be delivered , were washed out . To deal with the large amount of bodies in the wake of the disaster , Mexican officials decided to cremate and mass bury victims . By mid @-@ September , between 1 @,@ 600 and 1 @,@ 800 people were hired to repair and rebuild the devastated railways in Nuevo León . In 2009 , the third edition of the book El Río Fiera <unk> : 1909 by Oswaldo Sánchez , re @-@ accounting reports form people who experienced the flood , was planned . According to the director of publications at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León , the book was considered one of historical quality . In memory of those who perished during the flood , the book was released to the public on August 27 , 2009 , the 100 year anniversary of the disaster . 
 = SMS Berlin = 
 SMS Berlin ( " His Majesty 's Ship Berlin " ) was the third member of the seven @-@ vessel Bremen class , built by the Imperial German Navy . Throughout her over 40 @-@ year @-@ long career , she served with the Imperial Navy , the Reichsmarine , and the Kriegsmarine . She was built by the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig , laid down in 1902 , launched in September 1903 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in April 1905 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Berlin was capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 Berlin served in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet from her commissioning to 1911 , when she was sent abroad for overseas duties . She returned to the scouting forces the following year , where she remained through the first two years of World War I. She spent 1916 as a minelayer , and was disarmed in 1917 . She was one of six cruisers permitted to Germany by the Treaty of Versailles , and she remained in service with the new Reichsmarine through the 1920s as a training ship . She was withdrawn from active duty in 1929 , and later used as a barracks ship by the Kriegsmarine , a role she filled through World War II . After the end of the war , she was loaded with chemical weapons and scuttled in the Skagerrak . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Berlin was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Zieten and was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1902 and launched on 22 September 1903 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 4 April 1905 . The ship was 111 @.@ 1 meters ( 365 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 3 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 51 m ( 18 @.@ 1 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 792 t ( 3 @,@ 732 long tons ; 4 @,@ 180 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines , designed to give 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) for a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Berlin carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 270 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 910 km ; 4 @,@ 910 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 274 – 287 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . In 1915 , Berlin was modified to carry 80 naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Berlin was assigned to the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . In 1911 , she was deployed abroad for service on foreign stations . She returned to Germany the following year , and rejoined the fleet cruiser squadron . In October 1913 , the ship left Germany again bound for Veracruz , to relieve Hertha in the Caribbean . In 1915 , the ship was retrofitted to carry 80 mines . She was in drydock in May 1916 , and so she was unavailable for the Battle of Jutland on the last day of the month . In October 1916 , the British submarine HMS E38 attacked Berlin , but its torpedoes missed . After the end of the year , Berlin was disarmed . She was thereafter used as a coastal defense ship , a role she performed through to the end of the war in 1918 . 
 Berlin was among the six light cruisers Germany was permitted to retain by the Treaty of Versailles . In the service of the newly reorganized Reichsmarine , Berlin served as a training cruiser , starting in 1922 . That year , Wilhelm Canaris was assigned to the ship , which went to Norway in November 1923 . In January 1924 , Berlin departed German waters for an extended overseas cruise , which was the first time a German warship had done so since the end of World War I. While on the cruise , Canaris met a naval cadet by the name of Reinhard Heydrich , who went on to become a close friend and eventual architect of The Holocaust . In 1928 , Berlin conducted a training cruise around the world , which included a stop in Fremantle . Training duties lasted until 1929 , when she was withdrawn from service . Starting in 1935 , the Kriegsmarine used Berlin as a barracks ship in Kiel . There , she survived World War II ; in the aftermath of the war , she was loaded with chemical weapons and scuttled in the Skaggerak to dispose of them , on 31 May 1947 . 
 = Ernest Albert Corey = 
 Ernest Albert Corey MM & Three Bars ( 20 December 1891 – 25 August 1972 ) was a distinguished Australian soldier who served as a stretcher bearer during the First World War . He enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force on 13 January 1916 , and was allocated to the 55th Battalion , where he was initially posted to a grenade section before volunteering for stretcher bearing duties . In 1917 he was twice awarded the Military Medal for his devotion to duty in aiding wounded soldiers , and twice again in 1918 ; becoming the only person to be awarded the Military Medal four times . 
 Born in New South Wales , Corey was employed as a blacksmith 's striker upon leaving school . In January 1916 , he became a member of the " Men from Snowy River " recruiting march , enlisting in Goulburn . Returning to Australia after the Armistice , he was discharged on medical grounds in 1919 and was employed in a number of jobs before re @-@ enlisting in a militia battalion for service in the Second World War . He died in 1972 and was buried with full military honours in the Ex @-@ Servicemen 's section of Woden Cemetery , Australian Capital Territory . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Corey was born on 20 December 1891 in Numeralla , New South Wales , the eighth child of Thomas Corey and his wife Ellen , née Burke . He was educated at <unk> Lake Public School , before leaving to become a blacksmith 's striker at Martin 's Smithy in Cooma . In January 1916 , Corey marched from Cooma to Goulburn as a member of the " Men from Snowy River " recruiting march , and enlisted on 13 January . Along with the majority of other members of the march , he was allotted to the 55th Battalion . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Following training at Goulburn camp , he embarked for overseas on 4 September aboard HMAT Port Sydney with the 4th Reinforcements for the 55th Battalion . Arriving in England , he spent three months with the 14th Training Battalion at <unk> Camp near <unk> in Wiltshire , before joining the 55th Battalion on 8 February 1917 at Montauban , France . Posted to the grenade section of " C " Company , he took part in the capture of <unk> in April . 
 On 15 May , Corey 's brigade was in action near Quéant . Suffering heavy losses , the Commanding Officer of the 55th called for volunteers to assist the stretcher bearers ; Corey was one of thirty men who volunteered . For seventeen hours , he assisted in carrying the wounded approximately 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) back to the dressing station ; he was awarded the Military Medal for this action . 
 Following engagements at Bullecourt , the 5th Division — of which the 55th Battalion was part — spent four months in reserve , before moving into the Ypres sector in Belgium . Made a regular stretcher bearer , Corey was decorated with a bar to his Military Medal for his actions on 26 September during the Battle of Polygon Wood . While subject to heavy artillery and machine gun fire , he frequently ventured out into no @-@ man 's @-@ land to tend to the wounded . 
 During the winter of 1917 – 1918 , the 55th Battalion was posted to the Messines sector , where Corey was granted leave to the United Kingdom in February 1918 . While on leave , he became ill and spent ninety days in hospital before rejoining his battalion in July . Shortly after , the Allies launched an offensive against the Germans in August along the Somme , where the 55th Battalion became involved in the capture of Péronne in September . It was here where Corey received the second bar to his Military Medal ; between 1 – 2 September , while subject to heavy machine gun and artillery fire , he continually assisted the wounded with first aid . 
 Promoted to corporal on 21 September , he was placed in charge of the battalion 's stretcher bearers , whom he led during the battle north of Bullecourt on 30 September . Corey attended to the wounded while exposed to fire , and continued to direct other bearer parties throughout the action until wounded himself , receiving wounds in the right groin and thigh . It was during this engagement that he was awarded a third bar to his Military Medal . Evacuated to a casualty station , Corey was operated on before receiving a transfer to a general hospital at Le Havre . Operated on again , he was sent to a hospital in Bristol , England . Repatriated to Australia on 30 April 1919 , he was medically discharged in June . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Returning to Cooma , Corey was employed as a contract <unk> before moving to Canberra in 1922 , where he was employed as a camp caretaker . On 23 September 1924 , at St Gregory 's Catholic Church , Queanbeyan , he married Sarah Jane Fisher ; the pair later had a daughter , Patricia , before the marriage was dissolved in 1935 . Between 1927 and 1940 , Corey worked for the Department of the Interior as an office cleaner . He re @-@ enlisted for service in the Second World War with the Australian Military Forces on 23 September 1941 , and was posted to the 2nd Garrison Battalion for two years before he was medically discharged as a private on 11 October 1943 . 
 He then went through a series of jobs , including employment as a caretaker , a cook for a departmental survey party and as a leading hand at the Canberra incinerator . By 1951 he was almost crippled with osteoarthritis , and soon after was admitted to the Queanbeyan Private Nursing Home , where he died on 25 August 1972 ; he was buried with full military honours in the Ex @-@ Servicemen 's section of Woden Cemetery . 
 His medals are displayed in the Hall of Valour at the Australian War Memorial , and replicas of his medals and copies of the citations for the Military Medal and three bars can be viewed in the Canberra Services Club , of which he was a member for many years . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 Following several donations by the people of Cooma and the Monaro District , a Memorial Plaque to Corey was erected in Centennial Park , Cooma in 1979 . In 1995 , the plaque was moved to the Cooma Memorial and the committee involved with the relocation decided to erect a diorama based on a painting in the Australian War Memorial depicting stretcher bearers bringing in wounded soldiers under heavy shell fire at Mont St Quentin during the First World War . A local artist and sculptor , Chris Graham , was commissioned to undertake the project which was constructed from steel and concrete . It was erected in the Cooma War Memorial area on 23 April 1996 . 
 The inscription on the memorial reads : 
 = Burnham Park ( Chicago ) = 
 Burnham Park is a public park in Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . The park , which lies along 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of Lake Michigan shoreline , connects Grant Park at 14th Street to Jackson Park at 56th Street . The 598 acres ( 242 ha ) of parkland is owned and managed by Chicago Park District . It was named for urban planner and architect Daniel Burnham in 1927 . Burnham was one of the designers of the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition . 
 The park is an outgrowth of the 1909 Plan for Chicago developed by the park 's namesake Daniel Burnham and often called simply " The Burnham Plan " . Land for the park has been acquired by the city 's park district by a variety of means such as bequest , landfill , and barter . Now , the park hosts some of the city 's most important municipal structures , such as Soldier Field and McCormick Place . The park has surrendered the land for the Museum Campus to Grant Park . Recently , the park has become known as the landing site for Marine One when U.S. President Barack Obama visits his Kenwood home on Chicago 's south side . 
 In the early 20th century , Chicago businessman A. Montgomery Ward advocated that the lakefront must be publicly accessible , and remain " forever open , clear and free " , lest the city descend into the squalor typical of American cities of the time , with buildings and heavy industry destroying any chance for beauty . Ward 's influence lead to the protection of the lake shore parks system and to this day , the city 's lakefront is open from the former city limits at Hollywood Ave ( <unk> ) down to the former steel mills near Rainbow Beach ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 <unk> Drive is the boundary between Grant Park and Burnham Park . Beginning with Northerly Island and the 14th Street Beach , and enclosing Burnham Harbor and its public marina , the park runs in a narrow strip past Soldier Field and McCormick Place , both of which disrupt Burnham 's original plan , south to 56th street . The park , from North to South , runs through the communities of Near South , Douglas , Oakland , Kenwood and Hyde Park . 
 The park lies mostly between Lake Shore Drive and Lake Michigan , but crosses the drive and abuts the Illinois Central Railroad tracks in places . There is a beach at 31st Street , a skatepark at 34th Street , a stone beach at 49th Street , and a model boat pond at 51st Street in Hyde Park . The park ends with a flourish at Promontory Point at 55th Street . Footbridges and underpasses provide access to the park over the barriers of the train tracks and Lake Shore Drive . A 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) section of the Chicago Lakefront Trail bicycle and jogging path runs the length of the park . 
 = = History = = 
 Ward fought for the poor people 's access to Chicago 's lakefront . In 1906 , he campaigned to preserve neighboring Grant Park as a public park . Grant Park has been protected since 1836 by " forever open , clear and free " legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court rulings . In the mid @-@ 1890s , architect Daniel Burnham began planning a park and boulevard that would link Jackson Park with Grant Park and downtown . As Chief of Construction for the World 's Columbian Exposition of 1893 , Burnham was known for developing the White City . After the fair , Burnham began designing a more functional Chicago . Burnham 's plan , including a lakefront park with a series of islands , boating harbor , beaches , and playfields was published in his 1909 Plan of Chicago . Burnham 's famous 1909 plan eventually preserved Grant Park and the entire Chicago lakefront . 
 = = = 1860 @-@ 1890 = = = 
 Paul Cornell , a lawyer and real estate developer , donated and built East End Park between 51st and 53rd Streets in 1856 . After much of the land eroded , the property was incorporated into Burnham Park and was eventually renamed Harold Washington Park in 1992 . In the years following his donation , expansions were built at the northeast corner of the future Jackson Park , located at the south end of Burnham . The most notable expansions included a seawall and granite paved strolling beach , constructed from 1884 to 1888 , and a building used as the Iowa Pavilion during the Columbian Exposition . 
 Cornell lobbied for the establishment of the South Parks and Boulevard System . The first bond vote was rejected in 1867 , as just a method to provide remote driving grounds for rich citizens and to lure people to move away for the benefit of real estate speculators and developers . In 1869 , the bills were passed by the legislature , and the South Park Commission was formed with support from Cornell . The future site was primarily under Lake Michigan or abutting the Illinois Central Railroad right of way . In 1892 , the formerly <unk> railroad was raised on an embankment , along the present west edge of the park . South Park ( the present Jackson Park ) was slowly developed , and along with the Midway Plaisance and Washington Park , the designs by Frederick Olmsted and Calvert Vaux were focused on lagoons and navigation from the Lake to South Park Way ( now King Dr. ) and 55th Street , in addition to the development of a country driving park , horse and buggy paths along the lake , and a water system running north to downtown . By the 1880s , the development included the Kenwood and Bowen communities , and by the 1890s , immigrant neighborhoods were developing . The city limits were expanded from 39th to 130th in 1889 , absorbing virtually all of Hyde Park Township ( 35th to 138th ) . 
 = = = 1890 @-@ 1910 = = = 
 The Columbian Exposition was held in Jackson Park , leaving housing in Hyde Park built for the Fair . The area around the new University of Chicago allowed real estate developers an opportunity to profit during the depression of the mid @-@ 1890s . As part of Jackson Park 's transformation , South Park Commission President James E. Ellsworth asked Burnham to design a boulevard linking Jackson and Grant Parks . Ruling out residential expansion , Burnham developed plans for green areas , harbors and lagoons , water scenery , a canal to downtown , and a scenic drive . With a theme of a " playground for the people " , the area was planned to include bridges , beaches with pavilions , and bathing houses . In 1896 , Burnham began marketing the plan to Marshall Field , George Pullman , Philip Armour , and business organizations . In 1901 , the Chicago Commercial Club began promoting the ideas and in 1909 , published the Plan of Chicago by Burnham and Edward H. Bennett and illustrated by Jules Guerin . From 1907 until 1920 , legal battles to acquire parkland continued despite the 1907 Legislature passing a bill with language favoring railroads until courts rejected the legislation . 
 = = = 1910 @-@ 1920 = = = 
 The South Park Commission received rights to the future site of the Field Museum in exchange for 160 acres ( 65 ha ) transferred to the Illinois Central Railroad . Government agencies had to agree to plans , including the Cook County Circuit Court , General Assembly , Chicago Plan Commission , and U.S. Secretary of War . In 1912 , Burnham died and a new Chicago Plan Commission was created . In 1919 , landfill efforts began at the north end of the park . In February 1920 , voters approved a $ 20 million bond issue as part of the Burnham Plan initiative for new lands to complete Grant Park , so as to create the South Shore Development . In 1920 , the Field Museum was opened , with the exhibits moved from Jackson Park into the basement . By 1925 , new landforms , including Northerly Island , the only offshore landform in the Burnham Plan actually built , were completed to 23rd Street . 
 = = = 1920 @-@ 1930 = = = 
 A $ 2 @.@ 5 million bond issue passed in 1922 for a stadium conceived by Burnham . Designed by architects Holabird & Roche and named Soldier Field for the veterans of World War I , cost overruns required another bond issue in 1926 . By 1924 , the breakwater wall stretched from 14th to 55th Streets . In 1926 , Soldier Field and a portion of Lake Shore Drive were opened . <unk> extended from 23rd Street to 56th Street ; however , Promontory Point was not complete , prompting complaints regarding garbage , blowing sand and odors . Throughout the 1920s and 1930s , landfill efforts continued to fill in Burnham Park and the adjacent Northerly Island . The South Development was named for Daniel Burnham on January 14 , 1927 , and support increased for a world 's fair in the park . Construction was completed on Lake Shore Drive , with northbound lanes named for Leif Erikson , and southbound lanes for Christopher Columbus . In 1929 , construction of the park at Promontory Point began . The Great Depression delayed work and prevented construction of nearshore islands . Burnham Park was chosen for the site of the Century of Progress world 's fair and a yacht basin was built south of 51st Street . 
 = = = 1930s @-@ 1940s = = = 
 In 1933 and 1934 , the Century of Progress International Exposition was held in Burnham Park . In the mid @-@ 1930s , the Chicago Park District used funds from the federal Works Progress Administration to complete landfill operations and install landscaping at Promontory Point by renowned designer Alfred Caldwell , a professor at the Illinois Institute of Technology . In 1935 , Mayor Edward Joseph Kelly explored the idea of a permanent fair in the park . The state passed a bill creating the Metropolitan Fair and Exposition Authority and allowed construction of Meigs Field , after Northerly Island lost out as the site for the United Nations . In 1948 , Burnham Park hosted the Chicago Railroad Fair , proving the location 's viability for conventions , which eventually led to the construction of the first McCormick Place in 1960 . 
 = = = = Balbo Monument = = = = 
 One highlight of the 1933 Century of Progress World 's Fair was popular Italian aviator and prominent fascist Italo Balbo , leading 24 flying boats in landing on Lake Michigan after a transatlantic flight from Rome . Balbo 's squadron left Italy on June 30 , 1933 , and arrived on July 15 , after making several short stops . To honor his journey , 7th Street was renamed Balbo Drive . As a return gift , Benito Mussolini sent an ancient 2nd @-@ century Roman column , which was erected in front of the Italian pavilion during the Century of Progress Exposition . Located near the lakefront bike trail east of Soldier Field , the Balbo Monument is one of the few relics remaining from the fair . The column is from a portico near the Porta Marina of Ostia <unk> and stands on a marble base with inscriptions in both Italian and English reading : 
 " This column , twenty centuries old , was erected on the beach of Ostia , the port of Imperial Rome , to watch over the fortunes and victories of the Roman triremes . Fascist Italy , with the sponsorship of Benito Mussolini , presents to Chicago a symbol and memorial in honor of the Atlantic Squadron led by Balbo , which with Roman daring , flew across the ocean in the 11th year of the Fascist era . " 
 = = = 1950s @-@ 1970s = = = 
 During the 1950s , the park was the host of a Project Nike air defense system missile site . The United States Department of Defense and the United States Army kept similar sites in 40 United States cities during the Cold War and dismantled them in 1971 . The original McCormick Place burned down in 1967 , and despite opposition , a new facility opened in Burnham Park in 1971 . 
 = = Burnham Park today = = 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 The Museum Campus , which includes the Adler Planetarium , Shedd Aquarium and Field Museum , was annexed to Grant Park from Burnham Park in the late 1990s . Burnham 's 598 acres ( 242 ha ) still contain Soldier Field and Chicago 's premier convention center , McCormick Place @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake , which hosts more than four million people per year . The Chicago Park District maintains several beaches and also operates a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 900 m2 ) all @-@ concrete skatepark , just south of the 31st Street <unk> . It has been widely reported that when U.S. President Barack Obama returns to visit his Chicago home in the Kenwood community area , he is transported by helicopter from O 'Hare International Airport to Burnham Park , where he is transferred to his motorcade . 
 = = = = Harbors and marinas = = = = 
 The park includes two harbors for the docking of fishing and leisure craft . Burnham Harbor , located adjacent to the Museum Campus and Soldier Field , is created by Northerly Island . It contains 1120 docking facilities , a harbor store , boat ramp , and the Burnham Park Yacht Club . The 31st Street Harbor , adjacent to the 31st Street Beach , opened in 2012 . It contains 1000 floating slips , a harbor store , boat ramp and provides new park amenities . 
 = = = Morgan Shoal = = = 
 In 1999 , the Park District initiated a long @-@ range planning program for a number of lakefront and historic parks . On January 5 , 2000 , the Park District made its first move toward adding acreage to the park by adopting the Burnham Park Framework Plan . The project , which as of 2009 was still continuing , is a joint commission of the Park District , the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the City of Chicago Department of Environment . The project has been delayed in part because the Corps of Engineers has been diverted to design projects for the Iraq War . In conjunction with <unk> Engineering , <unk> Studio designed a nature area within a portion of the park between 45th and 51st Streets , featuring the shallow bedrock in an area known as Morgan Shoal . The $ 42 million expansion will increase parkland by 30 acres ( 12 ha ) , filling Lake Michigan . 
 = = = Chicago Lakefront Trail = = = 
 The Chicago Lakefront Trail ( <unk> ) is an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) multi @-@ use path along the shoreline of Lake Michigan . It is popular with cyclists and joggers . From north to south , it runs through Lincoln Park , Grant Park , Burnham Park and Jackson Park . 
 = Day of the Jackanapes = 
 " Day of the Jackanapes " is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 18 , 2001 . In the episode , Krusty announces his retirement due to interference from network executives and the growing popularity of the game show Me <unk> . But when Krusty reveals to Sideshow Bob that all of the episodes featuring him have been erased , Sideshow Bob uses Bart to try and murder Krusty during his farewell show . 
 " Day of the Jackanapes " was written by Al Jean and directed by Michael Marcantel and features recurring guest star Kelsey Grammer as Sideshow Bob , as well as Gary Coleman as himself . It features references to Johnny Carson , Bookends and Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , among other things . 
 It would also feature a parody of the song " Zip @-@ a @-@ Dee @-@ Doo @-@ Dah " , but because the series ' staff were not able to clear the rights for the song in time for the episode 's broadcast , the song remained unreleased until 2007 . The episode is the first appearance of Sideshow Bob since " Brother from Another Series " ( 1997 ) . 
 In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 9 million viewers , finishing in 34th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its broadcast , the episode received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When the popular game show Me <unk> ! steals ratings from The Krusty the Clown Show , Krusty , annoyed with his interfering network executives , announces that he will quit showbusiness for good . During an interview with Kent Brockman , he says he is tired of doing his show , and admits to taping Judge Judy over all his old shows featuring Sideshow Bob . 
 Upon hearing this on TV , Bob vows revenge and plots to kill Krusty . Bob is released from prison and applies for a job at Springfield Elementary as an assistant janitor . However , Principal Skinner decides to make him the morning announcer . Over the announcements , he asks Bart to meet him in the abandoned tool shed . Sideshow Bob binds Bart , then hypnotizes and programs him to smash a statue of Krusty at a local Krusty Burger . 
 The next night on Krusty 's farewell special , Krusty describes the history of his career . Bob straps Bart with explosives and tells him to hug Krusty at the end of his performance , thus killing both of them . However , as Krusty reaches the end of his performance , he talks to the audience about how he regrets mistreating Sideshow Bob , holding himself responsible for turning Bob into a ruthless criminal ( from Season 1 's " Krusty Gets Busted " ) . 
 Krusty even goes as far as singing a song on behalf of Bob , stating how very remorseful he is of mistreating him . Upon witnessing this , Bob is touched and develops a change of heart , but does not have time to stop his original plan from being carried out . Luckily , Krusty 's trained chimp Mr. Teeny sees the life @-@ threatening explosives and throws them into the network executives ' office , killing them all , though they later reanimate themselves like the T @-@ 1000 from Terminator 2 . 
 Bart comes out of his hypnotic state and he and his family serve dinner with Krusty , Bob and Sideshow Mel in a restaurant . Although Krusty and Bob reconcile , the police decide to execute Bob by guillotine for his plot of attempted murder , which is immediately revoked when he argues with Chief Wiggum that he should have a trial for it at least . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first draft of " Day of the Jackanapes " was written by current showrunner Al Jean . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Jean said that he had always wanted to write an episode about Sideshow Bob , and that " Day of the Jackanapes " would be a good way to have the character return . He also said that the writers wanted to work with Kelsey Grammer , who portrays Sideshow Bob , again . " Of all the guest stars we 've had who 've been great , he 's right up there as the very best " , he said . 
 Still , the writers had trouble with coming up with a story for Sideshow Bob since they had already explored several aspects of the character before . " It 's just that we 've done so many angles of whether he 's , he 's good , he 's reformed and then his brother came to town ... " executive producer and former showrunner Mike Scully said about the difficulty of writing episodes about Sideshow Bob . 
 At the beginning of the episode , Krusty is shown being pestered by network executives who comment on every choice he makes . He announces his departure from the Krusty the Klown Show after the executives give him notes during filming of a sketch . At the end of the episode , Mr Teeny is uncertain of where he should throw the plastic explosives that Bart wore . When he sees the two executives discussing in a room , he throws it onto them . Instead of dying of the explosion however , the pieces of the executives reconstitute into what Jean describes as a " super @-@ executive " . 
 These sequences were inspired by Jean 's dissatisfaction with some network executives , who he felt took control over a television series he was working on before he returned to The Simpsons in 1999 . " I had just worked on a show on another network [ ... ] we had a show where there were a lot of notes from executives " , Jean said of the inspiration for the scenes . The episode would originally have a different ending , but it was changed to its current iteration after the writers did not find the original ending humorous enough . When recording the DVD commentary however , Jean said that he was a bit dissatisfied with the new ending . " I think we did leave it a little hanging " , he said . 
 During one of the recording sessions for the episode , The Simpsons ' staff recorded " <unk> Lula " , a version of the 1946 song " Zip @-@ a @-@ Dee @-@ Doo @-@ Dah " with Grammer as Sideshow Bob on vocals . The song would originally be used in the episode , but the staff were not able to clear the rights for the song in time . It was therefore removed from the episode altogether , and remained unreleased until September 17 , 2007 , when it was included as a bonus track on the soundtrack album The Simpsons : Testify . Aside from Grammer , the episode also features American actor Gary Coleman as himself . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 This episode 's title , " Day of the Jackanapes , " is derived from the thriller novel " The Day of the Jackal " and the movie by the same name . 
 The plot of " Day of the Jackanapes " is based on the 1959 political thriller novel The Manchurian Candidate . Before filming an episode of his show , Krusty is stopped by the two network executives , who attempt to explain to him why the sitcom Seinfeld worked as a series . After Krusty has announced the cancellation of his show , a group of crying children are seen at the Krustylu Studios , where the show is filmed . 
 The name of the studio is based on Desilu Studios , a television company based in Los Angeles . In an interview with Kent Brockman , Krusty says that he taped over all episodes of his show that Sideshow Bob was in with episodes of the reality court show Judge Judy . This is a reference to how NBC reused tapes of early episodes of The Tonight Show to film new programs . 
 At one point in his last show , Krusty performs while sitting on a stool , a reference to television host Johnny Carson 's last appearance on The Tonight Show . While watching Krusty 's final show , Sideshow Bob holds a bag of Kettle Chips and says " Kettle Chips , the perfect side dish for revenge . " Because of this scene , the writing staff received several bags of Kettle Chips from Kettle Foods , according to Jean . When asking for Sideshow Bob 's forgiveness , Krusty sings a song to the tune of " Mandy " by Barry Manilow . The picture behind him is based on the cover of Bookends by Simon & Garfunkel . After having exploded , the two network executives reform into a " super @-@ executive " . The scene is a reference to the 1991 science fiction action film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . At the end of the episode , Krusty and Sideshow Bob reconcile in a restaurant . On the wall behind them are several pictures of guest stars that had previously appeared on The Simpsons , including Mark McGwire , Ringo Starr , Sting , Tom Jones , Brooke Shields and Elizabeth Taylor . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 18 , 2001 , " Day of the Jackanapes " received an 8 @.@ 8 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 9 million viewers . The episode finished in 34th place in the ratings for the week of February 12 – 18 , 2001 , tying with an episode of Malcolm in the Middle . On August 18 , 2009 , the episode was released as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season . Mike Scully , Al Jean , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Yeardley Smith , Tim Long , Matt Selman and Michael Marcantel participated in the audio commentary for the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Day of the Jackanapes " received positive reviews from critics . In his review of The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season , Mac McEntire of DVD Verdict described the episode as a " winner " . He especially enjoyed the scene in which Bart hits a statue of Krusty in the groin with a baseball bat . DVD Talk 's Jason Bailey wrote that this episode and " Insane Clown Poppy " both " really shine " , and Will Harris of Bull @-@ Eye.com wrote that the episode was " a crowd @-@ pleaser across the board . " 
 Colin Jacobson , of DVD Movie Guide wrote that , although it does not compare with the best Sideshow Bob episodes , it still " looks good " compared to the rest of the season . He enjoyed the lampooning of network executives , and though he did not consider the episode to be a " classic " , he maintained that it " fares pretty well . " IGN 's Robert Canning also wrote that , although the episode is overall " solid " , it is " lacking that extra something " that the best Sideshow Bob episodes have . Nevertheless , it reached number eight on the website 's list of ten best Sideshow Bob episodes of the series . 
 = Red Dutton = 
 Norman Alexander " Mervyn , Red " Dutton CM ( July 23 , 1897 – March 15 , 1987 ) was a Canadian ice hockey player , coach and executive . He played for the Calgary Tigers of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) and the Montreal Maroons and New York Americans of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . A rugged and physical defenceman , Dutton often led his team in penalty minutes , won the WCHL championship in 1924 as a member of the Tigers and was twice named a WCHL All @-@ Star . 
 Dutton coached and managed the Americans and later purchased the team before suspending operations in 1942 due to World War II . He served as the second president of the NHL between 1943 and 1946 before resigning the position after the NHL 's owners reneged on a promise to allow the Americans to resume operations following the war . He served as a Stanley Cup trustee for 37 years but otherwise limited his involvement with the NHL following the Americans ' demise . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 . 
 A successful businessman , Dutton operated a construction company that built Calgary 's McMahon Stadium in 1960 and he served for a time as the president of the Calgary Stampeders football club and later the Calgary Exhibition and Stampede . He was invested as a member of the Order of Canada in 1981 and is honoured by both the Manitoba Hockey and Alberta Sports Halls of Fame . He was posthumously awarded the Lester Patrick Trophy in 1993 in recognition of his contributions to the game of hockey in the United States . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dutton was born in Russell , Manitoba on July 23 , 1897 . His father , Bill , was a successful contractor who helped build Canada 's transcontinental railway system , and the younger Dutton often helped his father at his work when he was a boy . He had at least two elder brothers , and a sister . 
 His given name was Norman Alexander Dutton , but his birth names were quickly ignored . A family friend of the Duttons refused to call him Norman as the name had a negative connotation for her , so she instead called him " Mervyn " , a name that stuck . His friends called him " Red " after the colour of his hair , and to most , he was known as Mervyn " Red " Dutton . 
 Dutton attended school at St. John 's College in Winnipeg . He left school in 1915 to volunteer with the Canadian Expeditionary Force ( CEF ) in World War I and served with the Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry . He lied about his birth date on his CEF enlistment papers as he was not yet 18 , and served for four years . Dutton fought in the Battle of Vimy Ridge in 1917 where he suffered a shrapnel wound to his leg serious enough that doctors pressed for amputation . Dutton refused and spent the following 18 months working to recover full use of his leg . He played hockey almost constantly to regain strength , at one point playing in seven different Winnipeg leagues at the same time . 
 Following the war , Dutton sought to build his own contracting business . However , an economic depression in 1920 forced its closure . He then worked in a packing plant in Winnipeg that also ceased operations . Penniless , with only his pride preventing him from asking his father for help , he was met by the owner of a hockey team in Calgary who had sought him out . Dutton was offered $ 2 @,@ 500 to play in the Alberta city . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Dutton joined the Calgary Canadians of Alberta 's Big @-@ 4 League for the 1920 – 21 season , then moved onto the Calgary Tigers of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) in 1921 – 22 where he scored 16 goals and 21 points in 22 games . Two seasons later , in 1923 – 24 , Dutton and the Tigers won the WCHL championship . He assisted on the championship winning goal in a 2 – 0 victory over the Regina Capitals by carrying the puck the length of the ice before passing to Cully Wilson who scored . The team then defeated the Pacific Coast Hockey Association 's Vancouver Maroons before losing to the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) in the 1924 Stanley Cup Final . 
 Named a WCHL first team all @-@ star on defence in 1922 and 1923 , Dutton played five seasons for the Tigers . Known for his aggressive , physical style , he led the team in penalty minutes in each of those five years , and the league in 1921 – 22 and 1923 – 24 . Financial pressures forced the Western League to sell its interests to the NHL following the 1925 – 26 season , and having suffered a serious knee injury during the season , Dutton was left unsure of his future . 
 Nonetheless , his rights were sold to the Montreal Maroons , and he made his NHL debut on November 20 , 1926 against the Canadiens . Dutton played four seasons with the Maroons , scoring 15 goals and 41 points . He played in the Stanley Cup Finals for the second time in his career in 1927 – 28 , but the Maroons lost the best @-@ of @-@ five final three games to two . He led the league in penalty minutes the following season . 
 Dutton was the subject of trade talks between the Maroons and the Chicago Black Hawks following the 1928 – 29 NHL season . The teams had been negotiating to send Cyclone Wentworth to Montreal in exchange for Dutton and Babe Siebert before the Black Hawks purchased the contract of Taffy Abel , which ended the Hawks pursuit of Dutton . The Maroons continued to make him available , with the Toronto Maple Leafs showing interest following the 1929 – 30 season . Finally , he was sold to the New York Americans along with Mike Neville , Hap Emms and Frank Carson for $ 35 @,@ 000 . 
 At first distraught at leaving Montreal , Dutton quickly adapted to playing in New York . He maintained his aggressive style of play with the Americans , again leading the league in penalties in 1931 – 32 . Despite his fiery temper , Dutton became one of the most popular players in New York amongst both the fans and his fellow players . He was not able to turn the Americans ' fortunes on the ice around , however , as the team failed to qualify for the playoffs in his first five seasons with the team . 
 Dutton was named the coach of the Americans for the 1935 – 36 NHL season , and in doing so became the second player @-@ coach in NHL history . Under his leadership , the Americans finished third in the Canadian Division with a 16 – 25 – 7 record and qualified for the postseason . The Americans then went on to defeat the Black Hawks 7 – 5 in a two @-@ game , total @-@ goal series to face the Maple Leafs in the league semi @-@ final series . Dutton was unable to play parts of the series against Toronto due to a hip injury , and the Americans lost the best @-@ of @-@ three series two games to one . Dutton retired as a player following the season and turned his focus to coaching full @-@ time . 
 = = Executive career = = 
 While Dutton focused on coaching the team , the Americans were facing bankruptcy . Heavily in debt , team owner Bill Dwyer turned to Dutton who lent him $ 20 @,@ 000 to allow the team to continue operating . When the NHL finally forced Dwyer out and took over ownership of the franchise , the league asked Dutton to take over management of the team . 
 Though the <unk> team was written off by the press and labeled as being " orphans " , Dutton built an Americans team in 1937 – 38 that finished with a 19 – 18 – 11 record . It was only the third time in the team 's 13 @-@ year history they finished with a winning record . It was also only the third time the Americans qualified for the playoffs . They faced , and defeated , their rival New York Rangers in the first round of the playoffs before losing to the Black Hawks in the league semi @-@ final . Dutton pioneered the use of air travel as the Americans became the first hockey team to fly between games in 1938 . 
 The Americans continued to defy expectations in 1938 – 39 . They again qualified for the playoffs , losing to Toronto in the first round , while Dutton was named an NHL Second @-@ Team All @-@ Star as coach . He led them to the playoffs again in 1939 – 40 , but the loss of players due to World War II took its toll on the franchise . After finishing in last place the season before , the league announced that the Americans had suspended operations for the 1942 – 43 NHL season though Dutton continued to represent the team on the Board of Governors . Dutton believed that if the Americans could have held on through the war , his team would become more popular than the Rangers . " A couple of more years and we would have run the Rangers right out of the rink , " he said . 
 Following the sudden death of Frank Calder in 1943 , the NHL asked Dutton to serve as acting @-@ president of the league . The owners wanted Dutton in the post both because he was popular with the players , and because they felt they could control him . Dutton agreed to take the presidency on the promise that the league would reinstate the Americans following the war . He resigned the position after one year , citing the fact that the role took too much time away from his business interests in Calgary , but reversed his decision on the understanding that he would not always be available to serve the NHL post . Despite this agreement , he again attempted to leave the presidency in December 1944 , and again had to be persuaded to complete the season . 
 In spite of his earlier reluctance to retain the presidency , Dutton completed a five @-@ year agreement to remain as the head of the NHL in 1945 . He continued to make inquiries on the status of his team , but found in 1946 that the owners had reneged on their promise . Dutton had arranged $ 7 million in financing for a new arena in Brooklyn and upon being told by the owners during a league meeting that they weren 't interested told his peers " You can stick your franchise up your ass " , and left the meeting . Dutton then resigned the presidency , but remained in the position until he convinced the league to accept Clarence Campbell as his replacement . 
 Dutton felt that the Rangers were responsible for the league 's refusal to allow the Americans to resume operations , and in a fit of pique , swore that the Rangers would never win another Stanley Cup in his lifetime . His vow became known as " Dutton 's Curse " . Additionally , he never set foot in an NHL arena again until 1980 when , as the last surviving Calgary Tiger , he was asked to drop the puck for the ceremonial faceoff prior to the first game in Calgary Flames ' history . Dutton 's 34 @-@ year separation from the NHL was attributed to the betrayal of the league 's owners , but also because Dutton himself found the lure of the game too strong , and knew he had to step away in order to effectively manage his businesses . 
 In spite of this , he accepted a nomination in 1950 to become one of two Stanley Cup trustees , a position he held until his death in 1987 . Dutton was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 , and was a member of the Hall of Fame 's selection committee for 15 years . 
 = = Business career = = 
 Attempting to overcome the failure of his first contracting business following World War I , Dutton operated a second using the money he earned with the Tigers and Maroons . It too failed in 1933 as a result of the Great Depression . In 1938 , he tried again , joining with Reg Jennings and his brother Jack to form the Standard Gravel and Surfacing Company in Calgary . The company proved immensely successful during World War II , building numerous airports within Canada as part of the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan as well as completing highways in northern Alberta and the Northwest Territories . After serving a year as vice @-@ chairman , Dutton was named the chairman of the prairie roadbuilders section of the Canadian Construction Association in 1950 . By 1960 , the company had become Standard Holdings Ltd . , operating 20 different companies that had $ 70 million in contracts for that year alone , and Dutton had personally become a millionaire . 
 He remained active in the sporting world as well . When the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League found themselves in financial trouble in 1955 , Dutton led a group of local businessmen in purchasing the team . Named the president of the team , he worked to increase the team 's revenues and to force a greater level of professionalism amongst his peers in Canadian football . He served as team president until 1959 . 
 Dutton 's company built the Chinook Centre shopping mall , and in 1960 , was contracted to build McMahon Stadium as the new home of the Stampeders . He bet George McMahon , the stadium 's benefactor , $ 1 @,@ 000 that he could complete the 19 @,@ 000 seat facility within four months . He won the bet with three days to spare . 
 Also in 1960 , Dutton was named president of the Calgary Exhibition and Stampede on a two @-@ year term . He had been a Stampede director for ten @-@ years previous to his appointment . As head of the exhibition , he also spoke for the Stampeders hockey team of the Western Hockey League , and was its chief negotiator . Through his work and community spirit , Dutton played a major role in helping Calgary and the surrounding area shed its rural image in the 25 years following World War II . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Dutton and his wife <unk> had four children . Sons Joseph , Alex and Norman , and daughter Beryl . All three sons fought in World War II ; Joseph and Alex were both killed serving with the Royal Canadian Air Force within six months of each other . In their memory , he funded the Dutton Memorial Arena in Winnipeg which opened in 1967 and was dedicated to developing Canada 's national hockey team . Norman served in the navy during World War II ; he died in 1973 . 
 He raced thoroughbred horses for decades , and once sponsored a baseball team made up of hockey players known as the Calgary <unk> that enjoyed success during the hockey off @-@ seasons . Among his humanitarian efforts , Dutton was a longtime supporter of cancer research and treatment , and made donations of equipment in the memory of his father , who died from the disease . He became the potentate of the Al Azhar Shriner Temple in Calgary in 1953 so that he could help crippled children . 
 Dutton earned many honours in recognition of his life and career . He was made an honorary Lieutenant @-@ Colonel of the King 's Own Calgary Regiment in 1953 , and promoted to honorary Colonel two years later . He was invested as a member of the Order of Canada in 1981 . In 1993 , the NHL posthumously named him one of four recipients of the Lester Patrick Trophy in recognition of his contributions to hockey in the United States . He was inducted into the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame in 1998 , and the Alberta Sports Hall of Fame in 2005 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 = = = Coaching career = = = 
 = Space / Time = 
 " Space " and " Time " are two mini @-@ episodes of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . They were broadcast on 18 March 2011 as part of BBC One 's Red Nose Day telethon for the charity Comic Relief . The two mini @-@ episodes were written by the programme 's head writer Steven Moffat and directed by Richard Senior . 
 The episodes form a two @-@ part story , set entirely within the TARDIS , starring Matt Smith as The Doctor , and Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill as married couple Amy Pond and Rory Williams . Rory , helping the Doctor work on the TARDIS , looks up the glass floor surrounding the console and becomes distracted by Amy 's short skirt , causing him to drop the thermal couplings he was holding . This causes the three to be stuck in a " space loop " where the TARDIS materialises inside of the TARDIS . 
 " Space " and " Time " were filmed in two days alongside the sixth series DVD Night and the Doctor extras " Bad Night " and " Good Night " . The episodes are intended to show what life aboard the TARDIS would be like . Several editing techniques and doubles were used for the various shots where there were more than one of the same character on the screen . The mini @-@ episodes received mixed reviews ; some scenes were thought to be funny , but other jokes were criticised for relying on sexist humour . " Space " and " Time " were later released on the DVD and Blu @-@ ray sets of the sixth series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " Space " = = = 
 Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) is trying to get the Doctor 's ( Matt Smith ) attention while he fixes the TARDIS . She discovers that her husband Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) is helping the Doctor by installing thermal couplings underneath the glass floor of the TARDIS . Rory and Amy then start a small argument about Amy cheating when she took her driving test , when the TARDIS suddenly shakes and the lights go out . The Doctor asks Rory if he dropped a thermal coupling , which Rory admits to and apologises for doing . Amy then apologises as well and , at the Doctor 's confusion , explains that Rory was looking up her skirt through the glass floor when he dropped the thermal coupling . The Doctor then notes that they have landed through " emergency <unk> " which should have landed the TARDIS in the safest space available . The lights come on , revealing another TARDIS inside the control room — the TARDIS has materialised inside itself . The Doctor experimentally walks through the door of the TARDIS inside the control room and instantly walks back into the control room through the door of the outer TARDIS . The Doctor tells Rory and Amy that they are trapped in a " space loop " and that nothing can enter or exit the TARDIS ever again . Despite the Doctor 's words , another Amy enters through the TARDIS door saying , " Okay , kids , this is where it gets complicated . " 
 = = = " Time " = = = 
 Continuing from the ending of " Space " , the other Amy reveals that she is from a few moments in the future , and is able to come into the current outer TARDIS because " the exterior shell of the TARDIS has drifted forwards in time " . The other Amy knows what to say and do because , from her perspective , she is repeating what she heard herself say earlier on . The Doctor sends the current Amy into the TARDIS within the current TARDIS , in order to " maintain the timeline " . The two Amys take a moment to flirt with each other before the current one departs , much to the Doctor 's exasperation . However , not long after the current Amy has left , Rory and Amy enter through the door of outer TARDIS explaining that the Doctor , from their perspective , has just sent them into the inner TARDIS . The current Doctor promptly sends the current Rory and the now @-@ current Amy through the inner TARDIS . The Doctor then explains that he will set up a " controlled temporal implosion " in order to " reset the TARDIS " , but in order to do so he must know which lever to use on the control panel . Moments after he speaks , another Doctor enters though the outer TARDIS door and tells him to use " the wibbly lever " , which he quickly operates , then steps into the inner TARDIS to tell his past self which lever to use . The inner TARDIS dematerialises while the outer TARDIS ( being the same TARDIS ) does the same , and the Doctor assures Amy and Rory that they are now back in " normal flight " , and then advises Amy to " put some trousers on " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Doctor Who had previously aired two related specials for Comic Relief . The first was the 1999 spoof The Curse of Fatal Death , which was also written by Steven Moffat . The spin @-@ off series The Sarah Jane Adventures produced its own mini @-@ episode " From Raxacoricofallapatorius with Love " for the 2009 Comic Relief appeal . Unlike The Curse of Fatal Death , " Space " and " Time " are considered to be canonical . The canonicity of the two mini @-@ episodes was affirmed by Moffat in Doctor Who Magazine . Moffat stated that , unlike Curse of the Fatal Death , " Space " and " Time " is not a spoof or a sketch , but rather " a little miniature story " in the style of the Children in Need mini @-@ episodes . He described it as " A moment of life aboard the TARDIS . But obviously life about the TARDIS instantly gets you into terrible jeopardy , and all of causality is threatened . As I 'm sure it is every day when they get up and have their coffee ... " The concept of a TARDIS inside the TARDIS had been previously explored in The Time Monster ( 1972 ) and Logopolis ( 1980 ) , though both times it was the TARDIS of the Master . Amy also repeats one of her lines from " The Big Bang " at the end of " Space " . 
 The special was shot over two days alongside the made @-@ for @-@ DVD Night and the Doctor mini @-@ episodes " Bad Night " and " Good Night " . It was mostly shot on the first day , where all of the scenes with the TARDIS inside the TARDIS were filmed . Several tricks were used to create the illusion that there were more than one Doctor , Amy , and / or Rory . In scenes where the camera had to move between the double characters , a " whip @-@ pan " was used twice , with the actor in a different place each time . The two shots were then edited together into one seamless take . For scenes where there were more than one of the same character in the same shot , such as the two Amys in front of the TARDIS , the camera was held very still and the scene was filmed twice , with the actor 's double filling in for the part they were not playing . The doubles were also used briefly in scenes where the characters ' backs were to the camera , such as when the Doctor , Amy , and Rory watched the future Amy and Rory enter the TARDIS . 
 = = Broadcast , release and reception = = 
 " Space " and " Time " were broadcast during the Comic Relief Red Nose Day telethon on 18 March 2011 on BBC One . The telethon was watched by 10 @.@ 26 million viewers . The BBC posted the episode in two parts on their official YouTube channel . The mini episodes were included as bonus features in the Complete Sixth Series DVD and Blu @-@ ray box set , released on 21 November 2011 ( Region 2 ) and 22 November 2011 ( Region 1 ) . 
 Lucy Mangan of The Guardian responded positively , noting it " manages brilliantly to nod to just about every <unk> in @-@ joke , demographic and fetish within the span of two tiny installments " . The A.V. Club reviewer Christopher Bahn opined that the two Amys in " Space " and " Time " were " a lot more fun to watch " than the two in the sixth series episode " The Girl Who Waited " . Tor.com 's Teresa Jusino , who had positive towards Amy 's character in the past , was disappointed that the ending of the <unk> relied on " too @-@ easy , dated , sexist humor " . She cited the fact that Rory dropping the coupling was blamed on Amy 's short skirt rather than Rory himself , which implied that she had a " responsibility to cover up , because ' men will be men ' " . In Who is the Doctor , a guide to the revived series , Robert Smith wrote that the episode was " cute , plotted to perfection and ends precisely when it should , before it has the chance to outstay its welcome " . He said that the episodes used Amy well , as it did not make her unlikable . On the other hand , his coauthor Graeme Burk said that the story was " derivative and lazy " and a " missed opportunity " . He likened the plot to that of Red Dwarf 's " Future Echoes " , and felt that Moffat could have written something better and funnier . Like Jusino , he thought that the " blokey humor " was " misplaced " , denying a broad audience appeal and leading to the sexist last line : " Pond , put some trousers on ! " . Despite this , both Jusino and Burk enjoyed the scene where Amy flirts with herself . 
 = History of timekeeping devices = 
 For thousands of years , devices have been used to measure and keep track of time . The current sexagesimal system of time measurement dates to approximately 2000 BCE from the Sumerians . 
 The Ancient Egyptians divided the day into two 12 @-@ hour periods , and used large obelisks to track the movement of the sun . They also developed water clocks , which were probably first used in the Precinct of Amun @-@ Re , and later outside Egypt as well ; they were employed frequently by the Ancient Greeks , who called them clepsydrae . The Zhou dynasty is believed to have used the outflow water clock around the same time , devices which were introduced from Mesopotamia as early as 2000 BCE . 
 Other ancient timekeeping devices include the candle clock , used in ancient China , ancient Japan , England and Mesopotamia ; the <unk> , widely used in India and Tibet , as well as some parts of Europe ; and the hourglass , which functioned similarly to a water clock . The sundial , another early clock , relies on shadows to provide a good estimate of the hour on a sunny day . It is not so useful in cloudy weather or at night and requires recalibration as the seasons change ( if the gnomon was not aligned with the Earth 's axis ) . 
 The earliest known clock with a water @-@ powered escapement mechanism , which transferred rotational energy into intermittent motions , dates back to 3rd century BCE in ancient Greece ; Chinese engineers later invented clocks incorporating mercury @-@ powered escapement mechanisms in the 10th century , followed by Arabic engineers inventing water clocks driven by gears and weights in the 11th century . 
 The first mechanical clocks , employing the verge escapement mechanism with a foliot or balance wheel timekeeper , were invented in Europe at around the start of the 14th century , and became the standard timekeeping device until the pendulum clock was invented in 1656 . The invention of the mainspring in the early 15th century allowed portable clocks to be built , evolving into the first <unk> by the 17th century , but these were not very accurate until the balance spring was added to the balance wheel in the mid 17th century . 
 The pendulum clock remained the most accurate timekeeper until the 1930s , when quartz oscillators were invented , followed by atomic clocks after World War 2 . Although initially limited to laboratories , the development of microelectronics in the 1960s made quartz clocks both compact and cheap to produce , and by the 1980s they became the world 's dominant timekeeping technology in both clocks and wristwatches . 
 Atomic clocks are far more accurate than any previous timekeeping device , and are used to calibrate other clocks and to calculate the International Atomic Time ; a standardized civil system , Coordinated Universal Time , is based on atomic time . 
 = = <unk> devices of early civilizations = = 
 Many ancient civilizations observed astronomical bodies , often the Sun and Moon , to determine times , dates , and seasons . Methods of sexagesimal timekeeping , now common in both Western and Eastern societies , originated nearly 4 @,@ 000 years ago in Mesopotamia and Egypt ; a similar system was developed later in Mesoamerica . The first calendars may have been created during the last glacial period , by hunter @-@ gatherers who employed tools such as sticks and bones to track the phases of the moon or the seasons . Stone circles , such as England 's Stonehenge , were built in various parts of the world , especially in Prehistoric Europe , and are thought to have been used to time and predict seasonal and annual events such as equinoxes or solstices . As those megalithic civilizations left no recorded history , little is known of their calendars or timekeeping methods . 
 = = = Ancient Egypt = = = 
 The oldest known sundial is from Egypt ; it dates back to around 1500 BCE ( 19th Dynasty ) , and was discovered in the Valley of the Kings in 2013 . Sundials have their origin in shadow clocks , which were the first devices used for measuring the parts of a day . Ancient Egyptian obelisks , constructed about 3500 BCE , are also among the earliest shadow clocks . 
 Egyptian shadow clocks divided daytime into 12 parts with each part further divided into more precise parts . One type of shadow clock consisted of a long stem with five variable marks and an elevated crossbar which cast a shadow over those marks . It was positioned eastward in the morning , and was turned west at noon . Obelisks functioned in much the same manner : the shadow cast on the markers around it allowed the Egyptians to calculate the time . The obelisk also indicated whether it was morning or afternoon , as well as the summer and winter solstices . A third shadow clock , developed c . 1500 BCE , was similar in shape to a bent T @-@ square . It measured the passage of time by the shadow cast by its crossbar on a non @-@ linear rule . The T was oriented eastward in the mornings , and turned around at noon , so that it could cast its shadow in the opposite direction . 
 Although accurate , shadow clocks relied on the sun , and so were useless at night and in cloudy weather . The Egyptians therefore developed a number of alternative timekeeping instruments , including water clocks , and a system for tracking star movements . The oldest description of a water clock is from the tomb inscription of the 16th @-@ century BCE Egyptian court official Amenemhet , identifying him as its inventor . There were several types of water clocks , some more elaborate than others . One type consisted of a bowl with small holes in its bottom , which was floated on water and allowed to fill at a near @-@ constant rate ; markings on the side of the bowl indicated elapsed time , as the surface of the water reached them . The oldest @-@ known <unk> was found in the tomb of pharaoh Amenhotep I ( 1525 – 1504 BCE ) , suggesting that they were first used in ancient Egypt . Another Egyptian method of determining the time during the night was using plumb @-@ lines called <unk> . In use since at least 600 BCE , two of these instruments were aligned with Polaris , the north pole star , to create a north – south meridian . The time was accurately measured by observing certain stars as they crossed the line created with the <unk> . 
 = = = Ancient Greece and Rome = = = 
 Water clocks , or clepsydrae , were commonly used in Ancient Greece following their introduction by Plato , who also invented a water @-@ based alarm clock . One account of Plato 's alarm clock describes it as depending on the nightly overflow of a vessel containing lead balls , which floated in a columnar vat . The vat held a steadily increasing amount of water , supplied by a cistern . By morning , the vessel would have floated high enough to tip over , causing the lead balls to cascade onto a copper platter . The resultant clangor would then awaken Plato 's students at the Academy . Another possibility is that it comprised two jars , connected by a siphon . Water emptied until it reached the siphon , which transported the water to the other jar . There , the rising water would force air through a whistle , sounding an alarm . The Greeks and Chaldeans regularly maintained timekeeping records as an essential part of their astronomical observations . 
 Greek astronomer , Andronicus of <unk> , supervised the construction of the Tower of the Winds in Athens in the 1st century BCE . 
 In Greek tradition , clepsydrae were used in court ; later , the Romans adopted this practice , as well . There are several mentions of this in historical records and literature of the era ; for example , in <unk> , Plato says that " Those men , on the other hand , always speak in haste , for the flowing water urges them on " . Another mention occurs in Lucius Apuleius ' The Golden Ass : " The Clerk of the Court began bawling again , this time summoning the chief witness for the prosecution to appear . Up stepped an old man , whom I did not know . He was invited to speak for as long as there was water in the clock ; this was a hollow globe into which water was poured through a funnel in the neck , and from which it gradually escaped through fine perforations at the base " . The clock in Apuleius 's account was one of several types of water clock used . Another consisted of a bowl with a hole in its centre , which was floated on water . Time was kept by observing how long the bowl took to fill with water . 
 Although clepsydrae were more useful than sundials — they could be used indoors , during the night , and also when the sky was cloudy — they were not as accurate ; the Greeks , therefore , sought a way to improve their water clocks . Although still not as accurate as sundials , Greek water clocks became more accurate around 325 BCE , and they were adapted to have a face with an hour hand , making the reading of the clock more precise and convenient . One of the more common problems in most types of clepsydrae was caused by water pressure : when the container holding the water was full , the increased pressure caused the water to flow more rapidly . This problem was addressed by Greek and Roman horologists beginning in 100 BCE , and improvements continued to be made in the following centuries . To counteract the increased water flow , the clock 's water containers — usually bowls or jugs — were given a conical shape ; positioned with the wide end up , a greater amount of water had to flow out in order to drop the same distance as when the water was lower in the cone . Along with this improvement , clocks were constructed more elegantly in this period , with hours marked by gongs , doors opening to miniature figurines , bells , or moving mechanisms . There were some remaining problems , however , which were never solved , such as the effect of temperature . Water flows more slowly when cold , or may even freeze . 
 Between 270 BCE and 500 CE , Hellenistic ( <unk> , Hero of Alexandria , Archimedes ) and Roman horologists and astronomers began developing more elaborate mechanized water clocks . The added complexity was aimed at regulating the flow and at providing fancier displays of the passage of time . For example , some water clocks rang bells and gongs , while others opened doors and windows to show figurines of people , or moved pointers , and dials . Some even displayed astrological models of the universe . 
 Although the Greeks and Romans did much to advance water clock technology , they still continued to use shadow clocks . The mathematician and astronomer Theodosius of Bithynia , for example , is said to have invented a universal sundial that was accurate anywhere on Earth , though little is known about it . Others wrote of the sundial in the mathematics and literature of the period . Marcus Vitruvius Pollio , the Roman author of De Architectura , wrote on the mathematics of <unk> , or sundial blades . During the reign of Emperor Augustus , the Romans constructed the largest sundial ever built , the <unk> Augusti . Its gnomon was an obelisk from Heliopolis . Similarly , the obelisk from Campus Martius was used as the gnomon for Augustus 's zodiacal sundial . Pliny the Elder records that the first sundial in Rome arrived in 264 BCE , looted from Catania , Sicily ; according to him , it gave the incorrect time until the markings and angle appropriate for Rome 's latitude were used — a century later . 
 = = = Persia = = = 
 According to Callisthenes , the Persians were using water clocks in 328 BCE to ensure a just and exact distribution of water from <unk> to their shareholders for agricultural irrigation . The use of water clocks in Iran , especially in <unk> , dates back to <unk> . Later they were also used to determine the exact holy days of pre @-@ Islamic religions , such as the Nowruz , <unk> , or <unk> – the shortest , longest , and equal @-@ length days and nights of the years . The water clocks used in Iran were one of the most practical ancient tools for timing the yearly calendar . 
 Water clocks , or <unk> , in Persia reached a level of accuracy comparable to today 's standards of timekeeping . The fenjaan was the most accurate and commonly used timekeeping device for calculating the amount or the time that a farmer must take water from a qanat or well for irrigation of the farms , until it was replaced by more accurate current clock . Persian water clocks were a practical and useful tool for the qanat 's shareholders to calculate the length of time they could divert water to their farm . The qanat was the only water source for agriculture and irrigation so a just and fair water distribution was very important . Therefore , a very fair and clever old person was elected to be the manager of the water clock , and at least two full @-@ time managers were needed to control and observe the number of <unk> and announce the exact time during the days and nights . 
 The fenjaan was a big pot full of water and a bowl with small hole in the center . When the bowl become full of water , it would sink into the pot , and the manager would empty the bowl and again put it on the top of the water in the pot . He would record the number of times the bowl sank by putting small stones into a jar . 
 The place where the clock was situated , and its managers , were collectively known as <unk> fenjaan . Usually this would be the top floor of a public @-@ house , with west- and east @-@ facing windows to show the time of sunset and sunrise . There was also another time @-@ keeping tool named a <unk> or astrolabe , but it was mostly used for superstitious beliefs and was not practical for use as a farmers ' calendar . The <unk> <unk> water clock was in used until 1965 when it was substituted by modern clocks . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Joseph Needham speculated that the introduction of the outflow clepsydra to China , perhaps from Mesopotamia , occurred as far back as the 2nd millennium BCE , during the Shang Dynasty , and at the latest by the 1st millennium BCE . By the beginning of the Han Dynasty , in 202 BCE , the outflow clepsydra was gradually replaced by the inflow clepsydra , which featured an indicator rod on a float . To compensate for the falling pressure head in the reservoir , which slowed timekeeping as the vessel filled , Zhang Heng added an extra tank between the reservoir and the inflow vessel . Around 550 AD , Yin Gui was the first in China to write of the overflow or constant @-@ level tank added to the series , which was later described in detail by the inventor Shen Kuo . Around 610 , this design was trumped by two Sui Dynasty inventors , Geng Xun and Yuwen Kai , who were the first to create the balance clepsydra , with standard positions for the steelyard balance . Joseph Needham states that : 
 ... [ the balance clepsydra ] permitted the seasonal adjustment of the pressure head in the compensating tank by having standard positions for the counterweight graduated on the beam , and hence it could control the rate of flow for different lengths of day and night . With this arrangement no overflow tank was required , and the two attendants were warned when the clepsydra needed refilling . 
 = = Clocks by type = = 
 The term ' clock ' encompasses a wide spectrum of devices , ranging from wristwatches to the Clock of the Long Now . The English word clock is said to derive from the Middle English <unk> , Old North French <unk> , or Middle Dutch <unk> , all of which mean bell , and are derived from the Medieval Latin <unk> , also meaning bell . Indeed , bells were used to mark the passage of time ; they marked the passage of the hours at sea and in abbeys . 
 Throughout history , clocks have had a variety of power sources , including gravity , springs , and electricity . Mechanical clocks became widespread in the 14th century , when they were used in medieval monasteries to keep the regulated schedule of prayers . The clock continued to be improved , with the first pendulum clock being designed and built in the 17th century . 
 = = = Candle clocks = = = 
 The earliest mention of candle clocks comes from a Chinese poem , written in 520 CE by You <unk> . According to the poem , the graduated candle was a means of determining time at night . Similar candles were used in Japan until the early 10th century . 
 The candle clock most commonly mentioned and written of is attributed to King Alfred the Great . It consisted of six candles made from 72 <unk> of wax , each 12 inches ( 30 cm ) high , and of uniform thickness , marked every inch ( 2 @.@ 54 cm ) . As these candles burned for about four hours , each mark represented 20 minutes . Once lit , the candles were placed in wooden framed glass boxes , to prevent the flame from extinguishing . 
 The most sophisticated candle clocks of their time were those of Al @-@ Jazari in 1206 . One of his candle clocks included a dial to display the time and , for the first time , employed a bayonet fitting , a fastening mechanism still used in modern times . Donald Routledge Hill described Al @-@ Jazari 's candle clocks as follows : 
 The candle , whose rate of burning was known , bore against the underside of the cap , and its wick passed through the hole . Wax collected in the indentation and could be removed periodically so that it did not interfere with steady burning . The bottom of the candle rested in a shallow dish that had a ring on its side connected through pulleys to a counterweight . As the candle burned away , the weight pushed it upward at a constant speed . The automata were operated from the dish at the bottom of the candle . No other candle clocks of this sophistication are known . 
 A variation on this theme were oil @-@ lamp clocks . These early timekeeping devices consisted of a graduated glass reservoir to hold oil — usually whale oil , which burned cleanly and evenly — supplying the fuel for a built @-@ in lamp . As the level in the reservoir dropped , it provided a rough measure of the passage of time . 
 = = = Incense clocks = = = 
 In addition to water , mechanical , and candle clocks , incense clocks were used in the Far East , and were fashioned in several different forms . Incense clocks were first used in China around the 6th century ; in Japan , one still exists in the <unk> , although its characters are not Chinese , but Devanagari . Due to their frequent use of Devanagari characters , suggestive of their use in Buddhist ceremonies , Edward H. Schafer speculated that incense clocks were invented in India . Although similar to the candle clock , incense clocks burned evenly and without a flame ; therefore , they were more accurate and safer for indoor use . 
 Several types of incense clock have been found , the most common forms include the incense stick and incense seal . An incense stick clock was an incense stick with calibrations ; most were elaborate , sometimes having threads , with weights attached , at even intervals . The weights would drop onto a platter or gong below , signifying that a certain amount of time had elapsed . Some incense clocks were held in elegant trays ; open @-@ bottomed trays were also used , to allow the weights to be used together with the decorative tray . Sticks of incense with different scents were also used , so that the hours were marked by a change in fragrance . The incense sticks could be straight or spiraled ; the spiraled ones were longer , and were therefore intended for long periods of use , and often hung from the roofs of homes and temples . 
 In Japan , a geisha was paid for the number of <unk> ( incense sticks ) that had been consumed while she was present , a practice which continued until 1924 . Incense seal clocks were used for similar occasions and events as the stick clock ; while religious purposes were of primary importance , these clocks were also popular at social gatherings , and were used by Chinese scholars and intellectuals . The seal was a wooden or stone disk with one or more grooves etched in it into which incense was placed . These clocks were common in China , but were produced in fewer numbers in Japan . To signal the passage of a specific amount of time , small pieces of fragrant woods , resins , or different scented <unk> could be placed on the incense powder trails . Different powdered incense clocks used different formulations of incense , depending on how the clock was laid out . The length of the trail of incense , directly related to the size of the seal , was the primary factor in determining how long the clock would last ; all burned for long periods of time , ranging between 12 hours and a month . 
 While early incense seals were made of wood or stone , the Chinese gradually introduced disks made of metal , most likely beginning during the Song dynasty . This allowed craftsmen to more easily create both large and small seals , as well as design and decorate them more aesthetically . Another advantage was the ability to vary the paths of the grooves , to allow for the changing length of the days in the year . As smaller seals became more readily available , the clocks grew in popularity among the Chinese , and were often given as gifts . Incense seal clocks are often sought by modern @-@ day clock collectors ; however , few remain that have not already been purchased or been placed on display at museums or temples . 
 = = = Sundials = = = 
 Sundials had been used for timekeeping since Ancient Egypt . Ancient dials were nodus @-@ based with straight hour @-@ lines that indicated unequal hours — also called temporary hours — that varied with the seasons . Every day was divided into 12 equal segments regardless of the time of year ; thus , hours were shorter in winter and longer in summer . The sundial was further developed by Muslim astronomers . The idea of using hours of equal length throughout the year was the innovation of Abu 'l @-@ Hasan Ibn al @-@ Shatir in 1371 , based on earlier developments in trigonometry by Muhammad ibn Jābir al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . Ibn al @-@ Shatir was aware that " using a gnomon that is parallel to the Earth 's axis will produce sundials whose hour lines indicate equal hours on any day of the year " . His sundial is the oldest polar @-@ axis sundial still in existence . The concept appeared in Western sundials starting in 1446 . 
 Following the acceptance of heliocentrism and equal hours , as well as advances in trigonometry , sundials appeared in their present form during the Renaissance , when they were built in large numbers . In 1524 , the French astronomer <unk> <unk> constructed an ivory sundial , which still exists ; later , in 1570 , the Italian astronomer Giovanni Padovani published a treatise including instructions for the manufacture and laying out of mural ( vertical ) and horizontal sundials . Similarly , Giuseppe <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ad <unk> <unk> ( c . 1620 ) discusses how to construct sundials . 
 = = = Clocks with gears and escapements = = = 
 The earliest instance of a liquid @-@ driven escapement was described by the Greek engineer Philo of Byzantium ( fl . 3rd century BCE ) in his technical treatise <unk> ( chapter 31 ) where he likens the escapement mechanism of a washstand automaton with those as employed in ( water ) clocks . Another early clock to use escapements was built during the 7th century in Chang 'an , by Tantric monk and mathematician , Yi Xing , and government official Liang <unk> . An astronomical instrument that served as a clock , it was discussed in a contemporary text as follows : 
 [ It ] was made in the image of the round heavens and on it were shown the lunar mansions in their order , the equator and the degrees of the heavenly circumference . Water , flowing into scoops , turned a wheel automatically , rotating it one complete revolution in one day and night . Besides this , there were two rings fitted around the celestial sphere outside , having the sun and moon threaded on them , and these were made to move in circling orbit ... And they made a wooden casing the surface of which represented the horizon , since the instrument was half sunk in it . It permitted the exact determinations of the time of dawns and <unk> , full and new moons , tarrying and hurrying . Moreover , there were two wooden jacks standing on the horizon surface , having one a bell and the other a drum in front of it , the bell being struck automatically to indicate the hours , and the drum being beaten automatically to indicate the quarters . All these motions were brought about by machinery within the casing , each depending on wheels and shafts , hooks , pins and interlocking rods , stopping devices and locks checking mutually . 
 Since Yi Xing 's clock was a water clock , it was affected by temperature variations . That problem was solved in 976 by Zhang Sixun by replacing the water with mercury , which remains liquid down to − 39 ° C ( − 38 ° F ) . Zhang implemented the changes into his clock tower , which was about 10 metres ( 33 ft ) tall , with escapements to keep the clock turning and bells to signal every quarter @-@ hour . Another noteworthy clock , the elaborate Cosmic Engine , was built by Su Song , in 1088 . It was about the size of Zhang 's tower , but had an automatically rotating armillary sphere — also called a celestial globe — from which the positions of the stars could be observed . It also featured five panels with mannequins ringing gongs or bells , and tablets showing the time of day , or other special times . Furthermore , it featured the first known endless power @-@ transmitting chain drive in horology . Originally built in the capital of Kaifeng , it was dismantled by the Jin army and sent to the capital of Yanjing ( now Beijing ) , where they were unable to put it back together . As a result , Su Song 's son Su Xie was ordered to build a replica . 
 The clock towers built by Zhang Sixun and Su Song , in the 10th and 11th centuries , respectively , also incorporated a striking clock mechanism , the use of clock jacks to sound the hours . A striking clock outside of China was the <unk> Water Clock , at the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus , Syria , which struck once every hour . It was constructed by Muhammad al @-@ Sa 'ati in the 12th century , and later described by his son Ridwan ibn al @-@ Sa 'ati , in his On the Construction of Clocks and their Use ( 1203 ) , when repairing the clock . In 1235 , an early monumental water @-@ powered alarm clock that " announced the appointed hours of prayer and the time both by day and by night " was completed in the entrance hall of the <unk> Madrasah in Baghdad . 
 The first geared clock was invented in the 11th century by the Arab engineer Ibn Khalaf al @-@ Muradi in Islamic Iberia ; it was a water clock that employed a complex gear train mechanism , including both segmental and epicyclic gearing , capable of transmitting high torque . The clock was unrivalled in its use of sophisticated complex gearing , until the mechanical clocks of the mid @-@ 14th century . Al @-@ Muradi 's clock also employed the use of mercury in its hydraulic linkages , which could function mechanical automata . Al @-@ Muradi 's work was known to scholars working under Alfonso X of Castile , hence the mechanism may have played a role in the development of the European mechanical clocks . Other monumental water clocks constructed by medieval Muslim engineers also employed complex gear trains and arrays of automata . Like the earlier Greeks and Chinese , Arab engineers at the time also developed a liquid @-@ driven escapement mechanism which they employed in some of their water clocks . Heavy floats were used as weights and a constant @-@ head system was used as an escapement mechanism , which was present in the hydraulic controls they used to make heavy floats descend at a slow and steady rate . 
 A mercury clock , described in the Libros del saber de Astronomia , a Spanish work from 1277 consisting of translations and paraphrases of Arabic works , is sometimes quoted as evidence for Muslim knowledge of a mechanical clock . However , the device was actually a <unk> cylindrical water clock , which the Jewish author of the relevant section , Rabbi Isaac , constructed using principles described by a philosopher named " Iran " , identified with Heron of Alexandria ( fl . 1st century AD ) , on how heavy objects may be lifted . 
 = = = Astronomical clocks = = = 
 During the 11th century in the Song Dynasty , the Chinese astronomer , horologist and mechanical engineer Su Song created a water @-@ driven astronomical clock for his clock tower of Kaifeng City . It incorporated an escapement mechanism as well as the earliest known endless power @-@ transmitting chain drive , which drove the armillary sphere . 
 Contemporary Muslim astronomers also constructed a variety of highly accurate astronomical clocks for use in their mosques and observatories , such as the water @-@ powered astronomical clock by Al @-@ Jazari in 1206 , and the <unk> clock by Ibn al @-@ Shatir in the early 14th century . The most sophisticated timekeeping astrolabes were the geared astrolabe mechanisms designed by Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī in the 11th century and by Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr in the 13th century . These devices functioned as timekeeping devices and also as calendars . 
 A sophisticated water @-@ powered astronomical clock was built by Al @-@ Jazari in 1206 . This castle clock was a complex device that was about 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) high , and had multiple functions alongside timekeeping . It included a display of the zodiac and the solar and lunar paths , and a pointer in the shape of the crescent moon which travelled across the top of a gateway , moved by a hidden cart and causing doors to open , each revealing a mannequin , every hour . It was possible to reset the length of day and night in order to account for the changing lengths of day and night throughout the year . This clock also featured a number of automata including falcons and musicians who automatically played music when moved by levers operated by a hidden camshaft attached to a water wheel . 
 = = = Hourglass = = = 
 Since the hourglass was one of the few reliable methods of measuring time at sea , it is speculated that it was used on board ships as far back as the 11th century , when it would have complemented the magnetic compass as an aid to navigation . However , the earliest unambiguous evidence of their use appears in the painting Allegory of Good Government , by Ambrogio Lorenzetti , from 1338 . From the 15th century onwards , hourglasses were used in a wide range of applications at sea , in churches , in industry , and in cooking ; they were the first dependable , reusable , reasonably accurate , and easily constructed time @-@ measurement devices . The hourglass also took on symbolic meanings , such as that of death , temperance , opportunity , and Father Time , usually represented as a bearded , old man . Though also used in China , the hourglass 's history there is unknown . The Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan used 18 hourglasses on each ship during his circumnavigation of the globe in 1522 . 
 = = = Mechanical clocks = = = 
 = = = = Use in Medieval churches = = = = 
 The earliest medieval European clockmakers were Christian monks . Medieval religious institutions required clocks because they regulated daily <unk> and work @-@ schedules strictly , using various types of time @-@ telling and recording devices , such as water clocks , sundials and marked candles , probably in combination . When mechanical clocks came into use , they were often wound at least twice a day to ensure accuracy . Monasteries broadcast important times and durations with bells , rung either by hand or by a mechanical device , such as by a falling weight or by rotating beater . 
 Although the mortuary inscription of <unk> , archdeacon of Verona , records that he constructed a night clock ( <unk> <unk> ) as early as 850 , his clock has been identified as being an observation tube used to locate stars with an accompanying book of astronomical observations , rather than a mechanical or water clock , an interpretation supported by illustrations from medieval manuscripts . 
 The religious necessities and technical skill of the medieval monks were crucial factors in the development of clocks , as the historian Thomas Woods writes : 
 The monks also counted skillful clock @-@ makers among them . The first recorded clock was built by the future Pope Sylvester II for the German town of Magdeburg , around the year 996 . Much more sophisticated clocks were built by later monks . Peter Lightfoot , a 14th @-@ century monk of Glastonbury , built one of the oldest clocks still in existence , which now sits in excellent condition in London 's Science Museum . 
 The appearance of clocks in writings of the 11th century implies that they were well known in Europe in that period . In the early 14th @-@ century , the Florentine poet Dante Alighieri referred to a clock in his Paradiso ; the first known literary reference to a clock that struck the hours . Giovanni da Dondi , Professor of Astronomy at Padua , presented the earliest detailed description of clockwork in his 1364 treatise Il Tractatus <unk> . This has inspired several modern replicas , including some in London 's Science Museum and the Smithsonian Institution . Other notable examples from this period were built in Milan ( 1335 ) , Strasbourg ( 1354 ) , Lund ( 1380 ) , Rouen ( 1389 ) , and Prague ( 1462 ) . 
 Salisbury cathedral clock , dating from about 1386 , is one of the oldest working clocks in the world , and may be the oldest . It still has most of its original parts , although its original verge and foliot timekeeping mechanism is lost , having been converted to a pendulum , which was replaced by a replica verge in 1956 . It has no dial , as its purpose was to strike a bell at precise times . The wheels and gears are mounted in an open , box @-@ like iron frame , measuring about 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) square . The framework is held together with metal dowels and pegs . Two large stones , hanging from pulleys , supply the power . As the weights fall , ropes unwind from the wooden barrels . One barrel drives the main wheel , which is regulated by the escapement , and the other drives the striking mechanism and the air brake . 
 Note also Peter Lightfoot 's Wells Cathedral clock , constructed c . 1390 . The dial represents a geocentric view of the universe , with the Sun and Moon revolving around a central fixed Earth . It is unique in having its original medieval face , showing a philosophical model of the pre @-@ Copernican universe . Above the clock is a set of figures , which hit the bells , and a set of jousting knights who revolve around a track every 15 minutes . The clock was converted to pendulum @-@ and @-@ anchor escapement in the 17th century , and was installed in London 's Science Museum in 1884 , where it continues to operate . Similar astronomical clocks , or <unk> , survive at Exeter , Ottery St Mary , and Wimborne Minster . 
 One clock that has not survived is that of the Abbey of St Albans , built by the 14th @-@ century abbot Richard of Wallingford . It may have been destroyed during Henry VIII 's Dissolution of the Monasteries , but the abbot 's notes on its design have allowed a full @-@ scale reconstruction . As well as keeping time , the astronomical clock could accurately predict lunar eclipses , and may have shown the Sun , Moon ( age , phase , and node ) , stars and planets , as well as a wheel of fortune , and an indicator of the state of the tide at London Bridge . According to Thomas Woods , " a clock that equaled it in technological sophistication did not appear for at least two centuries " . Giovanni de Dondi was another early mechanical clockmaker whose clock did not survive , but his work has been replicated based on the designs . De Dondi 's clock was a seven @-@ faced construction with 107 moving parts , showing the positions of the Sun , Moon , and five planets , as well as religious feast days . Around this period , mechanical clocks were introduced into abbeys and monasteries to mark important events and times , gradually replacing water clocks which had served the same purpose . 
 During the Middle Ages , clocks primarily served religious purposes ; the first employed for secular timekeeping emerged around the 15th century . In Dublin , the official measurement of time became a local custom , and by 1466 a public clock stood on top of the <unk> ( the city court and council chamber ) . It was the first of its kind to be clearly recorded in Ireland , and would only have had an hour hand . The increasing lavishness of castles led to the introduction of turret clocks . A 1435 example survives from Leeds castle ; its face is decorated with the images of the Crucifixion of Jesus , Mary and St George . 
 Clock towers in Western Europe in the Middle Ages were also sometimes striking clocks . The most famous original still standing is possibly St Mark 's Clock on the top of St Mark 's Clocktower in St Mark 's Square in Venice , assembled in 1493 by the clockmaker Gian Carlo <unk> from Reggio Emilia . In 1497 , Simone <unk> moulded the great bell on which every definite time @-@ lapse is beaten by two mechanical bronze statues ( h . 2 @,@ 60 m . ) called Due Mori ( Two Moors ) , handling a hammer . Possibly earlier ( 1490 ) is the Prague Astronomical Clock by <unk> Jan <unk> ( also called <unk> ) – according to another source this device was assembled as early as 1410 by clockmaker Mikuláš of <unk> and mathematician Jan <unk> . The allegorical parade of animated sculptures rings on the hour every day . 
 Early clock dials showed hours : the display of minutes and seconds evolved later . A clock with a minutes dial is mentioned in a 1475 manuscript , and clocks indicating minutes and seconds existed in Germany in the 15th century . <unk> which indicated minutes and seconds were occasionally made from this time on , but this was not common until the increase in accuracy made possible by the pendulum clock and , in watches , by the spiral balance spring . The 16th @-@ century astronomer Tycho Brahe used clocks with minutes and seconds to observe stellar positions . 
 The Ottoman engineer Taqi al @-@ Din described a weight @-@ driven clock with a verge @-@ and @-@ foliot escapement , a striking train of gears , an alarm , and a representation of the moon 's phases in his book The Brightest Stars for the Construction of Mechanical Clocks ( Al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> fī <unk> ' al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) , written around 1556 . 
 = = = = Pendulum clock = = = = 
 Innovations to the mechanical clock continued , with miniaturization leading to domestic clocks in the 15th century , and personal watches in the 16th . In the 1580s , the Italian polymath Galileo Galilei investigated the regular swing of the pendulum , and discovered that it could be used to regulate a clock . Although Galileo studied the pendulum as early as 1582 , he never actually constructed a clock based on that design . The first pendulum clock was designed and built by Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens , in 1656 . Early versions erred by less than one minute per day , and later ones only by 10 seconds , very accurate for their time . 
 In England , the manufacturing of pendulum clocks was soon taken up . The longcase clock ( also known as the grandfather clock ) was first created to house the pendulum and works by the English clockmaker William Clement in 1670 or 1671 ; this became feasible after Clement invented the anchor escapement mechanism in about 1670 . Before then , pendulum clocks used the older verge escapement mechanism , which required very wide pendulum swings of about 100 ° . To avoid the need for a very large case , most clocks using the verge escapement had a short pendulum . The anchor mechanism , however , reduced the pendulum 's necessary swing to between 4 ° to 6 ° , allowing clockmakers to use longer pendulums with consequently slower beats . These required less power to move , caused less friction and wear , and were more accurate than their shorter predecessors . Most longcase clocks use a pendulum about a metre ( 39 inches ) long to the center of the bob , with each swing taking one second . This requirement for height , along with the need for a long drop space for the weights that power the clock , gave rise to the tall , narrow case . 
 Clement also introduced the pendulum suspension spring in 1671 . The concentric minute hand was added to the clock by Daniel Quare , a London clock @-@ maker , and the Second Hand was introduced . 
 The Jesuits were another major contributor to the development of pendulum clocks in the 17th and 18th centuries , having had an " unusually keen appreciation of the importance of precision " . In measuring an accurate one @-@ second pendulum , for example , the Italian astronomer Father Giovanni Battista Riccioli persuaded nine fellow Jesuits " to count nearly 87 @,@ 000 oscillations in a single day " . They served a crucial role in spreading and testing the scientific ideas of the period , and collaborated with contemporary scientists , such as Huygens . 
 = = = = Pocket watch = = = = 
 In 1675 , Huygens and Robert Hooke invented the spiral balance , or the <unk> , designed to control the oscillating speed of the balance wheel . This crucial advance finally made accurate pocket watches possible . This resulted in a great advance in accuracy of pocket watches , from perhaps several hours per day to 10 minutes per day , similar to the effect of the pendulum upon mechanical clocks . The great English clockmaker , Thomas <unk> , was one of the first to use this mechanism successfully in his pocket watches , and he adopted the minute hand which , after a variety of designs were trialled , eventually stabilised into the modern @-@ day configuration . 
 The Rev. Edward Barlow invented the rack and snail striking mechanism for striking clocks , which was a great improvement over the previous mechanism . The repeating clock , that chimes the number of hours ( or even minutes ) was invented by either Quare of Barlow in 1676 . George Graham invented the deadbeat escapement for clocks in 1720 . 
 = = = = Equation clock = = = = 
 In the late 17th and 18th Centuries , equation clocks were made , which allowed the user to see or calculate apparent solar time , as would be shown by a sundial . Before the invention of the pendulum clock , sundials were the only accurate timepieces . When good clocks became available , they appeared inaccurate to people who were used to trusting sundials . The annual variation of the equation of time made a clock up to about 15 minutes fast or slow , relative to a sundial , depending on the time of year . Equation clocks satisfied the demand for clocks that always agreed with sundials . Several types of equation clock mechanism were <unk> which can be seen in surviving examples , mostly in museums . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Marine chronometers are clocks used at sea as time standards , to determine longitude by celestial navigation . A major stimulus to improving the accuracy and reliability of clocks was the importance of precise time @-@ keeping for navigation . The position of a ship at sea could be determined with reasonable accuracy if a navigator could refer to a clock that lost or gained less than about 10 seconds per day . The marine chronometer would have to keep the time of a fixed location — usually Greenwich Mean Time — allowing seafarers to determine longitude by comparing the local high noon to the clock . This clock could not contain a pendulum , which would be virtually useless on a rocking ship . 
 After the Scilly naval disaster of 1707 where four ships ran aground due to navigational mistakes , the British government offered a large prize of £ 20 @,@ 000 , equivalent to millions of pounds today , for anyone who could determine longitude accurately . The reward was eventually claimed in 1761 by Yorkshire carpenter John Harrison , who dedicated his life to improving the accuracy of his clocks . 
 In 1735 Harrison built his first chronometer , which he steadily improved on over the next thirty years before submitting it for examination . The clock had many innovations , including the use of bearings to reduce friction , weighted balances to compensate for the ship 's pitch and roll in the sea and the use of two different metals to reduce the problem of expansion from heat . 
 The chronometer was trialled in 1761 by Harrison 's son and by the end of 10 weeks the clock was in error by less than 5 seconds . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The concept of the wristwatch goes back to the production of the very earliest watches in the 16th century . Elizabeth I of England received a wristwatch from Robert Dudley in 1571 , described as an arm watch . From the beginning , wrist watches were almost exclusively worn by women , while men used pocket @-@ watches up until the early 20th century . This was not just a matter of fashion or prejudice ; watches of the time were notoriously prone to fouling from exposure to the elements , and could only reliably be kept safe from harm if carried securely in the pocket . When the waistcoat was introduced as a manly fashion at the court of Charles II in the 17th century , the pocket watch was tucked into its pocket . Prince Albert , the consort to Queen Victoria , introduced the ' Albert chain ' accessory , designed to secure the pocket watch to the man 's <unk> by way of a clip . By the mid nineteenth century , most watchmakers produced a range of wristwatches , often marketed as bracelets , for women . 
 Wristwatches were first worn by military men towards the end of the nineteenth century , when the importance of synchronizing manoeuvres during war without potentially revealing the plan to the enemy through signalling was increasingly recognized . It was clear that using pocket watches while in the heat of battle or while mounted on a horse was impractical , so officers began to strap the watches to their wrist . The Garstin Company of London patented a ' Watch <unk> ' design in 1893 , although they were probably producing similar designs from the 1880s . Clearly , a market for men 's wristwatches was coming into being at the time . Officers in the British Army began using wristwatches during colonial military campaigns in the 1880s , such as during the Anglo @-@ Burma War of 1885 . 
 During the Boer War , the importance of coordinating troop movements and synchronizing attacks against the highly mobile Boer insurgents was paramount , and the use of wristwatches subsequently became widespread among the officer class . The company Mappin & Webb began production of their successful ' campaign watch ' for soldiers during the campaign at the Sudan in 1898 and ramped up production for the Boer War a few years later . 
 These early models were essentially standard pocket @-@ watches fitted to a leather strap , but by the early 20th century , manufacturers began producing purpose @-@ built wristwatches . The Swiss company , Dimier Frères & Cie patented a wristwatch design with the now standard wire lugs in 1903 . In 1904 , Alberto Santos @-@ Dumont , an early aviator , asked his friend , a French watchmaker called Louis Cartier , to design a watch that could be useful during his flights . Hans Wilsdorf moved to London in 1905 and set up his own business with his brother @-@ in @-@ law Alfred Davis , Wilsdorf & Davis , providing quality timepieces at affordable prices – the company later became Rolex . Wilsdorf was an early convert to the wristwatch , and contracted the Swiss firm <unk> to produce a line of wristwatches . His Rolex wristwatch of 1910 became the first such watch to receive certification as a chronometer in Switzerland and it went on to win an award in 1914 from Kew Observatory in Greenwich . 
 The impact of the First World War dramatically shifted public perceptions on the propriety of the man 's wristwatch , and opened up a mass market in the post @-@ war era . The creeping barrage artillery tactic , developed during the War , required precise synchronization between the artillery gunners and the infantry advancing behind the barrage . Service watches produced during the War were specially designed for the rigours of trench warfare , with luminous dials and unbreakable glass . Wristwatches were also found to be needed in the air as much as on the ground : military pilots found them more convenient than pocket watches for the same reasons as Santos @-@ Dumont had . The British War Department began issuing wristwatches to combatants from 1917 . 
 The company H. Williamson Ltd . , based in Coventry , was one of the first to capitalize on this opportunity . During the company 's 1916 AGM it was noted that " ... the public is buying the practical things of life . Nobody can truthfully contend that the watch is a luxury . It is said that one soldier in every four wears a <unk> watch , and the other three mean to get one as soon as they can . " By the end of the War , almost all enlisted men wore a wristwatch , and after they were demobilized , the fashion soon caught on – the British <unk> Journal wrote in 1917 that " ... the <unk> watch was little used by the sterner sex before the war , but now is seen on the wrist of nearly every man in uniform and of many men in civilian attire . " Within a decade , sales of wristwatches had outstripped those of pocket watches . 
 = = = = <unk> industry = = = = 
 The first professional clockmakers came from the guilds of locksmiths and jewellers . <unk> developed from a specialized craft into a mass production industry over many years . 
 Paris and Blois were the early centers of clockmaking in France . French clockmakers such as Julien Le Roy , clockmaker of Versailles , were leaders in case design and ornamental clocks . Le Roy belonged to the fifth generation of a family of clockmakers , and was described by his contemporaries as " the most skillful clockmaker in France , possibly in Europe " . He invented a special repeating mechanism which improved the precision of clocks and watches , a face that could be opened to view the inside clockwork , and made or supervised over 3 @,@ 500 watches . The competition and scientific rivalry resulting from his discoveries further encouraged researchers to seek new methods of measuring time more accurately . 
 Between 1794 and 1795 , in the aftermath of the French Revolution , the French government briefly mandated decimal clocks , with a day divided into 10 hours of 100 minutes each . The astronomer and mathematician Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace , among other individuals , modified the dial of his pocket watch to decimal time . A clock in the Palais des Tuileries kept decimal time as late as 1801 , but the cost of replacing all the nation 's clocks prevented decimal clocks from becoming widespread . Because <unk> clocks only helped astronomers rather than ordinary citizens , it was one of the most unpopular changes associated with the metric system , and it was abandoned . 
 In Germany , Nuremberg and Augsburg were the early clockmaking centers , and the Black Forest came to specialize in wooden cuckoo clocks . 
 The English became the predominant clockmakers of the 17th and 18th centuries . The main centres of the British industry were in the City of London , the West End of London , Soho where many skilled French Huguenots settled and later in Clerkenwell . The Worshipful Company of <unk> was established in 1631 as one of the Livery Companies of the City of London . 
 Thomas <unk> was the first English clockmaker with an international reputation and many of his pupils went on to become great horologists in their own right , such as George Graham who invented the deadbeat escapement , orrery and mercury pendulum , and his pupil Thomas Mudge who created the first lever escapement . Famous clockmakers of this period included Joseph Windmills , Simon de Charmes who established the De Charmes clockmaker firm and Christopher Pinchbeck who used the Pinchbeck alloy . 
 Later famous horologists included John Arnold who made the first practical and accurate modern watch by refining Harrison 's chronometer , Thomas Earnshaw who was the first to make these available to the public , Daniel Quare , who invented a repeating watch movement , a portable barometer and introduced the concentric minute hand . 
 Quality control and standards were imposed on clockmakers by the Worshipful Company of <unk> , a guild which licensed clockmakers for doing business . By the rise of consumerism in the late 18th century , clocks , especially pocket watches , became regarded as fashion accessories and were made in increasingly decorative styles . By 1796 , the industry reached a high point with almost 200 @,@ 000 clocks being produced annually in London , however by the mid @-@ 19th century the industry had gone into steep decline from Swiss competition . 
 Switzerland established itself as a clockmaking center following the influx of Huguenot craftsmen , and in the 19th century , the Swiss industry " gained worldwide supremacy in high @-@ quality machine @-@ made watches " . The leading firm of the day was Patek Philippe , founded by Antoni Patek of Warsaw and Adrien Philippe of Bern . 
 = = = Electric clock = = = 
 In 1814 , Sir Francis Ronalds ( 1788 ) of London invented the forerunner of an electric clock , the electrostatic clock . His prototype was powered with a dry pile battery . It proved unreliable in timekeeping , however , because of a strong dependence on a stable room temperature and ' weather conditions ' . 
 Alexander Bain , a Scottish clock and instrument maker , was the first to invent and patent the electric clock in 1840 . On January 11 , 1841 , Alexander Bain along with John <unk> , a chronometer maker , took out another important patent describing a clock in which an electromagnetic pendulum and an electric current is employed to keep the clock going instead of springs or weights . Later patents expanded on his original ideas . 
 = = = Quartz clock = = = 
 The piezoelectric properties of crystalline quartz were discovered by Jacques and Pierre Curie in 1880 . The first quartz crystal oscillator was built by Walter G. Cady in 1921 , and in 1927 the first quartz clock was built by Warren <unk> and J. W. Horton at Bell Telephone Laboratories in Canada . The following decades saw the development of quartz clocks as precision time measurement devices in laboratory settings — the bulky and delicate counting electronics , built with vacuum tubes , limited their practical use elsewhere . In 1932 , a quartz clock able to measure small weekly variations in the rotation rate of the Earth was developed . The National Bureau of Standards ( now NIST ) based the time standard of the United States on quartz clocks from late 1929 until the 1960s , when it changed to atomic clocks . In 1969 , Seiko produced the world 's first quartz wristwatch , the Astron . Their inherent accuracy and low cost of production has resulted in the subsequent proliferation of quartz clocks and watches . 
 = = = Atomic clock = = = 
 Atomic clocks are the most accurate timekeeping devices known to date . Accurate to within a few seconds over many thousands of years , they are used to calibrate other clocks and timekeeping instruments . 
 The idea of using atomic transitions to measure time was first suggested by Lord Kelvin in 1879 , although it was only in the 1930s with the development of Magnetic resonance that there was a practical method for doing this . A prototype ammonia maser device was built in 1949 at the U.S. National Bureau of Standards ( NBS , now NIST ) . Although it was less accurate than existing quartz clocks , it served to demonstrate the concept . 
 The first accurate atomic clock , a caesium standard based on a certain transition of the caesium @-@ 133 atom , was built by Louis Essen in 1955 at the National Physical Laboratory in the UK . Calibration of the caesium standard atomic clock was carried out by the use of the astronomical time scale ephemeris time ( ET ) . 
 The International System of Units standardized its unit of time , the second , on the properties of cesium in 1967 . SI defines the second as 9 @,@ 192 @,@ 631 @,@ 770 cycles of the radiation which corresponds to the transition between two electron spin energy levels of the ground state of the 133Cs atom . The cesium atomic clock , maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology , is accurate to 30 billionths of a second per year . Atomic clocks have employed other elements , such as hydrogen and rubidium vapor , offering greater stability — in the case of hydrogen clocks — and smaller size , lower power consumption , and thus lower cost ( in the case of rubidium clocks ) . 
 = French ironclad Jeanne d 'Arc = 
 The French ironclad Jeanne d 'Arc was a wooden @-@ hulled armored corvette built for the French Navy in the late 1860s . She was named for Joan of Arc , a Roman Catholic saint and heroine of the Hundred Years War . Jeanne d 'Arc participated in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 and remained in commission afterwards , unlike many of her sisters . The ship was condemned in 1883 , but nothing further is known as to her disposition . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Alma @-@ class ironclads were designed as improved versions of the armored corvette Belliqueuse suitable for foreign deployments . Unlike their predecessor the Alma @-@ class ships were true central battery ironclads as they were fitted with armored transverse bulkheads . Like most ironclads of their era they were equipped with a metal @-@ reinforced ram . 
 Jeanne d 'Arc measured 68 @.@ 9 meters ( 226 ft 1 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 08 meters ( 46 ft 2 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 37 meters ( 20 ft 11 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 675 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 617 long tons ) . Her crew numbered 316 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . On sea trials the engine produced 1 @,@ 884 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 405 kW ) and the ship reached 11 @.@ 75 knots ( 21 @.@ 76 km / h ; 13 @.@ 52 mph ) . Unlike all of her sisters except Thétis , she had two funnels , mounted side @-@ by @-@ side . Jeanne d 'Arc carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal which allowed the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 710 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 170 km ; 1 @,@ 970 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 454 square meters ( 15 @,@ 650 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Jeanne d 'Arc mounted four of her 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 breech @-@ loading guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 194 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship . The four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were also mounted on the upper deck . She may have exchanged her Mle 1864 guns for Mle 1870 guns . The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 20 @-@ caliber Mle 1870 gun weighed 165 @.@ 3 pounds ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Jeanne d 'Arc had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , backed by 240 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of wood . The unarmored portions of her sides were protected by 15 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Jeanne d 'Arc was laid down at Cherbourg in 1865 and launched on 28 September 1867 . The ship began her sea trials on 9 March 1868 and was put into reserve at Brest in 1869 . She was commissioned on 12 April 1870 , shortly before the Franco @-@ Prussian War began , and assigned to the Northern Squadron . On 24 July 1870 she departed Cherbourg in company with the rest of the Northern Squadron and they cruised off the Danish port of Frederikshavn between 28 July and 2 August until they entered the Baltic Sea . The squadron , now renamed the Baltic Squadron , remained in the Baltic , attempting to blockade Prussian ports on the Baltic until ordered to return to Cherbourg on 16 September . 
 On 1 August 1873 Jeanne d 'Arc was in Málaga , Spain and departed later that day bound for Cadiz . In 1875 she accidentally rammed and sank the dispatch vessel <unk> . On 3 December 1875 she became the flagship of Rear Admiral <unk> , but was placed in reserve on 1 January 1876 at Brest . Jeanne d 'Arc was recommissioned on 12 April 1879 for service with the Levant Squadron . She was condemned on 28 August 1883 and nothing further is known of her fate . 
 = Thiruvilaiyadal = 
 Thiruvilaiyadal ( English : The Divine Game ) is a 1965 Indian Tamil @-@ language Hindu devotional film written , directed , produced , and distributed by A. P. Nagarajan . The film features Sivaji Ganesan , Savitri , and K. B. Sundarambal in the lead roles with T. S. Balaiah , R. Muthuraman , Nagesh , T. R. Mahalingam , S. V. Sahasranamam , Devika , Manorama , and Nagarajan himself playing pivotal roles . The film 's soundtrack and score were composed by K. V. Mahadevan , while the lyrics of the songs were written by Kannadasan and <unk> Swamigal . 
 The story of Thiruvilaiyadal was conceived by A. P. Nagarajan , who was inspired by the Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam , a collection of sixty @-@ four Shaivite , devotional , epic stories written in the 16th century by the saint , Paranjothi Munivar , which record the actions and antics of Lord Shiva appearing on Earth in various disguises to test his devotees . Four of the sixty @-@ four stories are depicted in the film . The first is about the poet Dharumi ; the second concerns Dhatchayini ( Sati ) . The third recounts how Shiva 's future wife Parvati is born as a <unk> and how Shiva , in the guise of a fisherman , finds and remarries her . The fourth story is that of the singer Banabhathirar . The soundtrack was received positively and songs from it like " Pazham Neeyappa " , " Oru Naal Podhuma " , " Isai Thamizh " , and " Paattum Naane " remain popular today among the Tamil diaspora . 
 Thiruvilaiyadal was released on 31 July 1965 to critical acclaim , with praise directed at the film 's screenplay , dialogue , direction , music , and the performances of Ganesan , Nagesh , and Balaiah . The film was a commercial success , running for over twenty @-@ five weeks in theatres , and became a trendsetter for devotional films as it was released at a time when Tamil cinema primarily produced social melodramas . It won the Certificate of Merit for the Second Best Feature Film in Tamil at the 13th National Film Awards , and the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Tamil . The film was dubbed into Kannada as Shiva Leela Vilasa , the first Tamil film to be dubbed into Kannada in ten years . A digitally restored version of Thiruvilaiyadal was released in September 2012 , which was also a commercial success . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lord Shiva gives a sacred Mango fruit , brought by the sage Narada , to his elder son Vinayaka as a prize for outsmarting his younger brother Muruga in a competition to win it . Angered by his father 's decision , Muruga , dressed as a hermit , goes to Palani , despite Avvaiyar 's attempts to convince him to return to Mount Kailash . His mother , goddess Parvati , arrives there and narrates the stories of four of Shiva 's divine games to calm Muruga . 
 The first story is about the opening of Shiva 's third eye when he visits Madurai , the capital city of the Pandya Kingdom , ruled at that time by Shenbagapandian . Shenbagapandian wants to find the answer to a question posed by his wife — whether the fragrance from a woman 's hair is natural or artificial — and announces a reward of 1000 gold coins to anyone who can come up with the answer . A poor poet named Dharumi desperately wants the reward and starts to break down in the Meenakshi Amman Temple . Shiva , hearing his cries , takes the form of a poet and gives Dharumi a poem containing the answer . Overjoyed , Dharumi takes the poem to Shenbagapandian 's court and recites it , but Nakkeerar , the court 's head poet , claims the poem 's meaning is incorrect . On hearing this , Shiva argues with Nakkeerar about the poem 's accuracy , burning him to ashes when he refuses to relent . Later , Shiva revives Nakkeerar , and says that he only wanted to test his knowledge . Nakkeerar asks the king to give the reward to Dharumi . 
 The second story focuses on Shiva marrying Dhatchayini against the will of her father Dhatchan . Dhatchan performs a <unk> without inviting his son @-@ in @-@ law . Dhatchayini asks Shiva 's permission to go to the ceremony , but Shiva refuses to let her go as he feels no good will come from it . Dhatchayini disobeys him and goes only to be insulted by Dhatchan . Dhatchayini curses her father and returns to Shiva who is angry with her . Dhatchayini asserts that they are one and without her , there is no Shiva . He refuses to agree with her and burns her to ashes . He then performs his Tandava , which is noticed by the Devas , who pacify him . Shiva then restores Dhatchayini to life and accepts that they are one . 
 The third story describes Parvati being banished by Shiva when she becomes momentarily distracted while listening to his explanation of the Vedas . Parvati , now born as Kayarkanni , is the daughter of a fisherman . When playing with her friends , Shiva approaches in the guise of a fisherman and flirts with her , despite her disapproval . The fishermen often face problems due to a giant shark that disrupts their way of life . Shiva asserts that he alone can defeat the shark . After a long battle , Shiva subdues the shark ( which is actually Nandi in disguise ) and remarries Parvati . 
 The last story is that of Banabathirar , a devotional singer . Hemanatha Bhagavathar , a skilled singer , tries to conquer the Pandya Kingdom when he challenges the kingdom 's musicians . The King 's minister advises him to seek Banabathirar 's help to challenge Hemanatha Bhagavathar . When all the musicians reject the competition , the King orders Banabathirar to compete against Hemanatha Bhagavathar . Knowing that he cannot win , the troubled Banabathirar prays to Shiva who shows up outside Hemanatha Bhagavathar 's house in the form of a firewood vendor the night before the competition , and shatters his arrogance by singing the song " Paattum Naane " . Shiva introduces himself to Hemanatha Bhagavathar as Banabathirar 's student . <unk> upon hearing this , Bhagavathar leaves the kingdom immediately , informing Banabathirar of his departure with a note . Shiva gives the letter to Banabathirar and reveals his true identity to him . Banabathirar thanks Shiva for helping him . 
 After listening to these stories , Muruga 's rage finally subsides and he reconciles with his family . The film ends with Avvaiyar singing " Vaasi Vaasi " and " <unk> <unk> " in praise of both Shiva and Parvati . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Lead actors 
 Sivaji Ganesan as Shiva 
 Savitri as Parvati ( also referred to as Uma , Sakthi , Dhatchayini and Kayarkanni in the film ) 
 K. B. Sundarambal as Avvaiyar 
 Male supporting actors 
 T. S. Balaiah as Hemanatha Bhagavathar 
 R. Muthuraman as Shenbagapandian 
 Nagesh as Dharumi 
 O. A. K. Thevar as King Dhatchan 
 A. <unk> as Ponna / <unk> 
 T. R. Mahalingam as Banabhathirar 
 A. P. Nagarajan as Nakkeerar 
 S. V. Sahasranamam as Kayarkanni 's father 
 Female supporting actors 
 Devika as Shenbagapandian 's wife 
 Manorama as Ponni 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The first film where Sivaji Ganesan and A. P. Nagarajan collaborated was Naan Petra <unk> ( 1956 ) . The scene where the Tamil poet Nakkeerar confronts Shiva over an error in his poem , effectively exaggerating his sensitivity to right and wrong , laid the foundation for Thiruvilaiyadal . 
 The story of Thiruvilaiyadal was conceived by Nagarajan . The film was inspired from the Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam , a collection of sixty @-@ four Shaivite devotional epic stories written in the 16th century by the saint Paranjothi Munivar , which record the actions and antics of Shiva appearing on Earth in various disguises to test his devotees . Four of the sixty @-@ four stories are depicted in the film . Nagarajan produced and distributed the film under the banner of Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures . He wrote the screenplay in five parts , and made an appearance in the film as <unk> . M. N. Rajan and T. R. Natarajan were the editors , while K. S. Prasad , Ganga and R. <unk> were the film 's cinematographer , art director and Ganesan 's make @-@ up artist respectively . 
 Savitri 's portrayal of Goddess Parvati was the first instance of the deity being seen onscreen in a South Indian film . Ganesan was cast as Shiva , while K. B. Sundarambal was chosen to play <unk> , reprising her role from the 1953 film of the same name . Nagesh , R. Muthuraman and T. S. Balaiah were cast as Dharumi , Shenbagapandian and Hemanatha Bhagavathar respectively , while T. R. Mahalingam was cast as Banabhathirar . Other supporting actors include Devika , Manorama , S. V. Sahasranamam and O. A. K. Thevar . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Thiruvilaiyadal was entirely shot in a specially erected set at Vasu Studios in Madras ( now Chennai ) . It was filmed in Eastmancolor and was Nagarajan 's first colour film . The scenes featuring the conversations between Shiva and Dharumi were not scripted by Nagarajan but were improvised during filming by Nagesh and Ganesan . 
 Due to his busy schedule at that time , Nagesh had a call sheet of one and a half days to finish his portions . When he learned that Ganesan 's arrival was delayed because his make @-@ up had not been completed , he asked Nagarajan whether they could film any solo sequences , which included a scene where Dharumi rants about his misfortune in the Meenakshi Amman Temple . While filming , Nagesh spontaneously came up with the dialogue , " Varamaattan . Varamaattan . Avan <unk> <unk> . Enakku nalla <unk> . Varamaattan " ( English : He won 't come . He won 't come . He will definitely not come . I know . He won 't come ) . According to Nagesh , he was inspired by two incidents : one that involved two assistant directors discussing whether Ganesan would be ready before or after lunch — one said he would be ready while the other said he would not . The other was when Nagesh happened to notice a passerby talking to himself about how the world had fallen on bad times . The dubbing for the scenes featuring Nagesh and Ganesan was completed after the footage was shot . After viewing the sequences twice , Ganesan requested Nagarajan not to remove a single frame of Nagesh 's portions from the final version of the film as he felt that they , along with Balaiah 's scenes , would become a major highlight of the film . 
 Thiruvilaiyadal was the first Tamil film since P. U. <unk> 's <unk> ( 1944 ) to have the lead actor play five roles in one sequence . Ganesan does so in the song " Paattum Naane " where he plays the Veena , Mridangam , flute and <unk> ; the fifth role has him singing . R. Bharathwaj , writing for The Times of India , believes the story of the competition between Hemanatha Bhagavathar and Banabathirar to be comparable to a contest between Carnatic music composer Syama Sastri and <unk> , a singer from Bobbili . Sastri had sought divine intervention from the Goddess Kamakshi to defeat <unk> , mirroring Banabathirar 's plea for Shiva 's help . When asked by his biographer T. S. <unk> about the Tandava he performed in the film , Ganesan simply replied that he learned the movements necessary for that particular situation and performed according to the choreographer 's instructions . The final length of the film was 4 @,@ 450 metres ( 14 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The title of the film , Thiruvilaiyadal , is justified in the beginning of the film as a voiceover . It begins with salutation to the fans , and it quotes the literary epic of Shiva , Thiruvilaiyadal . The narrator briefs that whatever Shiva does , it is to test the <unk> of his disciples and the god plays games which invokes more devotion in the minds of his worshippers . Hence the title symbolically means the games played by Shiva . By opening in media res , the film follows a nonlinear narrative . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack and score were composed by K. V. Mahadevan , while the lyrics of the songs were written by Kannadasan , with the exception of the first portions of " Pazham Neeyappa " , which were penned by <unk> Swamigal . The soundtrack was released on the Saregama music label . Every line in the song " Oru Naal Podhuma " belongs to a different raga . Some of them include Darbar , Todi , Neelambari , Mohanam and Kalyani . " Pazham Neeyappa " is based on three ragas — Darbari Kanada , <unk> and <unk> . " Isai Thamizh " , " Paattum Naane " and " <unk> " are based on the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ragas respectively . <unk> <unk> and <unk> Kutty were the <unk> and Mridangam players for " Paattum Naane " respectively . The " Macha Veena " seen in " Paattum Naane " was made by Subbiah Asari ; the crew of Thiruvilaiyadal purchased it from him for ₹ 10 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to ₹ 470 @,@ 000 or US $ 6 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics , and the songs " Pazham Neeyappa " , " Oru Naal Podhuma " , " Isai Thamizh " and " Paattum Naane " still remain popular among the Tamil diaspora . Film historian Randor Guy , in his 1997 book Starlight , Starbright : The Early Tamil Cinema , identifies " Pazham Neeyappa " in particular , performed by Sundarambal , as the " favourite of millions " . The singer Charulatha Mani , writing for The Hindu , believed that Sundarambal had produced a " pure and pristine depiction " of the Neelambari raga in " Vaasi Vaasi " , and expressed approval of M. <unk> 's rendition of " Oru Naal Podhuma " . Mana Baskaran of The Hindu Tamil described the album as : " an attractive package for all to listen to . " Following T. M. Soundararajan 's death in May 2013 , M. Ramesh of Business Line wrote , " The unforgettable sequences from ... <unk> ... has forever divided the world of Tamil music lovers into two : those who believe that the Oru <unk> <unk> of the swollen @-@ headed Hemanatha Bhagavathar could not be bested , and those who believe that Lord Shiva ’ s Paattum Naane <unk> Naane won the debate hands down . " He praised Soundararajan 's performance in " Paattum Naane " , which he described as " stupefying " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Thiruvilaiyadal was released on 31 July 1965 . During the screening in a Madras cinema house several women went into a religious frenzy during a sequence with Avvaiyar and Murugan . This led to the projection being temporarily suspended so that the women could be attended to . According to artist V. Jeevananthan , the management of the Raja Theatre erected a set of Mount Kailash to promote the film . 
 The film was a commercial success ; it ran for 25 weeks in Shanti , a theatre owned by Ganesan , and ran for the same duration in the Crown and <unk> theatres in Madras and in theatres across South India . It went on to have a total theatrical run of 26 weeks , thereby becoming a silver jubilee film . The film contributed to Ganesan 's long string of successful films . 
 Thiruvilaiyadal was dubbed into Kannada as Shiva Leela Vilasa , making it the first Tamil film to be dubbed in the language since 1955 as there was a ban on dubbing other language films into Kannada . 
 = = = Critical reception and accolades = = = 
 Thiruvilayadal received critical acclaim , garnering the Certificate of Merit for the Second Best Feature Film in Tamil at the 13th National Film Awards . It also won the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Tamil . Critics applauded the screenplay , dialogue , direction , music , and the performances of Ganesan , Nagesh and Balaiah . The Tamil magazine Kalki , in a review dated 22 August 1965 , considered the film to be " a victory for Tamil cinema " , while Mana Baskaran of The Hindu Tamil appreciated the way Nagarajan blended contemporary social issues into a devotional film , opining that the costume and set designs " gave a new dimension to film making in Tamil cinema . " Ananda Vikatan , in a review dated 28 August 1965 , appreciated the film and noted : " When social films have started dominating Tamil Cinema , it is a welcome change to see a very good devotional film like this which made everyone happy . The film deserves another viewing . " 
 M. Suganth and Karuna Amarnath of The Times of India praised Ganesan for displaying versatility through Shiva 's various appearances in the film , and called it a " must watch " . The actor and film historian Mohan V. Raman was enthusiastic about Balaiah 's performance in " Oru Naal Podhuma " , believing his screen presence to have been instrumental in the success of the film . S. Theodore Baskaran gave a rather mixed review , describing his experience seeing the film as " watching a merely photographed drama " , but appreciated Nagesh 's performance : " If there is just one role that he is remembered for , it is this . " Baskaran also appreciated Ganesan 's dialogue delivery during the scene where his character argues with Nakkeerar . Subha J. Rao and K. Jeshi of The Hindu , in their article " Laughter lines " , highlighted the way that Nagesh " brings the house down as the impoverished poet . " Following Manorama 's death in October 2015 , The New Indian Express ranked Thiruvilaiyadal eighth in their list of " Top Movies " featuring her . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Thiruvilaiyadal has attained cult status in Tamil cinema . It was a landmark film in reviving public interest in devotional films and became the definitive film of the genre at a time when social melodramas dominated Tamil cinema . Many critics consider Thiruvilaiyadal to be Nagarajan 's greatest work , with film critic Baradwaj Rangan calling it " the best " of the epic Tamil films . Nagarajan and Ganesan went on to collaborate on several more films in the same genre , including Saraswati <unk> ( 1966 ) , <unk> ( 1967 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1967 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1968 ) , Other notable films that followed the trend set by Thiruvilaiyadal include Sri <unk> ( 1985 ) and Meenakshi Thiruvilayadal ( 1989 ) . Thiruvilaiyadal became a milestone in Nagesh 's career and the character of Dharumi is cited as one of his best roles to date . 
 Director <unk> Pandian 's <unk> <unk> ( 2006 ) was initially titled Thiruvilayadal , but this was changed after an outburst of objections from Ganesan 's fans . In July 2007 , when S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight acclaimed directors to list ten films they liked most , Thiruvilaiyadal was chosen by C. V. Sridhar and Ameer . The latter found the film to be " imaginative " and that it depicted the mythological genre in " an interesting way . " Ameer concluded by calling it " one of the best films in the annals of Tamil cinema . " Following Nagesh 's death in 2009 , Sify ranked Thiruvilaiyadal fifth in its list , " 10 Best Films of late Nagesh " , commenting that he " was at his comic best in this film " . Thiruvilaiyadal is included along with other Sivaji Ganesan films in 8th Ulaga Adhisayam Sivaji , a compilation DVD featuring Ganesan 's " iconic performances in the form of scenes , songs and stunts " which was released in May 2012 . 
 Thiruvilaiyadal has been parodied and referenced in various media such as cinema , television and theatre . Notable films that allude to Thiruvilaiyadal include <unk> ( 1981 ) , Poove Unakkaga ( 1996 ) , Mahaprabhu ( 1996 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1998 ) , Vanna Thamizh <unk> ( 2000 ) , Middle Class Madhavan ( 2001 ) , <unk> ( 2002 ) , Vanakkam <unk> ( 2005 ) , Kanthaswamy ( 2009 ) , and Oru Kal Oru <unk> ( 2012 ) . In his review of Oru <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 2014 ) , Baradwaj Rangan likened the way Shiva plays his divine games by intervening in human affairs in Thiruvilaiyadal to the use of touchscreen human face icons on mobile apps . 
 The Star Vijay comedy series Lollu Sabha made two parodies on the film ; once in an episode of the same name , and a contemporary version titled " <unk> <unk> " . In April 2008 , <unk> Sarathkumar launched a television series titled Thiruvilaiyadal , which covers all sixty @-@ four stories in the Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam , unlike the film which covered only four . In April 2012 , Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff included the film in her list , " The A to Z of Tamil Cinema " . The character of Dharumi was parodied in <unk> <unk> , a theatrical play performed in November 2013 . In a January 2015 interview with The Times of India , playwright Y. G. Mahendra said , " most character artists today lack variety [ ... ] Show me one actor in India currently who can do a [ Veerapandiya ] Kattabomman , a VOC , a Vietnam Veedu , a Galatta Kalyanam and a Thiruvilayadal [ sic ] . " In October 2014 , The Times of India ranked Thiruvilaiyadal fourth in its list , " Top 5 Sivaji Ganesan films on his birthday " , appreciating the performances of Ganesan and Nagesh . 
 = = Re @-@ release = = 
 In mid @-@ 2012 , legal issues arose when attempts were made to digitally re @-@ release the film . G. Vijaya of Vijaya Pictures had filed a lawsuit against Gemini Colour Laboratory and Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures for attempting to re @-@ release the film without her production company 's permission . The reason for the suit was that in December 1975 , Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures had transferred the entire rights of the film to Movie Film Circuit , which in turn had transferred them to Vijaya Pictures on 18 May 1976 . Vijaya Pictures approached the Gemini Colour Laboratory to digitise the film for re @-@ release , however Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures asked laboratory officials not to release the film without their prior consent . Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures also disputed Vijaya 's claim by running an advertisement in a Tamil newspaper on 18 May 2012 , stating that it was the owner of the film 's rights and anybody who wished to exhibit it in digital format should only do so with their permission . R. Subbiah , the judge who presided over the case , ordered the status quo to be maintained by both parties . 
 Bolstered by the success of the re @-@ release of Karnan ( 1964 ) , Nagarajan 's son and present head of Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures , C. N. <unk> , found film negatives of Thiruvilayadal in a storage facility at Gemini Films . <unk> restored the film and re @-@ released it in September 2012 in CinemaScope format . The digitised version had its premiere at the Woodlands Theater in <unk> , Chennai . Despite being a re @-@ release , the film earned public acclaim and was a commercial success . Of the digitised version , Ganesan 's son , producer Ramkumar said , " It was like watching a new film " . 
 = Benet Academy = 
 Benet Academy ( / <unk> / BEN @-@ et ; often shortened to Benet ) is a co @-@ educational , college @-@ preparatory , Benedictine high school in Lisle , Illinois , United States , overseen by the Diocese of Joliet . Founded in 1887 , the school was initially established in Chicago as the all @-@ boys St. Procopius College and Academy by Benedictine monks , who also operated the St. Joseph Bohemian Orphanage . In 1898 , the orphanage moved to Lisle , about 25 miles ( 40 km ) west of Chicago , to be joined by St. Procopius three years later . In 1926 Benedictine nuns constructed the all @-@ girls Sacred Heart Academy near the orphanage and school in Lisle . The orphanage closed in 1956 to make room for St. Procopius Academy , which separated from the college in 1957 . Due to rising costs and waning enrollment , Sacred Heart merged with St. Procopius Academy in 1967 to form Benet Academy on the St. Procopius campus . Since then , numerous building projects have been undertaken to expand Benet 's athletics , music , and science programs . As of 2016 it is considered the second best Catholic <unk> in Illinois , and eighth best private high school . 
 Admission is competitive and relies primarily on test scores . All students complete a college @-@ preparatory curriculum and may earn college credit through programs including Advanced Placement . As of 2009 , Benet 's average ACT test score regularly exceeds state and national averages , and more than 99 percent of students go on to college after graduation . The school 's academic program has been featured in reports by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and U.S. News & World Report . 
 The athletic program has fielded several teams that have placed fourth or higher in state tournaments . In the 2014 @-@ 2015 school year the girls ' volleyball team and the girls ' basketball team both won IHSA state titles , which makes Benet only the second school in IHSA history and the first large ( 4A ) school to win titles for both these sports in the same season . The boys ' basketball team has broken two state records , including a 102 home @-@ game winning streak . In the 2015 @-@ 2016 year the boys ' basketball team ended up getting second in the state , with the girls taking first , along with many other state titles in other sports . 
 Other activities include the annual Christmas Drive fundraiser and over 30 clubs and organizations , including the Math Team and Science Olympiad team , both of which have won awards in their state tournaments . 
 Benet 's performing arts program is highly praised and competitive and stages an annual winter musical , which often sells out quickly . Many performers have been nominated for state @-@ wide awards . Other productions include the fall play , one @-@ act plays , variety show , and spring play . 
 The band program performed in state @-@ wide events in 1998 and 2002 . 
 Notable alumni of the school include NBA player Frank Kaminsky , former Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan , and Grammy @-@ winning singer Dave <unk> . 
 = = History and facilities = = 
 = = = Founding in Chicago = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Great Chicago Fire , Chicago 's working @-@ class Pilsen neighborhood , a predominantly Czech enclave , expanded quickly . To serve this growing ethnic population , St. Procopius parish was founded in the summer of 1875 , near the intersection of 18th and Allport Streets . The parish was named for Saint Procopius of <unk> , who founded a monastery in Bohemia in the eleventh century and became the first saint from Czechoslovakia . Vilém Čoka served as the first pastor . Planning to build a school , Čoka left it to the community to decide if the school would be secular or Catholic . They chose a Catholic school , despite the fact that only 25 percent of Pilsen 's Czech population was Catholic . As the parish outgrew his capacity to serve them , Čoka turned for help to the Order of St. Benedict . 
 Rev. John Nepomucene Jaeger , the first Bohemian abbot in the United States , was urged to establish a monastic community to teach at parochial schools in Bohemian as well as English . He founded St. Procopius priory in 1885 . The priory took control of St. Procopius parish in January 1886 , and Jaeger became the pastor . Jaeger also founded a convent in 1895 , consisting of nuns brought from St. Mary 's Convent in Pittsburgh and headed by Jaeger 's biological sister , Mother Mary Nepomucene Jaeger . The Czech @-@ American media had pushed for a convent to prepare Czech @-@ speaking nuns for teaching positions in Czech parochial schools , which had previously hired mostly lay teachers trained in Austrian normal schools . The nuns were transferred from Pittsburgh to St. Scholastica 's Convent on Chicago 's north side , but later that same year moved to an old parish building at Ashland and 19th Streets , where they would remain until 1912 . A section of the convent was converted into a music school . Graduates taught in parishes throughout the nation . 
 The priory was elevated to the status of abbey by Pope Leo XIII in 1894 , and the monks founded a school for lay monks to help build a self @-@ sustaining source of revenue . Failing to attract a single prospective applicant in over seven years , they expanded enrollment to students with no intention of joining the clergy . The two groups would eventually be taught separately , and the monastic students were trained to become priests fluent in Bohemian , German , and English and prepared to preach to ethnically diverse congregations . Lay students were trained for employment in the business world . 
 In 1900 , Chicago had one of the largest Czech populations of any city in the world , with approximately 75 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 Czechs living in the city 's 10 Czech communities . Some 50 @,@ 000 Czech immigrants were served by the three Czech parishes of Chicago — 16 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 of them by St. Procopius . These Czech immigrants wanted to assimilate into American society , but also wanted to pass their language on to their children . The abbey established St. Procopius College and Academy in 1887 as a school that taught men of Czech and Slovak descent . It became the first Czech institution of higher learning in the nation , and in 1920 it remained the only Czech college . Rev. Procopius Neuzil was named the first teacher and director . Classes began on March 2 , 1887 , when Neuzil taught a remedial course to two students in two small rooms at 704 Allport Street . Enrollment grew to 20 within the week , taught by three instructors during the four @-@ month term . The first full year of classes began in the fall of 1887 . The college was chartered by the State of Illinois in 1890 ; only a two @-@ year high school program was offered at the time . In 1893 the college published its first catalog , which urged Czech parents to enroll their 13 @-@ year @-@ old boys . The academic curriculum included a preparatory year to teach elementary school subjects to remedial students . The two high school years were referred to as " Latin years " , and included required courses in Czech , English , Latin , math , orthography , history , and religion ; optional courses included German and bookkeeping . Following the Latin years , students were enrolled in the business course , which included math , bookkeeping , economics , composition , history , oratory , and religion . 
 = = = Orphanage = = = 
 The Benet Academy campus in Lisle began as an orphanage . On March 14 , 1899 , the abbey founded St. Joseph 's Orphanage on a farm in Lisle purchased from one Serafin <unk> , and transferred 10 Czech orphans there from St. Hedwig 's Polish Orphanage , which charged the parishes more for housing non @-@ Polish orphans . It opened under the supervision of the Sisters of St. Benedict . Abbot Jaeger allowed the orphanage to use the land for free until more satisfactory housing could be constructed . The orphanage lacked stoves , fuel , adequate bedding , decent food , and any stable source of income . Neuzil , then editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Czech Benedictine Press , raised $ 80 @,@ 000 within 12 years from the generally impoverished Czech immigrant community through local publications . A new building was commissioned in 1899 to accommodate the increasing number of applicants for admission , including orphans from out @-@ of @-@ state . The new building was dedicated on July 2 , 1900 , at the same time as the cornerstone was laid for St. Procopius College , about .25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) away . 
 Due to increasing applications for admission , still more space was required , and William Schwartz sold the abbey 40 acres ( 16 ha ) of land in Lisle . On July 16 , 1911 , a new building was dedicated on the grounds of what is now Benet Academy , the same day the cornerstone was laid for the nearby Sacred Heart Convent . A girls ' dormitory building was built in 1923 . It was later converted into classrooms and renamed Benet Hall ) . A power plant , a larger chapel , and additional classrooms were dedicated in 1926 . A gym was built in 1936 ; at that time the facility housed approximately 400 orphans . Twenty @-@ three headstones from that period can be found in a small cemetery on the northwest side of the school , where orphans as young as three , one of the workmen , and several former orphans who had been raised at St. Joseph are buried . According to school lore , ghosts of orphans still haunt the fourth floor of St. Joseph Hall and the basement of Benet Hall , where the nursery of the orphanage once was . 
 Elementary schooling at the orphanage featured better equipped classrooms than the original building . A few years after operations moved in 1911 , the school offered a two @-@ year business program . By 1948 the orphanage comprised the Lisle Manual Training School for Boys and the Lisle Industrial School for Girls , both of which were managed by the Sisters of St. Benedict and run by the Archdiocese of Chicago . In the 1950s Petru Hall was built as an annex on the east side of the dormitory building . 
 The archdiocese assumed control of the orphanage in 1920 , and began accepting orphans from the Juvenile Court of Cook County , most of whom came from broken homes whose parents did not pay the fines imposed by the court . This discouraged donations and strained the orphanage financially . Archbishop Samuel Cardinal Stritch , discovering that only 12 of the 255 children were actually orphans and only five of them were Slavs , closed the orphanage in 1956 . The 12 true orphans were moved to Holy Angels Orphanage in Des Plaines . Bishop of Joliet Martin Dewey McNamara gave the former orphanage buildings to St. Procopius Academy , which was at that time still combined with the college . 
 = = = College in Lisle = = = 
 As enrollment increased to 46 in 1891 , it became obvious that St. Procopius College 's enrollment would soon outstrip its facilities in Pilsen . Neuzil was replaced as rector by Rev. <unk> Wittman , also a Benedictine , in 1894 . In 1896 , the Abbey bought a 104 @-@ acre ( 42 ha ) farm in Lisle from Morris Neff to provide more space and a " better atmosphere " . On March 12 , 1900 , a new building was approved , to be built at the southwest corner of Maple and College Avenues . The groundbreaking was held on April 19 , 1900 , the school moved in May , and the new facility was dedicated on July 1 , 1901 , by Peter Muldoon , Bishop of the Diocese of Chicago . Classes began in September with six faculty and 11 students . Atheists in Chicago vehemently objected to the Catholic church @-@ run school , but the Czech community came to the school 's defense . Limited financial aid for the generally poor Czech immigrants led to meager enrollment . Attendance grew from 13 in 1901 to 100 in 1908 . 
 The academy offered its first four @-@ year high school program in 1904 , with both " classical " , or college @-@ preparatory , and " commercial " , or vocational , programs . Students enrolled in the commercial track studied for three years , the first two being identical to the classical track and the third consisting of specialized coursework . The commercial program was dropped in 1915 . Tuition for a semester cost $ 80 ; it was increased to $ 100 in 1909 . As of 1921 , the school enrolled only men of Bohemian or Slovak ancestry . 
 Income and enrollment fell during the Great Depression . Between 1917 and 1930 , enrollment fell from 205 students to 140 . The school sought accreditation from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools , but the application was denied because the college and academy could not be accredited as a single institution , and financial constraints prevented their separation . In 1932 the abbey and the school lost most of their money when the Kaspar American Bank in Chicago failed . Academic programs and student activities were not greatly affected , in part because the faculty was mainly clergymen , who were not highly paid . Still unaccredited , the school was certified by the state of Illinois in September 1934 . 
 Students , faculty , and clergymen sustained themselves with food produced on the 365 @-@ acre ( 148 ha ) Abbey Farm , which they maintained until the 1970s . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 chickens provided eggs , while Brown Swiss cattle provided milk . Meat came from the farm 's supply of bulls , hogs , and heifers . Bee hives produced honey and wax , while a cannery produced more than 12 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 45 @,@ 000 L ) of food products . 
 World War II caused enrollment to decline and the student body consisted mainly of high school students and seminarians . Following the war , new students enrolled , and the school built a temporary facility in 1947 to accommodate them . Students from Illinois began to replace out @-@ of @-@ state students , the percentage of day , or commuting , students rose , and the school employed more lay teachers . After the war , the previously ethnic Czech college acquired a more diverse student body , due to rising enrollment caused by the G.I. Bill . By 1947 the high school enrolled 30 students . Better times and higher birth rates led to growing enrollment at St. Procopius in the 1950s and 1960s . 
 With the gift of the former orphanage facility , the academy began to operate independently from the college in 1957 . It was accredited on March 28 , 1958 . St. Procopius College was renamed Illinois Benedictine College in 1971 , and Benedictine University in 1996 . Under the leadership of its first principal , Rev. Thomas J. <unk> , the academy added new classrooms and St. Martin Hall to its facilities . 
 = = = Convent in Lisle = = = 
 By 1912 , the community of nuns had outgrown their convent in Chicago , and relocated to the new Convent of the Sacred Heart in Lisle . They had prospered there as a teaching order educating Slovak @-@ speaking nuns and organized two Slovak schools . In 1926 , under the leadership of Mother Mary Genevieve , the convent founded a day and boarding high school for girls — the Sacred Heart Academy . The academy outgrew its space and in 1929 the convent was expanded to accommodate rising enrollment . The annexed facilities reserved for the school included a Renaissance @-@ style chapel , an auditorium , and a gymnasium . The Academy was later expanded to include the Jaeger Junior College . 
 The academy was primarily a boarding school . Students came from Illinois , the surrounding states , Texas , and Mexico . A few day students came from the Lisle area . In 1947 enrollment averaged 75 students . Enrollment grew from 120 in 1953 to 300 in 1958 , and remained at that level until 1966 . Day student enrollment also grew and in 1962 the academy stopped accepting boarding school students . By 1964 , the last year in which boarding school students were enrolled , alumni had hailed from all US states , South America , France , Mexico , and Guam . Day students from 1964 to 1968 came from Lisle and the neighboring communities . Unlike St. Procopius Academy , Sacred Heart Academy offered a business curriculum from 1953 to 1966 . Courses included shorthand , <unk> , and bookkeeping . 
 The students and nuns were supplied with food by the convent 's 476 @-@ acre ( 193 ha ) <unk> Farm . Cattle provided both dairy products and meat , while poultry provided eggs and their feathers were used to stuff pillows as another source of income . The nuns also raised rabbits and bees , and grew grain , hay , vegetables , grapes , and apples . The farm was closed in the late 1950s for financial reasons and the convent sold most of the land so a school could be built for the growing village of Lisle . 
 = = = Merger and expansion = = = 
 In the 1960s , St. Procopius Academy faced dwindling enrollment and funding . The Benedictines threatened to close the boys ' school , but were dissuaded by Abbot Daniel W. Kucera , who had graduated from St. Procopius in 1941 . Under Abbot Kucera 's leadership , St. Procopius Academy and Sacred Heart Academy merged to form Benet ( an anglicized form of " Benedict " ) Academy in 1967 , on the former St. Procopius campus . Enrollment in 1968 was at 875 students , including 575 boys and 300 girls . The business education program from Sacred Heart was continued at the new school ; three teachers taught courses in consumer economics , <unk> , shorthand , and bookkeeping . 
 St. Thomas Hall , funded by a private donor , was erected to house a library and physical sciences facilities in 1975 . A major construction project was launched in 1993 , in response to increasing enrollment and a growing athletic program . The $ 5 million building plan included a new 1 @,@ 800 @-@ seat gymnasium , a new boiler system and a new roof for the cafeteria and the existing gymnasium . New parking areas were planned and St. Mary 's Hall was to be demolished . 
 Neighborhood residents , concerned about the impact on property values , traffic , and aesthetics , opposed the project . The Lisle Village Board blocked construction , charging that Benet had not notified the local community of the pending construction , to which Benet replied that " the school was there prior to the homes being constructed " . The plan was approved in April , but the Board designated the entire 42 @-@ acre ( 17 ha ) campus a " planned @-@ unit development " , requiring Board approval for all future modifications . The new facilities included zoned lighting areas , which allowed for multipurpose use for assemblies , performances , sporting events , and graduation ceremonies . Construction was completed in May 1994 , and applications increased in the years that followed . The gym was later named as the St. Ronald Gymnasium to honor former principal Rev. Ronald Rigovsky . 
 In June 2000 , a need for more performance space became apparent ; the school 's music groups used small , crowded rehearsal rooms and drama students performed in the old chapel or across the street at Sacred Heart Monastery . Benet began construction of a new 22 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 000 m2 ) performing arts center at the east end of the campus to replace the 190 @-@ seat Assembly Hall on the third floor of St. Joseph Hall , originally a chapel for the St. Joseph Bohemian Orphanage . As part of the project , the room was converted back into a chapel , named the Chapel of St. Therese . 
 Petru Hall , which was used for the annual school auction after the orphans left , was demolished to make way for the new performing arts center , named St. Daniel Hall , after Abbot Daniel Kucera and Saint Daniel . Constructed of brick and pre @-@ cast concrete , the design includes arched entrances to match the other buildings on campus . The facility features a 369 @-@ seat auditorium , an outdoor theater complex , a rehearsal room for bands and choirs , a set @-@ construction area , and storage areas . In addition to plays and concerts , St. Daniel Hall is also used for assemblies , lectures , and masses , which had previously been held in the gymnasium . 
 In May 2007 , the school broke ground on a new $ 16 million science and student activity center . The 50 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) building includes extra corridors to ease hall traffic , a larger cafeteria , and additional storage space , along with four combination classrooms and laboratories for biology and earth science , three chemistry classrooms , and two chemistry labs . 
 = = Admissions = = 
 Admission is competitive and primarily based on the High School Placement Test , a standardized test by Scholastic Testing Service , taken in January of applicants ' eighth grade year ( around age 13 ) . According to the Daily Herald , schools like Benet hope to accept the top 40 percent of students taking the exam . Seventh grade ( around age 12 ) transcripts and a student essay are also factors in admission . In 2003 – 04 , 600 students applied for admission , 387 were accepted , and 338 enrolled . As of the 2010 admissions cycle , 70 percent of applicants were accepted . 
 Preference is given to siblings of current or former Benet students . In 1993 the average admitted eighth grader scored in the 87th percentile on the placement test . Applicants without siblings at the school were admitted only with scores above the 75th percentile ; applicants with siblings at Benet were admitted with scores as low as the 50th percentile on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . 
 = = Academics = = 
 As of the 2009 – 10 school year , students are required to complete 23 Carnegie units of a college @-@ preparatory curriculum to graduate , including 4 units of English , 2 units of foreign language , 3 units of math , 1 unit of world history , 1 unit of US history , 3 units of lab science , 4 units of religion , 1 @.@ 5 units of physical education , and 5 five units of electives . Spanish , French , German , and Latin are offered as foreign languages . Every summer since 1997 , an English teacher has offered a one @-@ week summer course in writing and photography . The school offers neither vocational nor remedial courses . 
 College credit is available through participation in 11 Advanced Placement courses ; the Program for Advanced College Credit ( <unk> ) offered through St. Mary 's University of Minnesota , which offers advanced courses in English , math , government , and history ; and the Benedictine University Future Scholars Program , which offers college @-@ level work in <unk> calculus and finite mathematics . 
 The Chicago Sun @-@ Times ranked Benet one of the top ten high schools in the Chicago area in 2003 , based on graduate enrollment rates at four @-@ year colleges and test scores over a four @-@ year period . In 1999 Benet was also one of two high schools in DuPage County , and 100 high schools nationwide , featured as an " Outstanding American High School " by US News and World Report . The study , conducted in conjunction with the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago , identified schools " where students progress steadily toward high academic standards and where every student matters . " Benet has credited the school 's academic success to Rev. Ronald Rigovsky , who served as principal for 23 years and as president from 1987 to 1992 . During his tenure , said the Chicago Tribune , Rigovsky developed the school into " one of the highest scoring and most scholastically respected high schools in the Chicago area . " 
 Benet Academy is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools , the Illinois State Board of Education , and the National Catholic Educational Association . 
 = = Students and faculty = = 
 Benet enrolled 1 @,@ 333 students in 2009 – 10 . Most students come from Catholic families with professional and college @-@ educated parents . In 2003 – 04 , 97 percent of students were Roman Catholic ; two percent received financial aid , which totaled $ 3 @,@ 000 . Tuition was $ 6 @,@ 000 . The average class size was 27 students . Most students come from Lisle , Downers Grove , and Naperville , but students in the class of 2013 came from 65 different schools and 34 different municipalities in DuPage and surrounding counties . 
 The Benet graduating class of 2010 achieved an average composite score of 28 @.@ 4 ( above the 92nd percentile ) on the ACT , a standardized college admission test , which was the seventh straight year average score topped 28 , compared to a statewide average of 20 @.@ 7 and national average of 21 @.@ 0 . Over 42 percent of the class had a score of 30 ( above the 96th percentile ) or higher . In 2000 , Benet outscored all DuPage County high schools , which then @-@ Principal Ernest Stark attributed to its closed campus policy , silent study halls , and " more focused " and " not very fancy " curriculum . In 1993 , Benet 's average ACT score exceeded those of 195 public high schools in northern Illinois , second only to the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy , a selective residential school for gifted students . In 2008 , Benet had nine National Merit Semi @-@ Finalists , 34 National Merit Commended Scholars , and 5 National Merit Hispanic Scholars in the National Merit Scholarship Program and 137 students were named Illinois State Scholars , an honor awarded to top ten percent of seniors in the state and based on test scores , class rank , or both . In 2010 , 332 students took Advanced Placement exams and 86 percent of them scored at least a three out of five . Two National AP Scholar awards were granted to students who averaged a 4 on all exams taken and received at least a 4 on eight or more exams , 28 AP Scholar with Distinction awards were granted to students who averaged at least 3 @.@ 5 on all exams taken and scored at least a 3 on five or more exams , 51 AP Scholar awards were granted to students who scored at least a 3 on three or more exams . 76 students received other AP Scholar awards . Benet does not report class rankings . 
 More than 99 percent of Benet graduates go to college ; roughly 1 percent serve in the military . Benet students were implicated in the University of Illinois clout scandal , in which some applicants were given preferential admission to the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign ( UIUC ) despite having sub @-@ par qualifications . The Chicago Tribune , investigating the scandal , reported that a majority of students who were admitted to UIUC through political favors came from elite , affluent high schools such as Benet , where families were politically connected with elected officials and university trustees . An email between admissions officers revealed that a female Benet student was admitted to the university 's College of Liberal Arts and Sciences , despite the fact that she had ranked lower than 27 of her classmates who were put on a waiting list or denied admission . Between 2005 and 2009 , thirteen applicants from Benet were alleged to have had political connections ; eight of them were admitted to UIUC . 
 In 2010 Benet employed 76 faculty , 26 of whom were alumni of the school . The average tenure was 17 @.@ 6 years ; 25 current or former faculty members served for 25 years or more . Tim White , an English teacher , completed his 50th consecutive year of teaching at Benet in the 2008 – 09 school year and was featured in an ABC 7 News segment entitled " Someone You Should Know " . 
 = = Activities = = 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The St. Procopius Academy football team played its first game against Downers Grove High School on Thanksgiving Day , 1917 . At first some faculty members did not approve of American football , but it became respected on campus in the 1920s under the direction of Rev. Benedict Bauer . Bauer served as Athletic Director until 1927 while also coaching basketball , baseball , and football , and planned the construction of a new gymnasium in 1925 . The college 's varsity baseball team won conference championships in 1924 and 1925 , and the football team defeated the University of Notre Dame freshman team in 1925 . 
 Benet competes in the East Suburban Catholic Conference ( <unk> ) , part of the Illinois High School Association ( IHSA ) . The school sponsors teams , named the Benet Academy Redwings , for men and women in basketball , cross country , golf , lacrosse , soccer , swimming and diving , tennis , track and field , volleyball , and bass fishing . Only men compete in baseball , football , and ice hockey . Only women compete in cheerleading and softball . Since 1978 , Benet has placed in the top four at least once in state tournaments in basketball , cross country , football , soccer , and tennis . In 2000 @-@ 01 and 2001 @-@ 02 seasons the boys ' soccer team were state champions , and in 2000 they were ranked 11th in the nation . In 2008 – 09 , the girls ' volleyball team finished second in the state . In November 2010 six student @-@ athletes signed letters of intent to play at NCAA Division I universities . The school 's boys ' basketball team was also ranked sixth in the nation in February 2011 by USA Today . In 2014 the basketball team finished second in state . 
 Benet 's boys ' basketball team has set several state records , including a 102 home @-@ game winning streak between November 26 , 1975 and January 24 , 1987 . The streak ended when Benet lost to Naperville North High School 46 – 47 . The team compiled a 96 game in @-@ conference winning streak from January 21 , 1977 , to February 24 , 1984 . The team recorded twelve consecutive seasons with at least 20 wins from 1975 to 1987 , tied for the ninth longest streak in state history . The basketball team honors these school records by playing one home game each year in the Alumni Gym , where the streaks were recorded . 
 Benet 's chess team , founded in 2012 , has won every Far Side Suburban Chess Conference champion ship since the team 's inception . In 2014 the chess team took 2nd place at the IHSA state tournament . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The theater department has staged annual musicals since 1997 . Shows have included 42nd Street , Bye Bye Birdie , Guys and Dolls , and Hello , Dolly ! In 2000 , the department began depicting works that were " not quite so fluffy and light " , including Children of Eden , West Side Story , Fiddler on the Roof , The Pirates of Penzance , and Into the Woods . In 2006 , the department celebrated its tenth anniversary of musical performances with a production of The Music Man . 
 Benet 's band program , practically nonexistent in the late 1950s , was revitalized by director Andy Marchese in the mid @-@ 1960s , who introduced new uniforms , regularly scheduled concerts , and marching band trophies . Participation in the marching band also increased after the school became coeducational , since there were more musicians willing to play instruments male students saw as feminine . Out of 1 @,@ 275 students at Benet in 1999 – 00 , 130 were choir students and 115 were band students . Instrumental groups include two concert bands , three jazz bands , a marching band , and a pep band . In 1998 the pep band was one of eight schools chosen from a pool of 58 to perform at the state basketball tournament . In 2002 , the school 's symphonic band was one of three high school bands invited to play at the Illinois Music Educators Association All @-@ State Conference in Peoria . Vocal music groups include five choirs , one of which is a student @-@ led mass choir that participates in school liturgies . 
 = = = Clubs and organizations = = = 
 Student clubs and organizations include the National Honor Society and Model United Nations , and a Campus Ministry geared towards fostering the students ' Catholic faith . Campus Ministry assists in coordinating several three @-@ day retreats held throughout the year , through which students are encouraged to reexamine their faith . Club activities include the Outreach Society service organization , Medical Club , and foreign language clubs . Student Government , in addition to coordinating the Christmas Drive , organizes student activities like prom , film festivals , and male beauty contests . 
 Benet 's Math Team won third place in its division in 2004 , first place in 2005 , and fourth place in 2006 in the state math competition sponsored by the Illinois Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Benet 's Science Olympiad team won second place in its division at the state tournaments in 2008 and 2010 . In February 2010 , the Law Club participated in its first mock trial , sponsored by the Illinois State Bar Association , which is expected to become an annual event . 
 = = = Christmas Drive = = = 
 The annual Christmas Drive takes place in December , during the two weeks prior to Christmas vacation . The fundraiser is a school @-@ wide effort , jointly coordinated by Student Government , National Honor Society , and the Outreach Society . The fundraising efforts are varied and creative ; boys donate money to remain unshaven ( a violation of school policy ) , the National Honor Society sells baked goods , the Mother 's Club serves breakfast , and each class competes to gather the most pennies in the school @-@ wide " penny wars " . The Christmas Drive was featured in the cover story of the December 2010 issue of Christ is our Hope , the official magazine of the Diocese of Joliet . In the previous year the school had raised $ 54 @,@ 500 . The money was used to support a mission trip in Appalachia , and also to provide food , school supplies , blankets , and gifts to local families in the Chicago area . In 2010 , the student body raised $ 66 @,@ 200 . In 2014 , they set the school record by raising over $ 86 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Benet alumni include Olympic air rifle gold medalist Nancy Johnson ; National Football League players Steve Baumgartner , Dan <unk> , and Justin <unk> ; professional boxer Mike Lee ; Charlotte Hornets basketball player Frank Kaminsky ; investment banker Dan " Fuego " <unk> ; and professional poker player and Positively Fifth Street author James McManus . Grammy @-@ winning rock singer Dave <unk> , former lead singer of the group Survivor , and Diablo Cody , Oscar @-@ winning screenwriter of Juno , graduated from Benet , as did former Illinois Attorney General and gubernatorial candidate Jim Ryan . 
 = The Boat Race 1955 = 
 The 101st Boat Race took place on 26 March 1955 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race , in which the Cambridge crew was substantially heavier than their opponents and where there were more non @-@ British participants than ever before , was umpired by former Oxford rower Gerald Ellison . Cambridge won by sixteen lengths , the second largest margin of victory in the history of the Boat Race , in a time of 19 minutes 10 seconds . It was their second win in three years and took the overall record in the event to 55 – 45 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1954 race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Cambridge led overall with 54 victories to Oxford 's 45 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by J. R. F. Best , G. <unk> @-@ Wood , Thom Langton ( who had rowed in the 1937 and 1938 races ) , Derek Mays @-@ Smith and James Owen . Oxford 's coaches were Christopher Davidge ( who rowed in the 1949 , 1951 and 1952 races and was non @-@ rowing president for the 1951 race ) , Hugh Edwards ( a Blue in 1926 and 1930 ) , W. J. Llewellyn @-@ Jones and A. D. Rowe ( who had represented Oxford in the 1948 and 1949 races ) . The race was umpired by former Oxford rower Gerald Ellison , the Bishop of Willesden , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1932 and 1933 races . 
 Prior to the race , the rowing correspondent for The Times suggested " it must be rare for two Boat Race crews to be as dissimilar as are the Oxford and Cambridge crews " who were to race against one another . Oxford were the lighter crew yet demonstrated uniformity and excellent <unk> . Cambridge 's style was diverse but demonstrated a " tremendous zest for hard work and hard rowing . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 2 @.@ 5 lb ( 83 @.@ 5 kg ) , 11 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Six of the Oxford crew had previous Boat Race experience including their bow James A. Gobbo . Cambridge saw two rowers return , in bow D. K. Hill and number four K. A. Masser . The race saw more non @-@ British participants than ever before : Oxford 's crew included four Australians in Gobbo , E. V. Vine , J. G. McLeod and Edward Pain , while Cambridge 's had two Harvard University rowers in P. du Bois and Robert Monks . Oxford 's Pain was an Olympic bronze medallist in the men 's eights at the 1952 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The umpire Ellison started the race at 2 : 20 p.m. whereupon Oxford made the better start , rating 40 strokes per minute , and taking a slight lead . Maintaining the higher stroke rate , the Dark Blues passed Craven Steps with a canvas @-@ length lead in a record time . Taking advantage of the bend in the river , Cambridge first drew level before holding a quarter @-@ length lead by the time the crews passed the Mile Post . By Harrods Furniture Depository the lead was just back to a canvas before a mistake in the steering from Oxford 's cox Watson on the approach to Hammersmith Bridge saw Cambridge leading by a few feet . A spurt from Oxford 's stroke G. Sorrell went unanswered by his crew , and in response , the Light Blue stroke pushed on , taking the Cambridge boat away . By Chiswick Eyot the Light Blues held a three @-@ length lead which they extended to over five lengths by Chiswick Steps . 
 Rough water in Corney Reach meant both crews had reduced to 28 strokes per minute but Oxford were tiring : their number six McLeod " stopped rowing ... he kept some sort of time , but barely dipping his blade into the water " . The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian suggested that he had " got his oar buried , was pounded in the stomach by its handle and virtually stopped rowing " . Cambridge passed below Barnes Bridge thirty seconds ahead and had reduced their rating to 26 strokes per minute , 6 fewer than Oxford who continued to struggle . Cambridge won by sixteen lengths , the second largest margin of victory in the history of the Boat Race , bettered only by their twenty @-@ length victory in the 1900 race . The winning time was 19 minutes 10 seconds . It was their second win in three years and took the overall record in the event to 55 – 45 in their favour . 
 = The Twisted World of Marge Simpson = 
 " The Twisted World of Marge Simpson " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 19 , 1997 . It was written by Jennifer Crittenden and directed by Chuck Sheetz . The episode guest stars Jack Lemmon as Frank Ormand and Joe Mantegna as Fat Tony . Over the course of the episode , Marge sets up her own business , selling pretzels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a meeting of the Springfield Investorettes , Marge admits that she is reluctant to invest money in high @-@ risk ventures and is ejected from the group . After some consideration , Lisa convinces Marge to buy her own franchise . During a Franchise Expo , the Investorettes become members of the glamorous " Fleet @-@ A @-@ Pita " franchise , in return prompting Marge to join a much smaller one called " Pretzel Wagon " , owned by a man named Frank Ormand . After watching a promotional video , Marge sets up a makeshift office in her garage , distributes flyers , and with Homer , Bart and Lisa 's help , proceeds to make pretzels . 
 To begin with , Marge sets up shop outside the Springfield Power Plant , with Homer convincing his colleagues to each try the new snack . However , the Investorettes ' Fleet @-@ A @-@ Pita van rolls up , and within a few seconds , converts Marge 's customers . Lisa suggests that Marge " think big " , and so the family offer " Free Pretzel Day " at the Springfield Isotopes baseball stadium . Before the crowd has a chance to consume their complimentary pretzel , it is announced that Mr. Burns has won a 1997 Pontiac <unk> in the day 's give @-@ away competition . The supporters react angrily to the news and bombard the field with the pretzels , knocking out Whitey Ford in the process . No one tries the food , and Marge 's efforts end in vain once again , with her about to give up . 
 Homer , seeing Marge depressed , decides to take matters into his own hands and searches for someone who can help Marge . After discovering that Frank Ormand has died in a car accident , as has the executor of his estate , Homer establishes a " business agreement " with Fat Tony . The following day , Marge surprisingly receives a large order for pretzels and the business is reinvigorated . Many snack @-@ food vendors , such as Luigi Risotto 's restaurant and the Girl Scouts are intimidated by the mob , culminating with the Investorettes ' Fleet @-@ A @-@ Pita van being detonated . Shortly after , Fat Tony greets Homer and demands he pay for his " favors " , but he promptly refuses . As a result , Marge is given an order to be delivered to a remote location on the outskirts of the town , where she is approached by Fat Tony and his gang . He informs her of the deal he made with Homer and claims that he is entitled to a 100 percent stake of Marge 's profits as a result . Marge confronts Homer about this and he comes clean , explaining that he was only trying to help her . Marge decides to refuse to pay any money to the mafia and to go on making pretzels . 
 The following morning the mob arrives and Marge makes her decision clear to them . As the mob advances on her , the Investorettes arrive with the Japanese Yakuza . The rival gangs begin to fight and the Simpsons retreat to the house . 
