 = = Production = = 
 The main plot of the episode concerning the two rival snack food franchises was selected because at the time of production , pita bread and pretzels were " becoming popular . " Josh Weinstein expressed his wish that the ideas had been changed to something more " fun " , as both snacks have since " gone out of fashion . " The Fleet @-@ A @-@ Pita chef was an early version of the " <unk> @-@ <unk> " man from " The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson . " At the Expo , many of the franchises were based on real franchises and get @-@ rich @-@ quick schemes . In the scene where Homer is inspecting pretzels , there was originally a shot where he gave a thumbs down to Maggie 's pretzel . 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden who wrote four other episodes . Homer 's line " Yeah , Homer 's right " during the scene where the pretzel wagon arrives was ad @-@ libbed by Dan Castellaneta . In another scene , Cletus calls for his many children to come out of the house ; the names of which were all " trendy names from the nineties " . The 1997 Pontiac <unk> that Mr. Burns wins was designed to accurately resemble one . The episode 's final scene , the mob war , was conceived by Matt Groening as no one else could come up with an ending . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene in which the Springfield Mafia destroy all of the competition to " Pretzel Wagon " is based on a scene from Goodfellas . Frank Ormand 's " You 'll be there " speech mirrors that of Tom Joad from John Steinbeck 's The Grapes of Wrath . Lemmon 's portrayal of Frank Ormand is based on the character Shelley Levene from the film Glengarry Glen Ross , also played by Lemmon . The character Gil Gunderson , who would not be introduced until the episode " Realty Bites " , was also based on Levene . Rumer and Scout , two of Cletus 's children , are named after Bruce Willis and Demi Moore 's children . The song used during the montage of Fat Tony destroying Marge 's competitors in the snack market is The Lineman composed by Ralph <unk> and produced by Sam Spence for NFL Films . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Twisted World of Marge Simpson " finished 55th in ratings for the week of January 13 – 19 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 0 million viewing households . It was the fifth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , King of the Hill , Melrose Place and Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " A clever , and rather unusual , idea for an episode that shows a frightening bitchiness beneath the middle @-@ class veneer of <unk> businesswomen . " The scene with Cletus 's children is one of two scenes from this episode that Josh Weinstein considers to be " classic " , with the second being the sequence when the crowd throw their free pretzels onto the baseball field , knocking Whitey Ford unconscious . The Ford scene was placed 24th on ESPN.com 's list of the " Top 100 Simpsons sport moments " , released in 2004 . Greg Collins , the author of the list , added that " Every time it looks like a fight is about to start at a baseball game , I start quoting this scene . " The A.V. Club named the baseball commentator 's line " <unk> <unk> come the pretzels " one of the quotes from The Simpsons that can be used in everyday situations . 
 = Ontario Highway 417 = 
 King 's Highway 417 , commonly referred to as Highway 417 and the Queensway through Ottawa , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . It connects Montreal ( via A40 ) with Ottawa , and is the backbone of the transportation system in the National Capital Region . Within Ottawa , it forms part of the Queensway ( along with Ottawa Regional Road 174 east to Trim Road ) west to Highway 7 . Highway 417 extends from the Quebec border ( near Hawkesbury ) to Arnprior , where it continues westward as Highway 17 . Aside from the urban section through Ottawa , Highway 417 passes through farmland that dominates much of the fertile Ottawa Valley . 
 Within Ottawa , the Queensway was built as part of a grand plan for the city between 1957 and 1966 , and later reconstructed to its present form throughout the 1980s . The eastern section , from Gloucester to the Quebec border , opened in 1975 in preparation for the 1976 Montreal Olympics . Sections west of Ottawa have been under construction since the mid @-@ 1970s , with the latest section bypassing Arnprior opening on November 29 , 2012 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 417 is a 181 @.@ 4 km ( 112 @.@ 7 mi ) controlled @-@ access highway that traverses the lower Ottawa Valley and upper St. Lawrence Valley , bypassing the generally two @-@ lane Highway 17 and providing a high @-@ speed connection between Montreal and Ottawa via A @-@ 40 . The freeway has also gradually been extended northwest from Ottawa alongside the old highway to its current terminus in Arnprior . Highway 417 currently has 42 interchanges from the Quebec border to Arnprior , with more planned as the highway is extended westward . Unlike other highways in Ontario and most of North America , exits are numbered from east to west . 
 While a significant portion of Highway 417 is a rural four lane freeway divided by a grass median , the section within urban Ottawa is a busy commuter route as wide as eight lanes . The portion of the route from the Highway 7 interchange east to the Split – a large four @-@ way interchange between Highway 417 , Ottawa Regional Road 174 and the Aviation Parkway – is known formally as the Queensway , although no indication of this name appears on any signage . 
 = = = Quebec to Ottawa = = = 
 Highway 417 begins at the border between the provinces of Ontario and Quebec , east of which the four lane freeway continues as Autoroute 40 . The route proceeds west along the former alignment of Highway 17 , which it has served to replace . It passes through a forested and agricultural landscape en route to Ottawa , serving the communities of Hawkesbury , Vankleek Hill , Casselman , Limoges and Vars . After approximately 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) the route curves southwest while ramps provide access from the westbound lanes to Prescott and Russell County Road 17 and from County Road 17 to the eastbound lanes of Highway 417 . The route later meets the southern terminus of Highway 34 at Exit 27 . Continuing southwest , the route meanders along the boundary between The Nation and North Glengarry , eventually encountering the northern terminus of Highway 138 — a highway built to connect Highway 417 with Highway 401 and Cornwall — east of Casselman . At this point , the freeway enters The Nation and diverges from the boundary . 
 After crossing a Via Rail line , the route dips south of Casselman and curves to the west at Exit 66 ( County Road 7 ) . It roughly parallels the Via Rail line several kilometres north of the freeway , though significant deviations bypass the communities of Benoit and Limoges ; the latter is served by Exit 79 ( County Road 5 ) . Near Limoges is the Larose Forest , a man @-@ made forest planted between 1928 and 1980 over the Bourget Desert , itself created as the result of clear cutting in the 19th century . At Exit 88 , Highway 417 enters the city of Ottawa , though the surroundings remain unchanged until Exit 110 ( Walkley Road ) , near Ramsayville . 
 North of Ramsayville , the route jogs abruptly to the west as it crosses Greens Creek and enters the suburbs of Ottawa ; an interchange with Innes Road divides the countryside to the south and east from the city to the north and west . The freeway merges with the Queensway at a large multi @-@ level interchange known locally as the Split , curving to the west and into downtown Ottawa . The interchange also provides access to Aviation Parkway from westbound Highway 417 and from the parkway to eastbound Highway 417 . 
 = = = Queensway = = = 
 Within Ottawa , the Queensway extends from Orleans in the east and passes just south of downtown through central Ottawa to Kanata in the west . Two major interchanges anchor either end of this section : in the east , Highway 417 diverges south towards Montreal at The Split , while the Queensway continues east as Ottawa Regional Road 174 and Aviation Parkway branches north ; in the west , Highway 416 travels south to Highway 401 . The core section of the Queensway is eight lanes wide , four per carriageway . 
 The freeway is elevated on a berm along some central portions of the route , providing views of downtown and the Gatineau Hills to the north . This section was constructed along a former Canadian National Railway <unk> . The route bisects central Ottawa with downtown and the Parliament Buildings lay to the north of the highway and residential neighbourhoods including the Glebe to the south . Towards the Richmond Road interchange , the original western terminus of the Queensway , both sides of the freeway are lined by residential subdivisions . 
 Between Eagleson / March Road and Moodie Drive in the west and between Blair Road and Place d 'Orléans Drive in the east , a bus @-@ only shoulder is used by <unk> 's Transitway rapid @-@ transit network . Several closely spaced exits serve the downtown core of Ottawa , including Nicholas Street , Bronson Avenue and Metcalfe Street ; the former was once designated as various provincial highways , most recently Highway 31 . 
 = = = West of Highway 416 = = = 
 West of the interchange with Highway 416 , the freeway enters the suburb of Kanata — an independent city until the formation of the new City of Ottawa in 2001 — and travels through it in an east – west direction . At Exit 145 , the route encounters the eastern terminus of Highway 7 , which travels southwest to Peterborough , Ontario and the GTA and provides an alternative route to Highway 401 via Highway 416 . Highway 417 makes a broad 90 @-@ degree curve to the north to meet with the midpoint of the Carp Bypass at the former Highway 44 ( now Ottawa Regional Road 49 ) . 
 The Carp Bypass was built in the mid @-@ 1960s as a bypass of the existing Highway 17 , which meandered through the communities of Carp , Kinburn and Antrim ; the former highway is now Donald B. Munro Drive , and lies to the east of Highway 417 . The bypass was built as a two lane road with full control of access , avoiding existing properties and easily facilitating the upgrade to a freeway . North of Antrim , Highway 417 travels in a straight line parallel to old Highway 17 as far as Arnprior , where it curves to cross the Madawaska River . The divided freeway ends east of Campbell Drive , northwest of the town . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Queensway = = = 
 Highway 417 was initially constructed as a connection between the existing Queensway and Autoroute 40 in Quebec , the latter being constructed in advance of Expo 1967 and opening December 17 , 1966 . However , the designation has since been applied to the Queensway west of the interchange between the two freeways . 
 Construction of the Queensway was driven by the Greber Plan , which was produced by Jacques Gréber under the direction of Prime Minister Mackenzie King in the late 1940s . Although Gréber had been corresponding with King as early as 1936 , World War II halted any plans from reaching fruition at that time . Following the war , Gréber was again contacted and his expertise requested . He arrived on October 2 , 1945 and began working almost immediately . The Greber Plan , as it came to be known , was released in 1950 and presented to the House of Commons on May 22 , 1951 . The plan called for the complete reorganization of Ottawa 's road and rail network , and included amongst the numerous parkways was an east to west expressway along what was then a Canadian National Railway line . 
 With the rail lines removed , construction of the new expressway got underway in 1957 when Queen Elizabeth visited Ottawa to open the first session of the 23rd Parliament . On October 15 , the Queen detonated dynamite charges from the <unk> Bridge , which now overlooks the highway as it crosses the Rideau River , and formally dedicated the new project as the Queensway . At the ceremony , premier Leslie Frost indicated that the entire project would cost C $ 31 million and emphasized the importance of the link to the Trans @-@ Canada Highway . 
 The Queensway was constructed in four phases , each opening independently : phase one , from Alta Vista Drive ( now Riverside Drive ) east to Highway 17 ( Montreal Road ) ; phase two , from Highway 7 and Highway 15 ( Richmond Road ) to Carling Avenue ; phase three , from Carling Avenue to O 'Connor Street ; and , phase four , from O 'Connor Street to Alta Vista Drive , crossing the Rideau Canal and Rideau River . Phase one opened to traffic on November 25 , 1960 , extending up to the Rideau River . On the western side of Ottawa , phase two opened a year later in October , 1961 . The central section presented the greatest challenge , as an embankment was built to create grade @-@ separations . In addition , the structures over the Rideau Canal and river required several years of construction . On May 15 , 1964 , the majority of the third phase was ceremonially opened , completing the Carling Avenue interchange and extending the freeway as far as Bronson Avenue . Several months later , on September 17 the short but complicated section east to O 'Connor Street was opened . This left only phase four , the central section of the Queensway , which was opened in three segments . On November 26 , 1965 , the structures over the Rideau Canal were opened to traffic . At the same time , the westbound lanes of the Queensway were extended to Concord Street , located west of the Nicholas Street interchange . The interchange opened on January 1 , 1966 , allowing travel in both directions over the canal . The final segment , linking the two section of the Queensway , was placed into service on October 28 , 1966 . Following this , the Highway 17 designation was applied along the Queensway and the old routing renumbered as Highway 17B . 
 = = = New freeway = = = 
 Planning was underway on a new freeway , Highway 417 , that would run east of Ottawa from the Queensway , connecting with A @-@ 40 to provide a high @-@ speed route to Montreal . Highway 17 , closely following the shore of the Ottawa River as it meanders towards Pointe @-@ Fortune , was dangerous , narrow , and accident prone , earning it the nickname of " the killer strip " . The awarding of the 1976 Summer Olympics to Montreal on May 12 , 1970 resulted in an accelerated construction schedule due to the anticipated high volume of traffic that would be travelling the corridor between Ottawa and Montreal during the games . Contracts to construct the new route were opened to bidding on November 15 , 1968 ; construction began in May 1969 starting at Base Line Road ( now Ramsayville Road ) and proceeding easterly . 
 The new freeway was built under a continuous construction program over the following 6 years , opening progressively as each segment of roadway was completed . The first 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) segment , from Ramsayville Road to Rockdale Road , near Vars , opened on September 21 , 1972 . By the end of that month , the easternmost 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) of Highway 17 had been converted into a divided freeway , and construction was progressing on the remainder of the route . On October 1 , 1973 , a 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) section of freeway opened between Vars and Limoges . On July 15 , 1974 , Minister of Transportation and Communications John Rhodes ceremonially opened the next section of Highway 417 , between Limoges Road and Highland Road . The section between Highland Road and Highway 17 opened on November 8 , 1974 , connecting with the existing section leading from the Quebec border . The final segment of the new route , connecting the section east of Ramsayville with the Queensway , was opened to traffic on December 2 , 1975 . The cost of the entire eastern segment was $ 77 million ( $ 314 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = = Extensions and expansions = = = 
 Meanwhile , to the west of Ottawa , planning got underway on a continuation of the Queensway . This extension was designed to connect with the Carp Bypass – a portion of Highway 17 designed to bypass the old meandering route ( now known as Donald B. Munro Drive ) through Carp , Marathon and Antrim that opened November 9 , 1965 – with an interchange and connection to Highway 7 . Prior to the completion of this section of freeway , Highway 17 followed Carling Avenue and March Road from Ottawa to west of Carp . Construction began in the west end of Ottawa in 1967 . On October 31 , 1969 , a short extension to Moodie Drive was completed , including the realignment of that road for continuity north and south of Highway 417 . The following year , the freeway was extended to March Road . Construction halted at the eastern edge of Kanata for several years while a study was conducted into the merits of building the highway in a trench through the established city . During this time , construction began in 1974 on the future Queensway and Highway 7 interchange . Work also began on the two lane connections to Highway 7 as well as to the Highway 17 and Highway 44 junction west of Carp at the same time . 
 Upon the completion of the Ottawa – Quebec section of freeway , the Queensway was designated as Highway 417 west of The Split . With the completion of the Kanata study during early 1976 , work began to build the route through the city @-@ centre in a depressed @-@ grade ; as a result all the crossings though that section pass over the freeway . By early 1978 , the western extension was opened to traffic , providing four lanes between Richmond Road and Highway 7 / 417 . The two legs beyond the interchange were initially constructed as two @-@ lane undivided roads , and remained as such for over a decade . 
 Throughout the 1980s , work on Highway 417 shifted from extensions to expansions . Within Ottawa , the initially four lane route , separated by a wide grass median , was expanded to eight lanes with paved shoulders and centre @-@ mounted lighting beginning in 1982 . To reduce weaving , the exit at Kent Street was removed during this work . Expansion of the two lane Highway 17 west of the interchange with Highway 7 got underway in 1991 ; this section was renumbered as Highway 417 as construction progressed westward . The construction saw a second two lane roadway built parallel to the existing route to create a divided freeway , a process known as twinning . 
 When the twinning of Highway 17 reached March Road , new contracts were tendered to continue the process northward . Bot Construction was awarded the contract for the section north to Panmure Road on December 9 , 1998 . On February 16 , 2000 , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) officially announced that Highway 417 would be extended to Arnprior over the next several years . A contract to build the freeway from north of Panmure Road to south of Arnprior was tendered in early 2002 . This work was completed and the extension opened to traffic on September 24 , 2004 . 
 Concurrent with the twinning of Highway 7 between Carleton Place and Ottawa , the interchange with Highway 417 was upgraded to support the divided traffic flows ; a new flyover ramp was built connecting westbound Highway 417 with westbound Highway 7 . Construction began on August 22 , 2006 , and was opened in June 2008 along with the Highway 7 expansion . 
 Construction to twin the Arnprior Bypass portion of Highway 17 , which included a new interchange at White Lake Road , began during the spring of 2009 . The bypass was originally built in 1981 as one of a number of upgrades to Highway 17 between Ottawa and North Bay . It was intended for directing through traffic around downtown Arnprior and was designed for an eventual upgrade to a divided freeway . The major structure in this project was a second crossing of the Madawaska River . Work was completed in late 2012 ; the new 5 @.@ 6 km ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) section was opened ceremonially on November 29 and cost $ 63 million , $ 7 million less than projected . 
 Highway 417 was widened from 4 lanes to 8 lanes between Eagleson Road / March Road in Kanata and Palladium Drive ( including HOV lanes ) , and from 4 lanes to 6 lanes between Carp Road and Highway 7 . The work on the westbound lanes was completed in late @-@ October 2014 , with the eastbound lanes completed in mid @-@ November 2014 . Highway 417 was recently expanded to 8 lanes between Moodie Drive and Eagleson Road / March Road to relieve congestion , especially when events occur at Canadian Tire Centre . 
 = = Future = = 
 The MTO plans to further extend Highway 417 westerly through the Ottawa Valley by twinning and realigning the existing route to a four @-@ lane freeway beyond Arnprior , where it currently merges into a two @-@ laned Highway 17 . Route planning has been completed to Pembroke , with a bypass to the east of the Cobden area . The second phase of the extension to be built ( phase 1 was the section around Arnprior ) is a 5 @.@ 3 km ( 3 @.@ 3 mi ) extension past Campbell Drive to Scheel Drive northwest of Arnprior , under construction as of June 26 , 2014 and scheduled to be completed in 2016 . Phases 3 and 4 total 22 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) and will take the 417 from Scheel Drive to a point 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) west of Renfrew . 
 Planning and construction efforts to upgrade Highway 17 through Sudbury and east of North Bay have prompted speculation that Highway 417 will continue to be extended west through Northern Ontario ; although no comprehensive conversion plan has been announced to date , Sault Ste . Marie MPP David <unk> has spearheaded a petition to have the entire highway four @-@ laned from Arnprior to Sault Ste . Marie , similar to the campaign previously undertaken by his caucus colleague Rick <unk> regarding the extension of Highway 400 . Cheryl Gallant , the federal Member of Parliament for Renfrew — Nipissing — Pembroke , has also advocated the four @-@ laning of the highway through the Ottawa Valley toward North Bay , and ultimately the entire length of the highway throughout Northern Ontario . 
 A widening project was recently completed between Nicholas Street and Ottawa Road 174 . The segment was widened from 6 lanes to 8 lanes . Construction began in 2013 and was completed on @-@ time in 2015 . The additional pair of lanes will be used as bus lanes temporarily , until 2018 , at which point they will become general traffic lanes . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 417 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . Unlike other highways in Ontario , Highway 417 is measured from east to west , and as such this table is presented in that order . 
 = Eliab Harvey = 
 Admiral Sir Eliab Harvey GCB ( 5 December 1758 – 20 February 1830 ) was an eccentric and hot @-@ tempered officer of the Royal Navy during the French Revolutionary and the Napoleonic Wars who was as distinguished for his gambling and dueling as for his military record . Although Harvey was a significant naval figure for over twenty years , his martial reputation was largely based on his experiences at the Battle of Trafalgar , when he took his ship HMS Temeraire into the thick of the action . Harvey used Temeraire to force the surrender of two French ships of the line and later created his family motto from the names of his opponents in the engagement ; " Redoutable et Fougueux " . 
 In his civilian life , Harvey pursued political interests and spent three spells as a Member of Parliament for Maldon and later Essex . During this period he was also knighted . However , Harvey was not a peaceable man and his life both in and out of the Navy was frequently punctuated by disputes with fellow officers and politicians . One such dispute , a consequence of the Battle of Basque Roads , eventually cost Harvey his career ; a bitter exchange with Lord Gambier forcing Harvey into early retirement in 1809 . Although reinstated a year later , Harvey was never again employed in an official capacity and further promotions were only bestowed as a matter of seniority . 
 Harvey was also notable in his time for his extravagant lifestyle . The deaths of his father and elder brother while he was still a young man provided Harvey with a considerable fortune , much of which he squandered gambling in London . Harvey 's exploits at the gaming tables became legendary , one story claiming that he once bet £ 100 @,@ 000 on a single game of chance and lost , only to win most of it back on the following throw . Despite his dissolute lifestyle , Harvey was married and had numerous children ; he was survived by six daughters and had three sons who predeceased him . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eliab Harvey was born in Chigwell , Essex to William and Emma Harvey . His father William Harvey was a Member of Parliament for Essex , but died when Harvey was only five years old , in 1763 . Until 1768 , Harvey was raised at the family estate of Rolls Park in Chigwell , which had passed to his elder brother William on the death of their father . Harvey then attended Westminster School for two years before moving to Harrow School in 1770 . At the age of thirteen in 1771 , Harvey was entered onto the books of the naval schooner HMS Mary , although he did not actually serve aboard the ship . Utilising a standard legal fiction of the time , Harvey 's name was entered on the ship 's books without his actual presence , a ruse that would provide him with sufficient seniority to gain rapid promotion when he did enter the Navy . In his summer holidays from school , Harvey served at sea , joining HMS Orpheus in 1773 . 
 Entering the Navy fully in May 1774 , Harvey became a midshipman aboard the sloop HMS Lynx and spent the next two years in the West Indies . Briefly returning to Britain at the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War , Harvey returned to the eastern seaboard of North America late in 1776 aboard HMS Mermaid , before transferring to the flagship of the North America Station HMS Eagle . From there Harvey joined HMS Liverpool on temporary assignment , only to be wrecked on Long Island aboard the frigate in 1778 . Harvey rejoined Eagle after the wreck and returned to Britain in her . He was promoted to lieutenant on 25 February 1779 . 
 Following his promotion , Harvey took a leave of absence from the Navy which would last three years . He stood for parliament in the seat of Maldon in Essex , which he won in 1780 and represented for the next four years . In 1781 Harvey briefly commanded HMS Dolphin , but took leave once again four months later . In 1782 Harvey again returned to the Navy just as peace was agreed and was promoted to commander on 21 March 1782 , briefly taking over the sloop HMS Otter before rapidly making the jump to Post Captain less than a year later , on 20 January 1783 . 
 = = Civilian life = = 
 With the peace of 1783 , Harvey again took leave from the Navy , seeing out his parliamentary term and continuing his notorious lifestyle of gambling and debauchery . The young death of Harvey 's elder brother William Harvey , MP in April 1779 had provided Harvey with a substantial fortune , which he immediately began squandering in epic nights at London 's fashionable drinking and gambling establishments . Harvey gained a reputation among this crowd for playing exceptionally high stakes ; one often repeated story concerns his loss , on his 21st birthday in 1779 , of over £ 100 @,@ 000 in a single game of hazard to a Mr O 'Byrne . O 'Byrne , recognising that such a sum would bankrupt his opponent , refused to take more than £ 10 @,@ 000 , insisting that they roll the dice again to determine the fate of the remaining £ 90 @,@ 000 . Harvey won and kept his fortune , but reportedly still failed to pay the £ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Despite this riotous lifestyle , Harvey married Lady Louisa Nugent in 1784 . Louisa was a daughter of Robert Nugent , 1st Earl Nugent and co @-@ heir to his substantial wealth . The couple had nine children , eight of whom survived infancy and six of whom , all daughters , outlived their father . Harvey 's eldest son was killed in action serving in the British Army under the Marquess of Wellington at the Siege of Burgos in 1812 . Harvey remained in semi @-@ retirement until 1790 , dividing his time between London and Rolls Park . 
 = = Return to service = = 
 In 1790 , Harvey was recalled up to the Navy during the Spanish armament and commanded the frigate HMS Hussar for six months , until the Navy returned to its peacetime complement . Three years later , Harvey was once again recalled to the Navy with the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars . Harvey would remain in service for the next 16 years , only briefly taking leave in 1802 during the Peace of Amiens . In 1793 , Harvey became captain of the frigate HMS Santa Margarita in the West Indies . There he participated in the successful campaigns against the French colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique under Admiral John Jervis . In May 1794 Harvey returned to Britain and served in the squadron under Sir John Borlase Warren which raided the French coast with great success in 1794 and 1795 . 
 In August 1795 , Harvey took command of the ship of the line HMS Valiant , initially in the Channel Fleet and later in the West Indies under Sir Hyde Parker . In 1797 Harvey returned to Britain due to ill @-@ health , and was given command of the Essex sea fencibles during the next year . In 1800 Harvey returned to sea in command of HMS Triumph , which he retained until the Peace of Amiens . During the peace he again dabbled in politics , becoming MP for Essex in 1802 . Even after returning to the Navy in 1803 as captain of the second rate HMS Temeraire , Harvey remained in parliament , serving until 1812 . 
 = = Trafalgar = = 
 With the resumption of the war against France , Temeraire was attached to the Channel Fleet and blockaded ports in eastern France until 1805 , when Harvey was sent to join Horatio Nelson 's blockade off Cadiz . When the Battle of Trafalgar was joined on 21 October , Harvey 's Temeraire was the second ship in Nelson 's division and was a faster and more agile ship than HMS Victory , Nelson 's flagship . As a result , Temeraire began to pull ahead of Victory as the division closed on the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet and Harvey was consequently reprimanded by Nelson , who hailed Temeraire : " I will thank you Captain Harvey , to keep your proper station which is astern of the Victory " . 
 During the combat that followed , Harvey was heavily engaged with the enemy , passing behind Bucentaure and astern of Redoutable . The broadside fired into Redoutable reduced the French ship to a wreck and forced its surrender soon afterwards when it became tangled with Victory and Temeraire . The three ships then drifted into the following French Fougueux , British fire disabling her and giving cover to a boarding party led by Temeraire 's first @-@ lieutenant , Thomas Fortescue Kennedy , which forced the surrender of Fougueux 's crew . In later years Harvey would use this incident for his personal motto " Redoutable et Fougueux " . 
 Once the fleet had returned to port , controversy erupted concerning Harvey 's role in the battle . Although his bravery and skill were not questioned , his prominence in the dispatch sent home by Cuthbert Collingwood was . In the dispatch , Harvey was singled out over the other captains for his bravery , Collingwood writing : " I have not words in which I can sufficiently express my admiration of it " . As a result of this special mention , Harvey was promoted to rear @-@ admiral on 9 November 1805 , and given the honour of being one of Nelson 's pallbearers at the admiral 's funeral despite their short acquaintance . Harvey 's new motto and his penchant for " bragging " further alienated him from his fellow officers . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Returning to naval service some months after the action , Harvey was given the 80 @-@ gun HMS Tonnant as his first flagship , in which he remained until 1809 . Serving under Lord Gambier in the Channel Fleet , Harvey was outraged not to be given command of the British ships in action at the Battle of Basque Roads . Harvey expressed his disgust that command had been given to the more junior Lord Cochrane in no uncertain terms to Gambier , and was dismissed from the admiral 's council as a result . When the operation was initially successful , Gambier refused to support Cochrane and as a result an opportunity to annihilate the French Atlantic Fleet was lost . The ensuing dispute lasted years and involved a court martial that eventually acquitted Gambier , and only ended with Cochrane 's dismissal from the service five years later . 
 Harvey was not embroiled in the political arguments surrounding the action , as he had resigned his commission on 23 May 1809 , before the attack went ahead , in protest at Cochrane 's preferment . Returning to the Navy a year later on 21 March 1810 , Harvey was never again called to active service , Gambier blocking his efforts to obtain gainful employment . Despite his failure to return to the sea , Harvey 's seniority brought more promotions ; he made vice @-@ admiral in 1810 and finally became a full admiral in 1819 . He was also made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in 1815 when the order was reformed , becoming a Knight Grand Cross in 1825 . Harvey 's retirement included a further period in politics , returning to his seat as MP for Essex between 1820 and 1830 . 
 Harvey died in 1830 at his family estate of Rolls Park and was buried in the Harvey family crypt at St Andrews Church at Hempstead in Essex , which contains the remains of over 50 family members , including his ancestor 's brother , Dr. William Harvey . His coffin is still in the crypt , and can be viewed on request . On the wall of church is a hatchment in his honour originally placed shortly after his death and restored in 1958 after it was destroyed in the partial collapse of the church in 1884 . A large wall memorial to him is also visible in the church , which also commemorates his youngest son William , who died in 1823 aged 22 . 
 The crest of the Harvey Grammar School of Folkestone bears Harvey 's motto as well as his ship 's name ' Temeraire ' . The crest was designed by Eliab Harvey . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = SMS Emden = 
 SMS Emden ( " His Majesty 's Ship Emden " ) was the second and final member of the Dresden class of light cruisers built for the Imperial German Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) . Named for the town of Emden , she was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Danzig in 1906 . Her hull was launched in May 1908 , and completed in July 1909 . She had one sister ship , Dresden . Like the preceding Königsberg @-@ class cruisers , Emden was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two torpedo tubes . 
 Emden spent the majority of her career overseas in the German East Asia Squadron , based in Tsingtao , in the Kiautschou Bay concession in China . In 1913 , she came under the command of Karl von Müller , who would captain the ship during World War I. At the outbreak of hostilities , Emden captured a Russian steamer and converted her into the commerce raider Cormoran . Emden rejoined the East Asia Squadron , after which she was detached for independent raiding in the Indian Ocean . The cruiser spent nearly two months operating in the region , and captured nearly two dozen ships . In late October 1914 , Emden launched a surprise attack on Penang ; in the resulting Battle of Penang , she sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug and the French destroyer Mousquet . 
 Müller then took Emden to raid the Cocos Islands , where he landed a contingent of sailors to destroy British facilities . There , Emden was attacked by the Australian cruiser HMAS Sydney . The more powerful Australian ship quickly inflicted serious damage and forced Müller to run his ship aground to prevent her from sinking . Out of a crew of 376 , 133 were killed in the battle . Most of the survivors were taken prisoner ; the landing party , led by Hellmuth von Mücke , commandeered an old schooner and eventually returned to Germany . Emden 's wreck was quickly destroyed by wave action , and was broken up for scrap in the 1950s . 
 = = Design = = 
 Emden was 118 @.@ 3 meters ( 388 ft 1 in ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 53 m ( 18 ft 2 in ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 268 t ( 4 @,@ 201 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , designed to give 13 @,@ 315 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 929 kW ) for a top speed of 23 @.@ 5 knots ( 43 @.@ 5 km / h ; 27 @.@ 0 mph ) . The engines were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and drove a pair of screw propellers . Emden carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 760 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 960 km ; 4 @,@ 330 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 18 officers and 343 enlisted men . Emden was the last German cruiser to be equipped with triple @-@ expansion engines ; all subsequent cruisers used the more powerful steam turbines . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She carried a secondary battery of eight 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 55 guns , also in single mounts . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with four torpedoes , mounted in the hull below the waterline . She was also fitted to carry fifty naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The contract for Emden , ordered as ersatz ( replacement ) SMS Pfeil , was placed on 6 April 1906 at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Danzig ( now Gdańsk , Poland ) . Her keel was laid down on 1 November 1906 . She was launched on 26 May 1908 and christened by the Oberbürgermeister ( Lord Mayor ) of her namesake city , Dr. Leo Fürbringer . After fitting @-@ out work was completed by 10 July 1909 , she was commissioned into the fleet . The new cruiser began her sea trials that day ; they were interrupted from 11 August to 5 September when she participated in the annual autumn maneuvers of the main fleet . During this period , she also served as the escort for Kaiser Wilhelm II aboard his yacht Hohenzollern . Emden was decommissioned in September after she completed her trials . 
 On 1 April 1910 Emden was reactivated and assigned to the Ostasiengeschwader ( East Asia Squadron ) , based at Tsingtao in Germany 's Kiautschou concession in China . The concession had been seized in 1897 in retaliation for the murder of German nationals in the area . Emden left Kiel on 12 April 1910 , bound for Asia by way of a goodwill tour of South America . A month later , on 12 May , she stopped in Montevideo and met with the cruiser Bremen , which was assigned to the <unk> ( East American ) Station . Emden and Bremen stayed in Buenos Aires from 17 to 30 May to represent Germany at the celebrations of the hundredth anniversary of Argentinian independence . The two ships then rounded Cape Horn ; Emden stopped in Valparaíso , Chile , while Bremen continued on to Peru . 
 The cruise across the Pacific was delayed because of a lack of good quality coal . Emden eventually took on around 1 @,@ 400 t ( 1 @,@ 400 long tons ; 1 @,@ 500 short tons ) of coal at the Chilean naval base at Talcahuano and departed on 24 June . The cruise was used to evaluate the ship on long @-@ distance voyages for use in future light cruiser designs . Emden encountered unusually severe weather on the trip , which included a stop at Easter Island . She anchored at Papeete , Tahiti to coal on 12 July , her bunkers nearly empty after crossing 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ; 4 @,@ 800 mi ) . The ship then proceeded to Apia in German Samoa , arriving on 22 July . There , she met the rest of the East Asia Squadron , commanded by Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Erich Gühler . The squadron remained in Samoa until October , when the ships returned to their base at Tsingtao . Emden was thereafter sent to the Yangtze River from 27 October to 19 November , which included a visit to Hankou . The ship visited Nagasaki , Japan , before returning to Tsingtao on 22 December for her annual refit . The repair work was not carried out , since the Sokehs Rebellion erupted on Ponape in the Carolines , which required Emden 's presence ; she departed Tsingtao on 28 December , and Nürnberg left Hong Kong to join her . 
 The two cruisers reinforced German forces at Ponape , which included the old unprotected cruiser Cormoran . The ships bombarded rebel positions and sent a landing force , which included men from the ships along with colonial police troops , ashore in mid @-@ January 1911 . By the end of February the revolt had been suppressed , and on 26 February the unprotected cruiser Condor arrived to take over the German presence in the Carolines . Emden and the other ships held a funeral the following day for those killed in the operation , before departing on 1 March for Tsingtao via Guam . After arriving on 19 March , she finally began her yearly overhaul . In mid @-@ 1911 , the ship went on a cruise to Japan ; while there she accidentally rammed a Japanese steamer during a typhoon . The collision caused significant damage and necessitated another trip to the drydock in Tsingtao . She thereafter returned to the Yangtze to protect Europeans during the Chinese Revolution that broke out on 10 October . In November , Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Maximilian von Spee replaced Gühler as the commander of the East Asia Squadron . 
 At the end of the year , Emden won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery in the East Asia Squadron . In early December , Emden steamed to Incheon to assist the grounded German steamer <unk> Rickmers . In May 1913 , Korvettenkapitän ( Lieutenant Commander ) Karl von Müller became the ship 's commanding officer ; he was shortly thereafter promoted to Fregattenkapitän ( Commander ) . In mid @-@ June , Emden went on a cruise to the German colonies in the Central Pacific , after which she was stationed off Nanjing , as fighting between Qing and revolutionary forces raged there . During this period , on 26 August , rebels attacked the ship , and Emden 's gunners immediately returned fire , silencing her attackers . Emden moved to Shanghai on 14 August . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Emden spent the first half of 1914 on the normal routine of cruises in Chinese and Japanese waters without incident . During the July Crisis that followed the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria , Emden was the only German cruiser in Tsingtao ; Spee 's two armored cruisers , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , were cruising in the South Pacific and Leipzig was en route to replace Nürnberg off the coast of Mexico . On 31 July , with war days away , Müller decided to put to sea to begin commerce raiding once war had been formally declared . Two days later , on 2 August , Germany declared war on Russia , and the following day , Emden captured the Russian steamer Ryazan . The Russian vessel was sent back to Tsingtao , where she was converted into the auxiliary cruiser Cormoran . 
 On 5 August , Spee ordered Müller to join him at Pagan Island in the Mariana Islands ; Emden left Tsingtao the following day along with the auxiliary cruiser Prinz Eitel Friedrich and the collier Markomannia . The ships arrived in Pagan on 12 August . The next day , Spee learned that Japan would enter the war on the side of the Triple Entente and had dispatched a fleet to track his squadron down . Spee therefore decided to take the East Asia Squadron to South America , where it could attempt to break through to Germany , harassing British merchant traffic along the way . Müller suggested that one cruiser be detached for independent operations in the Indian Ocean , since the squadron would be unable to attack British shipping while it was crossing the Pacific . Spee agreed , and allowed Müller to operate independently , since Emden was the fastest cruiser in the squadron . 
 = = = = Independent raider = = = = 
 On 14 August , Emden and Markomannia left the company of the East Asia Squadron , bound for the Indian Ocean . Since the cruiser Königsberg was already operating in the western Indian Ocean around the Gulf of Aden , Müller decided he should cruise in the shipping lanes between Singapore , Colombo and Aden . Emden steamed toward the Indian Ocean by way of the Molucca and Banda Seas . While seeking to coal off <unk> Island , the Dutch coastal defense ship Tromp stopped Emden and made clear that she would enforce Dutch neutrality . Müller therefore decided to steam into the Lombok Strait . There , Emden 's radio @-@ intercept officers picked up messages from the British armored cruiser HMS Hampshire . To maintain secrecy , Emden 's crew rigged up a dummy funnel to give her the appearance of a British light cruiser . She then steamed up the coast of Sumatra toward the Indian Ocean . 
 On 5 September , Emden entered the Bay of Bengal , achieving complete surprise , since the British assumed she was still with Spee 's squadron . She operated on shipping routes there without success , until 10 September , when she moved to the Colombo – Calcutta route . There , she captured the Greek collier <unk> , which was carrying equipment for the British . Müller took the ship into his service and agreed to pay the crew . Emden captured five more ships ; four were sunk , and the fifth , a steamer named <unk> , was used to carry the crews from the other vessels . On 13 September , Müller released <unk> and sank two more British prizes . Off the Ganges estuary , Emden caught a Norwegian merchantman ; upon searching her , the Germans determined she was not carrying contraband and therefore released her . The Norwegians informed Müller that Entente warships were operating in the area , and so he decided to return to the eastern coast of India . 
 Emden thereafter stopped and released an Italian freighter , whose crew relayed news of the incident to a British vessel , which in turn informed British naval authorities in the region . The result was an immediate cessation of shipping and the institution of a blackout . Vice Admiral Martyn Jerram ordered Hampshire , Yarmouth , and the Japanese protected cruiser Chikuma to search for Emden . The British armored cruiser Minotaur and the Japanese armored cruiser Ibuki were sent to patrol likely coaling stations . 
 In late September , Müller decided to bombard Madras . Müller believed the attack would demonstrate his freedom of maneuver and decrease British prestige with the local population . At around 20 : 00 on 22 September , Emden entered the port , which was completely illuminated , despite the blackout order . Emden closed to within 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) from the piers before she opened fire . She set fire to two oil tanks and damaged three others , and damaged a merchant ship in the harbor . In the course of the bombardment , Emden had fired 130 rounds . The following day , the British again mandated that shipping stop in the Bay of Bengal ; during the first month of Emden 's raiding career in the Indian Ocean , the value of exports there had fallen by 61 @.@ 2 percent . 
 From Madras , Müller had originally intended to rendezvous with his colliers off <unk> Island in Indonesia , but instead decided to make a foray to the western side of Ceylon . On 25 September , Emden sank a pair of British merchantmen and two days later , captured the collier Buresk , which was carrying a cargo of high @-@ grade coal . A German prize crew went aboard Buresk and she was thereafter used to support Emden 's operations . Later that day , the German raider sank two more British vessels . Low on fuel , Emden proceeded to the Maldives to coal . She arrived there on 29 September and remained for a day while her crew replenished her coal stocks . The raider then cruised the routes between Aden and Australia and between Calcutta and Mauritius for two days without success . Emden thereafter steamed to Diego Garcia for engine maintenance and to rest her crew . 
 The British garrison at Diego Garcia had not yet learned of the state of war between Britain and Germany , and so treated Emden to a warm reception . She remained there until 10 October , during which time her bottom was cleaned of fouling . She then resumed searching for merchant ships in the area west of Colombo . While operating there , Emden picked up Hampshire 's wireless signals again , and so departed for the Chagos Archipelago on 13 October . Meanwhile , the British had captured Markomannia on 12 October , depriving Emden of one of her colliers . On 15 October , Emden captured a British steamer off <unk> and sank her the next day . Over the next five days , she captured five more vessels ; one was used as a collier , three were sunk , and the fifth was sent to port with the crews of the other vessels . On 20 October , Müller decided it was time to move to a new area of operations . 
 = = = = Attack on Penang = = = = 
 Müller decided his next course of action would be a surprise attack on Penang in British Malaya . Emden coaled in the Nicobar Islands and departed for Penang on the night of 27 October , with the departure timed to allow her to arrive off the harbor at dawn . She approached the harbor entrance at 03 : 00 on 28 October , steaming at a speed of 18 kn ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , with her fourth dummy funnel erected to disguise her identity . Emden 's lookouts quickly spotted a warship in the port with her lights on ; it turned out to be the Russian protected cruiser Zhemchug , a veteran of the Battle of Tsushima . Zhemchug had put into Penang for repairs to her boilers ; only one was in service , which meant that she could not get under way , nor were her ammunition hoists powered . Only five rounds of ready ammunition were permitted for each gun , with a sixth chambered . Emden pulled alongside Zhemchug at a distance of 300 yards ( 270 m ) ; Müller ordered a torpedo to be fired at the Russian cruiser . Immediately thereafter , he gave the order for the 10 @.@ 5 cm guns to open fire . 
 Emden quickly inflicted grievous damage on her adversary ; she turned around to make another pass at Zhemchug . One of the Russian gun crews managed to get their weapon into action , but scored no hits . Müller ordered a second torpedo to be fired into the burning Zhemchug while his guns continued to batter her . The second torpedo caused a tremendous explosion that tore the ship apart . By the time the smoke cleared , Zhemchug had already slipped beneath the waves , her masts the only parts of the ship still above water . The destruction of Zhemchug killed 81 Russian sailors and wounded 129 , of whom seven later died of their injuries . The elderly French cruiser D 'Iberville and the destroyer Fronde opened wildly inaccurate fire on Emden . 
 Müller then decided to depart , owing to the risk of encountering superior warships . Upon leaving the harbor , he encountered a British freighter , SS Glen Turret , loaded with ammunition , that had already stopped to pick up a harbor pilot . While preparing to take possession of the ship , Emden had to recall her boats when she spotted an approaching ship . This proved to be the French destroyer Mousquet , and the unprepared ship was quickly destroyed . Emden stopped to pick up survivors from Mousquet and departed at around 08 : 00 as the other French ships were raising steam in preparation to get underway . One officer and thirty @-@ five sailors were plucked from the water . Another French destroyer tried to follow , but lost sight of the German raider in a rainstorm . On 30 October , Emden stopped the British steamer Newburn and put the French sailors aboard her after they signed statements promising not to return to the war . The attack on Penang was a significant shock to the Entente powers , and caused them to delay the large convoys from Australia , since they would need more powerful escorts . 
 = = = = Battle of Cocos = = = = 
 After releasing the British steamer , Emden turned south to <unk> , where she met the captured collier Buresk . Müller then decided to attack the British coaling station in the Cocos Islands ; he intended to destroy the wireless station there and draw away British forces searching for him in the Indian Ocean . While en route to the Cocos , Emden spent two days combing the Sunda Strait for merchant shipping without success . She thereafter proceeded to the Cocos , arriving off Direction Island at 06 : 00 on the morning of 9 November . Since there were no British vessels in the area , Müller sent ashore a landing party led by Kapitänleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Hellmuth von Mücke , Emden 's executive officer . The party consisted of another two officers , six non @-@ commissioned officers , and thirty @-@ eight sailors . 
 Emden was using jamming , but the British wireless station was able to transmit the message " Unidentified ship off entrance . " The message was received by the Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney , which was 52 nautical miles ( 96 km ; 60 mi ) away , escorting a convoy . Sydney immediately headed for the Cocos Islands at top speed . Emden picked up wireless messages from the then unidentified vessel approaching , but believed her to be 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) away , giving them much more time than they actually had . At 09 : 00 , lookouts aboard Emden spotted a smoke cloud on the horizon , and thirty minutes later identified it as a warship approaching at high speed . Mücke 's landing party was still ashore , and there was no time left to recover them . 
 Sydney closed to a distance of 9 @,@ 500 yards ( 8 @,@ 700 m ) before turning to a parallel course with Emden . The German cruiser opened fire first , and straddled the Australian vessel with her third salvo . Emden 's gunners were firing rapidly , with a salvo every ten seconds ; Müller hoped to overwhelm Sydney with a barrage of shells before her heavier armament could take effect . Two shells hit Sydney , one of which disabled the aft fire control station ; the other failed to explode . It took slightly longer for Sydney to find the range , and in the meantime , Emden turned toward her opponent in an attempt to close to torpedo range . Sydney 's more powerful 6 in ( 152 mm ) guns soon found the range and inflicted serious damage . The wireless compartment was destroyed and the crew for one of the forward guns was killed early in the engagement . At 09 : 45 , Müller turned his ship toward Sydney in another attempt to reach a torpedo firing position . Five minutes later , a shell hit disabled the steering gear , and other fragments jammed the hand steering equipment . Emden could only be steered with her propellers . Sydney 's gunfire also destroyed the rangefinders and caused heavy casualties amongst Emden 's gun crews . 
 Müller made a third attempt to close to torpedo range , but Sydney quickly turned away . Shortly after 10 : 00 , a shell from Sydney detonated ready ammunition near the starboard No. 4 gun and started a serious fire . A fourth and final attempt to launch a torpedo attack was made shortly thereafter , but Sydney was able to keep the range open . By 10 : 45 , Emden 's guns had largely gone silent ; her superstructure had been shredded and the two rear @-@ most funnels had been shot away , along with the foremast . Müller realized that his ship was no longer able to fight , and so he decided to beach Emden on North Keeling Island to save the lives of his crew . At 11 : 15 , Emden was run onto the reef , and her engines and boilers were flooded . Her breech blocks and torpedo aiming gear were thrown overboard to render the weapons unusable , and all signal books and secret papers were burned . Sydney turned to capture the collier Buresk , whose crew scuttled her when the Australian cruiser approached . Sydney then returned to the wrecked Emden and inquired if she surrendered . The signal books had been destroyed by fire and so the Germans could not reply , and since her flag was still flying , Sydney resumed fire . The Germans quickly raised white flags and the Australians ceased fire . 
 In the course of the action , Emden scored sixteen hits on Sydney , killing three of her crew and wounding another thirteen . A fourth crewman died later from his injuries . Sydney had meanwhile fired some 670 rounds of ammunition , with around 100 hits claimed . Emden had suffered much higher casualties : 133 officers and enlisted men died , out of a crew of 376 . Most of her surviving crew , including Müller , were taken into captivity the following day . The wounded men were sent to Australia , while the uninjured were interned at a camp in Malta ; the men were returned to Germany in 1920 . Mücke 's landing party evaded capture . They had observed the battle , and realized that Emden would be destroyed . Mücke therefore ordered the old 97 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 95 @-@ long @-@ ton ) schooner Ayesha to be prepared for sailing . The Germans departed before Sydney reached Direction Island , and sailed to Padang in the Dutch East Indies . From there , they traveled to Yemen , which was then part of the Ottoman Empire , an ally of Germany . They then traveled overland to Constantinople , arriving in June 1915 . There , they reported to Vizeadmiral Wilhelm Souchon , the commander of the ex @-@ German battlecruiser Goeben . In the meantime , the British sloop Cadmus arrived at the Cocos Islands about a week after the battle to bury the sailors killed in the battle . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Over a raiding career spanning three months and 30 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 56 @,@ 000 km ; 35 @,@ 000 mi ) , Emden had destroyed two Entente warships and sank or captured sixteen British steamers and one Russian merchant ship , totaling 70 @,@ 825 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Another four British ships were captured and released , and one British and one Greek ship were used as colliers . In 1915 , a Japanese company proposed that Emden be repaired and refloated , but an inspection by the elderly flat @-@ iron gunboat HMAS Protector concluded that wave damage to Emden made such an operation unfeasible . By 1919 , there were reports that the wreck had almost completely broken up and disappeared beneath the waves . The wreck was eventually broken up in situ in the early 1950s by a Japanese salvage company ; parts of the ship remain scattered around the area . 
 Following the destruction of Emden , Kaiser Wilhelm II awarded the Iron Cross to the ship and announced that a new Emden would be built to honor the original cruiser . Wilhelm II ordered that the new cruiser wear a large Iron Cross on her bow to commemorate her namesake ship . The third cruiser to bear the name Emden , built in the 1920s for the Reichsmarine , also carried the Iron Cross , along with battle honors for the Indian Ocean , Penang , Cocos Islands , and Ösel , where the second Emden had engaged several Russian destroyers and torpedo boats . Two further vessels have been named for the cruiser in the West German Bundesmarine : the Köln @-@ class frigate Emden laid down in 1959 , and the Bremen @-@ class frigate Emden laid down in 1979 . 
 Three of the ship 's 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were removed from the wreck three years after the battle . One is preserved in Hyde Park in Sydney , a second is located at the Royal Australian Navy Heritage Centre in HMAS Kuttabul , the main naval base in Sydney , and the third is on display at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra . In addition , Emden 's bell and stern ornament were recovered from the wreck and both are currently in the collection of the Australian War Memorial . A number of other artifacts , including a damaged 10 @.@ 5 cm shell case , an iron rivet from the hull , and uniforms were also recovered and are held in the Australian War Memorial . 
 A number of films have been made about Emden 's wartime exploits , including the 1915 movies How We Beat the Emden and How We Fought the Emden and the 1928 The Exploits of the Emden , all produced in Australia . German films include the 1926 silent film Unsere Emden , footage from which was incorporated in Kreuzer Emden of 1932 , and <unk> und <unk> unserer Emden , produced in 1934 . All three films were directed by Louis Ralph . More recently , in 2012 , Die Männer der Emden ( The men of the Emden ) was released , which was made about how the crew of Emden made their way back to Germany after the Battle of Cocos . 
 After the bombardment of Madras , Emden 's name , as " <unk> " , entered the Sinhala and Tamil languages meaning " someone who is tough , manipulative and crafty . " In the Malayalam language the word " <unk> " means " a big and powerful thing " or " as big as Emden " . 
 = Miniopterus tao = 
 Miniopterus tao is a fossil bat in the genus Miniopterus from the Pleistocene of Zhoukoudian in China . It is known from a number of mandibles ( lower jaws ) , which were initially identified as the living species Miniopterus schreibersii in 1963 before being recognized as a separate species , M. tao , in 1986 . Miniopterus tao is larger than living M. schreibersii and has more closely spaced lower premolars and more robust talonids ( back groups of cusps ) on the lower molars . The back part of the mandible is relatively low and on it , the coronoid and condyloid processes are about equally high . The average length of the mandible is 12 @.@ 0 mm . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1934 , Chinese paleontologist C.C. Young was the first to describe fossil bats from the fossil site of Zhoukoudian Locality 1 , which is famous for Peking Man . However , he did not mention Miniopterus , which was first recorded by Kazimierz Kowalski and Chuan @-@ <unk> Li in 1963 in a description of new material from layer 8 of the cave site . They identified the Miniopterus as the widespread living species Miniopterus schreibersii on the basis of 48 mandibles ( lower jaws ) from layer 8 and reassigned another mandible that had previously been identified as Myotis to Miniopterus . In a 1986 paper , however , Bronisław <unk> described the population as a new species , Miniopterus tao , after examining two mandibles in the collections of the Polish Academy of Sciences . He did place the species in the " schreibersii group " of Miniopterus , but considered it unlikely to be ancestral to living M. schreibersii . The specific name , tao , refers to the Chinese philosophical concept , the Tao . 
 = = Description = = 
 <unk> described the species on the basis of two mandibles , one damaged and with the third premolar ( p3 ) through third molar ( m3 ) , and the other intact and with the fourth premolar ( p4 ) through second molar ( m2 ) . Miniopterus tao is a large member of the " schreibersii group " and about as large as Miniopterus rummeli from the Miocene of Germany . The mandible is robust and generally resembles M. schreibersii . The mental foramen ( an opening at the outer side of the jaw ) is located between the lower canine and second lower premolar ( p2 ) . The coronoid process ( a projection at the back of the mandible ) is low and rounded and is connected to the condyloid process behind it by a nearly horizontal ridge , which contains a slight raising at its back . Compared to M. schreibersii , the condyloid process is more slender , but the base of the angular process ( at the lower back corner of the jaw ) is more robust . In M. rummeli , the back part of the mandible is higher and the coronoid process is distinctly higher than the condyloid process . 
 The preserved alveoli show that p2 is about as large as p3 , not smaller as in the " tristis group " of Miniopterus . The premolars in M. tao are placed closely together , which distinguishes the species from M. schreibersii and fossil European species , including M. rummeli . The p3 is robust and surrounded by a well @-@ developed cingulum ( shelf ) . The crown is trapezoid in shape . In p4 , there is a clear cingulum at the front and labial ( outer ) margins . The crown is triangular and the back edge is straight , not saddle @-@ shaped as in M. schreibersii . The molars resemble those of M. schreibersii , but are more robust , particularly the talonids ( the cusp groups at the back of the teeth ) . The total length of the mandible ranges from 11 @.@ 6 to 12 @.@ 4 mm and averages 12 @.@ 0 mm in ten specimens , the coronoid process is 3 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 3 mm high , averaging 3 @.@ 2 mm , and the length of the molar row is 4 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 4 mm , averaging 4 @.@ 2 mm . 
 = = Range = = 
 Miniopterus tao has only been recorded from Locality 1 at Zhoukoudian ; Locality 3 contains a smaller Miniopterus identified as M. schreibersii . Locality 1 is Pleistocene in age ( between about 2 million and 10 @,@ 000 years old ) and also contains Ia io and species of Rhinolophus and Myotis among bats , in addition to Homo erectus . 
 = Down and Dirty Duck = 
 Down and Dirty Duck , promoted under the abbreviated title Dirty Duck , is a 1974 American adult animated comedy film directed by Charles Swenson and starring Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan ( Flo & Eddie ) as the voices of a strait @-@ laced , low @-@ level white collar worker named Willard and an unnamed duck , among other characters . The plot consists of a series of often abstract sequences , including plot material created by stars Kaylan , Volman , Robert Ridgely , and , according to the film 's ending credits , various people Swenson encountered during the making of the film . Dirty Duck received mostly negative reviews , with many criticizing it for its crude humor and others seeing the film as an attempt to cash in on the success of Ralph Bakshi 's Fritz the Cat . Dirty Duck fared better on home video and is now considered a cult film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Willard <unk> , a lonely insurance man with wild sexual fantasies , decides to propose to the new secretary , Susie , whom he has only known for a day and to whom he has never spoken . He spends the entire morning before work fantasizing about having sex with her , but his attempts to approach her fails . His female boss sends him to investigate a claim filed by Painless Martha , an aging tattoo artist , who works in a prison . Martha believes in a Ouija board message saying that she will be killed by a wizard on a Tuesday . 
 When Willard tells her that the insurance company won 't pay until her death , she dies of a heart attack . Her will stipulates that her killer must take care of her duck . After the duo spend a night in jail , the duck takes Willard to a brothel . After a wild night of partying , they wind up in the desert , where the duck dresses Willard in women 's clothing in an attempt to get a ride . After several encounters with an old prospector dying of thirst , a racist police officer , two lesbians , and a short Mexican man , they are finally picked up by a trucker . 
 Back at his apartment , Willard creates a makeshift sex object , which the duck eats . Shortly after , Willard discovers that the duck is a girl , and has sex with her . The following morning , Willard and the duck go to Willard 's job , where Willard has sex with his female boss , and quits his job shortly after . Willard and the duck leave , and the movie ends with Willard saying that the duck was a good duck after all . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Howard Kaylan - Willard <unk> / Negro Lady / Side Hack Rider 
 Mark Volman - Duck / Side Hack Rider 
 Robert Ridgely - Car Salesman / Man at Bus Stop / Negro Gentleman / Big Fag / Police Officer / Tank 
 Walker Edmiston - Bus Driver / Jail Orator / Small Fag / Prospector / Mexican Official / President / Man in Elevator 
 Lurene Tuttle - Duck 's Mother 
 Aynsley Dunbar - Additional Voices 
 Cynthia Adler - Lady In Car / Boss Lady / Small Dyke / Lady In Elevator 
 Joëlle Le <unk> - Land Lady / Lady at Bus Stop / Madam / Big Dyke 
 Jerry D. Good - Transvestite Fag 
 = = Production = = 
 After the release and success of Fritz the Cat , several animated films meant for adults rather than children enjoyed success . Fritz , a film based on a character created by artist and illustrator Robert Crumb , was the first animated movie to receive an X rating in the United States . Charles Swenson developed Down and Dirty Duck as a project for former The Mothers of Invention band members Kaylan and Volman under the title Cheap ! Had the film been released under this title , as director Mick Garris notes , the title would have been Roger Corman 's Cheap ! However , Roger Corman observed the title as a shot at his production techniques , and asked that the title be changed . The film 's production budget was $ 110 @,@ 000 . According to Swenson , he created almost all of the animation himself , although publicity attributed the animation work to the Murakami @-@ Wolf Production Company . Although the film was promoted as an X @-@ rated animated film , New World Pictures had not actually submitted it to the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) . The film was also promoted as Dirty Duck , although the title on the film itself reads Down and Dirty Duck . 
 Despite the use of the title Dirty Duck , the film has nothing to do with the Dirty Duck character created by Bobby London and published in National Lampoon and Playboy magazines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When the film was released , the distributor did not promote it heavily , and most reviewers disliked it . Because the film was X @-@ rated , The New York Times refused to run the film 's advertisement . This was a somewhat awkward situation , as the ad included a positive review from The New York Times . According to Swenson , " it didn 't have a big following , ... but it is still in video stores . " The film played for about two weeks in New York City . Jerry Beck wrote a review in which he called the film " raunchier than Ralph Bakshi 's films . " He went on to say that the humor of the film " is good , but the design and drawing is downright awful . It seems to be sort of a cross between Jules Feiffer and Gahan Wilson , if that can be imagined . " Beck also stated that the film was " very similar to R. Crumb 's Mr. Natural and <unk> <unk> . There is no reason that the duck should be a duck . Every character in the film is human , and he just seems to be a duck just to give the film a catchy title . There are some highly imaginative animated ideas here , but the film 's entertainment value is at a minimum . " Beck later called the film " one of the most overlooked animated features of the 1970s , a glorious experimental mess of a film , which , from today ’ s vantage point , looks incredibly creative and daring , and something current Hollywood studios would never attempt . " 
 Playboy noted that the advertisements for the film said , " this film has no socially redeeming value " and continued " well , that 's dead right , yet this movie has some value as a promising X @-@ rated cartoon in the tradition of Ralph Bakshi 's Fritz the Cat . The New York Times called it a " zany , lively , uninhibited , sexual odyssey that manages to mix a bit of Walter Mitty and a touch of Woody Allen with some of the innocence of Walt Disney [ and the ] urban smarts of Ralph Bakshi " . Charles Solomon of The Los Angeles Times gave the film an extremely negative review , calling " a sprawling undisciplined piece of sniggering vulgarity that resembles nothing so much as animated bathroom graffiti . [ The film is ] degrading to women , blacks , Chicanos , gays , cops , lesbians , and anyone with an IQ of more than 45 " . Variety commented that the film " has little to recommend . " 
 = Marty Hogan = 
 Martin Francis Hogan ( October 25 , 1869 – August 15 , 1923 ) , nicknamed " The Indianapolis Ringer " , was an Anglo @-@ American right fielder in Major League Baseball who played for the Cincinnati Reds ( 1894 ) and St. Louis Browns ( 1894 – 1895 ) . After leaving the National League , Hogan moved on to the minor league Indianapolis Hoosiers . Some sources suggest he set a national baserunning record in the 1890s . 
 When his playing career ended , he worked as a minor league baseball manager in Ohio , Pennsylvania , and Wisconsin . As a manager , Hogan groomed several pitchers who excelled in the major leagues . He signed future stars Stan Coveleski and Sam Jones to their first professional contracts and helped launch the career of Roy Castleton , the first native of Utah to play in the major leagues . 
 In 1912 , Hogan was among a select group of veteran managers invited to participate in the United States Baseball League , which was treated by the baseball establishment as an " outlaw league " . For reasons that are unclear , he did not actually manage a franchise in the short @-@ lived alternative league and resumed his career as a minor league manager . Hogan eventually settled in his adopted hometown of Youngstown , Ohio , where he died in 1923 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Hogan was born to Patrick J. Hogan , Sr. , and his wife , the former Margaret Gillen , in the West Midlands industrial town of Wednesbury , Staffordshire , England . When he was still a child , his parents , both natives of Ireland , relocated the family from England to Youngstown , Ohio , a steel @-@ production center near the Pennsylvania border . Although Hogan is routinely identified as Anglo @-@ American ( given his English birth ) , baseball historians Joel Zoss and John Bowman wrote that he probably regarded himself as an Irish American . 
 The Hogan family settled on Youngstown 's near west side , in a working @-@ class district known as Westlake 's Crossing . In Youngstown , Hogan 's father , Patrick J. Hogan , Sr. , secured employment as a steelworker , while his older brother , Patrick J. Hogan , Jr . , worked his way up to the position of " roller " at the Union Steel Company ( later consolidated with U.S. Steel ) . Martin Hogan moved in the direction of an athletic career , gaining early recognition as a " foot racer " . His interest in sports was evidently encouraged by his father , who closely followed his son 's baseball career even in later life . Patrick J. Hogan , Sr. ' s obituary described him as " a great baseball fan " , who " was as quick to appreciate a clever ' steal ' or a ' heady ' play as any one of the younger generation " . 
 While little is known about Martin Hogan 's early years in Youngstown , there is evidence he was popular among local residents . His obituary referred to him as an individual " of pleasing personality " who " made many friends during his long residence in Youngstown " . Another newspaper article described him as " a good fellow " , and a third indicated he was well liked among players with whom he worked . At the same time , Hogan was reportedly quick to comment when he felt he was treated unfairly . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Before joining the major leagues , Hogan played for minor league baseball teams in the northeastern United States , including the Akron ( Ohio ) Summits and Scranton ( Pennsylvania ) Miners . He began his career as a major league player with the Cincinnati Reds , on August 4 , 1894 , but played only six games before switching to the St. Louis Browns ( later known as the Cardinals ) . By this time , St. Louis had been eliminated from league championship contention , after being tied with Cleveland and Boston for first place in April . Hogan participated in 29 games with St. Louis in the 1894 season . According to the 1895 edition of Spalding 's Official Baseball Guide , he ranked tenth among league outfielders with a percentage of <unk> for put @-@ outs , assists , and errors . Among his teammates , Hogan held the second highest percentage of stolen bases for games played . In March 1895 , a reporter for Sporting Life praised the Browns ' decision to retain Hogan in center field and emphasized the young outfielder 's potential . " On the bases and in the field the lad is a wonder " , the paper stated . " His only fault is weakness at the bat , but increasing confidence and familiarity with [ National ] League players will undoubtedly improve him in this respect " . Despite Hogan 's physical speed , however , his overall performance with the Browns proved uneven , and his two @-@ season batting average was just .241 . On May 17 , 1895 , the Youngstown Daily Vindicator reported that Hogan had been " farmed out " as a center fielder to the Indianapolis Hoosiers , a club connected to the well @-@ organized Western League , the predecessor of the American League . The Vindicator added , " At any time by giving a proper notification the St. Louis team , of which club Hogan is a member , can again secure his services " . Yet , for reasons that are unclear , Hogan never returned to the St. Louis Browns . He played his last game with the team on April 24 , 1895 , concluding a major @-@ league career that comprised 40 games over two seasons . 
 At Indianapolis , Hogan led at the bat , and contemporary sources indicate his performance improved . " Marty Hogan , who is playing temporarily in middle field for the Indianapolis team of the western league ... is covering himself in glory with his superb playing " , the Vindicator reported on June 4 , 1895 . " The Indianapolis Sentinel of May 31st says : Hogan made a great record at the bat yesterday morning " , the newspaper added . " One of the drives was for a home run and three of the hits were bunts " . In addition , the article credited Hogan with four runs , five base hits , and two put outs in a late morning game against a rival team from St. Paul , Minnesota . The Vindicator went on to quote the Indianapolis Journal as follows : " Among the features of the forenoon game was Hogan 's batting . He got five hits , one a home run , and his bunting was even cleverer than usual , and that is saying a great deal " . The article concluded , " If he keeps up this gait , it will not be long before [ St. Louis Browns owner Chris ] Von der Ahe reclaims his pet " . 
 Hogan 's obituary stated that , at some point in his playing career , he set a record for baserunning . Several sources trace this record to a field day event held in Indianapolis in 1895 , when he reportedly rounded the bases in 13 @.@ 2 seconds . The World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1906 , for instance , reported that Hogan " lowered the base @-@ running record " in 1895 , noting that " [ t ] he distance around the bases is 120 yards " . In January 1906 , Sporting Life reported that Hogan had " taken steps to have the base running record awarded to him " . The report added , " Under proper conditions [ Hogan ] turned the route in 13 1 – 5 seconds at Indianapolis in 1895 " . Some observers questioned the veracity of the record , however . In 1907 , for instance , Washington Post sports columnist J. Ed Grillo conceded that " Hogan was a great sprinter " but described his unofficial record as " out of reason " . Grillo , who argued that " the fastest runners in baseball failed to come anywhere near the mark " , lent his support to an official record of 14 @.@ 1 that had been set more recently by Eastern League player Wally Clement . An article published in the Washington Herald days earlier also raised questions about Hogan 's baserunning record . In this case , however , the writer claimed that the most " authentic " record had been set by Harry Berthrong in the 1860s . The article stated that , while Hogan was " said to have beaten Berthrong 's base @-@ circling record of 13 2 – 5 seconds by a fifth of a second " , this alleged feat was not " performed under official sanction " . One year earlier , in 1906 , Berthrong , himself , weighed in on the debate . According to an article that appeared in Sporting Life in March of that year , Berthrong disputed Hogan 's claim . " My time ... around the bases was made in Washington , D.C. , in July 1868 , after the old Nationals of Washington , D.C. , had played a game with the Pastimes of Baltimore , Md . " , Berthrong was quoted as saying in an interview . " Three stop watches were held over me , the slowest giving me 14 1 / 4 " . The retired player added : " I am skeptical about this man Hogan doing the bases in 13 1 @-@ 5 : nobody but an Arthur Duffey could possibly do it , and I doubt if he could " . For reasons that are unclear , the article indicated that Hogan claimed to round the bases in 1889 , six earlier than other reports . ( A similar description of Hogan 's claim appeared elsewhere in the same edition of Sporting Life ; a brief news item suggested he claimed to set the record " in Indianapolis in the 80 's " . ) Baseball historian Jon Daly traced Hogan 's contested record to 1898 ; he speculated that Ben Morgan , an official of the National Association , " disputed that claim when doing a study of field day records " . The most widely accepted national baserunning record was set by <unk> Swanson , who rounded the bases in 13 @.@ 4 seconds in 1929 . Despite questions surrounding Hogan 's baserunning record , he became popularly known as the " Indianapolis Ringer " . Newspaper reports suggest he defended his position as baserunning champion of the Western League in various pre @-@ game competitions . On August 2 , 1895 , the Vindicator noted that the outfielder had " a rival for the base running honors in the western league in George Nichol of the <unk> who , it is claimed , can get down to first quicker than Hogan " . The article added , " A race between the two is talked of " . Then , on August 17 , 1895 , the Vindicator reported that Hogan had defeated Detroit outfielder Frank Tower in a baserunning contest . " The Hoosiers have in Mart Hogan a pretty good extra card " , the article added . " Indianapolis goes around the land , and their sprinting outfielder meets all comers in foot races before the game . He has not yet been defeated " . Several days earlier , the same newspaper quoted a journalist from Sporting Life , who reportedly commented : " Mart Hogan , the Indianapolis outfielder , is showing such astonishing speed that he will probably be taken to England next year for the Sheffield Handicap " . 
 In February 1896 , Hogan received an offer to manage the Youngstown ( Ohio ) <unk> , a minor league team associated with the Interstate League . The Vindicator reported that the outfielder refused the offer . " Hogan expects to play again with the St. Louis team in the National League " , the Vindicator stated . The paper went on to quote an article that supposedly appeared in the Cincinnati @-@ based Commercial Gazette : " St. Louis fans are opposed to the idea of selling Marty Hogan , the fast out @-@ fielder , who played with the Indianapolis team last season , having been loaned by the Browns " . In the spring of 1896 , however , Hogan attempted to extricate himself from remaining contractual obligations to the St. Louis Browns . Sporting Life reported , in May 1896 , that Hogan was unsuccessful in his efforts to obtain a final release from the Browns , who retained him as an " extra " right fielder . " Marty has not been given any kind of trial by the manager of the Browns , although he stood high in batting and base running in the Western League last year " , the article stated . " He is in fine condition , and is anxious to play , but does not prepare to be shifted about at the will of alleged managers " . The paper added that Hogan had returned to St. Louis in March 1896 , prepared to " purchase " his release , " but he has been held onto until now , when he could have secured $ 1550 for his services in the Western League " . Hogan appeared especially confident of his baserunning abilities . The article noted that the outfielder had " offered to match himself to run 100 yards for $ 500 a side against any player in the National League " . Meanwhile , his batting evidently continued to improve . On May 24 , 1896 , an article in the St. Paul ( Minnesota ) Globe indicated Hogan performed exceptionally well at the bat during a contest between the Hoosiers and the St. Paul Saints . " Marty Hogan ... through an inadvertent mix @-@ up of pugilism and baseball ... tried to hammer the face off the ball , which had tantalized the other Hoosiers " , the article stated , " and when Marty 's work was done , the ball was out of the lot and he was on second base " . 
 At some point in the 1896 season , Hogan apparently secured his release from the Browns . Once again , however , his physical speed offered no guarantee of consistency on the playing field . On July 21 , 1896 , the St. Paul ( Minneapolis ) Globe reported that Hogan had performed poorly in a contest between the Hoosiers and the local ball club . " Marty Hogan ... made a bad fumble , and then looked up at the sky to see if it had moved while he was locating the ball " , the paper reported . " It was a good bluff , but the crowd discovered Marty 's weakness before the end of the game " . In January 1897 , the Vindicator reported that the Hoosiers had sold Hogan to a club in Grand Rapids , Michigan . The article called Hogan " one of the fastest outfielders and baserunners in the Western League " and predicted he would " greatly strengthen the Grand Rapids outfield " . The following month , however , the paper described the previous report as a " mistake " , indicating instead that Hogan had signed a contract with baseball executive John T. Brush to play with the Hoosiers for another year . The paper also reported that the contract granted Hogan " the largest salary he has ever drawn " . Despite this lucrative contract , Hogan established and maintained his own advertising distribution agency in Indianapolis . " He goes about the streets dressed much like an English <unk> " , Sporting Life reported in January 1897 . " Marty can be seen with a little red wagon full of signs and advertising matter chasing up and down streets nailing the signs to buildings and convenient places and distributing advertising literature in the reel @-@ dance portion of Indianapolis " . Less than four months later , in May 1897 , he was released by the Indianapolis ball club . In June 1897 , the Kansas City Journal indicated Hogan had moved on to the Dayton ( Ohio ) Old Soldiers , a team affiliated with the Class B Interstate League , where he was " playing a sensational center field " . In October of the same year , Sporting Life speculated Hogan would remain with Dayton during the upcoming 1898 season . " Marty Hogan 's contract with Dayton is such that he cannot be reserved , as are the rest of the players " , the article stated . " Unless Marty has a better offer to play with some other team it is safe to say that he will be with Dayton next year " . Further research is required to determine how long Hogan continued to play as an outfielder in the minor leagues . ( His obituary indicated that he also worked as a major league trainer . ) During his playing career , he apparently received at least one serious injury . In February 1903 , Sporting Life reported that the former baseball player 's friends were " anxious to get him appointed on the staff of American League umpires " . The article added , " Hogan has suffered from operations to remove portions of his breast bone , which was injured in a collision during a baseball game " . 
 = = Managing career = = 
 = = = Youngstown Ohio Works = = = 
 After retiring as a baseball player , Hogan settled in Youngstown and went into business . At some point , Sam Wright , then sports editor of The Youngstown Daily Vindicator , encouraged him to manage the city 's baseball team . In 1902 , Hogan was hired as manager of the Youngstown Ohio Works , an independent ball club sponsored by Joseph A. McDonald , superintendent of the Ohio Works of the Carnegie Steel Company . The club did not immediately become associated with an independent league , however . On April 5 , 1902 , Sporting Life noted that Hogan represented the Youngstown club at a poorly attended meeting of the Western Association , a short @-@ lived independent league based in Cleveland . " Marty Hogan arrived at noon and wanted a franchise for Youngstown " , the paper reported , " but Zanesville , Springfield and South Bend , who had asked to be admitted to membership , had no representatives present " . Then , in January 1904 , Sporting Life reported that Hogan had " declined the proposition to put a Central League into Youngstown " . In May 1905 , however , the Youngstown club was one of eleven teams to join the Protective Association of Independent Clubs , which formed the basis of the Class C Division Ohio – Pennsylvania League . Ultimately , the league trimmed down to eight teams from the following cities : Akron , Ohio ; Homestead , Pennsylvania ; Lancaster , Pennsylvania ; Newark , Ohio ; Niles , Ohio ; Sharon , Pennsylvania ; Youngstown , and Zanesville , Ohio . That September , the Youngstown Ohio Works won the league championship , although sources disagree on the team 's final record . As baseball researcher John <unk> writes : " The Reach Guide ( 1906 ) credits Youngstown with an 84 – 32 won @-@ lost record where the Spalding Guide of the same year lists a 90 – 35 record . The Encyclopedia of Minor League Baseball ( 1993 ) tells a third story , giving Youngstown an 88 – 35 mark " . 
 On the heels of this achievement , Hogan reportedly " lost his entire infield " , when several players moved on to more established minor league and major league teams . " [ Billy ] Phyle will go to the [ outlaw leagues ] , Starr will be traded by [ American League manager James ] McAleer , Whitney goes to Buffalo and Burton will likely return to Central League ball " , Sporting Life reported . The manager had no difficulty compensating for these losses , however . The sports paper reported , in October 1905 , that future major @-@ leaguer Louis " Lew " Schettler , " the star twirler of the Sharon team " , was anxious to join the Ohio Works team . The paper added that Schettler " would like a year under Marty Hogan " . In December 1905 , the paper confirmed that Hogan had secured catcher Lee Fohl and pitcher Schettler , " the star battery of this league for last season " . The paper added that the manager had " signed two young Cleveland players in outfielder Hugh Donovan and first baseman Harry [ Schwartz ] " . In addition , Hogan attempted to sign on as pitcher Walter Purdue , " second rush of the Youngstown polo team " . Meanwhile , Hogan reportedly " sold out his cafe at Youngstown " in order to " devote his entire time to base ball " . According to Sporting Life , the manager even planned to challenge former major @-@ leaguer Charlie Morton for the presidency of the Ohio @-@ <unk> League , a bid that evidently proved unsuccessful . 
 In January 1906 , Morton , as league president , called a meeting of the Ohio – Pennsylvania League . According to Sporting Life , representatives of the clubs were scheduled to meet at Zanesville 's Hotel Rogge on January 16 . " Assurances have been received that representatives from Akron , Youngstown , Zanesville , Newark , Lancaster , Mansfield , New Castle , East Liverpool , Steubenville and Erie , Pa . , will be present " , the paper reported , " and from there an eight or ten club circuit will probably be formed , with McKeesport , Butler and Ashtabula as applicants also " . ( The league eventually formed an eight @-@ team circuit that included teams from Akron , Lancaster , Mansfield , Newark , New Castle , Sharon , Youngstown and Zanesville . ) The paper also noted that William J. Maloney , the center fielder for the Ohio Works club during the previous season , would sign a contract and serve as team captain . Among others , Hogan announced the " engagement " of Utah @-@ born pitcher Roy Castleton . The Ohio Works team opened the 1906 season with 16 players , three of whom had been part of the club during the 1905 season . According to Sporting Life , Hogan predicted the club would win the pennant at the close of the upcoming season . He expressed confidence in a lineup that included Maloney of Bradford , Kentucky ; Will M. Thomas of Morristown , Pennsylvania ; Tommy Thomas of Piqua , Ohio ; Fohl of Allegheny , Pennsylvania ; Schettler of Pittsburgh ; " Dotty " Freck of Columbus , Ohio ; A. C. McClintock of Columbus ; Castleton of Salt Lake City ; Lewis Groh of Rochester , New York ; John Kennedy of Youngstown , Charles Crouse of Detroit ; Roy Chase of Andover , Ohio ; Forrester J. <unk> of Garrettsville , Pennsylvania ; Schwartz of Cleveland ; and Roy Gould of Middlesex , Pennsylvania . Indeed , in 1906 , the Ohio Works team took the league championship once again , with an 84 – 53 record , while new player Roy Castleton gained national recognition by pitching a perfect game against a rival club in Akron . On October 1 , 1906 , Hogan and members of the Ohio Works team were honored at a banquet held at the Elks ' Club in downtown Youngstown . Sporting Life reported that the keynote address was delivered by Father M. T. Kinkead , " who declared himself a fan of Sunday baseball playing " . The article added that Hogan " was presented with a ring and each player was given a pair of gold cuff link inscribed ' O. & P. Champs 1906 ' " . On October 6 , 1906 , Sporting Life summarized the league 's most recent season , reporting that the Ohio Works team had " held the lead continually after the first months of the season and at one time threatened a walkover " . 
 The following month , in November 1906 , Hogan responded to rumors that Walter East , manager of the Akron <unk> , had agreed to " lay down " to the Youngstown club , enabling them to win the pennant . " Instead of laying down to us , Akron loaded up with catcher [ Red ] Munson and pitcher Bob Spade " , Hogan said in an interview with the Pittsburgh Press . " They worked their heads off to down us , but could not do so " . Hogan went on to assert that the Akron club , and its manager , received generous incentives to defeat Youngstown . " The Akron owner offered the players a bonus of $ 500 if they would beat us out in addition to a $ 300 wad for East " , Hogan said . Then , he accused East himself of attempting to " fix " a game during the 1906 season , claiming that the Akron manager had " tried to get another club to take things easy against Akron so that Akron could beat us for the pennant " . 
 In the wake of the Ohio Works ' second league championship , steps were taken to incorporate the club . In December 1906 , Sporting Life reported that the team 's backers , Joseph and Thomas McDonald , who served as superintendent and assistant superintendent , respectively , of the Ohio Works of the Carnegie Steel Company , were compelled to invite additional investors because of planned ( and costly ) improvements at the steel plant . " The incorporators of the club will be Thomas McDonald , Joseph McDonald , Thomas Carr , Thomas Carter and Marty Hogan " , the paper stated . " Manager Hogan will be given even more control of the team next season than he has had . Heretofore he has had the entire control of the team and transacted most of the business " . Sporting Life predicted that , in the wake of the team 's incorporation , " everything will fall absolutely on [ Hogan 's ] shoulders " . The paper added that the Ohio Works team intended to build a new ballpark on the south side of Youngstown , near the corner of Glenwood and Parkview avenues . " One of the largest grand stands in the minor leagues will be put up and the grounds will be in every way modern " , the article stated . 
 Differences between Hogan and the McDonald brothers , however , had already surfaced in the autumn of 1906 . Although a sports writer for The Youngstown Daily Vindicator predicted in October 1906 that the " popular " Hogan would serve a fourth season as manager of the club , the Ohio Works manager appeared unwilling to negotiate the terms of a new contract without leverage . According to the Vindicator , Hogan publicly mulled an offer presented by a team in Nashville , whose representatives followed him to the train station . The same newspaper article indicated that Hogan later reached a verbal agreement with Ohio Works co @-@ owners Joseph and Thomas McDonald , announcing soon afterwards that he would remain with the local ball club . Yet , by January 1907 , the Newark Advocate reported that Hogan wanted to sell the Youngstown franchise . The paper observed that " a move in offering the Youngstown franchise for sale had created a furor in the league " . On January 8 , 1907 , Hogan and Joseph McDonald attended the annual meeting of the National Association of Professional Baseball Clubs in New York City , while the fate of the club remained uncertain . Then , on January 13 , The New York Times reported that the Youngstown team would participate in an eight @-@ team " outlaw league " comprising clubs from Elmira , New York ; Lancaster , Pennsylvania ; Pittsburgh , Reading , Pennsylvania ; Scranton , Pennsylvania ; Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania ; and Williamsport , Ohio . The Times described the envisioned league as " the most powerful ' outlaw ' league the National Association of Professional Baseball Clubs was ever called upon to oppose " , and stated that Hogan would " be at the head of " the Youngstown team . These rather confusing reports were followed by the abrupt sale and relocation of the Ohio Works team in February 1907 . 
 = = = Zanesville = = = 
 On February 18 , 1907 , the Zanesville Signal reported that Hogan had received permission from the McDonald brothers to negotiate a $ 3 @,@ 000 deal for the sale of the Youngstown club , including its players , to a group of investors in Zanesville , Ohio . In an interview with the Signal , the manager expressed frustration with the team 's former backers , when he said , " Youngstown couldn 't or didn 't raise enough money to cover a sparrow 's blanket " . The Zanesville investors reportedly raised an additional $ 15 @,@ 000 to enter the team into the Ohio – Pennsylvania League , although they were forced to settle for the less prestigious Pennsylvania – Ohio – Maryland League . The eight @-@ team P @-@ O @-@ M league included clubs from Braddock , Pennsylvania ; Charleroi , Pennsylvania ; East Liverpool , Ohio ; McKeesport , Pennsylvania ; Steubenville , Ohio ; Uniontown , Pennsylvania ; and Washington , Pennsylvania . Meanwhile , Hogan reportedly had some difficulty securing new players for the team . In June 1907 , the Marion Daily Mirror described Zanesville 's efforts to sign Bill <unk> , a player in the Baltimore Eastern League , as " merely another of the pipe dreams of one Marty Hogan " . The article added , " <unk> is not to be sold to Zanesville , and he has informed Hogan that he will play with his team under no conditions whatever " . The paper did observe , however , that Hogan had signed a Cleveland player named Tate and planned to secure another outfielder , " when three members of the present team will be canned " . After settling in Zanesville , Hogan apparently received offers from other teams . Sporting Life reported in June 1907 that Hogan was invited to manage a team in Rochester , New York , but had turned down the offer . Then , in October , Hogan was offered management of yet another league franchise in South Bend , Indiana , but , once again , he declined . He managed the Zanesville ball club for two seasons . During its first season , the team placed first in the eight @-@ team P @-@ O @-@ M League , with a record of 15 wins and seven losses . 
 In 1908 , his final season , the team was christened as the Zanesville Infants and joined the Central League . According to Sporting Life , the " schedule meeting " for the Central League that year was to be held in Zanesville on March 17 ( St. Patrick 's Day ) . " According to the plans of the magnates the season this year will consist of 140 games , not any of the club owners being willing to return to the 154 @-@ game schedule " , the paper reported . The paper added that Hogan was " making light of his task " of signing up players for his team . " His acquaintance with players , especially in the independent ranks , gives him an advantage which few managers have " . Sporting Life also reported that by March , Hogan had " signed his outfield , the players accepting terms being [ Curt ] Elson , Blount , and Miller " . Further research is needed to determine the Zanesville Infants ' league ranking at the close of the 1908 season , but available information shows that the team neither won the championship nor placed as a runner @-@ up . More information is available on Hogan 's dissatisfaction with his situation in Zanesville , which evidently stemmed from increasing limits on his control over the club . An article that appeared in The ( Pittsburgh ) Gazette Times in December 1908 described Hogan 's reasons for leaving the organization . " There were too many directors connected with the Zanesville club to suit Hogan , as each one had his own idea of how a club should be run " , the paper reported . " As Hogan has his own , which did not exactly coincide with the numerous directors , he resigned " . The Gazette Times praised Hogan 's performance in Zanesville , stating that his club " was a pennant contender at all stages of the championship race " . The paper added : " He did not have a very good team , but kept the men playing the game at all times and was really the wonder of the [ <unk> ] league " . 
 = = = Lancaster Red Roses = = = 
 The following year , in 1909 , Hogan relocated to Lancaster , Pennsylvania , where he replaced local ball club manager Clarence " Pop " Foster , who had managed the Red Roses since 1907 . Once Hogan signed a contract , Foster moved on to lead another club in Trenton , New Jersey . The Lancaster team 's momentum escalated during the 1909 season , and in July of that year , Sporting Life reported that the Red Roses club was drawing positive attention . " The fast pace at which the Lancaster bunch has been going lately has been the talk of the league " , the paper stated . " Marty Hogan was not given much consideration as a pennant aspirant when the season opened , but the plucky Red Roses manager has been ' sawing wood ' and not talking " . Indeed , by the close of the 1909 season , the Lancaster Red Roses had worked up a 75 – 39 record , seizing the championship of the Tri @-@ State League . As Spalding 's Baseball Guide ( 1910 ) reported : " Lancaster , under manager Marty Hogan , won its first pennant in the league , and the top rung of the ladder was only gained by the hardest kind of fighting " . Sporting Life indicated that Hogan was confident of the outcome early in the season . " After his return from the first trip around the circuit " , wrote reporter G. H. Hartley , " Marty said to your correspondent that he saw nothing in the league that was better than his team " . Hartley noted that , on the closing day of the season , Hogan accepted the Farnsworth Cup , " the Tri @-@ State trophy " , on behalf of his team . " Between the first and second innings the [ Lancaster ] players presented Manager Marty Hogan with a beautiful silver set and a silver loving cup " , he added . The inscribed silver cup reportedly left Hogan " so surprised that he was unable to respond " . On September 7 , 1909 , one day after the contest , the Reading Eagle stated , " A great crowd witnessed the final game , in which Hogan 's gallant band trimmed the Trenton wanderers " . The newspaper added , " The real enthusiasm was awakened , however , by the floating of the championship pennant , awarded by a Phila . [ sic ] paper " . A key participant in the team 's successful performance was a young pitcher named Stan Coveleski , who went on to post a record of 53 wins and 38 losses during his three seasons with Lancaster . He made his professional debut with the Philadelphia Athletics three seasons later . Indeed , the Ogden Standard had praised Hogan as a " live wire " back in February 1909 , when he " grabbed up the three brothers of Harry Coveleski of the Phillies , and had them all sign contracts " . Highlights of the season may have included an exhibition game with the Philadelphia Phillies , which was scheduled to be held in Lancaster on April 2 , 1909 . 
 The following year , however , the Red Roses ' performance fell short of the previous season when it placed second , with 63 wins and 47 losses . According to Spalding 's Baseball Guide ( 1911 ) , the Lancaster organization was one of several teams in the league caught off guard by a surprisingly strong new club from Altoona , Pennsylvania , which was " sent along at a clip that practically clinched the season " . While the Red Roses pulled out of a mid @-@ season slump , the " <unk> " prevailed with a 72 – 38 record . In an article regarding this outcome , Sporting Life stated that " nothing can be found to cast discredit upon the Lancaster team or its popular manager , Marty Hogan " . The paper added , " With a team that never stood high in club hitting or fielding , Marty pulled them through and anchored them in second place , which position they attained more by dint of their cleverness in inside work than with their prowess with the stick or in the field " . In December 1910 , a little more than two months after the article appeared , Hogan reportedly set down roots in Lancaster , opening a cigar shop and billiard hall in the city . His relationship with the Red Roses would not last more than another season , however . In 1911 , Hogan 's final year as manager of the Lancaster team , the club placed fourth in the eight @-@ team league , with 54 wins and losses , respectively . 
 Sporting Life reported that Hogan began the 1911 season with relatively modest expectations . The paper stated , " Hogan is not promising a pennant @-@ winning team ... but he does promise a good team and means to fight hard for the pennant again " . The team 's challenges included salary limits that sharply limited its capacity to attract more experienced players . Earlier that year , the Tri @-@ State League 's imposition of $ 1 @,@ 900 limits for individual salaries had created a stir throughout Lancaster , where fans resented the fact that outgoing clubs had been permitted to vote on an issue that would not affect them . Club president John H. Myers ' efforts to persuade the league to " advance the individual salary limit " proved unsuccessful , and Hogan " was directed to secure the best team that can be secured " under the circumstances . In January 1911 , Hogan had announced he would " cut out exhibition games and devote the entire preparatory season to hard practice " . Hogan added that " the exhibitions do not pay the club , and do harm to the unseasoned players " . Ultimately , the 1911 league championship went to a franchise from Reading , Pennsylvania , which " took the lead at the beginning of the season and never was headed until the finish " , closing with a record of 74 – 35 . 
 = = = United States Baseball League = = = 
 In March 1912 , organizers of a proposed United States Baseball League – described by members of the sports establishment as an " outlaw league " – met in New York City 's Hotel Imperial . The league is widely viewed as " a major precursor to the Federal League of 1914 – 1915 " . Hogan , who attended the New York meeting , was named as manager of a Cincinnati @-@ based franchise scheduled to compete in the league . ( The U.S. Baseball League also established teams in Chicago , Cleveland , Pittsburgh , New York City , Reading , Pennsylvania ; Richmond , Virginia ; and Washington , D.C. ) The following month , however , Hogan was evidently replaced by Hugh McKinnon , who was described in an April New York Times article as manager of the league 's Cincinnati franchise . An article that appeared in The New York Times several weeks earlier suggested that McKinnon was originally tapped as manager of the league 's Washington franchise . The same article also pointed out that ex @-@ major leaguer George Browne " had been approached by the Washington Club " . In the end , Browne was named as head of the Washington team when McKinnon was appointed manager of the Cincinnati club . While these developments shed some light on the outcome , the reasons for Hogan 's replacement as manager of the Cincinnati franchise remain uncertain . 
 In any event , the league did not survive for long . Sports historian Rudolf K. <unk> observed that the U.S. Baseball League " stressed the inherent ' good ' of baseball for all individuals and communities , and indicated that it wished to conduct its business in the accepted capitalist style – free competition in the marketplace " . The new league , however , quickly incurred the scorn and hostility of the baseball establishment . Burdened with weak leadership , limited financing , poor attendance , and a lack of skillful players , the U.S. Baseball League " folded after about one month of action " . In June 1912 , when the league ceased operation , the Cincinnati team that Hogan was supposed to manage ranked fourth in the eight @-@ team roster , earning 12 wins and 10 losses . The following year , former players of the Cincinnati club successfully sued the team 's owner , John J. Ryan , for unpaid wages . Sporting Life reported that the club 's members " received their money in Cincinnati on February 12 " . 
 = = = Zanesville Flood Sufferers = = = 
 In November 1912 , The Youngstown Daily Vindicator reported that Hogan would once again manage a local minor league ball club . The paper added , however , that the former Ohio Works manager was also considering an offer in Zanesville . Hogan evidently led the Zanesville team the previous season . In November 1912 , Sporting Life reported that the manager was still mulling his next move when he attended the annual meeting of the National Association in New York . " Marty Hogan , the veteran minor league manager , who is known from end to end of the land as a developer of minor league talent and winner of pennants , could not bear to miss meeting his old friends " , the paper stated . " Marty wound up the season with Zanesville and has not definitely decided upon his plans for the coming season " . Ultimately , Hogan went to Zanesville , where he managed the Zanesville Flood Sufferers in 1913 . The team 's nickname was evidently inspired by a massive flood that had devastated cities and towns throughout central and southern Ohio – including Zanesville – in the spring of 1913 . In April 1913 , Sporting Life noted that the Zanesville club would " stick to the circuit " , despite the fact that the city was " hit hard by the recent floods " . According to the paper , Zanesville 's ballpark was " completely destroyed , but the games will be played at the Fair Grounds " . 
 Earlier , in January 1913 , the Flood Sufferers pulled out from the 12 @-@ team Central League and joined the newly formed Interstate League , which included eight clubs . According to Sporting Life , the new league was expected to include teams from Akron , Youngstown , Canton , Steubenville , Wheeling , and either Johnstown or McKeesport . In February , the paper confirmed that the Interstate League ( which included Johnstown , not McKeesport ) had achieved Class B status on the basis of the eight cities ' combined populations . Sporting Life , which estimated the total population of the league 's participating cities at 412 @,@ 415 , noted that Youngstown ( with a population of 79 @,@ 066 ) was the largest city in the Interstate League . Later that month , the paper reported that the new league 's " salary limit of $ 2000 makes it imperative for each club to hold down expenses in every way ; consequently Marty Hogan , of the Zanesville Club , will be the only bench manager in the league , and he knows how to save his salary in various ways " . 
 During Hogan 's tenure as manager of the Zanesville Flood Sufferers , the club took advantage of at least one opportunity to test their skills against a major league club . Sports writer Walter LeConte observed that , on June 15 , 1913 , the Zanesville team participated in an in @-@ season exhibition game with the New York Giants . When the umpire declared the game forfeited after a disagreement with Giants player Fred Merkle , Hogan " ordered the game continued so the fans could see a 9 @-@ inning baseball game " . LeConte added that " Hogan even assumed umpiring duties and the game was then concluded " . The Giants won the game , with a score of 5 – 4 . Reliable information on the Zanesville club 's overall performance is currently unavailable , but an Associated Press report indicated the team had disbanded by late July 1913 . 
 At Zanesville , Hogan signed future Cleveland Indians pitcher Samuel Pond ( " Sad Sam " ) Jones to his first professional contract . Baseball historian Alexander Edelman noted that Jones gained valuable experience as a member of the Zanesville club ( including a chance to play against the Giants in an exhibition game ) , but he added that the player " was only 20 years old and very homesick " . When Jones was faced with the prospect of a pay cut , he approached Hogan on the street and demanded that he be released from his contract immediately . Edelman wrote : " In what Sam 's son , Paul , would later call ' probably the craziest release in baseball history , ' Hogan obliged , writing Jones ' release in pencil on the inside of a chewing tobacco packet " . 
 = = = Fond du Lac <unk> = = = 
 On July 20 , 1913 , The New York Times reported that Hogan left Zanesville to manage a Fond du Lac franchise in the Illinois @-@ Wisconsin League . According to the article , he planned to bring with him five players from the defunct Zanesville club . Reliable information on the Fond du Lac <unk> ' overall performance is currently unavailable . 
 In February 1914 , Sporting Life reported that Hogan was considering a return to the Tri @-@ State League . " In a letter to a friend in Lancaster [ Pennsylvania ] the former Lancaster manager stated that the Trenton [ New Jersey ] Club was after him and that there was [ sic ] good prospects of both sides coming to terms " , the paper stated . " Marty is anxious to get back in the Tri @-@ State , where he won fame as a manager " . The paper added that Hogan , at that point , was working as a " successful businessman " in Youngstown , Ohio . The same edition of Sporting Life , however , carried a wire report noting that the Trenton club 's new owner , W. J. Morris , had signed Zeke Wrigley as team manager . The report observed , " Manager Wrigley was strongly recommended to the club by Connie Mack " . ( Wrigley , a former major league infielder , had earlier pursued a position on the Tri @-@ State League 's umpire staff , and he was not initially in the running for the position of Trenton club manager . ) Further research will be required to determine whether Hogan 's career as a minor league manager continued after this point . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hogan was married to the former Agnes Daugherty on October 28 , 1896 , in St. Columba Church , in Youngstown , Ohio . After a wedding trip , the couple initially settled in Indianapolis . Although Hogan 's obituary makes no reference to children , he and his wife evidently raised an adopted child , Amy M. Hogan ( born Amy <unk> ) , who died at the age of 16 in a 1921 automobile accident . A front @-@ page article in the Vindicator reported that Amy Hogan was one of three passengers in an automobile whose driver had failed to slow down at a curve in the road and skidded into a telephone pole near Hubbard , Ohio . The article noted that Amy Hogan had recently graduated from Ursuline Academy and described her as " a girl of exceptional talents , being especially prominent in local amateur theatricals and entertainments " . Records at Youngstown 's Calvary Cemetery show that Amy Hogan was buried in the same plot as her adoptive parents . Published cemetery records also suggest that Martin Hogan 's wife , Agnes Hogan , gave birth to an unnamed infant , who died on September 6 , 1898 . The infant was buried in a section of the cemetery usually reserved for unbaptized children and the indigent . Agnes ( Hogan ) Moreland died on February 7 , 1950 , in Salem , Ohio . 
 Throughout his sports career , Hogan 's pastimes included trap shooting . In July 1911 , when he was manager of the Lancaster Red Roses , Sporting Life reported , " Marty shoots targets very well and can be looked to for high scores once he gets a little shooting " . Hogan 's obituary noted that , at some point , he helped to organize the Youngstown Gun Club . 
 Upon returning to Youngstown , Hogan supervised the athletic training of his youngest nephews , Edward and Raymond Hogan , who became sports stars at Rayen High School . In the early 1920s , Edward Hogan emerged as a track and field standout at the University of Notre Dame , where he trained under coach Knute Rockne . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1910s , Hogan permanently resettled in Youngstown , where he became athletic director of Thomas Field , a ballpark owned by the local Brier Hill Industrial Works . Prior to the enforcement of the Volstead Act , he was also employed as a clerk at Buckley & Hogan , a downtown saloon operated by his older brother , Patrick J. Hogan , Jr . , and his business partner , John J. Buckley , Sr. Further research will be required to determine Martin Hogan 's level of involvement , if any , in local baseball during the last decade of his life . 
 Martin F. Hogan was only 54 years old when he died at his north side home from injuries sustained months earlier in an auto accident . Several blood transfusions failed to revive him , and a bout with pneumonia proved fatal . Funeral services for Hogan were held at St. Columba Church , and he was buried at Youngstown 's Calvary Cemetery . His wife , Agnes , survived him along with his brother , Patrick . A sister , Mrs. John Dillon , had died several years earlier . Hogan 's obituary in The Youngstown Daily Vindicator highlighted his contributions to organized sports , observing that many young athletes he trained and managed went on to careers in major league baseball . Major league players who worked with Hogan during his years as a minor league manager included Roy Castleton , Stan Coveleski , Lee Fohl , Sam Jones , Billy Phyle , and Louis Schettler . His disputed baserunning record remains a curious footnote in American baseball history . 
 = Teddy Air = 
 Teddy Air AS was a regional airline , based at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen , in Norway . Operating between 1989 and 2004 , the company operated Britten @-@ Norman Islander , Embraer 110 and Saab 340 aircraft . The company started by providing a scheduled service between Skien and Oslo in 1990 , followed by services to Stavanger in 1993 and Bergen in 1994 . In 1996 , it won a contract with the Ministry of Transport from Oslo to Fagernes . It was involved in intense competition with other regional airlines , notably Coast Air and Guard Air , following the deregulation of the aviation market . It also had a single international service to Gothenburg , and from 1999 it served Stord Airport , Sørstokken . From 1999 , the company was transformed to a virtual airline , which wet leased aircraft from Golden Air . The company ceased operations in 2004 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 In April 1988 , Norwegian regional airline Norving terminated all scheduled services in Southern Norway . As a consequence , airports such as Skien Airport , Geiteryggen , were left without an airline and services to the capital , Oslo . Teddy Air was subsequently established as a Skien @-@ based company to provide an air route between Skien and Oslo Airport , Fornebu . Founded by Harald Sørensen in 1989 , the largest owners were Skien Business Development Fund and Telemark Business Development Fund . It would provide four round trips with a Britten @-@ Norman Islander . The company stated that it needed 8 @,@ 000 passengers annually to cover costs , with the ticket price set at about 500 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The fiercest competition would come from the Vestfold Line of the Norwegian State Railways , where a train from Skien to Oslo ran each hour . The three @-@ hour train trip cost NOK 167 , compared to the 25 @-@ minute flight . Concession was granted by the Ministry of Transport and Communications in August 1989 , but the airline did not commence operations until 18 July 1990 . 
 In Grenland , the metropolitan area surrounding Skien , there was a lot of opposition to the airline , and several local businesspeople claimed that it would be better if Norsk Air was awarded the contract , or Skien Airport was closed and locals instead used the nearby Sandefjord Airport , Torp . Norsk Air stated that it would not be possible for them to make money on the Skien – Oslo route ; despite that , it operated from Skien to Bergen Airport , Flesland and Stavanger Airport , Sola . In 1993 , Norsk Air announced that it would no longer fly from Skien , and would focus all their operations at Sandefjord . Teddy Air subsequently took over the Stavanger route , while the Bergen route was granted to Air Stord , despite Teddy Air having applied for the concession . In 1994 , the company had a revenue of NOK 7 @.@ 5 million , and a NOK 1 million profit . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Following the deregulation of the airline market in 1994 , which allowed any European Economic Area @-@ airline to operate any route they wished , Teddy Air tried to start services at Moss Airport , Rygge . Since it at the time was the military @-@ only Rygge Air Station , with no passenger facilities , the airline was not successful in receiving permission . However , it did choose to start competing with Air Stord on the Skien – Bergen route , starting 8 May 1995 . Using its Embraer 110 aircraft , it launched tickets for under NOK 1000 , compared with the NOK 1290 price offered by Air Stord . The latter had aircraft half the size , but offered 31 flights per week , compared to the 16 offered by Teddy Air . In addition , Coast Air launched two weekly round trips . The routes were mainly used by commuters working on offshore oil platforms in the North Sea . By 1995 , 60 percent of the airline had been bought by Hermann <unk> . 
 In 1996 , the company won the first public service obligation tender that was issued by the Ministry of Transport and Communications . Starting 1 August , Teddy Air started serving Fagernes Airport , Leirin , with routes to Oslo and Bergen . The contract gave a subsidy of NOK 23 @.@ 7 million for three years , and was 15 percent lower than what Coast Air had been receiving . On 20 May 1997 , Teddy Air started its first international route , from Stavanger to Gothenburg in Sweden . 
 After the 1998 opening of Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , which is located 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) north of Oslo , both Teddy Air and Guard Air announced they would start routes to the new airport . Both established six daily round trips — Teddy Air using an Embraer 110 and Guard Air using a Dornier 228 . The new airport would make driving to the Oslo Airport about an hour longer from Grenland , and both airlines hoped to create a feeder service . Teddy Air withdrew from the route after one month , after having lost more than NOK 1 million . 
 In February 1999 , Air Stord filed for bankruptcy . On 21 February , Teddy Air launched a route between Stord Airport , Sørstokken , and Oslo , using Saab 340 aircraft . This allowed four daily round trips during the week , and two on Sundays . Other airlines saw the route as attractive , and Coast Air launched eight daily round trips between the two airports . Teddy Air was soon forced to withdraw from the route , after it was unable to make any profits from it . The Fagernes routes were lost from 1 August 1999 , when the contract was won by Widerøe . 
 = = = Virtual airline = = = 
 Following the steep decline in routes , the company was reorganized into a virtual airline in 1999 . All operations were taken over by the Swedish airline Golden Air , who would operate the Saab 340 aircraft . At the same time , Golden Air bought half of Teddy Air . In October , Coast Air announced that they had too few aircraft to continue flying from Stord , and would terminate operations . Teddy Air became the only airline to serve Stord . 1999 returned a loss of NOK 6 @.@ 9 million . In 2004 , Teddy Air terminated all services . The contract with Golden Air was discontinued , and the hangar at Geiteryggen was sold . The company remained on paper until 2005 , when the equity was gone and the entity was dissolved . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 The following is a list of destinations served by Teddy Air : 
 = New York State Route 186 = 
 New York State Route 186 ( NY 186 ) is a short east – west state highway in northern New York in the United States . The highway is located entirely within the town of Harrietstown in the southwest part of Franklin County . The western terminus is at NY 30 and the eastern terminus is at NY 86 . NY 186 lies south of , and serves , the Adirondack Regional Airport . The current alignment of NY 186 was designated in 1989 to follow a former routing of NY 86 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 In the west , NY 186 begins at NY 30 in Harrietstown , near the eastern bank of Lake Clear . Known as Lake Clear Road , NY 186 heads east @-@ northeastward , crossing a pair of train tracks and later a creek . Situated within the forested terrain of the Adirondack State Park , the highway passes to the south of , and serves , the Adirondack Regional Airport . South of the airport NY 186 intersects several local roads . The highway turns more towards the northeast upon passing the airport , and proceeds uneventfully . Subsequent to turning towards the east , NY 186 terminates at NY 86 , still within Harrietstown . 
 = = History = = 
 The modern routing of NY 186 was originally designated as part of NY 10 when the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 . In the 1930 renumbering , NY 10 was rerouted east of Lake Clear to follow modern NY 30 north to the Canadian border . The former routing of NY 10 between Lake Clear and Harrietstown was incorporated into NY 86 , a new route extending from Lake Clear to Jay . NY 86 remained on this alignment until March 28 , 1989 , when the NY 192 designation was deleted . NY 86 was then rerouted to follow the former routing of NY 192 northwestward to Paul Smiths . The Lake Clear – Harrietstown roadway , vacated by NY 86 , was redesignated as NY 186 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Harrietstown , Franklin County . 
 = Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes , BWV 76 = 
 Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes ( English : The heavens are telling the glory of God ) , BWV 76 , is a cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the church cantata in Leipzig for the second Sunday after Trinity within the liturgical year and first performed it on 6 June 1723 . 
 Bach composed the cantata at a decisive turning point in his career . Moving from posts in the service of churches and courts to the town of Leipzig on the first Sunday after Trinity , 30 May 1723 , he began the project of composing a new cantata for every occasion of the liturgical year . He began his first annual cycle of cantatas ambitiously with Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 , in an unusual layout of 14 movements in two symmetrical parts , to be performed before and after the sermon . Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes has the same structure . 
 The unknown poet begins his text with a quotation from Psalm 19 and refers to both prescribed readings from the New Testament , the parable of the great banquet as the Gospel , and the First Epistle of John . Bach scored Part I with a trumpet as a symbol of God 's Glory . In Part II , performed after the sermon and during communion , he wrote chamber music with oboe d 'amore and viola da gamba , dealing with " brotherly devotion " . Both parts are closed with a stanza of Martin Luther 's hymn Es woll uns Gott genädig sein ( 1524 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Johann Sebastian Bach had served in several churches as Kantor and organist , and at the courts of Weimar and Köthen , when he applied for the post of Thomaskantor in Leipzig . He was 38 years old and had a reputation as an organist and organ expert . He had composed church cantatas , notably the funeral cantata Actus tragicus around 1708 . In Weimar , he had begun a project to cover all occasions of the liturgical year by providing one cantata a month for four years , including works such as Weinen , Klagen , Sorgen , Zagen , BWV 12 , and Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland , BWV 61 . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata for the Second Sunday after Trinity and first performed it in a service in the Thomaskirche , Leipzig , on 6 June 1723 , a week after he took up position as cantor in Leipzig with Die Elenden sollen essen . The cantata is similar in many respects to the earlier work . While BWV 75 was probably begun in Köthen , this cantata may have been composed in Leipzig , according to a manuscript with many corrections . The two cantatas mark the beginning of Bach 's first " annual cycle " : he started to compose one cantata for each Sunday and holiday of the liturgical year , a project described by Christoph Wolff as " an artistic undertaking on the largest scale " . 
 The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle of John , " Whoever doesn 't love , remains in Death " ( 1 John 3 : 13 – 18 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , the parable of the great banquet ( Luke 14 : 16 – 24 ) . The unknown poet was likely the same as for the first cantata for Leipzig , also in 14 movements , also arranged in two symmetrical parts to be performed before and after the sermon . Again the cantata begins with words from a Psalm , Psalms 19 : 1 @,@ 3 ( verses 2 and 4 in the Luther Bible ) , " The heavens declare the glory of God , and the firmament shows His handiwork . There is no speech or language , where their voice is not heard " , connecting the Gospel to the Old Testament . The poet first expands in movements 2 and 3 the thought of the Universe praising God 's creation . In the following two movements he deplores , following the Gospel , that nonetheless people did not follow the invitation of God , therefore he had to invite " von allen <unk> " ( from all streets ) and bless those , as movement 6 says . Part I closes with the first stanza of Martin Luther 's chorale Es woll uns Gott genädig sein ( 1524 ) , a paraphrase of Psalm 67 . Part I was to be performed before the sermon , Part II after the sermon and during communion . Part II talks about the duties of those who follow God 's invitation , to pass the love of Christ in order to achieve heaven on earth , a thought also expressed in the Epistle reading . The third stanza of Luther 's chorale closes the work . 
 John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , evaluated the work , connected to Bach 's first cantata for Leipzig : 
 this cantata is clearly more than just a sequel to the previous Sunday 's Die Elenden sollen essen ... together they form a diptych revealing a thematic continuity extended over two weeks , with plentiful cross @-@ referencing between the two set Gospels and Epistles beyond the obvious parallels between the injunction to give charitably to the hungry ( BWV 75 ) and of brotherly love manifested in action ( BWV 76 ) . 
 He described the works as featuring " a characteristically Lutheran interpretation " of the First Epistle of John . He also noted the depth of metaphorical uses of " eating and drinking " , highlighting " the rich man 's table , from which Lazarus tried to gather fallen crumbs ( BWV 75 ) , standing in opposition to the " great supper " and God 's invitation through Christ to the banquet of eternal life ( BWV 76 ) " . Summarising both pieces , Gardiner wrote : 
 evidently a lot of thought and pre @-@ planning had gone on while Bach was still in Köthen , as well as discussions with his unknown librettist and possibly with representatives of the Leipzig clergy , before he could set the style , tone and narrative shaping of these two impressive works . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata is structured in two parts of seven movements each , to be performed before and after the sermon . It is scored for four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir SATB , trumpet ( Tr ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , oboe d 'amore ( Oa ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , viola da gamba ( Vg ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . The two parts of seven movements each are composed as the same arrangement of alternating recitatives and arias with a concluding chorale , only Part II is opened by a sinfonia instead of a chorus . The duration is given as 35 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 Similar to the opening chorus of BWV 75 , Bach sets the psalm in two sections , comparable to a prelude and fugue on a large scale . An instrumental concerto unites the complete " prelude " , the trumpet " calls " to tell the glory of God . The fugue in C major is a permutation fugue , which develops the subject twice , starting with the voices , up to a triumphal entrance of the trumpet , similar in development to the first chorus of Wir danken dir , Gott , wir danken dir , BWV 29 , composed much later and used twice in the Mass in B minor . Joseph Haydn later set the same words , also in C major , in his oratorio The Creation . 
 In the first recitative the strings accompany the voice , most keenly in motifs in the arioso middle section , in Gardiner 's words " to evoke the spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters " . Trumpet and bass voice are used to convey the call " to banish the tribe of idolaters " , while the strings possibly illustrate " the hordes of infidels " . The last recitative leads in an arioso to the chorale . In the chorale , Bach has the violin play an obbligato part to the four @-@ part setting of the voices and separates the lines by interludes , with the trumpet anticipating the line to follow . The continuo plays ostinato a motif which is derived from the first line of the chorale . 
 Whereas Part I begins with a trumpet announcing ( " erzählen " ) God 's glory , Part II starts on an intimate chamber music scale with oboe d 'amore and viola da gamba , concentrating on " brotherly devotion " ( <unk> <unk> ) . A sinfonia in E minor for these two instruments is reminiscent both of Bach 's compositions for the court in Köthen and of a French overture , marked " adagio " , then " vivace " . Bach used the music of this movement later in his organ trio , BWV 528 . Gardiner calls the movement " in effect a sonata da <unk> " . The tenor aria illustrates the " masochistic " " Hate me , then , hate me with all your might , o hostile race ! " by a first dissonant entry on an ostinato bass line full of chromatic , leaps and interrupting rests . Oboe d 'amore and viola da gamba return to accompany the last aria , and " the sombre qualities of both voice and instruments create a feeling of peace and introspection " . The music of the closing chorale is identical to that of Part I. 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The sortable listing is taken from the selection provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = Oslo Metro = 
 The Oslo Metro ( Norwegian : Oslo T @-@ bane or Oslo <unk> or simply T @-@ banen ) is the rapid transit system of Oslo , Norway , operated by Sporveien T @-@ banen on contract from the transit authority Ruter . The network consists of five lines that all run through the city centre , with a total length of 85 kilometres ( 53 mi ) , serving 101 stations of which 17 are underground or indoors . In addition to serving 14 out of the 15 boroughs of Oslo ( all except St. Hanshaugen ) , two lines run to Bærum . In 2015 , the system had an annual ridership of 94 @.@ 4 million . 
 The first rapid transit line , the Holmenkoll Line , opened in 1898 , with the branch Røa Line opening in 1912 . It became the first Nordic underground railway in 1928 when the underground line to Nationaltheatret was opened . The Sognsvann Line opened in 1934 and the Kolsås Line in 1942 . The opening of the upgraded T @-@ bane system on the east side of town occurred in 1966 , after the conversion of the 1957 Østensjø Line , followed by the new Lambertseter Line , the Grorud Line and the Furuset Line ; in 1993 trains ran under the city between the two networks in the Common Tunnel , followed by the 2006 opening of the Ring Line . All the trains are operated with MX3000 stock . These replaced the older T1000 stock between 2006 and 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Suburban lines in the west = = = 
 Rail transport in Oslo started in 1854 , with the opening of Hoved Line to Eidsvoll , through Groruddalen . In 1872 , Drammen Line , going through Oslo West , and in 1879 , Østfold Line going through Nordstrand opened , offering a limited rail service to those parts of the city . By 1875 , Kristiania Sporveisselskab ( KSS ) opened the first horsecar trams . In 1894 electric trams were in service by Kristiania Elektriske Sporvei ( KES ) . 
 The first suburban tram line was the Holmenkoll Line that was opened by Holmenkolbanen in 1898 ; like all the later suburban tram line these were electric trams with a grade @-@ separated right @-@ of @-@ way and proper stations instead of tram stops , making it the first rapid transit in Oslo . Unlike the other suburban tram lines that were built later , the Holmenkollen Line was not extended into the city as a streetcar — instead passengers had to change at Majorstuen to the streetcars , though the system did not take into use wider suburban stock ( 3 @.@ 1 metres ( 10 ft ) ) until 1909 . A branch line was opened in 1912 , to Smestad , and in 1916 the Holmenkollen Line was extended to Tryvann , with the last part from Frognerseteren single track and used for freight , and removed in 1939 . 
 In 1912 , the construction of the first underground railway in the Nordic Countries started , when A / S Holmenkolbanen started construction of an extension of their line from Majorstuen to Nationaltheatret ; the 2 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) line was opened in 1928 ( and was then only the second underground railway to be opened in the Nordic countries after <unk> in Copenhagen which opened in July 1918 ) , with one intermediate station at Valkyrie Plass , giving the two suburban lines access to the central business district of Oslo . 
 The success of the suburban lines tempted KES to extend their streetcar service west from Skøyen as a suburban line ; the Lilleaker Line opened to Lilleaker in 1919 , to Avløs in 1924 and to Kolsås in 1930 . A new section from Jar to Sørbyhaugen opened in 1942 , connecting the line from Jar to Kolsås to Nationaltheatret , and making it a rapid transit and the replacement of stock with wide suburban standard . This service remained part of the municipal Oslo Sporveier , that had bough all the streetcar companies in 1924 . 
 Compensation for large amounts of damage to houses along the route during construction , along with higher construction costs than calculated was a heavy burden on the company , and in 1934 , the municipality of Aker took over the common stock , though the preferred stock remained listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange until 1975 , as Oslo Sporveier gradually took over the operation of the western suburban lines . Akersbanerne opened the connecting Sognsvann Line in 1934 . 
 = = = Metro = = = 
 The first idea to launch a city @-@ wide rapid transit was launched in 1912 with the construction of the Ekeberg Line ; constructed with the same width profile as the Holmenkollen Line , the plan was to build a tunnel under the city center and run through trains , but large cost expenditures on the first section of the Common Tunnel ceased the plans . As part of the rebuilding after World War II a planning office for a T @-@ bane was established in 1949 , with the first plans launched in 1951 ; in 1954 , the city council decided to build the T @-@ bane network in Eastern Oslo with four branches . The system would feature improvements over the suburban lines in having a third rail power supply , cab signaling with Automatic Train Protection , stations long enough for six @-@ car trains and level crossings replaced by bridges and underpasses — specifications christened metro standard . 
 At the time there were two suburban tramways on the east side , the Ekeberg Line ( opened in 1919 ) and the Østensjø Line ( 1923 ) . Only the latter would be connected to the T @-@ bane ; the Ekeberg Line would remain a tramway , but three new lines were to be built — the Grorud Line on the north side and the Furuset Line on the south side of Groruddalen and the Lambertseter Line on the east of Nordstrand . These areas were all chosen as new suburbs for Oslo , and would quickly need a good public transport system ; suburban lines would first be built out extending from the existing tramway , and later a final section with tunnel to the central station would be built . The Lambertseter Line was opened in 1957 , from Brynseng to Bergkrystallen while the Østensjø Line was extended to <unk> in 1958 . 
 The metro opened on 22 May 1966 , when the Common Tunnel opened from Brynseng to the new downtown station of Jernbanetorget , located beside the Oslo East Railway Station . In October the Grorud Line opened to Grorud while the Østensjø Line was connected to the system in 1967 when the line also was extended to Skullerud . In 1970 , the Furuset Line opened to Haugerud and extended to <unk> in 1974 , at the same time as the Grorud Line was extended to Vestli . By 1981 , the Furuset Line had reached Ellingsrudåsen . The metro took delivery of T1000 rolling stock from Strømmens Værksted ; from 1964 to 1978 , 162 cars in three @-@ car configurations were delivered for the eastern network . 
 = = = One tunnel = = = 
 The eastern network was extended from Jernbanetorget to Sentrum in 1977 . This station was forced to close in 1983 , due to water leakage , and when it opened again in 1987 , renamed Stortinget , the west network tunnel had also been extended there . Through services were not possible at the time because of incompatibility of signaling and power equipment . Not until 1993 did the first trains run through the station , after the Sognsvann Line had been rebuilt to " metro standard " ; the Røa Line followed in 1995 . The Holmenkoll and Kolsås Lines remained non @-@ metro , using dual mode trains that switch to overhead lines at Frøen and Montebello . The western network took delivery of 33 T1300 cars in 1978 – 81 , with an additional 16 converted from T1000 . In 1994 twelve T2000 cars were delivered for the Holmenkollen Line . 
 In 2003 the Ring Line opened , connecting Ullevål stadion to Storo . The following year , construction work caused a tunnel to collapse on the Grorud Line — the system 's busiest — forcing a shutdown of the line until December , and creating a havoc of overcrowded replacement buses . In 2006 the ring was completed , to Carl Berners plass . At the same time the Kolsås Line was closed for upgrade to metro standard . In 2003 the section of the Kolsås Line in Bærum closed due to budget disagreements between the two counties ; after a year of unpopular replacement buses , the line was reopened , only to close again in 2006 for upgrade to metro standard . Disagreements between the two counties means the upgrade will be done separately on the two sides of the municipal boundary , with the Oslo side opening first . In 2006 the replacement of existing rolling stock with new MX3000 units commenced . The history of the metro and public transport in Oslo is celebrated at the Oslo Tramway Museum in Majorstuen . 
 = = Network = = 
 The current route network was introduced on 3 April 2016 , with the opening of the connection tunnel from <unk> to Sinsen and the new Løren station . 
 The Oslo Metro operates in all fifteen boroughs of Oslo , as well as reaching a bit inside the neighbouring municipality of Bærum . There are five lines , numbered 1 through 5 , each color @-@ coded . They all pass through the Common Tunnel , serving eight branch lines . In addition two lines operate to the Ring Line . Two branches are served by two lines each : the Grorud branch is served by both lines 4 and 5 , while the Lambertseter branch has full @-@ time service by line 4 and limited service by line 1 . 
 The Grorud and Furuset Line head northeast into Groruddalen , while the other two eastern branches head south into Nordstrand . On the west side , the Holmenkoll and Sognsvann Line cover the northern boroughs of Oslo , along with the Ring Line that connects the northeastern and northwestern parts of town . The Kolsås and Røa Line reach deep into the neighbouring municipality of Bærum . All the lines run through the Common Tunnel before reaching out to different lines , or into the Ring . All lines have a base service of four trains per hour while line 2 and the eastern section of line 3 have eight trains per hour weekdays 7 @-@ 19 . The eastern section of line 2 also has eight trains per hour Saturdays 10 @-@ 19 . A reduced half @-@ hourly service operates on all lines during early weekend mornings . Trains run from about 05 : 00 ( 06 : 00 at weekends ) to 01 : 00 the next morning . 
 = = = Lines = = = 
 = = = = Line 1 = = = = 
 = = = = Line 2 = = = = 
 = = = = Line 3 = = = = 
 = = = = Line 4 = = = = 
 = = = = Line 5 = = = = 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 The system consists of 101 stations , of which 17 are underground or indoors . The only underground station on the pre @-@ metro western network was Nationaltheatret , and most of the underground station are in the common tunnel under the city center , or in shorter tunnel sections on the eastern network ; in particular the Furuset Line runs mainly underground , with all but Haugerud built in or at the opening of a tunnel . 
 Stations in the city center are located close to large employment centers as well as connection possibilities to other modes of transport , such as tram , rail and bus . All stations can be identified at ground level by signs with a blue T in a circle . Stations outside the center are unmanned since the 1995 , with ticket machines for fare purchase ; some stations feature kiosks . A system of turnstiles have been installed , but will never be activated due to security issues . All stations have step @-@ free accessibility through at least one entrance ( except the inbound platform at Frøen ) , and the platform height is aligned with the train cars . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The metro is integrated into the public transport system of Oslo and Akershus through the agency Ruter , allowing tickets to also be valid on the Oslo Tramway , city buses , ferries , and the Oslo Commuter Rail operated by Norwegian State Railways . A new , wireless ticketing system , <unk> , has in the recent years been implemented . From 31 January 2016 a single ticket for one zone ( the entire metro system is in zone 1 ) cost NOK 32 for adults ( NOK 50 if purchased onboard ) , for 30 @-@ day ticket , it costs NOK 690 for adults . This includes all means of public transport within the zone where the ticket is first activated ( again , for the metro , zone 1 ) . There is a fine of NOK 950 , or NOK 1150 , for not having a valid ticket , depending on if the fine is paid on location or not . 
 Oslo maintains a street tram system with six lines , of which two are suburban lines . The street trams operate mostly within the borders of the Ring Line , providing a frequent service in the city centre , with lower average speeds but with more stops . There are major transfer points to the tramway at Majorstuen , Jernbanetorget , Jar , Storo and Forskningsparken . 
 The commuter train serves suburbs further away from Oslo , though some of the commuter rail services remind of a rapid transit service , in particular line 400 and line 500 , to Lillestrøm , Asker and Ski , with higher service frequency through the continual populated area of Oslo . Transfer to railway services is available at Jernbanetorget ( to Oslo S ) and Nationaltheatret , the latter with a considerably shorter walk . 
 Bus services are provided to numerous stations . Most bus services provide feeding to the metro system where possible , and then do not continue into town . However , since the metro operates solely into town , instead of across it , many buses operate between stations on different lines , or provide alternative routes across town . 
 = = Future expansion = = 
 Between 2006 and 2014 the Kolsås Line was upgraded to metro standard . 
 As part of the political compromise Oslo Package 3 a number of changes have been proposed for the Oslo <unk> of the Furuset Line to Lørenskog with stations at <unk> , Lørenskog Centre and a new terminus at Akershus University Hospital , with travel time to Jernbanetorget of 27 minutes . 
 The frequency on the eastern lines will be increased . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> will get eight departures per hour , with half ( B @-@ routes ) terminating at Majorstuen for <unk> and <unk> . This will reduce the capacity in the Common Tunnel . 
 The construction of the Løren Line will connect the Ring Line with the Grorud Line , allowing trains to run from <unk> directly to the Ring . In addition a new station at Løren would be built . This will not increase the load on the Common Tunnel since it is an extension of the current line that terminates at Storo , and will also make way for eight departures per hour on the Østensjø line . This will also give all stations except Hasle and Løren eight departures per hour . 
 A new station , Homansbyen , on the Common Tunnel between Majorstuen and National Theatre . 
 Although not part of Oslo Package 3 , the Fornebu Line , which has been variously proposed as a light rail , metro and an automated train line since 1997 , is planned to run from Majorstuen to the old airport area at Fornebu . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 The trains on the Oslo metro are currently exclusively the MX3000 , ordered in 2003 to replace the oldest T1000 stock . Delivery started in 2006 , and unlike older stock the MX3000 units are painted white instead of red . 83 three @-@ car units were ordered in 2006 ; a further 32 were ordered in December 2010 . 
 A number of versions of the T1000 stock have earlier been used on the Oslo metro . This includes 146 cars of the types T1 through T4 , that have third @-@ rail only operation , and thus did not run on the Holmenkollen and Kolsås lines . These ran usually in units of three or six ( sometimes four or five ) cars . Types T5 to T8 , 49 in total , delivered with both third @-@ rail and overhead wire equipment , normally ran on the Holmenkollen line ( two cars ) and Kolsås line ( three cars ) . 
 When the Holmenkollen Line was connected to the T @-@ bane it was still using old teak cars ; to allow through services the T2000 , capable of dual @-@ system running , was delivered in 1993 . They were not particularly successful and only 12 units were delivered , operating in pairs on the Holmenkollen line sometimes connecting with the Lambertseter line , and scrapped in 2010 . 
 = = Depots and facilities = = 
 Avløs Depot – located near Avløs station on the Kolsås Line , it has been closed for refurbishment since 2011 and is expected to reopen in May 2015 . 
 Etterstad Depot – located on the shared section of the Østensjø Line , Furuset Line and the Lambertseter Line before Brynseng station , it is used as the main operations centre for the Oslo Metro and has a yard for maintenance of way equipment . 
 Majorstuen Depot – a small yard used mainly for storing trains , located just beside the Oslo Tramway Museum . 
 Ryen Depot – the main storage and maintenance yard for all Oslo Metro trains , located on the Lambertseter Line near Ryen station . 
 = = = Inline references = = = 
 = Tupolev Tu @-@ 80 = 
 The Tupolev Tu @-@ 80 was a Soviet prototype for a longer @-@ ranged version of the Tupolev Tu @-@ 4 bomber built after World War II . It was canceled in 1949 in favor of the Tupolev Tu @-@ 85 program which offered even more range . The sole prototype was used in various test programs before ending its days as a target . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Tu @-@ 80 was designed as a modernized and enlarged Tu @-@ 4 with greater range . This was to be achieved by the use of more fuel @-@ efficient engines , better aerodynamics and adding fuel tanks . It was intended to have a range of 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 300 – 5 @,@ 000 mi ) and carry a maximum bomb load of 12 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 26 @,@ 000 lb ) with a top speed of 620 kilometres per hour ( 390 mph ) . Work began on the design in February 1948 and this was confirmed by a Council of Ministers order of 12 June that required the prototype be ready for State acceptance trials in July 1949 . 
 The forward portion of the fuselage was redesigned with an airliner @-@ style stepped windscreen and the fuselage was lengthened by almost 4 m ( 13 ft ) which allowed the bomb bays and their doors to be lengthened . The radar and its operator were moved into the forward pressurized compartment and the radar itself was located in the " chin " position in a new streamlined fairing . The wings were enlarged to a total of 173 square metres ( 1 @,@ 860 sq ft ) and the rubber deicing boots were replaced by more efficient and aerodynamic bleed air <unk> . The engine nacelles were redesigned with smaller cross @-@ sections with less drag . Originally Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> or Dobrynin VD @-@ <unk> engines were considered , but neither engine was ready so the Shvetsov ASh @-@ 73TKFN was used . Fully feathering propellers were also used . All of these changes increased the lift / drag ratio to 18 from the 17 @.@ 0 of the Tu @-@ 4 . 
 Construction of the Tu @-@ 80 began in November 1948 , using as many Tu @-@ 4 components as possible to speed up construction , but the first flight wasn 't until 1 December 1949 , after the Council of Ministers had canceled the program on 16 September 1949 in favor of the Tu @-@ 85 which was expected to have much better performance . The Tu @-@ 80 became a research aircraft , testing reversible @-@ pitch propellers and structural deformation in heavy aircraft . It eventually became a target on a bombing and gunnery range . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from The Osprey Encyclopedia of Russian Aircraft 1975 – 1995 
 General characteristics 
 Length : 34 @.@ 32 m ( 112 ft 7 ¼ in ) 
 Wingspan : 43 @.@ 45 m ( 142 ft 6 ⅝ in ) 
 Height : 8 @.@ 91 m ( <unk> 3 in ) 
 Wing area : 167 @.@ 0 m ² ( 1 @,@ 798 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 37 @,@ 850 kg ( 83 @,@ 444 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 51 @,@ 500 kg ( 113 @,@ 536 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 60 @,@ 600 kg ( <unk> ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> 18 @-@ cylinder two @-@ row radial engine , 1 @,@ 977 kW ( 2 @,@ 650 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 545 km / h ( 295 kn , 339 mph ) 
 Range : 8 @,@ 214 km ( 4 @,@ 436 nmi , 5 @,@ 104 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 11 @,@ 180 m ( 36 @,@ 680 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 363 kg / m ² ( 74 @.@ 3 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 0 @.@ 13 kW / kg ( <unk> / lb ) 
 Armament 
 Bombs : 12 @,@ 000 kg ( 26 @,@ 500 lb ) bombs 
 = Thomas Farrell ( general ) = 
 Major General Thomas Francis Farrell ( 3 December 1891 – 11 April 1967 ) was the Deputy Commanding General and Chief of Field Operations of the Manhattan Project , acting as executive officer to Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . 
 Farrell graduated from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute with a degree in civil engineering in 1912 . During World War I , he served with the 1st Engineers on the Western Front , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross and the French Croix de guerre . After the war , he was an instructor at the Engineer School , and then at the United States Military Academy at West Point . He resigned from the Regular Army in 1926 to become Commissioner of Canals and Waterway for the State of New York from 1926 to 1930 , and head of construction and engineering of the New York State Department of Public Works from 1930 until 1941 . 
 During World War II he returned to active duty as Groves ' executive officer in the Operations Branch of the Construction Division under the Office of the Quartermaster General . He went to the China @-@ Burma @-@ India theater to help build the Ledo Road . In January 1945 , Groves chose Farrell as his second @-@ in @-@ command of the Manhattan Project . Farrell observed the Trinity test at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range with J. Robert Oppenheimer . In August 1945 , he went to Tinian to supervise the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Afterwards he led teams of scientists to inspect the effects of the atomic bombs . 
 In 1946 he was appointed chairman of the New York City Housing Authority . He subsequently worked as a consultant for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority on projects such as the Cross Bronx Expressway . He was a member of the evaluation board for Operation Crossroads , and was an advisor to Bernard Baruch , the United States representative on the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission . During the Korean War , Farrell returned to active duty once more , serving with the Defense Production Administration , and then with the Atomic Energy Commission as its Assistant General Manager for Manufacturing . He oversaw a vast increase in the Commission 's production capabilities before retiring again in 1951 . From 1960 to 1964 , he worked on the preparations for the 1964 New York World 's Fair . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Francis Farrell was born on 3 December 1891 in Brunswick , New York , the fourth of nine children of John Joseph Farrell , Sr. , a farmer , and his wife Margaret née Connolly . Farrell was raised on the family 's 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) farm , where his father had an apple orchard , and raised pigs and dairy cattle . The children helped with the farm chores , and delivering the milk , but none stayed on as adults . Farrell graduated from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1912 . His first professional job was working on the New York State Barge Canal . Seeing Irish workers being mistreated by bosses made him a staunch supporter of organized labor . He worked on the Panama Canal from 1913 to 1916 . 
 Farrell joined the Corps of Engineers Officers Reserve Corps in 1916 . He married Maria Ynez White in 1917 before departing for France with the American Expeditionary Force ( AEF ) . He joined the 1st Engineers with the rank of second lieutenant , and departed from Hoboken , New Jersey on the USAT Finland on 6 August as the assistant supply officer with the rank of first lieutenant . He became a captain and regimental supply officer in October , and subsequently , with the rank of major , commanded the 2nd Battalion from January to May 1918 , Company F from May to July , and finally the 1st Battalion from July 1918 . 
 Farrell participated in the Battle of <unk> , the Aisne @-@ Marne Offensive , the Battle of Montdidier @-@ Noyon and the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . The 1st Engineers ' main role was maintenance of the roads and construction of bridges in the 1st Division area , although detachments also employed Bangalore torpedoes to clear paths through barbed wire . However , during the Argonne battle , Farrell 's 1st Battalion was committed to the line as infantry . For his leadership in the action that followed , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . His citation read : 
 for extraordinary heroism in action while serving with 1st Engineers , 1st Division , <unk> , at Bois @-@ de @-@ <unk> , France , October 8 – 9 , 1918 . On October 8 when ordered to take and hold Hill 269 , which was strongly held by enemy forces , Major Farrell with great skill and with undaunted courage and determination led his battalion to the attack , seized and held this vital point despite the fact that he was attacked by greatly superior numbers on three sides and nearly surrounded by strong enemy forces who showed extraordinary determination to regain this highly important position . He held the hill until reinforcements could reach him after darkness had fallen on 9 October 1918 . His fearless leadership , utter disregard for his own safety , and complete devotion to duty raised the morale of his battalion to a high pitch and inspired them to acts of great endeavor . 
 Farrell was also awarded the Croix de guerre with palm for his actions , and the 1st Battalion received a citation from Major General Charles Summerall , the commander of V Corps . After the Armistice with Germany in November 1918 , the 1st Engineers participated in the occupation of the Rhineland , with Farrell 's 1st Battalion basing itself at <unk> . The 1st Engineers returned to the United States in August and September 1919 . After the war , Farrell joined the Regular Army . He served as an instructor at the Engineer School at Camp A. A. Humphreys from 1921 to 1924 , and then at the United States Military Academy at West Point until 1926 . 
 Farrell resigned from the Regular Army in 1926 , but remained in the reserves . The Governor of New York , Al Smith , appointed Farrell as Commissioner of Canals and Waterway for the State of New York . He was head of construction and engineering of the New York State Department of Public Works from 1930 until 1941 . He was considered as a possible candidate to replace Frederick Stuart Greene as Superintendent of Public Works , but Greene did not retire . The Great Depression led to a vast expansion of public works activity , both nationally and in New York . Major projects in New York included the 1939 New York World 's Fair and the construction of LaGuardia Airport . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Construction in the United States = = = 
 Farrell returned to active duty in February 1941 with the rank of lieutenant colonel to act as then @-@ Colonel Leslie R. Groves , Jr . ' s executive officer in the Operations Branch of the Construction Division under the Office of the Office of the Quartermaster General . At this point , the US Army was about to embark on a national mobilization , and it was the task of the Construction Division of the Quartermaster Corps to prepare the necessary accommodations and training facilities for the vast army that would be created . The enormous construction program had been dogged by bottlenecks , shortages , delays , spiralling costs , and poor living conditions at the construction sites . Newspapers began publishing accounts charging the Construction Division with incompetence , ineptitude , and inefficiency . Farrell and Groves worked out new , simplified procedures for centralized procurement that provided the flexibility needed to get projects done on time with the accountability that such enormous expenditures demanded . He was awarded the Legion of Merit for his services . 
 = = = China @-@ Burma @-@ India = = = 
 In September 1943 , the Chief of Army Service Forces , Lieutenant General Brehon B. Somervell , created a special India Committee to coordinate activities in the China @-@ Burma @-@ India theater with those of Army Service Forces back home . Farrell , now a colonel , was appointed to the committee to oversee construction . The creation of a line of communications from India to China would be the largest engineer undertaking of the war . A number of new units were trained in the United States specifically for the task . In a reorganization later that year , Farrell became Chief Engineer of the Services of Supply in the China @-@ Burma @-@ India theater . In December he also became head of its Construction Division . 
 Farrell , who was promoted to brigadier general in January 1944 , organized his command into two divisions and six districts . He was in charge of the work inside India ; construction of the Ledo Road itself was the responsibility of Colonel Lewis A. Pick . In addition to this work , Farrell had to support Operation Matterhorn , the deployment of B @-@ 29 bombers to China and India , which involved the construction and expansion of a series of air bases . The B @-@ 29s required runways that were almost twice the size of those for the older B @-@ 17s , and he was forced to divert his resources to construct a 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) oil pipeline to the Matterhorn airfields . 
 To bridge the fast @-@ following rivers of northern Burma , Pick and Farrell selected the H @-@ 20 Portable Steel Highway Bridge . Production of these had been discontinued in favor of the Bailey bridge , but Farrell 's technical arguments won out and the Corps of Engineers had to reinstate production of the H @-@ 20 . In view of these difficulties , Farrell obtained Bailey bridges from British sources . In the end , all the major bridges beyond the Irrawaddy River would be Baileys . He also made the decision , controversial in Washington , to shift the terminus of the 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) oil pipeline from Calcutta to Chittagong in order to avoid crossing the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers , and the dangers of concentrating too many vulnerable installations in the Calcutta area . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 In December 1944 , the Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , ordered Groves , now the Director of the Manhattan Project , to find a deputy . Stimson was concerned about what would happen if Groves became incapacitated . " You can have any officer in the Army , " Stimson told Groves , " no matter who he is , or what duty he is on . " Groves told Colonel Kenneth Nichols , the commander of the Manhattan District , that his first choice would be Farrell . Nichols replied : " He would be my first choice too . " " Site Y " was the code name for the remote Los Alamos County , New Mexico facilities that housed the main group of researchers and was responsible for final assembly of the bombs . 
 Farrell was briefed on the physics of the atomic bomb by Robert Oppenheimer , and he made several extended tours of the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range , which had been chosen as the site for the Trinity test . On signing a receipt for the plutonium from Oak Ridge , Farrell commented : 
 I recall that I asked them if I was going to sign for it shouldn 't I take it and handle it . So I took this heavy ball in my hand and I felt it growing warm , I got a certain sense of its hidden power . It wasn 't a cold piece of metal , but it was really a piece of metal that seemed to be working inside . Then maybe for the first time I began to believe some of the fantastic tales the scientists had told about this nuclear power . 
 Farrell observed the Trinity ( nuclear test ) with Oppenheimer from the control dugout located 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) from the test tower . In his report on the test to President Truman on 21 July 1945 , Farrell stated : 
 The effects could well be called unprecedented , magnificent , beautiful , stupendous , and terrifying . No man @-@ made phenomenon of such tremendous power had ever occurred before ... It lit every peak , crevasse and ridge of the nearby mountain range with a clarity and beauty that cannot be described but must be seen to be imagined . Seconds after the explosion came , the air blast pressed hard against the people watching , to be followed almost immediately by the strong , sustained , awesome roar which warned of doomsday and made us feel we puny things were blasphemous to dare tamper with the forces previously reserved for the Almighty . Words are inadequate tools for the job of acquainting those not present with the physical , mental and psychological effects . It had to be witnessed to be realized . 
 . 
 Farrell assumed special responsibility for combat operations . He served on the target committee , acting as its chairman when Groves was absent . In July 1945 , Farrell arrived on Guam to coordinate the project with the local commanders . One of his tasks was to brief General of the Army Douglas MacArthur . Farrell was joined by Rear Admiral William R. Purnell , who represented the Military Liaison Committee , and Captain William S. Parsons , the commander of Project Alberta . They became , informally , the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " , with decision @-@ making authority over the nuclear mission . 
 Farrell notified Groves that the Little Boy bomb would be ready for use on or about 3 August , weather permitting . In the space of a week on Tinian , four B @-@ 29s crashed and burned on the runway . Parsons became very concerned . If a B @-@ 29 crashed with a Little Boy , the fire could cook off the explosive and detonate the weapon , with catastrophic consequences . Parsons raised the possibility of arming the bomb in flight with Farrell , who agreed that it might be a good idea . Farrell asked Parsons if he knew how to do it . " No sir , I don 't " , Parsons conceded , " but I 've got all afternoon to learn . " After the bombing of Hiroshima on 6 August , Farrell , along with Generals Carl Spaatz , Nathan Twining , Barney Giles and James H. Davies , debriefed Parsons , the aircrews and the observers , and sent Groves a detailed report . 
 Farrell brought forward the date for the next attack because good weather was only predicted until 9 August . He signed the Fat Man bomb , " To Hirohito , with love and kisses , T. F. Farrell . " The bomb was loaded on the B @-@ 29 Bockscar . During pre @-@ flight inspection , a fuel pump was found to be faulty , meaning that 800 US gallons ( 3 @,@ 000 l ; 670 imp gal ) of fuel in the bomb bay tank could not be used , although it would have to be carried . Farrell took the difficult decision to continue the mission , in view of the worsening weather . This was only the first of a number of problems that faced the mission crews that day , but the mission was carried out successfully . 
 The surrender of Japan on 14 August precluded further attacks . Groves had already directed Farrell to prepare teams to inspect the effects of the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki , and Farrell had begun assembling the required personnel and equipment . Farrell arrived in Hiroshima by air on 8 September as part of a group , equipped with portable geiger counters , that was headed by himself , and also included Brigadier General James B. Newman , Jr from the US Army Air Forces , Japanese Rear Admiral Masao Tsuzuki , who acted as a translator , and Colonel Stafford L. Warren , the head of the Manhattan District 's Medical Section . They remained in Hiroshima until 14 September and then surveyed Nagasaki from 19 September to 8 October . They were greatly impressed by both the damage done by the atomic bombs , and the extensive Japanese preparations for the Allied invasion that had been planned prior to the surrender . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Farrell was promoted to the rank of major general in October 1945 . He remained Deputy Commander of the Manhattan Project until he retired from active service in April 1946 . He was appointed chairman of the New York City Housing Authority by Mayor William O 'Dwyer on Robert Moses 's recommendation . In the aftermath of the war , providing public housing , especially for returning veterans , was a major priority for the city . Unlike other projects of the time , New York City public housing was not racially segregated . Writing in 1950 , Farrell declared , " New York 's public housing projects demonstrate that Negroes and whites can live together . " 
 He served as a member of the evaluation board for Operation Crossroads , and was an advisor to Bernard Baruch , the United States ' representative on the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission . In 1950 , during the Korean War , Farrell returned to active duty with the Army once more , and served with the Defense Production Administration . In July 1951 , he was transferred to the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , the successor organization to the Manhattan Project , where he became the Assistant General Manager for Manufacturing . In this role , he oversaw a vast increase in the Commission 's production capabilities . The construction of new reactors at the Hanford and Savannah River Sites would eventually triple the production of nuclear weapons . 
 Farrell left the AEC and active duty Army again in February 1952 . He subsequently worked as a consultant for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority on projects such as the Cross Bronx Expressway . From 1960 to 1964 , he worked on the preparations for the 1964 New York World 's Fair . 
 His children were Thomas , Barbara , Peter , Patricia , and Stephen . Thomas graduated from West Point in the class of 1942 , received the Silver Star Medal and the Distinguished Service Cross , and reached the rank of captain before being killed at Anzio on 25 February 1944 . An Army port repair ship , the Thomas F. Farrell Jr . , was named in his honor . Peter graduated from West Point in the class of 1950 . He served with the Army in the Vietnam War , where he commanded the 6th Battalion , 56th Air Defense Artillery during the Tet Offensive . He retired from the Army in 1978 with the rank of colonel . Farrell 's daughter , Barbara <unk> , was the first woman from Nevada to be elected to the United States House of Representatives , serving from 1983 to 1997 . His granddaughter , Patricia Dillon <unk> , served as Nevada State Treasurer from 1983 to 1987 . Farrell died at Saint Mary 's Hospital in Reno , Nevada , on 11 April 1967 . His wife Ynez had died the year before . Ironically , the man who had spent a lifetime building things was principally remembered for the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 = Bill Willis = 
 William <unk> Willis ( October 5 , 1921 – November 27 , 2007 ) was an American football defensive lineman who played eight seasons for the Cleveland Browns in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and the National Football League ( NFL ) . Known for his quickness and strength despite his small stature , Willis was one of the dominant defensive football players of the 1940s and early 1950s . He was named an All @-@ Pro in every season of his career and reached the NFL 's Pro Bowl in three of the four seasons he played in the league . His techniques and style of play were emulated by other teams , and his versatility as a pass @-@ rusher and coverage man influenced the development of the modern @-@ day linebacker position . When he retired , Cleveland coach Paul Brown called him " one of the outstanding linemen in the history of professional football " . Willis was also one of the first African Americans to play professional football in the modern era , signing with the Browns a year before Jackie Robinson broke the color barrier in Major League Baseball with the Brooklyn Dodgers . 
 Born in Columbus , Ohio , Willis attended Ohio State University , where he joined the track and football teams . He was part of a Buckeyes football team that won the school 's first national championship in 1942 . After graduating in 1944 , Willis heard about a new AAFC club in Cleveland led by his old Ohio State coach , Paul Brown . He got a tryout and made the team . With Willis as a defensive anchor , the Browns won all four AAFC championships between 1946 and 1949 , when the league dissolved . The Browns were then absorbed by the NFL , where Willis continued to succeed . Cleveland won the NFL championship in 1950 . 
 Willis retired in 1954 to focus on helping troubled youth , first as Cleveland 's assistant recreation commissioner and later as the chairman of the Ohio Youth Commission . He remained in that position until his death in 2007 . Willis was inducted into both the College Football Hall of Fame and Pro Football Hall of Fame in the 1970s . He married Odessa Porter and had three sons , William , Jr . , Clement and Dan . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willis was born in Georgia , the son of Clement and <unk> " Anna " Willis . The family moved to Columbus , Ohio about 1922 . His father died of pneumonia on April 10 , 1923 , and he was raised by his grandfather and mother amid the financial hardships of the Great Depression . He ran dashes and threw the shot put on the track team and played on the football team at Columbus East High School . Worried about being compared to his older brother Claude , who had been an All @-@ State fullback at the same school a few years earlier , Willis eschewed the backfield to play tackle and end . He had a successful three years on the high school team , winning Honorable Mention All @-@ State honors as a senior . After graduating from high school , Willis took a year off and worked . Willis 's high school coach wrote to Paul Brown , the Ohio State University football coach , saying the school should recruit him because he matched the type of player Brown liked : large , but more importantly , quick . He enrolled at Ohio State in 1941 . 
 = = College career = = 
 Willis was small for a lineman at 202 pounds , and despite signing up to play for Brown he was initially expected to focus on track and the 60 @-@ yard and 100 @-@ yard dashes . Brown , however , brought him onto the football team as a sophomore in 1942 . Willis played middle guard , a defensive position opposite the center . That year , the Buckeyes posted a 9 – 1 record and won the Big Ten Conference . The team was voted national champion by the Associated Press , a first for the school . 
 Before the following season , scores of Ohio State players left the school to join the military as American involvement in World War II intensified . Willis volunteered for the U.S. Army , but was classified as 4 @-@ F , or only available for service in case of a national emergency , due to varicose veins . With many stars gone , however , Brown fielded a team composed mostly of 17 @-@ year @-@ olds who were not yet eligible for military service . The " Baby Bucks " , as they were called , fell to 3 – 6 , although Willis was named a first @-@ team All Conference selection in the Big Ten . 
 By the 1944 season , Brown had joined the military and was coaching a team at Great Lakes Naval Training Station outside Chicago . Under his substitute , coach Carroll Widdoes , the Buckeyes completed an undefeated season . Willis was named to the United Press International and Look magazine All @-@ America teams . He played in the 1944 College All @-@ Star Game at Chicago , and was named the game 's outstanding player . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 A professional football career was unlikely for Willis when he graduated from Ohio State in 1945 . While the exclusion of black players was not a written rule , no African @-@ American had played in the National Football League since 1933 . The gentlemen 's agreement had been in effect ever since segregationist George Preston Marshall entered the league as owner of the Boston Redskins . In his physical prime but with no real prospect of playing professionally , Willis took a job as the head football coach at Kentucky State College in the fall of 1945 . Kentucky State , an historically black school , played against other small black schools near its campus in Frankfort . 
 Willis , however , still wanted to play football . " My heart was not really in coaching " , he later said . He read that Paul Brown was coaching a team in the newly formed All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , and he gave Brown a call . Brown said he would get back to Willis on a possible tryout . In the meantime , Willis was recruited by the Montreal Alouettes , a team in the Canadian Football League . Not hearing back from Brown , he planned to go play in Canada . Willis was about to leave for Montreal when Paul Hornung , a sportswriter for the Columbus Dispatch , called with a message from Brown . Hornung told Willis to go for a tryout in Bowling Green , Ohio , where the new team , the Cleveland Browns , was holding its training camp . 
 Willis went to the camp and impressed Brown with his speed and reflexes , as he had at Ohio State . Brown lined him up against center Mo Scarry in practice on his first day . Willis beat him every time . Scarry complained that Willis was coming across the line before he snapped the ball . On one snap , Scarry stepped on quarterback Otto Graham 's foot as he <unk> to handle Willis . Brown took a look himself : Willis was not offside . He was getting a jump by watching for the center 's fingers to tighten on the ball . " He was quick " , said Alex Agase , who later joined the Browns as a guard . " I don 't think there was anybody as quick at that position , or any position for that matter . He came off that ball with that ball as quick as anything you would want to see . " 
 Willis made the team , and 10 days later the Browns signed a second African @-@ American player , fullback Marion Motley . Willis played middle guard for the Browns , lining up opposite the center but often dropping back into coverage to defend the pass . He had a playing style and physique similar to that of the modern @-@ day linebacker . For Brown , signing Willis and Motley was nothing unusual . Brown had black players on his teams from the time he coached at Massillon Washington High School in Massillon , Ohio . The coach did not care about race one way or the other ; he wanted to field the best team he could . " I never considered football players black or white , nor did I keep or cut a player just because of his color " , Brown wrote in his autobiography . In joining the Browns in 1946 , Willis and Motley were two of four professional football players who broke the color barrier in 1946 , a year before Jackie Robinson became Major League Baseball 's first black player in the modern era . Brown later added other black players to the team , including Horace Gillom and Len Ford . 
 With the Browns , Willis became an anchor on defense as the team dominated the AAFC . The team won each of the league 's four championship games before the AAFC folded and the Browns , along with two other teams , were absorbed by the National Football League ( NFL ) following the 1949 season . Willis was named to all @-@ AAFC teams in every year of its existence . 
 While the team was a success , Willis and Motley contended with their share of racism . They were taunted , stepped on and insulted on the field . Off @-@ the @-@ field incidents also occurred . In their first season in 1946 , Willis and Motley did not travel to a game against the Miami Seahawks after they received threatening letters and Miami officials said they would invoke a Florida law that forbade black players from competing against whites . Another time , a hotel where the team was staying asked Willis and Motley to leave . Brown threatened to move the entire team , and the hotel 's management backed down . Willis and Motley were forced to stay in a separate hotel for a 1949 AAFC all @-@ star game in Houston , Texas . 
 The Browns ' success continued when the team entered the NFL in 1950 . In a playoff game that year against the New York Giants , Willis caught up with running back Gene " Choo @-@ Choo " Roberts on a breakaway reception in the fourth quarter to prevent the touchdown and ensure a Browns victory . " I knew it meant the ball game " , he said . " I just had to catch him . " The Browns beat the Giants 8 – 3 and went on to win the NFL championship in 1950 . Willis was one of seven Browns players chosen for the first @-@ ever Pro Bowl that year . 
 The 1951 and 1952 seasons were equally successful for Willis , although the Browns lost in the NFL championship to the Los Angeles Rams and Detroit Lions . He was an all @-@ pro selection and was named to the Pro Bowl in both years . In 1953 , when the Browns lost a third championship game in a row , Willis was named an all @-@ pro but did not make the Pro Bowl . 
 Both Willis and Motley retired after the 1953 season . Willis was 32 years old and had played eight seasons for the Browns , earning all @-@ pro honors every year he played . He was the best player on a strong defense that was crucial to Cleveland 's success in the AAFC and NFL . He was also the embodiment of what Brown looked for in his players : speed and intelligence instead of size . At around 210 pounds , he was small for a lineman , even in his era . Willis 's play as a powerful but quick middle guard influenced the development of the modern linebacker position . " In my opinion Bill ranks as one of the outstanding linemen in the history of professional football " , Brown said when he retired . " He certainly was the fastest and many coaches use his technique as a model in teaching line play . " 
 = = Later career and death = = 
 Willis retired because he wanted to concentrate on other activities ; he had become a popular figure in Ohio and worked with youth in Cleveland and Columbus . He accepted a $ 6 @,@ 570 @-@ a @-@ year job as Cleveland 's assistant recreation commissioner . " This is the type of work I want to do , working with kids " , he said . By the late 1970s , he was the chairman of the Ohio Youth Commission , a state agency created to combat criminality among young people . He died in 2007 . He was married to Odessa Porter until her death in 2002 . The couple had three sons , William , Jr . , Clement and Dan . 
 = = Honors and legacy = = 
 Willis was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1971 . In 1977 he was inducted as a charter member of the Ohio State Varsity O Hall of Fame . He was elected the same year to the Pro Football Hall of Fame . Ohio State University honored Willis on November 3 , 2007 by retiring his # 99 jersey . 
 = Bali Nine = 
 The Bali Nine is the name given to a group of nine Australians arrested 17 April 2005 , and convicted for smuggling 8 @.@ 3 kg ( 18 lb ) of heroin valued at around A $ 4 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 1 million ) from Indonesia to Australia . <unk> Andrew Chan and <unk> Sukumaran were sentenced to death and were executed on 29 April 2015 . Other members Si Yi Chen , Michael Czugaj , Renae Lawrence , Tan Duc Thanh Nguyen , Matthew Norman , Scott Rush , and Martin Stephens were sent to prison . Australian authorities contacted their Indonesian counterparts with the tip @-@ off that precipitated these arrests . 
 On 13 February 2006 , Lawrence and Rush , the first of the nine to face sentencing , were sentenced to life imprisonment . The next day , Czugaj and Stephens were sentenced to life imprisonment , and the group ringleaders , Chan and Sukumaran , were sentenced to death by firing squad , the first ever death sentences imposed by the Denpasar District Court . The other three , Norman , Chen and Nguyen , were all sentenced to life imprisonment on 15 February 2006 . On 26 April 2006 , Lawrence , Nguyen , Chen , and Norman appealed and had their sentences reduced to 20 years , while the life sentences for Czugaj and Stephens were upheld . Prosecutors launched appeals against the changes in their sentences . 
 On 6 September 2006 , it was revealed that as a result of appeals brought by prosecutors and heard by the Supreme Court , Chen had the death penalty reimposed after his reduced sentence of life imprisonment was overturned . Rush , Nguyen and Norman also had their appeal verdicts overturned and the death penalty imposed . The new death sentences were unexpected . Prosecutors , in their appeals against the 20 @-@ year terms faced by most of the nine , had only called for them to be upgraded to life imprisonment . Czugaj 's life sentence , after being reduced to 20 years on appeal , was reinstated . Stephens ' life sentence was upheld on appeal as were Sukumaran 's and Chan 's death sentences . Lawrence had not lodged a further appeal to her 20 @-@ year sentence , so her sentence was not <unk> . 
 On 6 March 2008 , it was revealed that three of the four Bali 9 ( Norman , Chen and Nguyen ) who were issued death sentences on appeal had their sentences reduced to life imprisonment . The reduction has not been officially announced but court sources have confirmed that the judges have decided to spare their lives . In August 2010 , Rush launched his final appeal to overturn the death penalty , and was granted a judicial review , which commenced on 18 August 2010 . On 10 May 2011 , Rush 's appeal was successful as his sentence was reduced to life imprisonment . On 21 September 2010 , the leaders of the drug smuggling ring , Chan and Sukumaran , appealed against their pending death @-@ row sentence and to reduce their jail time to 20 years , instead of the previous life sentence . On 17 June 2011 , it was announced that Chan 's final judicial appeal was rejected on 10 May . On 7 July 2011 , it was announced that Sukumaran 's final judicial appeal was dismissed . On 10 December 2014 , the President of Indonesia Joko Widodo stated in a speech that he will not approve any <unk> for drug offences . On 30 December , Sukumaran 's plea for clemency was rejected ; and Chan 's plea for clemency was rejected on 22 January 2015 . 
 After being moved to the prison island Nusa Kambangan , and following numerous legal appeals that were rejected and pleas from the Australian government for clemency , the execution of Sukumaran and Chan by firing squad took place on 29 April 2015 . 
 = = Background and arrests = = 
 Australian police were unclear how the two groups from Sydney and Brisbane were linked , but did establish the movements of members of the group before their departure for Indonesia . Several of the Bali Nine were employed by <unk> Australia , a multinational catering company with more than 9000 employees . Norman , Lawrence , Martin , Stephens and Chan , a supervisor with the company , all worked for <unk> , which provided hospitality services to the Sydney Cricket Ground , where the group was employed . Rush and Czugaj alleged they were recruited by Tan Duc Thanh Nguyen , their co @-@ defendant and the alleged financier of the smuggling plan , while socialising at a karaoke bar in Brisbane . 
 Evidence was heard that Rush had met Nguyen six months earlier while fishing . He then travelled to Sydney with Nguyen to attend a 21st birthday party where he was introduced to Sukumaran , who called himself " Mark " . It was alleged Nguyen offered them free trips to Bali . Several days later Rush and friend Czugaj returned to Sydney , where arrangements were made for them to travel to Indonesia . The Australian Federal Police ( AFP ) concluded that Sukumaran , Chan , Lawrence and Norman were part of a larger syndicate that successfully imported a commercial quantity of heroin into Australia from Indonesia on 23 October 2004 . Other members of the syndicate were arrested in 14 AFP raids in Sydney and Brisbane on the same day in early May 2005 . 
 = = = Arrests in Indonesia = = = 
 Lawrence and Stephens arrived in Indonesia on 6 April , followed by Rush and Czugaj , old school friends from Brisbane , who arrived two days later . The group was introduced at a hotel where Chan and Sukumaran were staying , having arrived in Bali , earlier . The group was highly organised by Chan and Sukumaran who split it apart . Some of the Bali 9 did not even meet each other until they were arrested . 
 Chan and Sukumaran handed out SIM cards , to stay in contact . During their stay police noted the group would spend a large amount of time indoors in their hotel rooms , although Rush and Czugaj did make the most of their time in Bali and went shopping , eating , drinking and playing water sports . The group met again on 16 April for what police allege was a final briefing , before meeting for their final time at the airport before their 17 April arrest . After receiving information from the AFP about the group , including the names , passport numbers and information relating to their links to possible illegal drug trade , Indonesian police placed the group under constant surveillance for a week before their arrest . Indonesian police believe a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Thai woman , Cherry <unk> <unk> , supplied Chen with the heroin . She is wanted by Interpol . 
 <unk> was believed to have left Bali on 18 April 2005 , a day after the nine Australians were arrested , and was briefly detained at the Thai @-@ Malaysian border until Indonesian police arrived . She was released when her paperwork was determined not to be in order for her to be extradited to Indonesia . Head of the surveillance team I Nyoman <unk> later testified in court during trials for the accused that police were initially unaware Sukumaran was part of the group , because original information obtained from the AFP did not mention him by name . Indonesian police assumed Sukumaran was Chan 's bodyguard as he was seen to accompany Chan in Bali . [ 1 ] Four of the nine , friends Czugaj and Rush , and co @-@ workers Stephens and Lawrence were arrested at Bali 's Ngurah Rai International Airport as they prepared to board an Australia @-@ bound flight . 
 Between them , all were found to have been carrying more than 8 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 18 lb ) of heroin in plastic bags strapped to their bodies . On the same evening , Chan was removed from Australian Airlines about to depart Ngurah Rai for Australia . Chan had several mobile phones in his possession , but was carrying no drugs when arrested . He was believed to be the person responsible for collecting the heroin from the couriers upon their arrival in Australia . [ 2 ] Four others , Nguyen , Sukumaran , Chen and Norman were arrested at <unk> Beach Bungalows near Kuta Beach in possession of 350 grams ( 12 oz ) of heroin and strapping equipment . 
 = = Criminal proceedings = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ trial investigation = = = 
 Indonesian law does not require that arrested people be immediately charged with an offence , and by 22 April 2005 no charges had yet been laid . Police indicated that the five arrested at the airport would be charged with drug trafficking , which carries the death penalty , while those arrested in the hotel would be charged with the lesser offence of drug possession , which carries a maximum penalty of ten years ' imprisonment . It was suggested that Andrew Chan recruited the other eight to act as drug mules – couriers who would not arouse suspicion while carrying heroin to Australia – and offered them A $ 10 @,@ 000 to A $ 15 @,@ 000 each to carry out this task , and given A $ 5000 spending cash . 
 On 27 April 2005 , Colonel Bambang <unk> , head of the Bali police drug squad , said police would seek to have all nine charged with offenses which carry the death penalty . He revealed that several of the nine had previously visited Bali using false passports , suggesting that they had acted as drug couriers before . Indonesian police released video evidence showing heroin being removed from the bodies of the four arrested at the airport . Indonesian police initially maintained that Chan was the " mastermind " of the importation plan . 
 Australian police said that they believed that an Australian drug syndicate was behind the plan . It was soon decided that <unk> Sukumaran , not Chan , was the real leader of the smuggling plot . Defense lawyers conceded that the four arrested at the airport were acting as drug couriers , but said they did it for the money to help their low @-@ income families and because they were threatened with physical harm if they did not comply . They also said they did not know what they were transporting and did not know that drug trafficking in Indonesia carries the death penalty . Investigations closed in August 2005 and briefs handed prosecutors in Denpasar ready for trial . 
 = = = Reactions in Australia = = = 
 The parents of Rush and Lawrence criticised the AFP for allowing the Indonesian police to arrest the nine rather than allowing them to fly to Australia and arresting them in Sydney upon their return . On 24 April 2005 , AFP Commissioner Mick Keelty said the AFP would hand over all evidence it had obtained against the Bali Nine : 
 " The policy is that we will not give evidence that will , or information that will , directly cause or result in somebody receiving the death penalty , but the reality is in this case , it would appear , on the allegation , that these people have been caught red @-@ handed with heroin in Indonesia . " 
 Lawrence 's father , Bob Lawrence , said in October 2005 that he wanted to meet Keelty face to face after learning of the comments made by Lee Rush : 
 " As far as I 'm concerned , and excuse the expression , [ Keelty ] is an arsehole . These kids were forced into this ... they should have been either arrested at the airport here or followed to get the big guys . I don 't know how they can sleep at night ... even if [ the Bali Nine ] were guilty of doing it willingly , it still doesn 't deserve the death penalty . " 
 On 13 February 2006 , Rush 's parents gave an interview to the ABC TV program Australian Story , speaking out against AFP actions . Rush 's parents were quoted as saying : 
 " I was informed at 1 @.@ 30 in the morning that Scott would be spoken to and asked not to board the flight to Bali . It wasn 't until about mid @-@ morning that I received a call from Bob ( Rush 's lawyer ) and a distressed tone in his voice he said ' Mate , we could not stop him , they have let him go through and he 's on his way to Bali . ' Under no circumstances do I condone the trafficking of drugs – I particularly dislike drugs of any nature , always have . When I received a call from the Australian Government authorities that Scott had been detained in Indonesia for attempting to export heroin , I was speechless , sickened to the gut . " 
 " I feel very let down by our Australian Federal Police – we tried to lawfully stop our son leaving the country , it wasn 't done ..... " The Federal Police can do , go wherever they want , do anything , anytime without supervision from the Australian Attorney @-@ General or from the Justice Minister . " ..... " This is not good for Australians and our laws need to be changed to protect our citizens and this must not happen to any Australian citizen again . " 
 In an interview aired on the same episode of Australian Story , Mike Phelan of the AFP responded to the Rush family 's criticisms and said : 
 " Even with the aid of hindsight , should the same set of circumstances present themselves again with another syndicate or other people , we would do exactly the same thing ... there have also been a large number of young lives on the other side of the ledger that have been saved as a result of the AFP 's operations over many years . " 
 Keelty went on to state that " if someone went back to Lee Rush and assured him that Scott would not be able to travel then that is their call . " 
 " We would never have given any assurance , because there was no lawful reason to prevent him from travelling . My sympathy is with Lee Rush because somebody has misled him . Whoever gave Lee Rush the assurance that his son would be prevented from travelling acted <unk> . There is no way anyone in the AFP would have provided that assurance because there was simply no power to detain him . He was not wanted on warrants , there were no conditions of his bail that prevented him from travelling overseas . " 
 Federal justice minister Chris Ellison , defended the AFP 's actions : 
 " What we have are serious allegations as to criminal activity which allegedly occurred on Indonesian soil and the Indonesian police acted accordingly . We would expect the same of Australian police if the situation was reversed . " 
 The Foreign Minister , Alexander Downer , said that Australia opposed the death penalty and would seek clemency for the group if they were convicted . 
 Philip Ruddock , a federal MP , was quoted as saying : 
 " We will not provide co @-@ operation in relation to criminal matters unless there is an assurance that a death penalty will not be sought . If there was further information that had to be obtained from here through the Australian Federal Police , we would seek an assurance that Indonesia would not be wanting a death penalty in each of those cases . " 
 Rush , Lawrence , Stephens and Czugaj began legal proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia against the AFP , arguing that it had acted illegally by tipping off Indonesian police with information leading to the arrests in Bali and knowingly exposed the Australians to the death penalty . Federal Court judges dismissed the claims in January 2006 . 
 = = = Criminal trials = = = 
 Criminal trials for the accused commenced in the Denpasar District Court on 11 October 2005 . Three of the four arrested at the <unk> Bungalows , Nguyen , Chen and Norman , were tried together , with the remaining six defendants tried separately . All defendants faced a maximum penalty of death by firing squad if found guilty . The trials were often delayed due to the defendants complaining of illness , headaches and nausea . Australia 's prime minister , John Howard , said the Australian government would oppose any death sentences imposed . 
 On 6 December 2005 , Australian lawyers Robert Richter QC and Brian Walters QC called for the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to extradite the nine to Australia on heroin conspiracy @-@ related charges . On 7 December 2005 , Denpasar District Court judge I <unk> <unk> <unk> called for Australians not to interfere in the legal proceedings in Indonesia , saying : 
 " Criticism from outside is expected , but Indonesian courts will only adhere to the laws applied in this country , and that includes the death penalty . The judges will not budge , we will not be affected by public opinion or the media . " 
 Sukumaran remained mostly silent throughout the proceedings and blamed amnesia for his poor recollections of events leading to his arrest . Trials were scheduled to be completed with verdicts announced before 23 February 2006 , before a legal deadline for the group 's detention expired . Lawrence claimed that she received threats of harm against herself and her family if she did not proceed with the plan to import heroin into Australia ; she gave evidence in the Denpasar District Court , that she was ordered to book a flight to Bali . She claimed she did not know why she was ordered to travel and her colleague Stephens claims he was also ordered with threats to travel to Bali by Chan , who showed him some photographs of his family , as they were going about their daily lives , saying that they would be killed if he did not co @-@ operate . 
 The Indonesian judges found no evidence of threats , with Judge I Gusti Ngurah <unk> saying during the sentencing of Lawrence . 
 Rush further accused Chan of strapping the heroin to his body wearing rubber gloves . Chan protested his innocence and defending his silence during his final plea , reading from a two @-@ page statement : 
 " I didn 't say anything in court because if I did , I 'd be lying . The truth is , I know nothing . A lot of lies have been said against me , but the true reality is I 'm not what people put me out to be . I 've never threatened anybody in my life . The outcome I wish , of course , and my family is that you find that you would release me , for I had nothing to participate in this . " 
 In sentencing Lawrence , the judges found no evidence to support her claim that her life was threatened and although the prosecutors requested a lighter 20 @-@ year sentence due to her early cooperation with police , the judges sentenced her to life imprisonment . On the next day , the remaining three defendants , Chen , Nguyen and Norman , were sentenced to life imprisonment as well . On 24 January 2006 , the prosecutors demanded the death penalty for Sukumaran , this being the first time that a demand of death was put forward for any of the Bali Nine . They told the Bali court that there was no reason to show any leniency to the 24 @-@ year @-@ old , because he helped organize the heroin smuggling operation . The prosecutors also claim that it was Sukumaran who strapped heroin to the bodies of his fellow accused . Indonesian police identified Sukumaran as one of the main players , in what they said to be a major smuggling ring . On 26 January , it was also recommended that Andrew Chan receive the death penalty . 
 On 14 February 2006 , after learning of his fate , Sukumaran attacked photographers and threw water bottles at protesters and onlookers gathered outside the court building . 
 After news that the death penalty had been handed down , then @-@ Australian Prime Minister John Howard , noting that the death penalty warnings had been in place in Indonesia for decades , implored the youth of Australia to take notice and not take such " terrible risks " . 
 The death sentences were criticised by some Australians , who compared them to the light sentence given to Abu Bakar Bashir , the Indonesian leader of the terrorist group which carried out the 2002 Bali bombings that killed more than 200 people including 88 Australians . Both death sentences were cheered by some of those in court . 
 Allegations of bribery were made on 27 April 2015 relating to Indonesian judicial authorities , in order to reduce sentences to less than 20 years in prison . A former lawyer for Chan and Sukumaran declared that the original amount demanded was more than 1 billion rupiah ( A $ 133 @,@ 000 ) , but two weeks before they were due to be sentenced , the " deal " failed and backfired , triggering a request for the death penalty . Julie Bishop , Australia 's Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed her concern over the allegations involving the questioning of the integrity of the judicial process . 
 = = = Summary of sentences = = = 
 All of the Bali Nine were convicted of drug trafficking of heroin . 
 = = = Appeals = = = 
 There were several avenues of appeal available to the Bali Nine . Lawyers had seven days post @-@ sentencing to lodge appeals . There is no time limit for those convicted to request clemency from the President of Indonesia , Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono , but this requires an admission of guilt and had never been granted for a drug crime until 2009 . All appealed to overturn their sentence . The sentences of Chen , Czugaj , Nguyen , Norman and Stephens stand at life imprisonment and Lawrence 's sentence remains at 20 years after appeal . In May 2011 , Rush 's death sentence was reduced to life after he launched a final appeal in August 2010 . 
 Chan and Sukumaran launched final appeals to have their death sentences reduced in August 2010 . Chan lost his appeal to the Indonesian Supreme Court on 10 May 2011 and Sukumaran 's appeal was dismissed on 6 July 2011 . Both made pleas for clemency to the Indonesian President that were rejected in December 2014 and January 2015 . 
 In late January 2015 , lawyers for Chan and Sukumaran filed an application for a judicial review into their cases ; which was rejected by the Denpasar District Court a few days later . Meanwhile , with a spokesperson for the Indonesian Attorney General stating that requests for judicial review did not preclude the execution process proceeding , Indonesian officials continued planning for the imminent execution of Chan and Sukumaran : 
 On 9 February 2015 , the lawyers for Chan and Sukumaran launched a rare challenge against the Indonesian president 's refusal to grant them pardons ; which was dismissed by the Indonesian government a day later . 
 On 6 April 2015 , an Indonesian court rejected an appeal by Chan and Sukumaran , ruling that they could not challenge the decision by the Indonesian president to grant them clemency in court . One of their lawyers announced that a further appeal would be lodged with the Indonesian Constitutional Court to examine Widodo 's refusal to give clemency . However , the Indonesian Attorney @-@ General accused the lawyers of simply trying to buy time , and announced that there would be no more delays to the executions . 
 = = = Execution of duo = = = 
 Chan and Sukumaran were executed by firing squad early on 29 April 2015 in the Nusa <unk> prison island , along with six other prisoners convicted for drug offences . Six other men who were convicted and executed for similar offenses were : <unk> ( or Zainal ) Abidin ( an Indonesian ) , Rodrigo <unk> ( a Brazilian ) , and four Nigerians : Sylvester <unk> <unk> , Raheem Agbaje Salami , <unk> ( or <unk> ) <unk> and Martin Anderson . Filipina Mary Jane Veloso was given a last @-@ minute stay of execution following a pending investigation initiated in her home country about a drug trafficking syndicate in which she is expected to testify . 
 The executions were widely supported among the Indonesian public , while foreign diplomats protested against them . 
 = = = Reaction in Australia = = = 
 A candlelight vigil hosted by the Mercy Campaign , entitled Music for Mercy , was held in Sydney 's Martin Place on the evening of 29 January 2015 in support of Chan and Sukumaran . The concert featured performances by Archibald Prize artist Ben <unk> , musicians Megan Washington , Josh Pyke , Kate Miller @-@ Heidke , Paul Mac , Glenn Richards from Augie March , and The Presets ' and Julian Hamilton ; with media personalities Andrew Denton and his partner Jennifer Byrne and musician Missy Higgins who recorded video messages of support for Chan and <unk> . Amnesty International organised similar vigils in Federation Square , Melbourne , Adelaide , Canberra , and Byron Bay . 
 Not everyone was sympathetic , however . 
 A SMS opinion poll of 2 @,@ 123 people was conducted by Roy Morgan Research over the 26 January 2015 Australia Day weekend and the results were broadcast on ABC 's Triple J radio network . The poll revealed that 52 per cent of people agreed that Australians convicted of drug trafficking in another country and sentenced to death should be executed . Muhammad Prasetyo , Indonesia 's attorney general , was reported as saying that there was strong support in Australia for the death penalty . 
 = = = Related arrests = = = 
 On 27 April 2005 , Indonesian police shot and killed Man Singh Ghale , a known major Indonesian drug trafficker believed to be directly connected to the Bali Nine . Ghale , of Nepali origin , was killed when police stormed his Jakarta home . 
 Australian Federal Police commissioner Mick Keelty said Ghale was " directly linked " to the Bali Nine . Six men aged between 19 and 25 were arrested and released on bail in Brisbane on drug trafficking charges believed to be associated with the Bali Nine . On 12 February 2006 , police arrested Do <unk> Lee , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old of South Korean origin , at Brisbane Airport after arriving on a flight from South Korea . Lee was charged with drug trafficking and importation offences and appeared in the Brisbane Magistrates Court on 13 February 2006 , the same day the first of the nine accused in Indonesia learned of their fate . Lee was bailed to reappear in court with the five others on 3 April 2006 . Keelty told a Senate estimates committee hearing that more arrests were expected . 
 = = Prior criminal records and charges = = 
 Details of previous criminal convictions of some of the accused were not published during the trial to avoid harming legal defences in Indonesia . Once the Denpasar District court reached guilty verdicts and issued sentences it was reported in the Australian media that members of the group had been convicted of offences in Australia before their arrests in Indonesia . In December 2004 Rush pleaded guilty at the Inala Magistrates ' Court in Queensland to 16 offences including drug possession , fraud , theft and drunk @-@ driving . A warrant for his arrest in Australia remains in place over the theft of $ <unk> from the Commonwealth Bank via a forged cheque . Czugaj , also of Brisbane , has 14 convictions for offences including theft , wilful damage , traffic offences and fare evasion . 
 Lawrence and Norman were arrested on 26 March 2005 , while travelling along the Pacific Highway in a stolen Ford Laser after police used road spikes to intercept the stolen vehicle . Both were due to appear in the Gosford Magistrates Court to face car <unk> and traffic @-@ related charges . On 26 April 2005 , they failed to appear due to their imprisonment in Indonesia a week earlier on 17 April 2005 . Lawrence admitted , after her arrest in Indonesia on 17 April 2005 , of having visited Bali twice before : in October and November 2004 . She and Chan had made an earlier successful run with heroin from Bali to Australia during their October visit . The second delivery , scheduled for December 2004 , was aborted when the heroin suppliers failed to deliver . She provided a statement to police saying she was paid $ <unk> for the successful heroin delivery but later retracted her statement . 
 = = Reaction after execution = = 
 Amnesty International strongly condemned the executions of Chan and Sukumaran together with six other drug @-@ related convicts on 29 April 2015 . Diana Sayed , Human Rights Lawyer and Crisis Campaigner , said " The death penalty is always a human rights violation , but there are a number of factors that make today 's executions even more distressing . " The Australian ambassador to Indonesia was recalled after Chan and Sukumaran were executed . Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott stated that the executions were " cruel and unnecessary " , claiming both men had been " fully rehabilitated " during their detention in prison . Opposition leader Bill Shorten agreed , saying he was " disgusted " at the execution . However , the majority of the Australian public believed these people were criminals , and criminals for life who deserved their punishment . 
 = Ontario Highway 3 = 
 King 's Highway 3 , commonly referred to as Highway 3 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario which travels parallel to the northern shoreline of Lake Erie . It has three segments , the first of which travels from the Ambassador Bridge in Windsor to Highway 77 in Leamington . The second portion begins at Talbotville Royal outside of St. Thomas at Highway 4 , and travels to the western city limits of Port Colborne . The road is regionally maintained within Port Colborne as Niagara Regional Road 3 , but regains its provincial designation at Highway 140 . Its third and final terminus is at Edgewood Park , within the Fort Erie town limits . From there , the road continues as Niagara Regional Road 3 to the Peace Bridge , where drivers can cross to the United States . The total length of Highway 3 is 259 @.@ 2 km ( 161 @.@ 1 mi ) , consisting of 50 @.@ 2 km ( 31 @.@ 2 mi ) from Windsor to Leamington , 187 @.@ 9 km ( 116 @.@ 8 mi ) from Talbotville Royal to Port Colborne and 21 @.@ 1 km ( 13 @.@ 1 mi ) from Port Colborne to Edgewood Park . 
 Until the late 1990s , Highway 3 formed a single continuous 413 @.@ 2 km ( 256 @.@ 8 mi ) route from the Ambassador Bridge to near the Peace Bridge , but since then has had significant portion transferred to regional and county governments . A large segment of the route follows the historic Talbot Trail , a settlement road following the northern shore of Lake Erie constructed by Colonel Talbot in the early 1800s as part of a grand settlement plan along the lake front . East of Canborough , the road generally follows older settlement trails : Forks Road , connecting Dunnville with Wainfleet , portions of Sherk 's Road , through Port Colborne to Gasline , and the Garrison Road , a military road built west from Fort Erie . The highway was initially designated in 1920 , but not numbered until five years later . It originally connected to Niagara Falls , but was rerouted to Fort Erie following completion of the Peace Bridge in the late 1920s . Although a few portions of Highway 3 were upgraded in the years since , the highway generally follows the same route as it did in 1930 . However , in 1997 , segments through Port Colborne and Fort Erie were decommissioned as a provincial highway , followed by a segment of the route from Leamington to Talbotville Royal in 1998 . All three now exist as county / regional roads . The portion of Highway 3 along Huron Church Road in Windsor was reconstructed as part of the Windsor – Essex Parkway project between 2011 and 2015 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 3 follows the route of the historic Talbot Trail for most of its length . Abutting the northern shore of Lake Erie between Windsor and Fort Erie , the route deviates in places to bypass towns and to avoid the less than direct trail laid nearly two centuries ago . Prior to 1998 , the highway spanned this entire distance , but has since then been divided into three discontinuous sections . The western section travels 50 @.@ 2 km ( 31 @.@ 2 mi ) from Windsor to Leamington . From there , a 145 @.@ 0 km ( 90 @.@ 1 mi ) gap separates the western and central sections . Highway 3 resumes near St. Thomas at the southern end of Highway 4 and travels 187 @.@ 9 km ( 116 @.@ 8 mi ) east to Port Colborne . The central and eastern sections are divided by a 3 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) Connecting Link through Port Colborne . The eastern section begins at Highway 140 and travels 21 @.@ 1 km ( 13 @.@ 1 mi ) to Fort Erie . It ends at Rosehill Road , a short distance west of the Peace Bridge crossing into New York . 
 = = = Western segment = = = 
 The western segment of Highway 3 begins at the Ambassador Bridge , which connects Canada with the U.S. state of Michigan over the Detroit River . The five lane highway travels southeast through Windsor along Huron Church Road , surrounded by residential subdivisions , then curves east to meet the western end of Highway 401 . The section through Windsor to Cabana Road is maintained under a Connecting Link agreement . Between the E. C. Row Expressway and Highway 401 , construction is ongoing as of 2015 on the Windsor – Essex Parkway , which will displace Highway 3 from its former alignment . At Essex County Road 11 , Highway 3 enters rural southwestern Ontario , and is dominated by farmland for much of its length through Essex County . The now four @-@ laned route becomes divided as it follows the Essex Bypass around the southern edge of Essex , with commercial services lining the highway , primarily on the north side . Returning to farmland and narrowing to a two lane undivided road , the highway continues southeast , passing nearby , but avoiding , several small communities that the original highway travelled through . After passing Essex County Road 18 , the route curves eastward , passing north of Ruthven before entering Leamington along its northern fringe . The western section ends at the southern terminus of Highway 77 , where the provincially built but county maintained Leamington Bypass continues east to meet the Talbot Road just east of the town . 
 = = = Central segment = = = 
 The central segment is the longest of the three , at 187 @.@ 9 km ( 116 @.@ 8 mi ) . It begins at the southern terminus of Highway 4 at Talbotville Royal in Elgin County , just northwest of St. Thomas and south of London . The route travels east into St. Thomas , becoming a two @-@ laned expressway aptly named the St. Thomas Expressway . This expressway begins at Wellington Road ( Elgin County Road 25 / 26 ) and travels through St. Thomas to Centennial Road , featuring a single interchange . However , the right @-@ of @-@ way is wide enough to accommodate any future upgrade to a divided expressway . At the eastern end , Highway 3 turns south onto Centennial Road and then east onto Talbot Line , following the historic Talbot Trail to east of Aylmer . This mostly straight and rural portion passes through several small villages before the Talbot Trail splits from it to follow Elgin / Norfolk County Road 38 through <unk> . Highway 3 meanwhile curves northeast and passes through Tillsonburg , encountering Highway 19 . It then curves east and travels parallel to the St. Thomas and Eastern Railway to Courtland , <unk> with the Talbot Trail and snaking towards Delhi , now within Norfolk County . 
 At Delhi , Highway 3 turns south for 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) before returning to its eastward orientation . It continues through farmland to the town of Simcoe , where it meets Highway 24 . From Simcoe to Canborough , the highway is nearly straight as an arrow , with an occasional jog to the northeast . It enters Haldimand County and intersects Highway 6 in Jarvis . At Cayuga it crosses the Grand River ; until 2014 , a five @-@ span steel girder bridge crossed the river , but it has since been replaced by a concrete structure . At Canborough , the historic Talbot Trail ends and Highway 3 veers south to Dunnville , briefly travelling along the northern bank of the Grand River and gradually curving back eastward . East of Dunnville , the route follows Forks Road into Wainfleet and the Niagara Region . At Chambers Corners it turns south and passes through Wainfleet village , crossing the old Feeder Canal which once supplied the Welland Canal with water from the Grand River . Just north of Lake Erie , Highway 3 turns east and travels straight towards Port Colborne , passing just south of the Wainfleet Bog . At Townline Road , the boundary between Wainfleet and Port Colborne , the central section ends and the roadway continues as Niagara Regional Road 3 through the city , meeting the southern end of Highway 58 . 
 Portions of the central segment of Highway 3 through several towns are maintained under Connecting Link agreements , including within Aylmer , Delhi , Simcoe , Cayuga and Dunnville . The combined length of these segments is 15 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) . 
 = = = Eastern segment = = = 
 The final and shortest section of Highway 3 begins at Highway 140 on the eastern fringe of Port Colborne and lies entirely within Niagara Region . The 21 @.@ 1 km ( 13 @.@ 1 mi ) segment travels several kilometres inland to Lake Erie , as well as parallel to it . From there it mostly travels along a straight line eastward through generally rural areas . The notable exception is the village of Gasline , where the Niagara Speedway stands on the northern side of the highway . At the Fort Erie boundary , the route widens to four lanes and jogs northeast to align with the old Garrison Road . As the highway progresses eastward into the town , the surroundings gradually become more urbanized before it ends at Rosehill Road . The roadway continues east through Fort Erie to the foot of the Peace Bridge as Niagara Regional Road 3 , connecting with the Queen Elizabeth Way to provide access to the United States . 
 = = = Connections with the United States = = = 
 Highway 3 was the only Ontario provincial highway to start and end at bridges ( the Ambassador Bridge leading into Detroit , Michigan and the Peace Bridge leading into Buffalo , New York ) with both termini at international crossings . A quick link from Chicago , Toledo , and Detroit to Buffalo and Western New York , Highway 3 was shorter and more direct than any American route ( including Interstate 90 ) , because the Lake Erie shoreline dips south along Ohio , Pennsylvania , and New York . After the 1954 New York State Thruway opened from Buffalo to New York City , Michigan officials had encouraged Ontario to replace Highway 3 with a turnpike from Detroit to Buffalo . 
 Highway 3 has been largely replaced as a Detroit – Buffalo truck route by Highway 401 , Highway 403 and the Queen Elizabeth Way . The last section of Highway 403 opened in August 1997 , leaving a local section of Highway 3 on Windsor surface streets as a bottleneck to be bypassed by the Windsor – Essex Parkway and Gordie Howe International Bridge to Detroit in 2020 . 
 When the Michigan Department of Transportation discontinued US 25 in 1973 , much of it through Detroit was redesignated as M @-@ 3 , whose southern terminus came at Clark Street in Detroit , at the junction of I @-@ 75 by the Ambassador Bridge . This provided a connection between Michigan 's M @-@ 3 and Ontario 's Highway 3 until 2001 , when jurisdictional changes within downtown Detroit created a discontinuous segment of M @-@ 3 , and this international Route 3 connection was lost when the portion of M @-@ 3 along Fort Street was redesignated M @-@ 85 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Talbot Trail = = = 
 The history of Highway 3 dates back over 200 years to the pioneering settlement era of Upper Canada following the American Revolution and the resulting influx of United Empire Loyalists . Thomas Talbot , an influential scion who joined the British army at the age of 11 , would challenge the government , the terrain , and the forces of nature to see to it that his road be built . Due to his family legacy , Talbot worked through the ranks quickly and found himself a personal aide to John Graves Simcoe , the first Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada . He returned to England after Simcoe fell ill , but vowed to return to the hinterland he had come to love . 
 After completing his military commission , Talbot returned to Upper Canada in 1801 at the age of 30 . Although Simcoe had promised Talbot 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land in Yarmouth Township on the shoreline of Lake Erie , he had not made it official . Talbot returned to England in 1802 and spoke to the legislature , promoting his concept of a vibrant farming settlement . The government granted Talbot his land and promised an additional 200 acres ( 81 ha ) for each family that settled a 50 acres ( 20 ha ) lot in the original grant . Talbot returned to Upper Canada in 1803 with four families and a letter from Lord Hobart authorizing his grant , and established what is now the town of Port Stanley . Wishing to expand his grant and create his ideal colony , Talbot sought out new settlers ; a road was required . 
 Talbot received a grant of $ 250 in September 1804 for the construction of a road between Brantford and Delhi . John Bostwick would survey the route that year ; however , funding shortages would halt construction in 1806 . Talbot approached the new Lieutenant Governor – Francis Gore – in 1808 with the intent of persuading him to fund the building of the road . He insisted that a road would increase the value of the land in the surrounding townships , as well as providing a greater incentive for newcomers to settle in what was otherwise a desolate wilderness . Gore instructed deputy surveyor Mahlon Burwell to " Build a road one chain wide , laid out on the principle of Yonge Street with lots on each side . " Burwell began this work in 1809 westward from Delhi . In 1811 , he was tasked with surveying the West Talbot Road from Talbotville Royale to Amherstburg . By then , a road was already opened between Port Talbot and Talbotville Royale . 
 Construction of the new road proved far more difficult than first imagined . Workers followed an old Native American trail , wholly consumed by nature , between Delhi and Port Talbot . To get across the numerous swamps , felled trees were laid across the path to create a corduroy road , much to the chagrin of settlers . The outbreak of the War of 1812 would temporarily halt further construction . When it resumed in 1816 , Talbot himself began directing the surveyor , ordering that the road remain on the highest ground possible . This led to an irregular and winding route between Aylmer and Delhi . By 1830 , the corduroy logs had been removed and the road improved and extended from Amherstburg to Canborough . 
 = = = Niagara trails = = = 
 East of Canborough , Highway 3 follows several early settlement trails : Forks Road between Dunnville and Chambers Corners , Sherk 's Road through Port Colborne to Gasline , and the military Garrison Road through Fort Erie . These roads predate the land survey grid of concession roads and sidelines , which would be used by the provincial government to make Highway 3 a continuous route through the Niagara Peninsula where none previously existed . 
 Forks Road , a river road following Forks Creek , served to connect the Grand River at Dunnville with the Welland River west of Welland . Like many early roads in Upper Canada , it was built along a river bank . It can therefore be assumed that this trail was built prior to the completion of the Feeder Canal in 1832 . Sherk 's Road was built at the request of Elias Sherk ( d . 1893 ) in 1858 to connect his house ( the historic Danner House ) with his and Michael Gondor 's properties . The irregular road connected the Welland Canal at Humberstone ( now Port Colborne ) to the community of Ridgeway , where it met the west end of the Garrison Road . That road was built due to the threat of American attack to provide quick access from Fort Erie , and , like other military roads in Upper Canada ( e.g. Dundas Street or Yonge Street ) , it travelled in a straight line , in this case parallel to the Lake Erie shoreline . 
 = = = Provincial Highway Network = = = 
 Until 1918 , the majority of the primary roads through southern Ontario formed part of the County Road System . The Department of Public Works and Highways paid up to 60 % of the construction and maintenance costs for these roads , while the counties were responsible for the remaining 40 % . In 1919 , the federal government passed the Canada Highways Act , which provided $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to provinces under the condition that they establish an official highway network ; up to 40 % of construction costs would be subsidized . The first network plan was approved on February 26 , 1920 , and included the Talbot Road . The majority of what would soon become Highway 3 was designated several months later in August . However , it would not receive a route number until the summer of 1925 . 
 Four significant changes to Highway 3 have taken place since the designation of the route in 1920 . The first was an adjustment to the eastern terminus . The second was the Essex Bypass , built through the 1970s between Windsor and Leamington . The third was the St. Thomas Expressway , a super two highway built in the late 1970s . The final change was the provincial highway transfers conducted in 1997 and 1998 that resulted in three segments of Highway 3 being decommissioned : between Leamington and Talbotville Royale , through Port Colborne and within Fort Erie . 
 Highway 3 originally ended at the Honeymoon Bridge in Niagara Falls ; it continued east of Chambers Corners along Forks Road ( Regional Road 23 ) rather than south through Wainfleet as it does today . It then travelled north through Welland and east along <unk> Lane . Highway 58 and Highway 20 would later follow portions of this route . As part of the " spirit of cooperation " that inundated Canada and the US following World War I , as well as to celebrate a century of peace , a new bridge was planned between Fort Erie and Buffalo alongside the international railway crossing . Construction began in 1925 ; the completed bridge opened to traffic on June 1 , 1927 . Two months later , on August 7 , the bridge was formally dedicated as the Peace Bridge by US Vice President Charles Dawes , and Edward , Prince of Wales . 
 Traffic patterns quickly shifted to take advantage of the new crossing and the bypass of Niagara Falls that it provided . In foresight of this , the Department of Public Highways took control of a Welland County road between Chambers Corners and Fort Erie on May 11 , 1927 . This roadway , which followed a significant portion of Sherk 's Road and the Garrison Road , in addition to a concession road built west from Port Colborne and north through Wainfleet village , was designated as Highway 3A . The following year it was surfaced with concrete and a new bridge built over the Welland Canal in Port Colborne . The new route became so popular that in 1929 the Highway 3 and Highway 3A designations were swapped . 
 In the early 1970s , as part of a review to determine the future route of Highway 406 south of Welland , proposals arose for a bypass of Highway 3 from east of Dunnville to Port Colborne near Highway 58 . 
 = = = Essex Bypass and St. Thomas Expressway = = = 
 The Essex Bypass was opened in stages in the 1970s and early 1980s . Plans were completed in 1968 as part of a province @-@ wide program to bypass small towns on busy provincial highways . The first stage , opened by 1972 , began west of Maidstone and passed south of Essex , where it then routed along Malden Road to its former alignment ( now Essex County Road 34 ) . Construction of an eastward extension to Ruthven was underway by 1982 , and completed in 1983 , with the road following Union Road to the old alignment . Construction of a final extension , from Union Road north of Ruthven to past Highway 77 on the northern fringe of Leamington , was underway in late 1998 ; it opened in early December 1999 . Although the Leamington Bypass was constructed by the Ministry of Transportation ( MTO ) , the 1 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) segment east of Highway 77 to County Road 34 ( Talbot Road ) was never a part of Highway 3 or the provincial highway network . It is signed as Essex County Road 33 , as Leamington is planning to link the discontinuous segments of County Road 33 with the East Side Arterial Road . 
 The St. Thomas expressway was built along the northern edge of that city beginning in 1974 . It features six overpasses and a single interchange , at First Avenue . A ribbon cutting ceremony was held on September 7 , 1981 to officially open the new route , which bypassed the former Highway 3 alignment along Talbot Street and the short concurrency with Highway 4 ( Sunset Drive ) . The bypass cost C $ 16 @.@ 5 million to construct , and features a two @-@ lane roadway with allotted space on the north side for a second two @-@ lane roadway . Plans originally called for the expressway to extend further east to New Sarum and later even as far as Aylmer , but these have never materialized . 
 = = = Downloads and changes since = = = 
 Aside from the Essex Bypass and St. Thomas Expressway , Highway 3 remained generally unchanged between the 1930s and late 1990s . However , budget constraints brought on by a recession in the 1990s resulted in the Mike Harris provincial government forming the Who Does What ? committee to determine cost @-@ cutting measures in order to balance the budget after a deficit incurred by former premier Bob Rae . It was determined that many Ontario highways no longer served long @-@ distance traffic movement and should therefore be maintained by local or regional levels of government . The MTO consequently transferred many highways to lower levels of government in 1997 and 1998 , removing a significant percentage of the provincial highway network . 
 Despite once serving as one of the principal highways through southwestern Ontario , Highway 3 had been largely supplanted by Highway 401 , the QEW and later Highway 403 as a through @-@ route . As a result , portions of the route through the Regional Municipality of Niagara were transferred to the region on April 1 , 1997 , including a 3 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) segment through Port Colborne ( most of which had existed as a Connecting Link ) and a 5 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) segment in Fort Erie . To the west , a segment of the route paralleling Highway 401 between Leamington and Talbotville Royal was decommissioned on January 1 , 1998 and transferred to Essex County , Chatham – Kent and Elgin County . It has since been designated as Essex County Road 34 , Chatham – Kent Road 3 and Elgin County Road 3 . 
 In 2001 , the MTO considered renumbering the western segment of Highway 3 as Highway 103 to avoid confusion . However , this never came to pass . 
 = = Future = = 
 At the western end of Highway 3 , two major traffic concerns have been the focus of controversy since the mid @-@ 1990s and early 2000s : the Essex Bypass and the approach to the Ambassador Bridge . Numerous attempts by local and provincial politicians since then have led the MTO to begin remedying the situation by upgrading the bypass to a divided four lane road and constructing the Windsor – Essex Parkway to a new international crossing . 
 The Essex Bypass , completed around the village of Essex in 1972 , was designed to accommodate future widening to a divided four lane road when traffic volumes warranted . By the mid @-@ 1990s , a regular pattern of fatalities were occurring , prompting local politicians and Essex Member of Provincial Parliament ( MPP ) Bruce Crozier to lobby the MTO widen the route . It was announced in June 2006 that the entire 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) bypass would be widened to four lanes with a grassy median separating the opposing flows of traffic . The three phase project began in September 2007 with a 6 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) stretch between Maidstone and County Road 8 west of Essex . The four @-@ laned highway opened in June 2009 at a cost of C $ 20 @.@ 7 million . The C $ 22 @.@ 1 million second phase involved widening the highway between Walker Road and Maidstone to a five lane cross @-@ section , and began in mid @-@ November 2009 . It was completed in early 2012 . Despite concerns raised by Crozier in 2006 that the project would be halted after the first phase , which were dismissed at the time , no further work has actually been completed on the Essex Bypass since 2012 , and the section between Essex and Ruthven remains a two lane highway . It is still considered as a future project by the MTO , with no time line set . Three months after Crozier 's unexpected death on June 3 , 2011 , the entire Essex Bypass was renamed the Bruce Crozier Way in honour of his commitment to the widening of the highway . 
 In 2004 , a joint announcement by the federal government of the United States and Government of Canada confirmed that a new border crossing would be constructed between Detroit and Windsor . The Detroit River International Crossing ( DRIC ) was formed as a bi @-@ national committee to manage the project . The MTO took advantage of this opportunity to extend Highway 401 to the international border and began an environmental assessment on the entire project in late 2005 . The new parkway will be below @-@ grade and have six through @-@ lanes . It will follow ( but not replace ) Talbot Road and Huron Church Road from a new interchange at the current end of Highway 401 to the E. C. Row Expressway , where it will run concurrently westward for 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . From there , it will turn northwest and follow a new alignment to the border . Initial construction of a noise barrier from North Talbot Road to Howard Avenue began in March 2010 . Full construction began on August 19 , 2011 , with an expected completion date of mid @-@ 2015 for the first phase and 2015 @-@ 16 for the remainder of the parkway . In early 2015 , it was announced that the parkway would open to traffic between Highway 3 and Labelle Street ( near the E.C. Row Expressway ) in the spring . 
 Work is ongoing in Cayuga to install a new crossing over the Grand River , replacing the five @-@ span steel structure that previously served traffic since 1924 . The new concrete structure was opened to traffic on June 20 , 2014 , and the former structure was demolished after that . On November 4 and December 4 of that year , construction on the bridge was halted by the Haudenosaunee Confederacy Chiefs Council on the claim that the structure impeded on land reserved for a towpath along the Grand River by the Six Nations of the Grand River First Nation . The remaining work includes a scheduled three @-@ day closure during which the new bridge will be jacked 5 metres ( 16 ft ) north to align with the former structure , as well as decorative work . Work is scheduled for completion in the autumn of 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 3 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Background of the Winter War = 
 The background of the Winter War covers the period before the outbreak of the Winter War between Finland and the Soviet Union in 1939 – 1940 , stretching from Finland 's Declaration of Independence in 1917 to the Soviet @-@ Finnish negotiations in 1938 – 1939 . Before its independence , Finland was an autonomous grand duchy inside Imperial Russia . During the ensuing Finnish Civil War , the Red Guards , supported by the Russian Bolsheviks , were defeated . Fearful of Soviet designs , during the 1920s and 1930s , the Finns were constantly attempting to align themselves with Scandinavian neutrality , particularly with regard to Sweden . Furthermore , the Finns engaged in secret military co @-@ operation with Estonia in the 1930s . 
 While during the late 1920s and early 1930s relations with the Soviet Union became normalized to a degree , from 1938 on , the Soviets , anxious that Finland could be used as a springboard for an invasion , started negotiations to conclude a military agreement . At the same time , Soviet leader Joseph Stalin 's desire to recover the territories of Tsarist Russia lost during the chaos of the October Revolution and the Russian Civil War made Finland an obvious target . Due to the nature of Soviet demands , which included the installation of Soviet military facilities on Finnish soil , these negotiations went nowhere . 
 In August 1939 , the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , in which Eastern European countries were divided into spheres of interest ; Finland belonged to the Soviet sphere of interest . In October 1939 , Stalin gained control of the Baltic states and turned his sights on Finland , confident that control could be gained without great effort . The Soviet Union demanded territories on the Karelian Isthmus , the islands of the Gulf of Finland and a military base near the Finnish capital Helsinki , similar to the demands presented in the previous years . The Finns again refused , and the Red Army attacked on 30 November 1939 . Simultaneously , Stalin set up a puppet government for the Finnish Democratic Republic , headed by the Finnish communist Otto Wille Kuusinen . 
 = = Finnish politics before the war = = 
 = = = First steps of the Republic = = = 
 Finland had been the eastern part of the Swedish kingdom for centuries until 1809 , during the Napoleonic Wars , when Imperial Russia conquered and converted it into an autonomous buffer state within the Russian Empire to protect Saint Petersburg , the imperial capital . Finland enjoyed wide autonomy and its own Senate until the turn of the century , when Russia began attempts to assimilate Finland as part of a general policy to strengthen central government and unify the Empire by Russification . These attempts ruined relations and increased the support of Finnish movements vying for self @-@ government . 
 The outbreak of the First World War gave Finland a window of opportunity to achieve this . The Finns sought aid from both the German Empire and the Bolsheviks to that end , and on 6 December 1917 , the Senate of Finland declared the country 's independence . The new Bolshevik Russian government was weak , and soon the Russian Civil War would break out . Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin could spare no troops or attention for Finland , and consequently , Soviet Russia recognized the new Finnish government just three weeks after the declaration of independence . In 1918 , the Finns fought a short civil war , where the pro @-@ Bolshevik Red Guards were armed by 7 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 Russian troops stationed in Finland . 
 After the First World War , an inter @-@ governmental organization , the League of Nations was founded . The League 's goals included preventing war through collective security and settling disputes between countries through negotiation and diplomacy . Finland joined the League in 1920 . 
 In 1920s and 1930s Finland was politically diverse . The Communist Party of Finland was declared illegal in 1931 , and the far @-@ right Patriotic People 's Movement ( IKL ) had a minor presentation of fourteen seats in the 200 @-@ seat parliament . The middle ground , occupied by Conservatives , Liberals , Agrarians and Swedish People 's Party , tended to cluster with the Social Democratic Party , whose leader , Väinö Tanner , was a strong proponent of the parliamentary system . By the late 1930s the Finnish export @-@ oriented economy was growing , the country had almost solved its " right @-@ wing problem " and Finland was preparing for the 1940 Summer Olympics . 
 = = = Finnish – German relations = = = 
 During the closing stages of World War I , German @-@ trained Finnish Jäger troops played a key role in the Finnish Civil War , while the German Baltic Sea Division also intervened late in the civil war . Jäger troops were volunteers from German @-@ influenced circles , such as university students . This participation in the Finnish struggle for independence created close ties with Germany , but after the German defeat in the World War , Scandinavian relations became more important and the main goal of the Finnish foreign policy . 
 Finnish @-@ German relations cooled after the National Socialists rose to power in 1933 — Finns admired Imperial Germany , not the radical and anti @-@ democratic Nazi regime . Finnish conservatives did not accept the state violence and anti @-@ church policies of the Nazis . Still , there was sympathy for German aims to revise the Treaty of Versailles , although the official Finnish policy was reserved , especially after the German occupation of Czechoslovakia . Finland even recalled its ambassador for a short period . Finnish Nazis and ultranationalist parties such as the IKL achieved only minor support in several elections , especially in the aftermath of the failed <unk> rebellion in 1932 . 
 = = = Finnish – Swedish co @-@ operation = = = 
 After the 1917 Finnish independence and the Civil War , the other Scandinavian countries would have been the best candidates for a political alliance . <unk> @-@ Finnish cooperation represented a rich vein of shared history in the culture of both nations , and the Swedish @-@ speaking Finns had a common language with Swedes . During the Civil War , however , Sweden briefly occupied the Åland Islands and later supported the local movement that wanted to secede from Finland and join the islands to Sweden . The dispute was resolved by the League of Nations in 1921 and the Åland remained Finnish , but were granted autonomy . Other obstacles to closer relations were the ongoing language strife on the status of the Swedish language in Finland . Sweden had also opposed the upper @-@ class resistance movement against Russification . As a result , young Finnish men received their military training in Germany , generating the Jäger Movement . Nevertheless , Finnish – Swedish relations improved considerably before the Winter War . 
 Finland sought security guarantees from the League of Nations , but did not have high expectations . Sweden was one of the founding members of the League , and consequently framed its military policies based on the League 's principles of disarmament and sanctions . In the mid @-@ 1920s the Finns established a special planning committee , called the Committee of Erich after its chairman Rafael Erich , which consisted of top politicians and officers , with the aim of exploring a possible military collaboration of Finland with other nations . The prime goal was co @-@ operation with the Scandinavian countries , amongst which Sweden was the most important prospective partner . 
 The Finnish and Swedish militaries engaged in wide @-@ ranging co @-@ operation , but it was more focused on the exchange of information and defence planning for the Åland islands than on military exercises or materiel . The Finnish objective was to commit the Swedes by establishing a military @-@ political joint venture in the Åland : if the Swedes would undertake to assist Finland in fortifying the islands , then an important and useful precedent might be set . The Government of Sweden was aware of the military co @-@ operation , but carefully avoided committing itself to Finnish foreign policy . 
 = = = Secret military co @-@ operation with Estonia = = = 
 Finnish – Estonian relations were closest diplomatically after the Estonian Freedom War in the 1920s , but cooled afterwards . Military relations however remained close . From the Finnish point of view , the close relations with Estonia did not exclude the Scandinavian neutrality policy . Nevertheless , the military relations were top secret , and the countries held joint military exercises . The central aim was to prevent the Soviet Baltic Fleet from freely using its strength in the Gulf of Finland against either country . Estonia also sought public security guarantees and signed the Baltic Entente in 1934 with Latvia and Lithuania . 
 = = = Relations with the United Kingdom and France = = = 
 After the collapse of Imperial Germany in November 1918 , the Finns sought new political partners . The United Kingdom had been a significant trading partner since the 18th century , and the Finns worked to improve the relations for the next two decades . In the 1930s Finland purchased Thornycroft torpedo boats from the United Kingdom , and also refrained from buying bomber aircraft from Germany because of British protests , purchasing instead modern Bristol Blenheims , which later served successfully during the Winter War . 
 Relations with France were important after World War I and in the 1920s , as France played a leading role in the new European security arrangements . In the 1930s France started to fear the rise of Nazi Germany and initiated a rapprochement with the Soviet Union , which strained Franco @-@ Finnish relations . However , during the Winter War France was one of the most important suppliers of military materiel . 
 = = = Finnish defence plans = = = 
 The Finnish Defence Forces ' military operation plan against the Soviet Union was named <unk> <unk> ( " Russian Concentration " ; VK ) in the 1920s . In the latest 1934 plan , the Finns saw two possible scenarios . In the <unk> scenario , the Soviets would mobilize all along their western border , and would deploy only limited forces against Finland . In this case the Finns would make counterattacks across the border . The <unk> scenario envisaged a much more unfavourable situation for the Finns . The main defense line would be on the Karelian Isthmus , the Finnish forces would repel Soviet attacks in favourable positions , and destroy the enemy by counterattacks . In the Winter War , the <unk> scenario was flexible and its basis proved correct , but the Finnish General staff badly underestimated the numerical superiority of the Red Army . 
 Finland had a limited defence budget after its independence and especially in the 1930s . Consequently , the Finnish Defence Forces were lacking military materiel in almost all branches . Much of the military 's materiel was outdated , and even proved unsuitable for the field during the Winter War . During the Winter War the material situation improved , but it still lagged behind the more modern and well @-@ equipped Red Army . 
 = = Soviet – Finnish relations = = 
 = = = Diplomatic relations = = = 
 The relationship between the Soviet Union and Finland had been tense — a legacy of the two periods of forced Russification at the turn of the century and the failed Soviet @-@ backed socialist rebellion in Finland , as well as incursions by groups of Finnish nationalists — the <unk> expedition in 1918 and the <unk> expedition of 1919 — into Russian East Karelia . 
 On 14 October 1920 , Finland and Soviet Russia signed the Treaty of Tartu , confirming the new Finnish @-@ Soviet border as the old border between the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland and Imperial Russia proper . In addition , Finland received Petsamo , with its ice @-@ free harbour on the Arctic Ocean . The treaty did not prevent the Finnish government from allowing volunteers to cross the border to support the East @-@ Karelian Uprising in 1921 however , nor expatriate Finnish communists from causing disturbances in Finland . In 1923 both countries signed the Border Peace Agreement , which normalized the border . 
 In 1928 , the Soviet Union began collectivization in Ingria . During the collectivization and ethnic cleansing , the Soviets captured , killed and deported Ingrian peasants , provoking widespread criticism by the Finnish media in 1930 . Two years later , the nationalist <unk> Movement unsuccessfully attempted to overthrow the Finnish government in the <unk> rebellion . 
 Nevertheless , during the 1930s , the diplomatic climate between Finland and the Soviet Union gradually improved . From the 1920s , the Soviet Union had offered different non @-@ aggression pacts with Finland but they were all rejected . Now the offer was renewed as part of a series of agreements with the countries on the Soviet Union 's western border . In 1932 , the Soviet Union signed a non @-@ aggression pact with Finland , re @-@ affirmed in 1934 for ten years . 
 Relations between the two countries remained largely de minimis however . While foreign trade in Finland was booming , less than one percent of it was with the Soviet Union . In 1934 , the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations , and later accepted other " progressive forces " beside Communist parties . This change in Soviet attitudes , as well as internal politics in Finland , enabled a short thaw in relations in 1937 . 
 = = = Stalin and the protection of Leningrad = = = 
 After the Russian civil war , Joseph Stalin was disappointed at the Soviet Union 's inability to foment a successful revolution in Finland , and furthermore , the Bolsheviks struggle with national sentiments inside the Soviet Union . In 1923 , Stalin proclaimed that the main danger in national relations was Great @-@ Russian chauvinism . He started the policy of <unk> , <unk> , to promote national communist cadres for every nationality . However , from 1937 Stalin encouraged Russian chauvinism , implying the Russians were politically and culturally superior . The Soviet diplomacy turned towards the recovery of the territories of the Tsarist state . The Soviet Union used the Comintern to announce a doctrine where bourgeoisie equaled Fascism , and that Communism was the natural agency of the proletariat . In practice , this meant that anything other than Communism would be considered anti @-@ Soviet and fascist . The Soviet foreign policy was a mixture of the ideology of world revolution and the traditional concerns of Russian national security . 
 During the Stalin era , the Soviet agriculture production collapsed causing famines in 1932 – 1933 . Official output numbers of industrial production were used as propaganda to portray the Soviet Union as an economic miracle . Soviet propaganda also used cross @-@ border comparisons with Finland , to represent the country as a " vicious and reactionary Fascist clique " . The Finnish Marshal C.G.E. Mannerheim and the leader of the Finnish Social Democrat Party Väinö Tanner were particular hate figures . Stalin gained near @-@ absolute power in 1935 – 1936 , leaving only army as self @-@ governing , but its officers also became the target of purges during the Great terror in 1937 – 1938 . 
 In the late 1930s , Stalin 's Soviet Union was no longer satisfied with the status quo in its relations with Finland . This came as a result of a change in Soviet foreign policy , which now pursued the aim of recovering the provinces of Tsarist Russia lost during the chaos of the October Revolution and the Russian Civil War . The Soviets considered the old Empire to have had an optimal balance of security and territory , and their thoughts were shaped by a historical precedent : as the Treaty of Nystad of 1721 was intended to protect Tsarist Saint Petersburg from the Swedes , the re @-@ acquisition of Finland would protect the now Bolshevik Leningrad from the rising power of Nazi Germany . While in 1938 Sweden was no longer a major threat against Russia , the Soviets had not forgotten the role that the Finnish @-@ controlled Åland islands had played as a base of operations for the German Expeditionary Force in the Finnish Civil War . 
 = = Finnish – Soviet negotiations = = 
 = = = Negotiations from 1938 to early 1939 = = = 
 In April 1938 , a junior diplomatic official named Boris Yartsev contacted the Finnish foreign minister Rudolf Holsti and prime minister <unk> <unk> , stating that the Soviets did not trust Germany and war was considered possible between the two countries . In such a war Germany might use Finland as a base for operations against the Soviet Union . The Red Army would not wait passively behind the border , but would rather " advance to meet the enemy " . If Finland were to fight against Germany , then the Soviet Union would offer all possible economic and military assistance . The Soviets would also accept the fortification of Åland islands , but demanded " positive guarantees " on Finland 's position . 
 The Finns assured Yartsev that Finland was committed to a policy of neutrality , and the country would resist any armed incursion . Yartsev was not satisfied with the reply , given Finland 's military weakness . He suggested that Finland could cede , or lease , some islands in the Gulf of Finland along the seaward approaches to Leningrad , a suggestion the Finns rejected . Earlier in the mid @-@ 1930s , the Soviet ambassador in Helsinki , Eric <unk> , and the Leningrad Bolshevik party leader Andrei Zhdanov , had presented a similar proposal . 
 Negotiations continued during autumn 1938 . The Soviets reduced their demands : a Red Army operation was not an option anymore and the focus was shifted on securing the Gulf of Finland . The Soviets wanted to be informed of key elements of the Finnish – Estonian Gulf blockade , the secret military plan against the Baltic Fleet . Furthermore , Yartsev suggested that the Finns fortify the Suursaari island , but that the Soviets would take care of its defence . During the negotiations , Rudolf Holsti resigned as foreign minister , although not for reasons associated with the negotiations , and his place was taken by Eljas Erkko . Holsti was rather anti @-@ German , so the resignation set off rumours , quickly quelled by the Finnish government , that he had been forced to resign by a Finnish government sympathetic to the Germans . The Finns attempted to appear even @-@ handed , and the interior ministry issued an order banning the extreme @-@ right IKL . The ban was reversed by the Finnish courts as being unconstitutional . Many years later , the minister in charge at that time , Urho Kekkonen , admitted that this was a simple gesture , to suggest to Moscow that Finland did not harbour a German fifth column . 
 By the winter of 1939 , the Soviets further reduced their demands and sent Boris Stein to negotiate . Stein and Erkko met five times . Erkko rejected the Soviet proposals , saying that the Soviet demands would mean the end of the Finnish neutrality policy and displease the Germans . When the chairman of the Finnish Defense Council C.G.E. Mannerheim was informed of the negotiations , he opined that Finland should give up the Suursaari islands because their defence would anyway be impossible during a war , but his arguments did not persuade the majority of the Finnish government . Stein departed Helsinki empty @-@ handed on 6 April . 
 The Finns had many reasons to turn down the Soviet proposals . Finland had started negotiations for a military co @-@ operation with Sweden , and the Finns had great hopes for the joint Finnish – Swedish defense for the <unk> islands and did not want to jeopardize these negotiations . In addition , the violent collectivization , purges , show trials and executions in Stalin 's Soviet Union had given the country a bad reputation . Furthermore , most of the Finnish Communist leadership in the Soviet Union was executed during the Great Purge . The Soviet Union did not therefore seem to be a reliable contracting party . The Soviet envoys sent to negotiate with Finns were officially of relatively low rank , but as Väinö Tanner put it later , the Finns assumed rightly that they represented of some higher organ of State , probably the Soviet secret police NKVD . 
 = = = Soviet – German pact = = = 
 On 23 August 1939 , the Soviet Union and Germany signed the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . Nominally , the pact was a non @-@ aggression treaty , but it included a secret protocol in which the independent countries of Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland and Romania were divided into spheres of interest , with Finland falling to the Soviet sphere of interest . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the Pact , the Scandinavian countries and Finland were relieved . The Germans and Soviets were now allies , and there was no German threat against the Soviet Union . But shortly afterwards , Germany invaded Poland and Great Britain and France declared war against Germany . Next , the Soviets invaded eastern Poland , and later Moscow requested that the Baltic states allow the establishment of Soviet military bases and the stationing of troops on their soil . The government of Estonia accepted the ultimatum , signing the corresponding agreement in September , while Latvia and Lithuania followed suit in October . 
 = = = Soviet demands in late 1939 = = = 
 On 5 October the Soviet Union invited Finland to negotiations in Moscow . The Finnish government did not hasten to comply , like the Estonian government had earlier . Unlike the Baltic countries , the Finns started a gradual mobilization under the guise of " additional refresher training " . The Finnish government did not send the foreign minister , but its ambassador in Stockholm , J.K. Paasikivi . This was done on purpose , to limit his powers as a negotiator . In Moscow , Paasikivi met both Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov and Stalin . 
 The Soviets demanded that the frontier between the USSR and Finland on the Karelian Isthmus be moved westward to a point only 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) east of Viipuri , Finland 's second @-@ largest city , to the line between Koivisto and <unk> . In addition , the Finns would have to destroy all existing fortifications on the Karelian Isthmus . Finland should also cede to the Soviet Union the islands of Suursaari , <unk> , and Koivisto in the Gulf of Finland . In the north , the Soviets demanded the Kalastajansaarento peninsula . Furthermore , the Finns should lease the Hanko Peninsula to the Soviets for thirty years , and permit the Soviets to establish a military base there . In exchange the Soviet Union would cede Repola and Porajärvi from Eastern Karelia , an area twice as large as the territories demanded from the Finns . 
 The Soviet offer divided the Finnish government . The foreign minister Eljas Erkko and the defence minister Juho <unk> rejected the offer , backed by the president <unk> Kallio . J.K. Paasikivi and C.G.E. Mannerheim , together with Väinö Tanner — who was later appointed one of the Finnish negotiators — wanted to accept the Soviet offer . 
 The Finns relied on military assistance from Sweden , and Eljas Erkko took part in the Stockholm assembly of Scandinavian leaders between 18 October and 19 October . There , Erkko met the Swedish foreign minister Rickard Sandler in private , and Sandler assured him that he would persuade the Swedish government to assist Finland during a possible war . During the actual war , however , Sandler failed in this task and resigned . Finland was totally isolated by a German and Soviet blockade , and attempted in October to obtain arms and ammunition in absolute secrecy by enlisting the German arms dealer Josef <unk> . 
 On 31 October , Molotov announced the Soviet demands in public , during a session of the Supreme Soviet . The Finns made two counteroffers — the first on 23 October and the second on 3 November . In both offers Finland would cede the Terijoki area to the Soviet Union , which was far less than the Soviets had demanded . The Finnish delegation returned home on November 13 , taking for granted that the negotiations would continue in the future . 
 = = Beginning of war = = 
 = = = Military preparations = = = 
 The Soviet Union had started an intensive rearmament near the Finnish border in 1938 – 1939 . Finnish students and volunteers had spent the late summer 1939 improving the defensive structures across the Karelian Isthmus . On the Soviet side of the border , penal labour worked hard in order to add some density to sparse road and rail networks . In summer 1939 was an important phase of Soviet planning , told by Aleksandr Vasilevsky and Kirill Meretskov in their memoirs . The Supreme Council of War ordered the Commander of Leningrad Military District <unk> to draft an invasion plan , instead of Chief of Staff Boris Shaposhnikov . The plan was adopted in July . Necessary assault troop deployments and commands were not initiated until October 1939 , though operational plans made in September called for the invasion to start in November . Stalin however was certain that the Finns would change their opinion under Soviet pressure and cede the demanded territories . 
 The invasion plans were laid down by the Soviet General Staff under Boris Shaposhnikov and Alexander Vasilevsky . The Soviet timetable was clearly and rigidly defined , with little or no margin for error . The key date was 21 December , Stalin 's sixtieth birthday . By then , the Finnish capital Helsinki would have been " freed of the Fascist oppression " . Andrei Zhdanov had already commissioned a celebratory piece from Dmitri Shostakovich , entitled " Suite on Finnish Themes " to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army would be parading through Helsinki . 
 On 26 November , the Soviets staged the shelling of Mainila , an incident in which Soviet artillery shelled area near the Russian village of Mainila and then announced that a Finnish artillery attack had killed Soviet soldiers . The Soviet Union demanded that the Finns apologize for the incident and move their forces 20 – 25 kilometres from the border . The Finns denied any responsibility for the attack and rejected the demands , calling for a joint Finnish @-@ Soviet commission to examine the incident . The Soviet Union claimed that the Finnish response was hostile , and used it as an excuse to withdraw from the non @-@ aggression pact . 
 = = = The Red Army assaults = = = 
 On 30 November , Soviet forces invaded Finland with 27 divisions , totalling 630 @,@ 000 men , bombed civilian boroughs of Helsinki and quickly reached the Mannerheim Line . The shelling of Mainila was a casus belli of the Soviet Union as it had withdrawn from non @-@ aggression pacts on 28 November . Earlier , Nazi Germany had staged a similar incident to have an excuse to withdraw from the nonaggression pact with Poland . Later , the Soviet Union would used the <unk> incident to challenge the neutrality of Estonia . 
 Later , the Finnish statesman J.K. Paasikivi commented that the Soviet attack , without a declaration of war , violated three different non @-@ aggression pacts : the Treaty of Tartu of 1920 , the Non @-@ aggression Pact between Finland and the Soviet Union signed 1932 and again in 1934 , and further the Charter of the League of Nations . The invasion was judged as illegal by the League of Nations , which expelled the Soviet Union on December 14 . Following the Soviet attack , C.G.E. Mannerheim was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Finnish Defense Forces . Furthermore , the Finnish government changed as Risto Ryti was appointed the new prime minister and Väinö Tanner as foreign minister . 
 On 1 December , the Soviet Union created a new government for Finland , henceforth to be called the Finnish Democratic Republic . It was a puppet regime headed by O. W. Kuusinen , and became known as the " Terijoki Government " , since the village of Terijoki was the first place " liberated " by the Red Army . The puppet regime was unsuccessful , and it was quietly discarded during the winter of 1940 . Contrary to Soviet expectations , from the beginning of the conflict , the working @-@ class Finns stood behind the legal government . This national unity against the Soviet invasion was later called the " spirit of the Winter War " . 
 = Watchmen ( film ) = 
 Watchmen is a 2009 American epic neo @-@ noir superhero film directed by Zack Snyder , based on the 1986 – 87 DC Comics limited series of the same name by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons . It stars an ensemble cast of Malin Åkerman , Billy Crudup , Matthew Goode , Carla Gugino , Jackie Earle Haley , Jeffrey Dean Morgan , and Patrick Wilson . A dark satirical take on the superhero genre , the film is set in an alternate history in the year 1985 at the height of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union , as a group of mostly retired American superheroes investigates the murder of one of their own before uncovering an elaborate and deadly conspiracy , while their moral limitations are challenged by the complex nature of the circumstances . 
 From October 1987 until October 2005 , a live @-@ action film adaptation became stranded in development hell : Producer Lawrence Gordon began developing the project at 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. , parent company of Watchmen publisher DC Comics , with producer Joel Silver and director Terry Gilliam , the latter eventually deeming the complex comic " un @-@ filmable " ; During the 2000s , Gordon and Lloyd Levin collaborated with Universal Studios and Paramount Pictures to produce a script by David Hayter ; Darren Aronofsky and Paul Greengrass were also attached to the project before it was canceled over budget disputes ; and , in October 2005 , the project returned to Warner Bros. , where Snyder was hired to direct — Paramount remained as international distributor . Fox sued Warner Bros for copyright violation arising from Gordon 's failure to pay a buy @-@ out in 1991 , which enabled him to develop the film at the other studios . Fox and Warner Bros settled this before the film 's release with Fox receiving a portion of the gross . Principal photography began in Vancouver , September 2007 . As with his previous film 300 , Snyder closely modelled his storyboards on the comic , but chose not to shoot all of Watchmen using green screens and opted for real sets instead . 
 Following its world premiere at Odeon Leicester Square on February 23 , 2009 , the film was released in both conventional and IMAX theaters on March 6 , 2009 , grossing $ 55 million on the opening weekend , and over $ 185 million at the worldwide box office . The film 's reception has been polarized between positive and negative reactions . 
 A DVD based on elements of the Watchmen universe was released , including an animated adaptation of the comic Tales of the Black Freighter within the story , starring Gerard Butler , and the fictional biography Under the Hood , detailing the older generation of superheroes from the film 's back @-@ story . A director 's cut with 24 minutes of additional footage was released in July 2009 . The " Ultimate Cut " edition incorporated the Tales of the Black Freighter content into the narrative as it was in the original graphic novel , lengthening the runtime to 215 minutes , and was released on November 3 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The " Minutemen , " a team of costumed crime fighters , was formed in 1939 in response to a rise in costumed gangs and criminals ; the " Watchmen " was similarly formed decades later . Their existence has dramatically affected world events : Doctor Manhattan 's powers have helped the United States win the Vietnam War , and given the West a strategic advantage over the Soviet Union , which by 1985 threatens to escalate the Cold War into a nuclear war . Growing anti @-@ vigilante sentiment leads to masked crime @-@ fighters being outlawed . While many of the heroes retire , Dr Manhattan and The Comedian operate as government @-@ sanctioned agents , and Rorschach continues to operate outside the law . 
 While investigating the murder of government agent Edward Blake , Rorschach discovers that Blake was the Comedian , and theorizes that someone may be attempting to eliminate former costumed heroes . He warns his retired comrades — Daniel Dreiberg ( Nite Owl II ) , Dr Manhattan , and the latter 's lover Laurie Jupiter ( Silk Spectre II ) . Dr Manhattan ignores Rorschach , and Dreiberg is skeptical , but relays this information to vigilante @-@ turned @-@ billionaire Adrian Veidt ( Ozymandias ) , who also dismisses it . 
 Following a backlash , Dr Manhattan exiles himself to Mars , giving the Soviet Union the confidence to invade Afghanistan . Rorschach 's theory appears to be justified when Veidt narrowly avoids an assassination attempt , and Rorschach finds himself framed for the murder of a former villain named Moloch . When Rorschach is arrested , his identity is revealed to be Walter Kovacs , and he is sent to jail . Jupiter goes to stay with Dreiberg after breaking up with Manhattan . The two become lovers and decide to come out of retirement . After helping Rorschach break out of prison , Jupiter is confronted by Manhattan , who transports her to Mars . As he probes her memories , he discovers that she is Blake 's daughter , and realizes the miracle of her life , created in spite of her parents ' turbulent relationship . He then returns to Earth with her . 
 Investigating the conspiracy , Rorschach and Dreiberg discover that Veidt is behind everything . Rorschach records his suspicions in his journal , which he drops off at the publication office of the New Frontiersman , a right @-@ wing tabloid . Rorschach and Dreiberg confront Veidt at his Antarctic retreat . Veidt admits to being responsible for Blake 's murder , Manhattan 's exile , Rorschach 's framing , and his own assassination attempt , which he staged to divert suspicion . He explains that his plan is to unify the United States and the Soviet Union by destroying the world 's main cities with exploding energy reactors infused with energy from Manhattan . Rorschach and Dreiberg attempt to stop him , but Veidt subdues them both and reveals that his plan has already been set into motion : the reactors have been detonated , and the energy signatures are recognized as Manhattan 's . 
 Jupiter and Manhattan arrive in a destroyed New York City and determine that Veidt is responsible . They teleport to his base , causing him to retreat and attempt to kill Manhattan . Unsuccessful , he shows them a televised news report in which Nixon states that the United States and Soviet Union have allied against their new " common enemy " : Dr Manhattan . Although his allies realize that revealing the truth would only disrupt this new peace , Rorschach , refuses to compromise , and attempts to return to America to expose Veidt . Manhattan intervenes , and Rorschach demands that Manhattan kill him to keep him from revealing the truth . Manhattan complies . 
 Manhattan shares a final kiss with Jupiter before departing permanently to another galaxy , while an enraged Dreiberg attacks Veidt , who makes no effort to defend himself . Nevertheless , he defends his actions , claiming that for world peace to be possible , there had to be sacrifice . Dreiberg rejects his logic declaring that Veidt has deformed and mutilated humanity . Dreiberg and Jupiter return to New York with plans to continue fighting crime . Later , an editor of the New Frontiersman tells a young employee that , as the world is at peace , there is nothing to report on . The editor gives the employee permission to print the contents of a collection of crank mailings , among which is Rorschach 's journal . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Production for Watchmen began casting in July 2007 for look @-@ alikes of the era 's famous names for the film — something Snyder declared would give the film a " satirical quality " and " create this ’ 80s vibe " — including Richard Nixon , Leonid Brezhnev , Henry Kissinger , H. R. Haldeman , Ted Koppel , John McLaughlin , Annie Leibovitz , John Lennon and Yoko Ono , Fidel Castro , Albert Einstein , Norman Rockwell , John F. Kennedy and Jackie Kennedy , Andy Warhol , Truman Capote , Elvis Presley , Mao Zedong , Larry King , David Bowie , Mick Jagger , Lee Iacocca , and the Village People . Snyder said he wanted younger actors because of the many flashback scenes , and it was easier to age actors with make @-@ up rather than cast two actors in the same role . Snyder 's son cameos as a young Rorschach , while the director himself appears as an American soldier in Vietnam . Actor Thomas Jane was invited by Snyder , but declined to work in the film due to being too busy . 
 Jackie Earle Haley as Walter Kovacs / Rorschach : A masked vigilante who continues his extralegal activities after they are outlawed . He takes his name from the Rorschach test , as the shifting black @-@ and @-@ white patterns on his mask resemble its <unk> . Unlike the principal actors , Haley had read the comic as a young adult and was keen to pursue the role when he heard he had become a favorite candidate among fans . Rorschach wears a mask with ink blots : motion capture markers were put on the contours of Haley 's blank mask , for animators to create his ever @-@ changing expressions . Haley has a black belt in <unk> , but described Rorschach 's attack patterns as <unk> and more aggressive due to the character 's boxing background . Rorschach appears several times in the movie without his mask before he is apprehended , carrying a placard sign proclaiming , " The End is Nigh , " but not until he is unmasked by the police is it made apparent that the sign bearer is Rorschach . 
 Eli Snyder as young Walter Kovacs 
 Patrick Wilson as Daniel Dreiberg / Nite Owl II : A retired superhero with technological expertise . Snyder cast Wilson after watching 2006 's Little Children , which also co @-@ starred Haley . Wilson put on 25 <unk> to play the overweight Dreiberg . He compared Dreiberg to a soldier who returns from war unable to fit into society . Both Joaquin Phoenix and John Cusack ( another fan of the novel ) were involved in previous attempts at making the film . 
 Billy Crudup as Jon Osterman / Dr. Manhattan : A superhero with genuine superpowers who works for the U.S. government . Crudup plays Osterman in flashbacks as a human and is replaced for his post @-@ accident scenes with a motion @-@ capture CG version of himself . During filming , Crudup acted opposite his co @-@ stars , wearing a white suit covered in blue LEDs , so he would give off an otherworldly glow in real life , just as the computer @-@ generated Manhattan does in the movie . His body was modeled on that of fitness model and actor Greg Plitt . The crew then 3D @-@ digitized Crudup 's head and " <unk> it onto Greg Plitt 's body . " Snyder chose not to electronically alter Crudup 's voice for Manhattan , explaining the character " would try and put everyone as much at ease as he could , instead of having a robotic voice that I think would feel off @-@ putting . " 
 <unk> <unk> as young Jon Osterman 
 Malin Åkerman as Laurie Jupiter / Silk Spectre II : Åkerman described her character as the psychology and the emotion of the film due to being the only woman among the men . The actress worked out and trained to fight for her portrayal of the crime fighter . 
 Haley <unk> as young Laurie Jupiter 
 Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Edward Morgan Blake / The Comedian : A superhero who is commissioned by the U.S. government as a black @-@ ops specialist . When reading the comic for the part , Morgan stopped when he saw his character was killed off three pages in . When telling his agent he did not want the part , he was told to continue reading it and find out how important his character was . Morgan found the role a challenge , explaining , " For some reason , in reading the novel , you don 't hate this guy even though he does things that are unmentionable . [ ... ] My job is to kind of make that translate , so as a viewer you end up not making excuses to like him , but you don 't hate him like you should for doing the things that he does . " Of his casting , Snyder said , " It 's hard to find a man 's man in Hollywood . It just is . And Jeffrey came in and was grumpy and cool and grizzled , and I was , like , ' OK , Jeffrey is perfect ! ' " 
 Matthew Goode as Adrian Veidt / Ozymandias : A retired superhero who has since made his identity public . At first Snyder wanted Jude Law ( a big fan of the character ) for the part , but said that Goode was " big and tall and lean , " which aided in bringing " this beautiful ageless , German superman " feel to the character . Goode interpreted Veidt 's back @-@ story to portray him with a German accent in private and an American one in public ; Goode explained Veidt gave up his family 's wealth and traveled the world , becoming a self @-@ made man because he was ashamed of his parents ' Nazi past , which in turn highlighted the themes of the American Dream and the character 's duality . Snyder said Goode " fit the bill .... We were having a hard time casting [ the role ] , because we needed someone handsome , beautiful and sophisticated , and that 's a tough combo . " 
 Carla Gugino as Sally Jupiter / Silk Spectre : A retired superheroine , mother of Laurie Juspeczyk , former member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen , and the first Silk Spectre . Gugino 's character ages from 25 years old in the 1940s to 67 years old in the 1980s , and the 37 @-@ year @-@ old actress wore prosthetics to reflect the aging process . Gugino described her character 's superhero outfit as " Bettie Page meets Alberto Vargas . " 
 Dan Payne as William Brady / Dollar Bill : A deceased member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen . Brady was a bank @-@ sponsored member of The Minutemen who was created for publicity purposes . He dies during a bank robbery in 1947 when his cape is caught in the bank 's revolving doors , allowing the robbers to shoot him at point @-@ blank range . 
 Niall Matter as Byron Lewis / Mothman : A former member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen . Lewis had a privileged upbringing and sought to help the less fortunate and fight oppression and corruption as a crime @-@ fighter . To this end Lewis created a costume with special wings that helped him glide . His mental stability ultimately deteriorated after he was called before HUAC , leading to him being forcibly brought to a mental asylum . 
 Apollonia <unk> as Ursula Zandt / The Silhouette : A deceased member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen . A gun @-@ toting vigilante , motivated by the deaths of her parents and sister at the hands of the Nazis in their native Austria . Zandt is killed along with her lesbian lover in what is implied to be a hate @-@ crime . 
 Glenn Ennis as Jacob Müller / Hooded Justice : A deceased former member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen . H.J. was a violent vigilante , who was trained in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . 
 Darryl <unk> as Nelson Gardner / Captain Metropolis : A retired former member and leader of the now @-@ defunct superhero team , The Minutemen . A former Marine Lieutenant . He was one of the more active members of the Minutemen , having organized its formation . He died in a car accident in 1974 that left him decapitated , and is believed by some to be a form of suicide . 
 Stephen McHattie as Hollis Mason / Nite Owl : A retired former member of the now @-@ defunct superhero team The Minutemen . Mason now works in an auto shop . 
 Clint Carleton as young Hollis Mason / Nite Owl : Carleton appears in The Minutemen flashback scenes only . 
 Matt <unk> as Edgar Jacobi / Moloch : A former supervillain . Moloch was jailed for a time during the 1970s . He is dying of cancer which he received from Adrian Veidt . Moloch was later murdered by Adrian who frames Rorschach . 
 Mike Carpenter as young Edgar Jacobi / Moloch 
 Danny Woodburn as Big Figure : A jailed dwarfish crime boss and former adversary of Nite Owl and Rorschach . He tries to get revenge when Rorschach is imprisoned in the same jail as he is . 
 Robert Wisden as President Richard Nixon 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1986 , producers Lawrence Gordon and Joel Silver acquired film rights to Watchmen for 20th Century Fox . After author Alan Moore declined to write a screenplay based on his story , Fox enlisted screenwriter Sam Hamm . Hamm took the liberty of re @-@ writing Watchmen 's complicated ending into a " more manageable " conclusion involving an assassination and a time paradox . Fox put the project into turnaround in 1991 , and the project was moved to Warner Bros. , where Terry Gilliam was attached to direct and Charles McKeown to rewrite it . Due to lack of funding — Gilliam and Silver were only able to raise $ 25 million for the film ( a quarter of the necessary budget ) because their previous films had gone overbudget — and Gilliam 's belief that the comic would have been unfilmable , Gilliam eventually left Watchmen and Warner Bros. dropped the project . 
 In October 2001 , Gordon partnered with Lloyd Levin and Universal Studios , hiring David Hayter to write and direct . Hayter and the producers left Universal due to creative differences , and Gordon and Levin expressed interest in setting up Watchmen at Revolution Studios . The project did not hold together at Revolution Studios and subsequently fell apart . In July 2004 , it was announced Paramount Pictures would produce Watchmen , and Michael Bay was considered to direct . Eventually , they attached Darren Aronofsky to direct Hayter 's script . Producers Gordon and Levin remained attached , collaborating with Aronofsky 's producing partner , Eric Watson . Paul Greengrass replaced Aronofsky when he left to focus on The Fountain . Ultimately , Paramount placed Watchmen in turnaround . 
 In October 2005 , Gordon and Levin met with Warner Bros. to develop the film there again . Tim Burton at one point expressed interest in directing the film but ultimately turned it down . Impressed with Zack Snyder 's work on 300 , Warner Bros. approached him to direct an adaptation of Watchmen . Screenwriter Alex Tse drew from his favorite elements of Hayter 's script , but also returned it to the original Cold War setting of the Watchmen comic . Similar to his approach to 300 , Snyder used the comic book as a storyboard . Following negotiations , Paramount , which had already spent $ 7 million in their failed project , earned the rights for international distribution of Watchmen and 25 % of the film 's ownership . 
 The fight scenes were extended , and a subplot about energy resources was added to make the film more topical . Although he intended to stay faithful to the look of the characters in the comic , Snyder intended Nite Owl to look scarier , and made Ozymandias ' armor into a parody of the rubber muscle suits from 1997 's Batman & Robin . Production took place in Vancouver , where a New York City back lot was built . Sound stages were used for apartments and offices , while sequences on Mars and Antarctica were shot against green screens . Filming started on September 17 , 2007 , and ended on February 19 , 2008 , on an estimated $ 120 million budget . To handle the 1 @,@ 100 shots featuring visual effects , a quarter of them being computer @-@ generated imagery , ten different effects companies were involved with Watchmen . While 20th Century Fox filed a lawsuit to block the film 's release , the studios eventually settled , and Fox received an upfront payment and a percentage of the worldwide gross from the film and all sequels and spin @-@ offs in return . 
 Dave Gibbons became an adviser on Snyder 's film , but Moore has refused to have his name attached to any film adaptations of his work . Moore has stated he has no interest in seeing Snyder 's adaptation ; he told Entertainment Weekly in 2008 , " There are things that we did with Watchmen that could only work in a comic , and were indeed designed to show off things that other media can 't . " While Moore believes that David Hayter 's screenplay was " as close as I could imagine anyone getting to Watchmen , " he asserted he did not intend to see the film if it were made . 
 = = Music = = 
 Both a soundtrack and excerpts from Tyler Bates ' film score were released as albums on March 3 , 2009 . The soundtrack features three songs written by Bob Dylan — " Desolation Row " , " All Along the Watchtower " and " The Times They Are a @-@ Changin ' " — with only the latter performed by Dylan on the soundtrack . It includes some songs mentioned in the comic , such as Simon and Garfunkel 's " The Sound of Silence " and Leonard Cohen 's " Hallelujah " . Dylan 's " The Times They Are a @-@ Changin ' " and " All Along the Watchtower " are also quoted in the graphic novel . Music by Philip Glass from Koyaanisqatsi plays when Dr. Manhattan is looking back on his life when he arrives on Mars . The <unk> of Mozart 's Requiem appears at the end of the film . " Desolation Row " was covered by My Chemical Romance especially for the film , and the song plays in the end credits . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment published a USA @-@ only episodic video game to be released alongside the film called Watchmen : The End Is Nigh . Warner Bros. took this low @-@ key approach to avoid rushing the game on such a tight schedule , as most games adapted from films are panned by critics and consumers . The game is set in the 1970s , and is written by Len Wein , the comic 's editor ; Dave Gibbons is also an advisor . On March 4 , 2009 Glu Mobile released Watchmen : The Mobile Game , a beat ' em up mobile game featuring Nite Owl and The Comedian fighting enemies in their respective settings of New York City and Vietnam . On March 6 , 2009 , a game for the Apple Inc. iPhone and iPod Touch platform was released , titled Watchmen : Justice is Coming . Though highly anticipated , this mobile title suffered from serious game play and network issues which have yet to be resolved . 
 As a promotion for the film , Warner Bros. Entertainment released Watchmen : Motion Comic , a series of narrated animations of the original comic book . The first chapter was released for purchase in the summer of 2008 on digital video stores , such as iTunes Store and Amazon Video on Demand . DC Direct released action figures based on the film in January 2009 . Director Zack Snyder also set up a YouTube contest petitioning Watchmen fans to create faux commercials of products made by the fictional Veidt Enterprises . The producers also released two short video pieces online , which were intended to be viral videos designed as fictional backstory pieces , with one being a 1970 newscast marking the 10th anniversary of the public appearance of Dr. Manhattan . The other was a short propaganda film promoting the Keene Act of 1977 , which made it illegal to be a superhero without government support . An official viral marketing web site , The New Frontiersman , is named after the tabloid magazine featured in the graphic novel , and contains teasers styled as declassified documents . After the trailer to the film premiered in July 2008 , DC Comics president Paul Levitz said that the company had had to print more than 900 @,@ 000 copies of Watchmen trade collection to meet the additional demand for the book that the advertising campaign had generated , with the total annual print run expected to be over one million copies . DC Comics reissued Watchmen # 1 for the original cover price of $ 1 @.@ 50 on December 10 , 2008 ; no other issues are to be reprinted . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Tales of the Black Freighter , a fictional comic within the Watchmen limited series , was adapted as a direct @-@ to @-@ video animated feature from Warner Premiere and Warner Bros. Animation , and released on March 24 , 2009 . It was originally included in the Watchmen script , but was changed from live @-@ action footage to animation because of the $ 20 million it would have cost to film it in the stylized manner of 300 that Snyder wanted ; this animated version , originally intended to be included in the final cut , was then cut because the film was already approaching a three @-@ hour running time . Gerard Butler , who starred in 300 , voices the Captain in the animated feature , having been promised a role in the live @-@ action film that never materialized . Jared Harris voices his deceased friend Ridley , whom the Captain hallucinates is talking to him . Snyder had Butler and Harris record their parts together . International rights to Black Freighter are held by Paramount . 
 The Tales of the Black Freighter DVD also includes Under the Hood , a fictional in @-@ universe documentary detailing the characters ' backstories , which takes its title from that of Hollis Mason 's memoirs in the comic book . Under the Hood is rated PG because it is meant to resemble a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes television news magazine profile of the characters . The actors were allowed to improvise during filming interviews in character . Bolex cameras were even used to film " archive " footage of the Minutemen . The film itself was scheduled to be released on DVD four months after Tales of the Black Freighter , and Warner released a director 's cut on July 21 , 2009 , and the extended version with the animated film edited back into the main picture was scheduled to be released on November 3 , 2009 , but did not hit the shelves until November 10 , 2009 . Snyder said if the film did well enough , a theatrical release of the director 's cut would be shown at theaters in New York and Los Angeles simultaneously . In addition , the Watchmen : Motion Comic , was released in digital video stores and DVD on March 3 . It included an exclusive scene from the movie but as of press time ( prior to the disc 's release ) the scene had yet to be added . 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on July 21 , 2009 . The Blu @-@ ray version contains " Maximum Movie Mode " , which plays the film along with a video presentation by director Snyder , and includes behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , comic comparisons , trivia , and more . In November 2009 , an " Ultimate Collector 's Edition " was released . The five @-@ disc set includes the director 's cut of the film with Tales of the Black Freighter woven in , new commentaries by Zack Snyder and Dave Gibbons , the complete Watchmen : Motion Comic , and over 3 hours of bonus content including Under the Hood , which was previously released on the Tales of the Black Freighter DVD . A special Blu @-@ ray included the director 's cut of Watchmen along with both parts of the game Watchmen : The End is Nigh for PlayStation 3 . 
 Watchmen debuted at the top of the rental , DVD , and Blu @-@ ray charts . First week sales of the DVD stood at 1 @,@ 232 @,@ 725 copies , generating $ 24 @,@ 597 @,@ 425 in sales revenue . As of November 1 , 2009 the DVD has sold a total of 2 @,@ 510 @,@ 321 copies and $ 46 @,@ 766 @,@ 383 in revenue . 
 = = = Director 's cut = = = 
 A director 's cut of the film running at 186 minutes held a limited release in Los Angeles , Dallas , Minneapolis , and New York City . The director 's cut was released on DVD in the United States , along with the theatrical version . The director 's cut was also released on Blu @-@ ray , but not the theatrical cut . The theatrical version was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the European area , later on , the director 's cut was also released , exclusively on the Blu @-@ ray format . This is the preferred version of the film by director Zack Snyder . 
 = = = Ultimate cut = = = 
 In November 2009 , a four @-@ disc set was released as the " Ultimate Cut " . This version included the director 's cut of the film re @-@ edited to contain Tales of the Black Freighter into the story as it is featured in the graphic novel , bringing the run time of the film to 215 minutes . The set also included two additional hours of bonus features including Under the Hood and The Complete Motion Comic . Originally released only on DVD , the set later became available on Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Watchmen was released at midnight on March 5 , 2009 , and earned an estimated $ 4 @.@ 6 million for the early showing , which is approximately twice as much as 300 , Snyder 's previous comic book adaptation . The film earned $ 24 @,@ 515 @,@ 772 in 3 @,@ 611 theaters its first day , and later finished its opening weekend grossing $ 55 @,@ 214 @,@ 334 . Watchmen 's opening weekend is the highest of any Alan Moore adaptation to date , and the income was also greater than the entire box office take of From Hell , which ended its theatrical run with $ 31 @,@ 602 @,@ 566 . Although the film finished with $ 55 million for its opening , while Snyder 's previous adaptation 300 earned $ 70 million in its opening weekend , Warner Bros. ' head of distribution , Dan <unk> , believes that the opening weekend success of the two films cannot be compared due to the extended running time of Watchmen — the film comes in at 2 hours and 45 minutes , while 300 is just under 2 hours — provides the 2009 film with fewer showings a night than 300 . Next to the general theaters , Watchmen pulled in $ 5 @.@ 4 million at 124 IMAX screens , which is the fifth largest opening behind Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen , Star Trek , Avatar , and The Dark Knight . 
 Following its first week at the box office , Watchmen saw a significant drop in attendance . By the end of its second weekend , the film brought in $ 17 @,@ 817 @,@ 301 , finishing second on that weekend 's box office . The 67 @.@ 7 % overall decrease is one of the highest for a major comic book film . Losing two @-@ thirds of its audience from its opening weekend , the film finished second for the weekend of March 13 – 15 , 2009 . The film continued to drop about 60 % in almost every subsequent weekend , leaving the top ten in its fifth weekend , and the top twenty in its seventh . Watchmen crossed the $ 100 million mark on March 26 , its twenty @-@ first day at the box office , and finished its theatrical run in the United States on May 28 , having grossed $ 107 @,@ 509 @,@ 799 in 84 days . The film had grossed one @-@ fifth of its ultimate gross on its opening day , and more than half of that total by the end of its opening weekend . 
 Watchmen currently sits tenth in all time March openings , as well as the twelfth largest opening for an R @-@ rated film in North American history . It was the sixth highest grossing R @-@ rated film of 2009 , behind The Hangover , Inglourious Basterds , District 9 , Paranormal Activity , and It 's Complicated . On the North American box office , Watchmen currently sits as the twelfth highest grossing film based on a DC Comics comic book ( narrowly ahead of 1997 's Batman & Robin ) , and the thirty @-@ first highest @-@ grossing film of 2009 . 
 Watchmen earned $ 26 @.@ 6 million in 45 territories overseas ; of these , Britain and France had the highest box office with an estimated $ 4 @.@ 6 million and $ 2 @.@ 5 million , respectively . Watchmen also took in approximately $ 2 @.@ 3 million in Russia , $ 2 @.@ 3 million in Australia , $ 1 @.@ 6 million in Italy , and $ 1 @.@ 4 million in Korea . The film collected $ 77 @,@ 743 @,@ 688 in foreign box office , bringing its worldwide total to $ 185 @,@ 253 @,@ 487 . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Watchmen received a polarizing reaction from both audiences and critics . Some critics gave it overwhelmingly positive reviews for the dark and unique take on the superhero genre , the cast , and the visual effects ; while others derided it for the same reasons , as well as the R @-@ rating ( for " strong graphic violence , sexuality , nudity , and language " ) , the running time , and the much @-@ publicized fidelity to the graphic novel . 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , Watchmen currently has a 65 % ' fresh ' approval rating , based on 294 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 3 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Gritty and visually striking , Watchmen is a faithful adaptation of Alan Moore 's graphic novel , but its complex narrative structure may make it difficult for it to appeal to viewers not already familiar with the source material . " By comparison , on Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating reviews from mainstream critics , the film has a score of 56 out of 100 , based on 39 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade cinemagoers gave the film was B on an A + to F scale , and that the primary audience was older men . 
 Patrick Kolan of IGN Australia gave the film an enormous amount of praise , awarding it a perfect 10 / 10 and saying " It 's the Watchmen film you always wanted to see , but never expected to get . " Also praising the film along with another perfect score ( 4 / 4 ) was Kyle Smith of the New York Post , comparing it to some of Stanley Kubrick 's films . " Director Zack Snyder 's cerebral , scintillating follow @-@ up to 300 seems , to even a weary <unk> 's eye , as fresh and magnificent in sound and vision as 2001 . " Roger Ebert gave it four out of four stars . " It 's a compelling visceral film — sound , images and characters combined into a decidedly odd visual experience that evokes the feel of a graphic novel . " Richard Corliss of Time concluded " this ambitious picture is a thing of bits and pieces , " yet " the bits are glorious , the pieces magnificent . " Total Film awarded it 4 / 5 stars , stating : " It 's hard to imagine anyone watching the Watchmen as faithfully as Zack Snyder 's heartfelt , stylised <unk> . <unk> , uncommercial , and unique . " When comparing the film to the original source material , Ian Nathan of Empire felt that while " it isn 't the graphic novel ... Zack Snyder clearly gives a toss , creating a smart , stylish , decent adaptation . " Nick Dent of Time Out Sydney gave the film 4 / 6 in his review of February 25 , praising the film 's inventiveness but concluding , " While Watchmen is still as rich , daring , and intelligent an action film as there 's ever been , it also proves Moore absolutely right [ that Watchmen is inherently un @-@ filmable ] . As a comic book , Watchmen is an extraordinary thing . As a movie , it 's just another movie , awash with sound and fury . " 
 The negative reviews generally disliked the film 's Cold War @-@ period setting , using various adjectives to describe it such as " stuffy " , " stiff " , " bor [ ing ] " , " oddly hollow " , " embalmed " , " truncated " , and " psychic suffocation " . They cited the film 's much @-@ advertised reverence of the source material as a fault , referring to the story as " trapped " in a faithful representation of Alan Moore 's graphic novel . " Watchmen is a bore [ ... ] It sinks under the weight of its reverence for the original , " wrote Philip Kennicott of The Washington Post . Devin Gordon wrote for Newsweek , " That 's the trouble with loyalty . Too little , and you alienate your core fans . Too much , and you lose everyone — and everything — else . " Owen Gleiberman 's Entertainment Weekly review reads , " Snyder treats each image with the same stuffy hermetic reverence . He doesn 't move the camera or let the scenes breathe . He crams the film with bits and pieces , trapping his actors like bugs wriggling in the frame . " " [ Snyder ] never pause [ s ] to develop a vision of his own . The result is oddly hollow and disjointed ; the actors moving stiffly from one overdetermined tableau to another , " said Noah Berlatsky of the Chicago Reader . David Edelstein of New York agrees : " They 've made the most reverent adaptation of a graphic novel ever . But this kind of reverence kills what it seeks to preserve . The movie is embalmed . " A reviewer in The Wall Street Journal wrote , " Watching ' Watchmen ' is the spiritual equivalent of being whacked on the skull for 163 minutes . The reverence is inert , the violence noxious , the mythology murky , the tone grandiose , the texture glutinous . " Donald Clarke of The Irish Times was similarly dismissive : " Snyder , director of the unsubtle 300 , has <unk> hard at the source material and turned it into a colossal animated storyboard , augmented by indifferent performances and <unk> obvious music cues . " The trade magazines Variety and The Hollywood Reporter were even less taken with the film . Variety 's Justin Chang commented that , " The movie is ultimately undone by its own reverence ; there 's simply no room for these characters and stories to breathe of their own accord , and even the most fastidiously replicated scenes can feel glib and truncated , " and Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter writing , " The real disappointment is that the film does not transport an audience to another world , as 300 did . Nor does the third @-@ rate Chandler @-@ esque narration by Rorschach help ... Looks like we have the first real flop of 2009 . " 
 Analyzing the divided response , Geoff Boucher of the Los Angeles Times felt that , like Eyes Wide Shut , The Passion of the Christ , or Fight Club , Watchmen would continue to be a talking point among those who liked or disliked the film . Boucher felt in spite of his own mixed feelings about the finished film , he was " oddly proud " that the director had made a faithful adaptation that was " nothing less than the boldest popcorn movie ever made . Snyder somehow managed to get a major studio to make a movie with no stars , no ' name ' superheroes and a hard R @-@ rating , thanks to all those broken bones , that oddly off @-@ putting Owl Ship sex scene and , of course , the unforgettable glowing blue penis . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Watchmen was nominated for one award at the 2009 VES Awards , seven awards at the 36th Saturn Awards , and 13 awards at the 2009 Scream Awards . The film was also pre @-@ nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , although it did not make the final shortlist . 
 = = TV series = = 
 On October 1 , 2015 , it was reported that HBO is in talks with Snyder to make a TV series based on the comics with no word about it being a sequel to the film . 
 = Honoré de Balzac = 
 Honoré de Balzac ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> d ( ə ) <unk> ] , born Honoré Balzac , 20 May 1799 – 18 August 1850 ) was a French novelist and playwright . The novel sequence La Comédie Humaine , which presents a panorama of post @-@ Napoleonic French life , is generally viewed as his magnum opus . 
 Owing to his keen observation of detail and unfiltered representation of society , Balzac is regarded as one of the founders of realism in European literature . He is renowned for his multi @-@ faceted characters ; even his lesser characters are complex , morally ambiguous and fully human . Inanimate objects are imbued with character as well ; the city of Paris , a backdrop for much of his writing , takes on many human qualities . His writing influenced many famous writers , including the novelists Émile Zola , Charles Dickens , Gustave Flaubert , Jack Kerouac and Henry James , as well as important philosophers such as Friedrich Engels . Many of Balzac 's works have been made into films , and they continue to inspire other writers . 
 An enthusiastic reader and independent thinker as a child , Balzac had trouble adapting to the teaching style of his grammar school . His willful nature caused trouble throughout his life and frustrated his ambitions to succeed in the world of business . When he finished school , Balzac was apprenticed in a law office , but he turned his back on the study of law after wearying of its inhumanity and banal routine . Before and during his career as a writer , he attempted to be a publisher , printer , businessman , critic , and politician ; he failed in all of these efforts . La Comédie Humaine reflects his real @-@ life difficulties , and includes scenes from his own experience . 
 Balzac suffered from health problems throughout his life , possibly due to his intense writing schedule . His relationship with his family was often strained by financial and personal drama , and he lost more than one friend over critical reviews . In 1850 , Balzac married Ewelina Hańska , a Polish aristocrat and his longtime love ; he died in Paris five months later . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Honoré de Balzac was born into a family which through its industry and efforts aspired to achieve respectability . His father , born Bernard @-@ François <unk> , was one of eleven children from an artisan family in Tarn ( <unk> ) , a region in the south of France . In 1760 he set off for Paris with only a Louis coin in his pocket , intent on improving his social standing ; by 1776 he had become Secretary to the King 's Council and a Freemason ( he had also changed his name to the more noble sounding " Balzac , " his son later adding — without official recognition — the nobiliary particle : " de " ) . After the Reign of Terror ( 1793 – 94 ) , François Balzac was despatched to Tours to coordinate supplies for the Army . 
 Balzac 's mother , born Anne @-@ Charlotte @-@ Laure <unk> , came from a family of <unk> in Paris . Her family 's wealth was a considerable factor in the match : she was eighteen at the time of the wedding , and François Balzac fifty . As the author and literary critic Sir Victor Pritchett explained , " She was certainly drily aware that she had been given to an old husband as a reward for his professional services to a friend of her family and that the capital was on her side . She was not in love with her husband " . 
 Honoré ( named after Saint @-@ Honoré of Amiens , who is commemorated on 16 May , four days before Balzac 's birthday ) was actually the second child born to the <unk> ; exactly one year previous , Louis @-@ Daniel had been born , but he lived for only a month . Honoré 's sisters Laure and Laurence were born in 1800 and 1802 , and his younger brother Henry @-@ François in 1807 . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 As an infant Balzac was sent to a wet @-@ nurse ; the following year he was joined by his sister Laure and they spent four years away from home . ( Although Genevan philosopher Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's influential book Émile convinced many mothers of the time to nurse their own children , sending babies to wet @-@ nurses was still common among the middle and upper classes . ) When the Balzac children returned home , they were kept at a frosty distance from their parents , which affected the author @-@ to @-@ be significantly . His 1835 novel Le Lys dans la Vallée features a cruel governess named Miss Caroline , modeled after his own caregiver . 
 At age ten Balzac was sent to the Oratorian grammar school in Vendôme , where he studied for seven years . His father , seeking to instill the same hardscrabble work ethic which had gained him the esteem of society , intentionally gave little spending money to the boy . This made him the object of ridicule among his much wealthier schoolmates . 
 Balzac had difficulty adapting to the rote style of learning at the school . As a result , he was frequently sent to the " alcove " , a punishment cell reserved for disobedient students . ( The janitor at the school , when asked later if he remembered Honoré , replied : " Remember M. Balzac ? I should think I do ! I had the honour of escorting him to the dungeon more than a hundred times ! " ) Still , his time alone gave the boy ample freedom to read every book which came his way . 
 Balzac worked these scenes from his boyhood — as he did many aspects of his life and the lives of those around him — into La Comédie Humaine . His time at Vendôme is reflected in Louis Lambert , his 1832 novel about a young boy studying at an Oratorian grammar school at Vendôme . The narrator says : " He devoured books of every kind , feeding indiscriminately on religious works , history and literature , philosophy and physics . He had told me that he found indescribable delight in reading dictionaries for lack of other books . " 
 Balzac often fell ill , finally causing the headmaster to contact his family with news of a " sort of a coma " . When he returned home , his grandmother said : " <unk> donc comme le collège nous <unk> les <unk> que nous lui <unk> ! " ( " Look how the academy returns the pretty ones we send them ! " ) Balzac himself attributed his condition to " intellectual congestion " , but his extended confinement in the " alcove " was surely a factor . ( Meanwhile , his father had been writing a treatise on " the means of preventing thefts and murders , and of restoring the men who commit them to a useful role in society " , in which he heaped disdain on prison as a form of crime prevention . ) 
 In 1814 the Balzac family moved to Paris , and Honoré was sent to private tutors and schools for the next two and a half years . This was an unhappy time in his life , during which he attempted suicide on a bridge over the Loire River . 
 In 1816 Balzac entered the Sorbonne , where he studied under three famous professors : François Guizot , who later became Prime Minister , was Professor of Modern History ; Abel @-@ François Villemain , a recent arrival from the Collège Charlemagne , lectured on French and classical literature ; and , most influential of all , Victor Cousin 's courses on philosophy encouraged his students to think independently . 
 Once his studies were completed , Balzac was persuaded by his father to follow him into the Law ; for three years he trained and worked at the office of Victor <unk> , a family friend . During this time Balzac began to understand the vagaries of human nature . In his 1840 novel Le <unk> , he wrote that a young person in the legal profession sees " the oily wheels of every fortune , the hideous wrangling of heirs over corpses not yet cold , the human heart grappling with the Penal Code . " 
 In 1819 <unk> offered to make Balzac his successor , but his apprentice had had enough of the Law . He despaired of being " a clerk , a machine , a riding @-@ school hack , eating and drinking and sleeping at fixed hours . I should be like everyone else . And that 's what they call living , that life at the grindstone , doing the same thing over and over again .... I am hungry and nothing is offered to appease my appetite " . He announced his intention to become a writer . 
 The loss of this opportunity caused serious discord in the Balzac household , although Honoré was not turned away entirely . Instead , in April 1819 he was allowed to live in the French capital – as English critic George Saintsbury describes it – " in a garret furnished in the most Spartan fashion , with a starvation allowance and an old woman to look after him " , while the rest of the family moved to a house twenty miles [ 32 km ] outside Paris . 
 = = = First literary efforts = = = 
 Balzac 's first project was a libretto for a comic opera called Le Corsaire , based on Lord Byron 's The Corsair . Realizing he would have trouble finding a composer , however , he turned to other pursuits . 
 In 1820 Balzac completed the five @-@ act verse tragedy Cromwell . Although it pales by comparison with his later works , some critics consider it a quality text . When he finished , Balzac went to <unk> and read the entire work to his family ; they were unimpressed . He followed this effort by starting ( but never finishing ) three novels : <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 In 1821 Balzac met the enterprising Auguste Le Poitevin , who convinced the author to write short stories , which Le Poitevin would then sell to publishers . Balzac quickly turned to longer works , and by 1826 he had written nine novels , all published under pseudonyms and often produced in collaboration with other writers . For example , the scandalous novel <unk> des Ardennes ( 1822 ) — banned for its depiction of nearly @-@ incestuous relations and , more egregiously , of a married priest — attributed to a " Horace de Saint @-@ Aubin " . These books were potboiler novels , designed to sell quickly and titillate audiences . In Saintsbury 's view , " they are curiously , interestingly , almost <unk> bad " . Saintsbury indicates that Robert Louis Stevenson tried to dissuade him from reading these early works of Balzac . American critic Samuel Rogers , however , notes that " without the training they gave Balzac , as he groped his way to his mature conception of the novel , and without the habit he formed as a young man of writing under pressure , one can hardly imagine his producing La Comédie Humaine " . Biographer Graham Robb suggests that as he discovered the Novel , Balzac discovered himself . 
 During this time Balzac wrote two pamphlets in support of primogeniture and the Society of Jesus . The latter , regarding the Jesuits , illustrated his lifelong admiration for the Catholic Church . In the preface to La Comédie Humaine he wrote : " Christianity , above all , Catholicism , being ... a complete system for the repression of the depraved tendencies of man , is the most powerful element of social order " . 
 = = = " Une bonne <unk> " = = = 
