 = Diversity Day ( The Office ) = 
 " Diversity Day " is the second episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's second episode overall . Written by B. J. Novak and directed by Ken Kwapis , it first aired in the United States on March 29 , 2005 , on NBC . The episode guest stars Office consulting producer Larry Wilmore as Mr. Brown . 
 In this episode , Michael 's ( Steve Carell ) controversial imitation of a Chris Rock routine forces the staff to undergo a racial diversity seminar . A consultant ( Larry Wilmore ) arrives to teach the staff about tolerance and diversity , but Michael insists on imparting his own knowledge — aggravating both the consultant and the entire office staff — and creates his own diversity seminar . He eventually assigns each staff member an index card with a different race on it , causing tempers to slowly simmer until they finally snap . Meanwhile , Jim struggles to keep hold of a lucrative contract extension , but Dwight makes the sale for himself . 
 " Diversity Day " was the first episode of The Office to feature original writing , as the " Pilot " contained many jokes from the British series pilot . The episode guest starred Larry Wilmore , who plays the sensitivity trainer Mr. Brown . Wilmore , a writer for the show , had to formally audition with other actors because of stipulations with the Screen Actors Guild . The episode received a 2 @.@ 7 / 6 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 garnered 6 @.@ 0 million viewers overall , losing almost half of its audience from the previous week . Despite this setback , the episode received positive reviews from television critics . NBC webcast this episode on March 16 , 2005 on MySpace to promote the show 's then @-@ upcoming premiere . This was NBC 's first @-@ ever online debut of a complete episode of a network series , and also included a trimmed @-@ down webisode version of the episode for on @-@ demand viewing on MySpace the following day . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In answer to Michael ’ s ( Steve Carell ) apparently constant recitation Chris Rock 's " Niggas Vs . Black People " routine , the corporate offices of Dunder Mifflin send a representative ( Larry Wilmore ) from Diversity Today to hold a meeting regarding diversity training . Michael finds it insulting and , as a response , holds his own diversity meeting . He shows a brief video that addresses nothing of significance , claims that his heritage is " two @-@ fifteenths Native American , " and instructs everyone to wear index cards with a certain race on it and to treat others however they might treat people of those races . 
 Meanwhile , Jim ( John Krasinski ) desperately tries to re @-@ up an annual sale that will amount to a quarter of his yearly commission but is ultimately undercut by Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 Larry Wilmore , who plays the sensitivity trainer Mr. Brown , is a writer for the show . At the table @-@ read for this episode , they had not cast the part yet and Daniels had Wilmore read for the role to fill in . After the read , producer Greg Daniels thought he was perfect for the role . However , because of stipulations with the Screen Actors Guild , producers still had to have Wilmore formally audition with other actors for the role . Daniels was also not sure where to use Mindy Kaling on screen in the series until the point came in this episode 's script when Michael needed to be slapped by a minority . Her character in this episode , however , is far from the bubbly , chatty character that Kelly later becomes . The second episode of the series was the first to feature predominantly original writing , as the " Pilot " contained many jokes from the British series pilot . During one of Michael 's impersonations , a racial expletive spoken by Michael had to be censored by the producers for NBC . Daniels was terrified that the scene would leak unedited , so he personally oversaw the censoring of the master copy . The scene where Pam rests her head on Jim 's shoulder after Dwight has stolen his sale and Jim smiles and says " not a bad day after all " came about when Greg Daniels spoke to the writers about wanting to have small , happy interactions between Jim and Pam and mentioned the head @-@ on @-@ shoulder idea , which BJ Novak immediately wrote into his script . Paul Lieberstein did not want to appear in the episode and did so assuming it would be a one @-@ time event , but Kevin Reilly was impressed by his work and said the show should use him more , leading to the expansion of Paul 's work as Toby Flenderson . Two scenes that were cut involved Michael Scott responding to Mr. Brown 's " HERO " acronym by creating one that sounded good until everyone noticed the words created the acronym of " <unk> " , and Michael responded to Mr. Brown 's <unk> of that idea by pointing out the links between incest and racism in some states , while another had Jim replacing Dwight 's " Asian " headband with " Dwight " and then having the other co @-@ workers complain to a clueless Dwight about how annoying his behavior was ( http : / / <unk> / tv / 2015 / 03 / feature @-@ the @-@ behind @-@ the @-@ scenes @-@ story @-@ of @-@ diversity @-@ day @-@ the @-@ episode @-@ that @-@ defined @-@ <unk> @-@ the @-@ office ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Diversity Day " premiered on NBC on March 29 , 2005 . While the pilot episode garnered over eleven million viewers , the second episode lost over half its viewing audience from the previous episode . The episode received a 2 @.@ 7 / 6 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds viewed the episode and six percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching TV viewed it . The episode garnered 6 @.@ 0 million viewers overall . The episode , airing after Scrubs , retained 90 % of its lead @-@ in 18 @-@ 49 audience . In addition , " Diversity Day , " along with the other first season episodes of The Office helped NBC score its highest @-@ rated Tuesday night slot since February 1 , 2005 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Contrary to the lukewarm response to the pilot , " Diversity Day " earned positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode positive reviews , stating that : " Think of the toss @-@ off racism of the original , <unk> into a PC @-@ gone @-@ wrong showcase that might be entitled The Accidental Bigot . As when the African @-@ American diversity trainer introduces himself as Mr. Brown , and Scott assures him , ' I will not call you that . ' " Ricky Gervais , who was the lead in the British series , stated that , in comparison to the British version , " It is as good . I love the fact that , apart from the first one , the scripts are all original . You 've gone back to the blueprint of what the characters are and you 've started from there , as opposed to copying anything . " Rolling Stone magazine named the scene wherein Michael shows the office his diversity video the third greatest Moment from The Office . The article particularly praised Michael 's line : " Abraham Lincoln once said , ' If you are a racist , I will attack you with the North . ' " 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " and felt that , as the show lost viewers in the first season , the stories got better , and that " Diversity Day " is an excellent example of this " unfortunate trend " . He noted that the episode " would go on to be one of the series ’ defining episodes , an installment that put a more hopeful spin on the original Office 's views on accepting the disparity between our dreams and our realities . " However , Adams noted that Carell 's character was still too aggressive for Michael Scott to be completely lovable , and that the second season episode " Sexual Harassment " would serve as " a gentler spiritual sequel " to this episode , featuring a similar premise , but with a softened Michael Scott . For his work on this episode , B. J. Novak was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy . 
 = Freedom of Speech ( painting ) = 
 Freedom of Speech is the first of the Four Freedoms paintings by Norman Rockwell that were inspired by United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms , he delivered on January 6 , 1941 . 
 Freedom of Speech was published in the February 20 , 1943 Issue of The Saturday Evening Post with a matching essay by Booth Tarkington as part of the Four Freedoms series . Rockwell felt that this and Freedom to Worship were the most successful of the set . Since Rockwell liked to depict life as he experienced it or envisioned it , it is not surprising that this image depicts an actual occurrence . 
 = = Background = = 
 Freedom of Speech was the first of a series of four oil paintings , entitled Four Freedoms , painted by Norman Rockwell . The works were inspired by United States President , Franklin D. Roosevelt in a State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms , delivered to the 77th United States Congress on January 6 , 1941 . Of the Four Freedoms , the only two described in the United States Constitution were freedom of speech and freedom of worship . The Four Freedoms ' theme was eventually incorporated into the Atlantic Charter , and it became part of the charter of the United Nations . The series of paintings ran in The Saturday Evening Post accompanied by essays from noted writers on four consecutive weeks : Freedom of Speech ( February 20 ) , Freedom of Worship ( February 27 ) , Freedom from Want ( March 6 ) and Freedom from Fear ( March 13 ) . Eventually , the series became widely distributed in poster form and became instrumental in the U. S. Government War Bond Drive . 
 = = Description = = 
 Freedom of Speech depicts a scene of a local town meeting in which Jim Edgerton , the lone dissenter to the town councilors ' announced plans to build a new school , was accorded the floor as a matter of protocol . The old school had burned down . Once he envisioned this scene to depict freedom of speech , Rockwell decided to use his Vermont neighbors as models for a Four Freedoms series . The blue @-@ collar speaker wears a plaid shirt and suede jacket . He has dirty hands and a darker complexion than others in attendance . The other attendees are wearing white shirts , ties and jackets . Although one of the men is wearing a wedding band , the speaker is not . Edgerton 's youth and workmanlike hands are fashioned with a worn and stained jacket , while the other attendees , appear to be older and more neatly and formally dressed . He is shown " standing tall , his mouth open , his shining eyes transfixed , he speaks his mind , untrammeled and unafraid . " Edgerton is depicted in a way that resembles Abraham Lincoln . According to Bruce Cole of The Wall Street Journal , the closest figure in the painting is revealing a subject of the meeting as " a discussion of the town 's annual report " . According to John Updike , the work is painted without any painterly brushwork . According to Robert Scholes , the work shows audience members in rapt attention with a sort of admiration of this lone speaker . 
 = = Production = = 
 Rockwell 's final work was the result of four restarts and consumed two months . According to Scholes , the subject resembles a Gary Cooper or Jimmy Stewart character in a Frank Capra film . Each version depicted the blue @-@ collar man in casual attire standing up at a town meeting , but each was from a different angle . Earlier versions were troubled by the distraction of multiple subjects and the improper placement and perspective of the subject for the message to be clear . An Arlington , Vermont Rockwell neighbor , Carl Hess , stood as the model for the shy , brave young workman , and another neighbor , Jim Martin , who appeared in each painting in the series , is in the scene . Rockwell 's assistant , Gene Pelham , suggested Hess , who had a gas station in town and whose children went to school with the Rockwell children . According to Pelham , Hess " had a noble head " . Others in the work were Hess ' father Henry ( left ear only ) , Jim Martin ( lower right corner ) , Harry Brown ( right — top of head and eye only ) , Robert Benedict , Sr. and Rose Hoyt to the left . Rockwell 's own eye is also visible along the left edge . Hess was married at the time and Henry Hess was a German immigrant . Pelham was the owner of the suede jacket . Hess posed for Rockwell eight different times for this work and all other models posed for Rockwell individually . 
 An early draft had Hess surrounded by others sitting squarely around him . Hess felt the depiction had a more natural look , Rockwell objected , " It was too diverse , it went every which way and didn 't settle anywhere or say anything . " He felt the upward view from the bench level was more dramatic . Rockwell explained to Yates at The Post that he had to start Freedom of Speech from scratch after an early attempt because he had overworked it . Twice he almost completed the work only to feel it was lacking . Eventually , he was able to produce the final version with the speaker as the subject rather than the assembly . For the accompanying essay , Post editor Ben Hibbs chose novelist and dramatist Tarkington who was a Pulitzer Prize winner . People who purchased war bonds during the Second War Bond Drive received a full @-@ color set of reproductions of the Four Freedoms that had a commemorative cover with Freedom of Speech on it . 
 = = Essay = = 
 Tarkington 's accompanying essay published in the February 20 , 1943 issue of The Saturday Evening Post was really a fable or parable in which youthful Adolf Hitler and youthful Benito Mussolini meet in The Alps in 1912 . During the fictional meeting both men describe plans to secure dictatorships in their respective countries via the suppression of freedom of speech . 
 = = Critical review = = 
 This image was praised for its focus , and the empty bench seat in front of the speaker is perceived as inviting to the viewer . The solid dark background of the blackboard helps the subject to stand out but almost obscures Rockwell 's signature . According to Deborah Solomon , the work " imbues the speaker with looming tallness and requires his neighbors to literally look up to him . " The speaker represents a blue @-@ collar unattached and sexually available , likely ethnic , threat to social customs who nonetheless is accorded the full respect from the audience . Some question the authenticity of white @-@ collar residents being so attentive to the comments of their blue @-@ collar brethren . The lack of female figures in the picture gives this an Elks club meeting feel rather than an open town meeting . 
 Laura Claridge said , " The American ideal that the painting is meant to encapsulate shines forth brilliantly for those who have canonized this work as among Rockwell 's great pictures . For those who find the piece less successful , however , Rockwell 's desire to give concrete form to an ideal produces a strained result . To such critics the people looking up at the speaker have stars in their eyes , their posture conveying celebrity worship , not a room full of respectful dissent . " 
 Cole describes this freedom as an " active and public " subject that Rockwell formulated " his greatest painting forging traditional American illustration into a powerful and enduring work of art . " He notes that Rockwell uses " a classic pyramidal composition " to emphasize the central figure , a standing speaker whose appearance is juxtaposed with the rest of the audience that by participating in democracy defends it . Cole describes Rockwell 's figure as " the very embodiment of free speech , a living manifestation of that abstract right — an image that transforms principle , paint and , yes , creed , into an indelible image and a brilliant and beloved American icon still capable of inspiring millions world @-@ wide " . He notes that the use of a New England town @-@ hall meetings incorporates the " long tradition of democratic public debate " into the work while the blackboard and pew represent church and school , which are " two pillars of American life . " 
 Hibbs said of Speech and Worship " To me they are great human documents in the form of paint and canvas . A great picture , I think is one which moves and inspires millions of people . The Four Freedoms did — do so . " Westbrook notes that Rockwell presents " individual dissent " that acts to " protect private conscience from the state . " Another writer describes the theme of the work as " civility " , a theme of days gone by . 
 = Brian the Bachelor = 
 " Brian the Bachelor " is the seventh episode from the fourth season of Family Guy . It originally broadcast on June 26 , 2005 and was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Dan Povenmire . The episode sees Brian becoming a contestant on The Bachelorette and falling in love with the bachelorette , only to be let down by her ignoring him off – camera . Meanwhile , Chris discovers his pimple , " Doug , " can talk , and the pair cause mischief across the city . Overall , the episode was received with positive comments by critics and news sources . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter , Joe and Quagmire drag Cleveland to a bar to get him to meet some women , as he 's still reeling from him and Loretta getting a divorce . It doesn ’ t work so well , so when The Bachelorette comes to Quahog , Peter takes Cleveland to audition for the show . Cleveland gets nervous at the audition and in an effort to calm him , Peter removes Cleveland ’ s clothes and then his own . The producers see this and Brian apologizes for what happened with Peter and <unk> begins to explain how Cleveland and his wife recently divorced and how Cleveland 's confused about what he really wants in a relationship . 
 After meeting Brian , they recruit him to be a contestant . He signs up for the free martinis and food , but ends up falling in love with the reality starlet , Brooke Roberts . Quagmire and Brian are the final two contestants on The Bachelorette . When Brooke visits the Griffins , it is very catastrophic , but not nearly as bad as the dinner she had with Quagmire and his mom . Brian wins her heart and the final rose , but when the cameras are turned off , Brooke tells Brian that it was nice " working with him " , and it is apparent that the show really is scripted , as Brian thought . Brian quickly becomes obsessed with her and leaves several messages on Brooke ’ s answering machine , even though she never gets back to him . Brooke Roberts is angry at Brian for stalking her . Afterwards , he gets a guitar and sings to Brooke . He finally stops stalking her when she throws the phone at him after he shows up at her apartment , upset that he became the very thing he was mocking in the beginning . 
 Meanwhile , Chris has a pimple on his face which he names “ Doug . ” Lois worries about Chris , as Doug tells Chris to make some mischief . He goes to the Swansons ' house and sets a bag of feces on fire on their porch , and writes “ That ’ s enough , John Mayer ” in <unk> on the wall of the Quahog Mini @-@ Mart . Lois sees Chris sneaking back into his room and is going to punish him but Chris tells her that Doug said he does not have to listen to her . This outrages Lois , deciding to go to Goldman 's Pharmacy the next day and get some astringent to get rid of Doug . However , the next day , as Peter and Lois head to Goldman ’ s , they realize there has been a break @-@ in , and someone has destroyed Mort ’ s entire stock of acne medication . That night , when Brooke comes over for dinner to meet Brian ’ s family , Doug tells Chris to lift up Brooke ’ s shirt . He does this , shocking and offending the family . Joe comes in , saying he has proof that it was Chris who vandalized , broke into Goldman ’ s Pharmacy and stole Mort 's acne medication . Chris decides he no longer wants to listen to Doug after he made his mom cry , but Doug says he could make Chris punch himself , or even worse , shoot him in the brain . Chris finally winds up at the dermatology clinic , and a struggle ensues as Doug tries to shoot him in the brain , but Chris manages to overpower him and use cortisone on Doug , finally taking him out . 
 = = Production = = 
 When this episode was being produced , The Bachelorette was a bigger and more prolific program than when this episode was originally broadcast . In addition , ABC was not doing very well at the time of this episode 's production . The production staff encountered some trouble when deciding what Peter would be doing in the lobby with Cleveland during his Bachelorette audition ; although the series could never come up with ideas they deemed to be suitable , they intended for Peter to put his buttocks in an aquarium tank in order to embarrass Cleveland and make him want to leave . This scene was not used , and the production staff used a scene of Peter putting his naked buttocks on Cleveland 's naked buttocks ; they also shortened this more detailed version and used the less @-@ detailed current version . 
 During Cleveland 's audition for The Bachelorette , an unused scene was created that showed both Peter and Cleveland naked , with Peter sitting on top of Cleveland and bouncing up and down , as if he and Cleveland were engaging in anal sex , but broadcasting standards prohibited the scene . Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane comments in the DVD commentary that Walter Murphy , who composes much of the music for Family Guy , goes back and forth from standard Family Guy music to Bachelorette @-@ style music during the episode . During the sequence where Brian and Brooke are talking in the barn , originally , the two horses in the background were intended to begin mating , but the sketch was never used . Nancy Cartwright , voice actor of Bart Simpson on The Simpsons , and Michael Bell , voice actor of Chaz Finster on Rugrats , provided their voices for the Snorks reference . The name of Quagmire 's cat was originally " Pussy " , but broadcasting standards objected . The episode was originally to feature a sequence showing Chris breaking entry into Goldman 's Pharmacy in order to destroy the acne medication wearing a Balaclava , but the scene was never shown . The promo features Quagmire in a limo finding the girl of his dreams , but the scene was also cut . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 According to the commentary from the DVD , Chris ' talking pimple is a reference to Little Shop of Horrors . Chris shown waving his shirt above his head and being watched by Herbert through the window is a reference to 1978 comedy film National Lampoon 's Animal House . He @-@ Man from the Masters of the Universe media franchise is shown at the ranch during Brian 's time on The Bachelorette . The sequence of Peter and Lois at Mort Goldman 's pharmacy after the store vandalism is a reference to Fast Times at Ridgemont High , with Jeff <unk> coming out of the restroom . Brian 's phone call to Brooke after she selects him as a final contestant makes references to the Billy Vera song At This Moment . Disney CEO Michael Eisner is featured after Brooke reveals that " it 's just TV " . He comes out to give Brian a " consolation prize " , which turns out to be a bill for the Bachelorette mansion . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As the most @-@ watched Fox program that night , this episode had an audience of 7 @.@ 29 million . 
 In a positive review of the episode in Family Guy , Volume 3 , Dan MacIntosh of PopMatters praised the performance of Chris : 
 " Chris ' best scenes occur during " Brian The Bachelor " , where he is shown developing an unlikely friendship with one of his facial <unk> . " 
 By contrast , Family Guy , Volume 3 , included a negative review by Francis Rizzo III ( aka <unk> ) of DVD Talk : 
 " Among the more frustrating trends in the series is its willingness to stretch an unfunny joke to its very limits . When Stewie berated Brian for not finishing his novel for nearly two minutes , not once , but twice , in " Brian the Bachelor " , it tested my patience severely , and didn 't even make me smile . " 
 = FreeSpace 2 = 
 FreeSpace 2 is a 1999 space combat simulation computer game developed by Volition , Inc. as the sequel to Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War . It was completed ahead of schedule in less than a year , and released to very positive reviews . <unk> gameplay , excellent sound effects in addition to the inclusion of vocal talent such as Robert Loggia and Ronny Cox led several gaming sites to proclaim it as the definitive simulation game for 1999 . 
 The game continues on the story from Descent : FreeSpace , once again thrusting the player into the role of a pilot fighting against the mysterious aliens , the Shivans . While defending the human race and its alien Vasudan allies , the player also gets involved in putting down a rebellion . The game features large numbers of fighters alongside gigantic capital ships in a battlefield fraught with beams , shells and missiles in detailed star systems and nebulae . Free multiplayer games were available via Parallax Online which also ranked players by their statistics . A persistent galaxy was also available as SquadWar for players to fight with each other over territories . 
 In 2002 , Volition released the source code for the game engine under a non @-@ commercial license . This code became the core of the FreeSpace 2 Source Code Project , which continuously improves it and enables new features . In cooperation with the FreeSpace Upgrade Project the game 's graphics are kept up to date . The improved game engine is also used by various mod projects , for example The Babylon Project and Diaspora which are based on the science fiction series Babylon 5 and Battlestar Galactica respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 FreeSpace 2 's gameplay involves the player piloting a starfighter using mounted weapons to destroy enemy starfighters , performing reconnaissance behind enemy lines , or escorting other starships . Its flight model is based on a looser interpretation of space physics instead of realistic Newtonian physics . Hence , the ships are weightless and feel more responsive , though they require constant application of engine power to move . The result is that the game plays more like a " WWII dogfight simulator " unaffected by gravity . Although joysticks are the recommended controller for this game , the mouse is a viable alternative . Single player mode is executed in the form of a campaign , which follows a story as a linear sequence of missions are executed . 
 The pre @-@ mission briefing stage is where the player gets information on the background and objectives , and selects the ship and weapons . The choices of ships and weapons increase as the player proceeds further along the campaign . Certain missions , however , will dictate certain ships and weapons to be used . Weapons can be classified into primary weapons and secondary weapons . Primary weapons are kinetic and energy weapons , while missiles and torpedoes are classified as secondary weapons . Each weapon has its own specifications such as its rate of fire . They also inflict different damages on hulls ( body of the ships ) or shields ( the protective energy fields surrounding the ships ) , or possess special effects such as shutting down specific electronic systems or propulsion . 
 The player flies around in a fighter with a first @-@ person , in @-@ cockpit view with a fully customizable fixed head @-@ up display ( HUD ) as the visual interface . The HUD displays video communications and relevant data on the ship 's status and performance , weapons , objectives , and targets . It can also warn players from which direction missiles are locking onto them from , thus becoming an aide for launching countermeasures or taking evasive maneuvers . Players have to maneuver into position and shoot through both shields and hull to destroy enemy ships . While hull damage is unrecoverable , shields recharge over time . With the game supporting force feedback technology , joystick players will find their controllers vibrating or putting up resistance when they engage the afterburners or collide with objects . Similarly , certain events , such as engaging afterburners and firing powerful weapons , will shake the screen as a form of visual feedback . 
 FreeSpace 2 has many helpful features available . The player can target enemies attacking a protected objective or match speeds with them . Power can be shunted between shields , engines , and weapons , thereby allowing faster recharge of shields , afterburners , and weapons at the expense of other subsystems . These features can be ignored without any detrimental effects on gameplay . The mission parameters are not rigidly fixed , as there is an allowance for the failures of some primary objectives . When the mission is concluded , a post @-@ mission briefing will be conducted to discuss the mission , and the performance of the player , before the next mission can be taken on . 
 FreeSpace 2 allows multiplayer games to be played across a local area network ( LAN ) or over the Internet via the free services provided by Parallax Online ( PXO ) . The player can communicate with the other network players vocally through FreeSpace 2 's own voice chat capability . LAN play allows the players to play the standard player versus player modes such as deathmatch , or cooperate to complete multiplayer missions . They can even join in games which are already underway . The same can be done over PXO but with the added incentive of having the players ' statistics of kills and deaths being tracked on a ladder ( ranking ) system . Players can also form up or join squadrons in SquadWar , an online persistent galaxy hosted by Volition on PXO , where squadrons fight each other for territories . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 FreeSpace 2 takes place entirely in outer space . The playing area is vast when compared to the small starfighters piloted by the player and the effective range they have . This space is populated with interstellar bodies such as stars , planets , asteroids , etc . The implementation of nebulae as an interactive environment is one of the most distinctive and crowning aspects of FreeSpace 2 . Flying through a nebula involves impaired vision , and occasional disruptions to flight electronics . Nebulae have become known as an eerie and suspenseful arena of play . 
 Journeys between star systems are achieved by " jumping " through jump nodes and traveling through subspace , while shorter intra @-@ system distances are done by " hopping " into subspace at any time . All ships in a mission either " jump " or " hop " to make their entries and exits . The game 's starship designs are clearly distinguishable between the three races . Terran starships tend to be plain and practical , the Vasudans ' starships are artistic with sleek lines and curves , and the enemies ' ships — the Shivans — are sharp , pointy and asymmetrical in insidious black and red colors . FreeSpace 2 also features humongous capital ships , hundreds of times larger than the fighters , and armed to the teeth with beam weapons and flak guns . These ships are commonly scripted to seek each other out and engage in massive duels . 
 FreeSpace 2 's story is brought out via narrative pre @-@ rendered cutscenes , the pre- and post @-@ mission briefings , as well as in @-@ game chatter between non @-@ player characters , and scripted mission events . The structure for the story is linear without any branching paths for alternate storylines , though there are optional covert missions which can further flesh out the story . The story can only be continued by clearing missions and progressing through the campaign . However , players are given the option to skip a mission if they have failed it five times in a row . This gives those who are interested in the story , but less skilled , the chance to continue on with the story without frustration . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player takes the role of a pilot in the ranks of the Galactic Terran – Vasudan Alliance ( GTVA ) . While the appearance and name of the pilot can be customized by the player , the player never gets to personally interact with other characters in the game . The pilot is also never shown in the game 's cinematics or any other media . This distant approach led to complaints of the game failing to motivate the player into the story . However , the game 's writer , James Scott , has stated the approach was to preserve the feeling of being a " nameless cog in the great machine " as per the first game . 
 Just like the player 's pilot , most of the other characters are low @-@ key . The non @-@ player character Admiral <unk> Bosch , however , plays a crucial part in moving the story . As a prominent antagonist from the start , he sparks off a rebellion which escalates the scale of action , and brings in the other antagonist force , the Shivans , into the story . The storytelling took on a character @-@ driven approach with expositions taking the form of cutscenes in which Bosch gives out monologues , revealing the purpose and driving forces behind his actions . A few established voice actors were brought in to give a polished touch to the voices in the game . Academy Award nominee Robert Loggia voiced the player 's commanding officer , Admiral Petrarch , and Admiral Bosch was voiced by Ronny Cox . Kurtwood Smith and Stephen Baldwin participated in bit roles as well . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins 32 years after the events in Descent : FreeSpace . Following the end of the Great War , both the GTA and PVE cemented their alliance by combining together to form the Galactic Terran – Vasudan Alliance ( GTVA ) — a single entity formed to cement the alliance between the Terran and Vasudan races after the destruction of <unk> Prime by the Lucifer and the subsequent collapse of all subspace nodes to the Sol system as a result of the <unk> 's destruction inside the Sol – Delta Serpentis jump node . Despite this alliance , however , opposition still exists to this union in the form of a faction of Terrans led by Great War veteran , Admiral <unk> Bosch , who leads the rebel group under the banner of the Neo @-@ Terran Front ( NTF ) . The NTF 's rebellion led to the faction gaining control over the Sirius , Polaris and Regulus star systems , while engaging the GTVA for 18 months , before launching attacks on the Vasudan systems of Deneb and Alpha Centauri . 
 Seeking to stop the NTF from securing Deneb , the GTVA launch a campaign in the star system , though they are shocked to find Bosch within . An effort to stop him fails badly , and so the GTVA focus on securing the star system , with great success . Just as further engagements against the NTF are about to commence , an incident in the Gamma Draconis system leads to the 3rd Fleet of the GTVA being reassigned to the star system , where they learn that the Shivans have returned , along with the discovery of an artificial jump gate that leads to Shivan space . After securing the device and passing through it , the GTVA discover a nebula along with more Shivans , and a cruiser of the NTF , the Trinity . Despite efforts to secure and recover the cruiser , the Trinity is destroyed , and the GTVA fleet focus on dealing with the Shivans , before returning to Gamma Draconis for reassignment . 
 The NTF rebellion soon becomes the focus of attention once again after attacks intensify , eventually leading the GTVA to quell an attack on a space station with their latest ship , the enormous capital ship GTVA Colossus . Dwarfing all other capital ships , this juggernaut @-@ class ship 's power proves more than a match to many NTF ships , defeating a major officer in the rebellion . Seeking to <unk> on this , the <unk> ( Galactic Terran – Vasudan Intelligence ) organise an operation with their SOC ( Special Operation Command ) to investigate and uncover information on Bosch 's ETAK project , which is nearly wrecked when a Vasudan admiral attempts to hit Bosch 's flagship , the Iceni . 
 Following the latest campaign against the NTF , GTVA forces re @-@ engage Shivan forces in the nebula , while testing out new weapon and technology prototypes such as an AWACS cruiser that enables better vision in the nebula , a TAG missile that enables friendly capital ships to instantly lock on to the " tagged " enemy ship , and the Pegasus @-@ class stealth fighter . With the aid of these new technologies , the Alliance destroys a Shivan Ravana @-@ class destroyer . The 3rd Fleet soon return to GTVA space , where Bosch launches an assault to get the NTF to the Jump Gate . While the NTF loses many ships , the Iceni escapes with Bosch on board , thanks to sabotage preventing the GTVA Colossus from firing on it . While pursuing Bosch into the nebula , the GTVA attack Shivan nebular gas mining operations , only for the Shivans to retaliate with a juggernaut @-@ class warship of their own , dubbed the Sathanas . The Sathanas enters Terran – Vasudan space , despite an effort to destroy the jump gate linking the nebula to Gamma Draconis ; the node between the two system had stabilised at some point . With the Shivans encroaching on GTVA space , the Sathanas is engaged by the Colossus as it enters the densely populated Capella system and , thanks to the player 's efforts in disabling its beam turrets , is destroyed in the engagement . 
 The Alliance Fleet soon resumes it efforts to track down Bosch , and discover that Bosch had built a device that enables him to communicate with the Shivans , which was the purpose of ETAK ; the Alliance realise the jump gate was activated by Bosch , who had been stealing artefacts from archaeological sites looking into the Ancients , and had been hoping to meet and contact the Shivans . The Shivans respond to his transmission , and in turn board his command frigate , the Iceni , and capture him and fifteen other crewmen before attempting to destroy it . The GTVA manage to save the surviving crew of the Iceni and the ETAK device , but as they try to intercept the Shivan transport carrying Bosch , they discover a second jump gate in the nebula , which the Alliance destroyer , the <unk> Psamtik , attempts to secure . However , it is destroyed by another Sathanas juggernaut shortly afterwards , forcing the GTVA to pull out . During this time , the <unk> and SOC launch a secret operation within the nebula , at great risk , to recover an operative and check the other side of the gate , discovering the threat posed to the GTVA by the Shivans is much greater than they had thought . 
 The Alliance devises a plan to halt the Shivan invasion while evacuating civilians and others from the Capella star system , by collapsing the two jump nodes from Capella to the rest of GTVA space . The Alliance plans to recreate the same conditions that collapsed the Sol jump nodes — namely a sufficiently powerful meson explosion , using a number of Great War @-@ era destroyers , including the Bastion , which the GTVA send out to collapse the Capella – Epsilon Pegasi node by detonating its payload while it is within the node . 
 The plan works but it is pyrrhic victory , as the GTVA loses the Colossus , their only match for Shivan juggernauts , in a diversionary engagement at the other end of the Capella system . With not much left to do but escort the remaining evacuation convoys to the Capella – Vega jump node while a second payload is sent to the jump node , the GTVA soon begins to detect activity from the system 's star , which is being bombarded with an intense subspace field by numerous Sathanas @-@ class ships . This causes the star to goes supernova , destroying the fighting GTVA and Shivans in system . The player can choose to flee the scene when the warning is given or stay and die defending the remaining ships , which affects the ending slightly . In the ending cutscene the player 's commanding officer , Admiral Petrarch , delivers a speech about everything the Alliance has lost , speculating on the nature of the Shivans and why they destroyed the Capella star , and if the player decides to stay , a small tribute is paid to the player 's heroic actions as Petrarch informs his wingmen of his sacrifice . The Admiral concludes by saying that the Alliance now has the means to recreate the Ancient subspace gate , implying that there 's a chance the node to Earth can be restored and that this conflict didn 't bring only sorrow , before signing off . 
 = = Development = = 
 The news of FreeSpace 2 being in development was confirmed in a chat on November 6 , 1998 . The Volition team revealed they had written up a deep story and will be targeting high @-@ end hardware with dogfights for a greater number of ships and even larger and more deadly capital ships . The team set themselves the goals of setting new standards for both single @-@ player and multiplayer space combat simulations , and started to modify the FreeSpace game engine for FreeSpace 2 . This team was the same team which had worked on Descent : FreeSpace , plus several new members . In order to flesh out the story , Volition hired Jason Scott as a full @-@ time writer before work even started . The linear mission structure was adopted as it was decided it would help the immersion factor of the story greatly . As the relations between the Terrans and Vasudans dominated the first game , it was decided to scale the focus down to a personal level with Admiral Bosch and his decisions to rebel . Scott 's close work with the designers , and co @-@ ordination of the voice recording process helped to tightly integrate the story into the missions , giving a more sophisticated feel to the story . 
 Due to time constraints , a lot of the initial ideas were dropped from the final version of the game , such as atmospheric battles , and new weapons types like a " subspace missile artillery strike " . The team made major improvements to the same FreeSpace engine from the first game . By revamping the core of the graphical engine , and adding 32 @-@ bit support , they sped up the interface screens and graphic processing . Hardware acceleration for the graphics was also decided to be a requirement to target the high @-@ end machines of 1999 . This allowed for a greater number of ships visibly active on the battlefield , satisfying the team 's penchant of having great numbers of fighters and capitals ships duking it out in a big battlefield , instead of " multiple small @-@ ass " battles . The shifting of their target focus to higher end machines also fulfilled their top priority of having capital ships many times larger than fighter crafts . The team also followed real world concepts for some of their designs . The Pegasus stealth fighter was modeled on the stealth technology of the 1990s for people to relate to it easily . The game was restrained from becoming too realistic by the team 's recognition that most gamers only want believable worlds to have a blast flying around in and blowing things up . 
 Compared to the graphical changes , the artificial intelligence ( AI ) of the computer @-@ controlled characters was only slightly changed . The justification given was that the team felt the AI worked very well for the first game . All they had to do was to tweak it a little and fix some bugs . There was , however , a lot of work done in improving the multiplayer portion of the game . For FreeSpace 2 , the player 's personal computer was assigned a greater role in predicting the possible consequences for other players ' actions . This reduced the amount of data needed to be transferred between the computers , which would result in a smoother playing experience . Beta testers were recruited to stress test and troubleshoot the multiplayer mode as well . SquadWar was implemented as an attempt to establish a sense of continuity among the players in the form of a persistent online territorial fight , along with pilot statistics and ladder rankings . Volition hoped this concept would help to establish a strong , online community and build up the game 's lifespan . The process of fixing the bugs detected was even publicly published on the game 's official website as the " Bug Fix of the Day " feature . 
 FreeSpace 2 was released on September 30 , 1999 , one month ahead of schedule . However , the team had to quickly come up with and release a patch ( version 1 @.@ 01 ) for a software bug which prevented recognition of a CD during the installation process . Three months later , they released the next and final patch ( version 1 @.@ 20 ) to fix several other bugs . The release of FreeSpace 2 was considerably muted compared to its predecessor Descent : FreeSpace . Its publisher , Interplay , did not organize contests for it , nor did they generate pre @-@ release hype up with the same drive as before . They also posted the incorrect system requirements for the game on their site . FreeSpace 2 was also placed on less @-@ visible shelves than Descent 3 . However , when GameSpot awarded FreeSpace 2 the " Sci @-@ Fi Simulation of the Year " award , Interplay pushed out the " Sci @-@ Fi Sim of the Year Edition " to capitalize on it . 
 Despite Volition 's interest and desire to develop add @-@ ons and expansions for FreeSpace 2 , Interplay told them to stop . Volition was then acquired by THQ in 2000 . As Interplay owns the rights to the FreeSpace series ( as well as the Descent series ) and Volition 's owners , THQ , is only interested in pursuing development on what they own , Volition was unable to continue developing the FreeSpace franchise . Faced with source code which became practically useless to them , Volition released the source code for only game engines to the public under a noncommercial license on April 25 , 2002 . Mike Kulas , the President of Volition , said this was to give those outside the game industry a chance to look at the code of a commercial software product , a desire he and Matt <unk> had when they were not yet in the industry . In the years since , no sequels to FreeSpace 2 have been made and Interplay has only published a limited re @-@ release of it on February 2 , 2004 , to commemorate the company 's 20th anniversary . Interplay , by that time , was in financial trouble , failing to pay rent and wages to its workers . Seeking investors to inject it with funds , Interplay changed business strategies : instead of developing and publishing single @-@ player games , it sold licenses to those games and looked towards developing massive multi @-@ player online games . Derek Smart , creator of Battlecruiser <unk> , had casually mentioned his interest in the <unk> license , but nothing significant came out of this . In 2013 , Interplay acquired the remaining rights to the FreeSpace franchise for $ 7 @,@ 500 after THQ went to bankruptcy court . 
 = = Reception = = 
 FreeSpace 2 has garnered high praise from most established reviewers . FreeSpace 2 received numerous " Game of the Year " awards for 1999 , and was nominated for " Computer Simulation Game of the Year " in the 3rd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards , 2000 . Every review praised FreeSpace 2 's graphics . From the ships to the backgrounds , the reviewers were pleased with the details Volition had paid attention to , such as the thematic differences in the ship designs between the races , the textures and clarity of the backdrops , and even the realism of the explosions , though FiringSquad pointed out explosions from torpedo strikes were lower in quality . The nebulae feature was also praised for its rendered atmosphere , which reviewers described as tense and paranoia @-@ inducing as they keep expecting enemy ships to appear out of the gases in a deadly ambush . Even though a couple of reviewers wrote that the nebulae made them dizzy , they still liked the feature . Combatsim even claimed FreeSpace 2 was unrivaled among its space combat peers in the graphics department . The graphical standards were such that when <unk> reviewed the Anniversary Edition in 2004 , Wehbi found the graphics to stand up quite well to the recent games then . 
 GameSpot felt FreeSpace 's story was " both deeper and darker " than either the Wing Commander and X @-@ Wing series , establishing invincible foes who never lost their stature despite the player learning of plausible ways to defeat them . Game Revolution felt the story was " first rate " for being able to " build several different conflicts into an unforgettable climax " , nicely presented by the emphasis of story telling by means of in @-@ game events . While Eurogamer supported the story as intriguing , it also marked down its rating of the game for the way the story was told . The reviewer felt the " just a cog in the machine " story @-@ telling approach left him apathetic towards the non @-@ player characters and missions in the game . FiringSquad , however , said it created a " very believable military atmosphere , " which helped to show how things revolve around big events , instead of just around a single person . Combatsim.com offered another angle ; Reynolds said the gameplay elements of FreeSpace 2 are " light years beyond the competition " and more than offsets the loss of being personally immersed in the game 's universe . 
 FreeSpace 2 's key attraction is its dogfights . CNN.com said the close @-@ ranged dogfights make for engrossing , and exciting skirmishes . FiringSquad described it as a " total thrill " to be among 20 fighters flying in between opposing capital ships with beams , missiles , and flak all around and warnings going off , as they try to seek out and destroy their opposite numbers , a view which GameSpot agreed with . The game 's AI was judged adequate to provide for such fights , being cunning enough to trick others to crash into the walls of narrow openings , and good enough to detect and warn their wingmen of enemies coming up directly behind them . There are those who expressed minor disappointments with the AI tending to collide too often with other objects . While the dynamic mission objectives were celebrated for coming up with twists and turns to spice up the story , there were a few who found these " in @-@ game red herrings " overused instead . Sharky Extreme praised FreeSpace 2 for having the enormous capital ships , as this burst the " trapped in a bubble " trend in Wing <unk> and X @-@ Wing- type games . Instead of the action simply coming to the player , it flows all around , and the player is the one who has to go and seek it . The scenes of these giant ships duking it out , with many gnat @-@ like fighters swarming around in their little dances of death , have led reviewers to feel a sense of epicness , comparable to reliving battles in science fiction series like Babylon 5 and Star Wars . Similarly , PC Gamer praised the scaling of ships and battles and said that they " [ came ] as close to creating the feeling of a World War II naval battle in space as any game has ever come " and that " That 's what fighter combat , in space or on Earth , should be all about . " . 
 Opinions were generally favorable towards FreeSpace 2 's multiplayer implementation . SquadWar received favorable responses from the reviewers who were impressed by its persistent nature and statistics tracking . While the required registration with PXO was considered a troublesome process by a few , the gameplay itself was a smooth experience with no lag at all . Other reviewers ' experiences with lag were different . Reynolds of Combatsim.com said Internet gaming was <unk> with ships jumping places , but LAN gaming was smooth sailing . GameSpy 's reviewer said lag became more apparent on a dial @-@ up connection during a multiplayer mission with four or more players . FiringSquad 's reviewer 's experience was similar but he said the lag was not enough to hinder his enjoyment of the multiplayer action . 
 GameSpot , in electing FreeSpace 2 as one of the " Greatest Games of All Time " , pointed out that while most of the game 's features could be found in its predecessor or peers , its " sheer quality of presentation and gameplay " was the key reason for their choice . Computer and Video Games has acknowledged it as offering the best dogfighting among the space combat classics . Ars Technica also posed FreeSpace 2 as the last significant stage in evolution of the space combat genre as of 2005 . 
 Despite all the glowing reviews , FreeSpace 2 sold poorly . The April 2000 issue of PC Gamer stated that only 26 @,@ 983 copies had been sold in the first six months of its release . These figures were acknowledged as disappointing , and described as awful by Kulas . He , however , stated that as the team had stayed within budget by sticking to schedule , Volition should at least be breaking even with the estimated final sales of the game . In NowGamer 's interview with Jim Boone , a producer at Volition Inc . , he stated that this could have been due to joysticks ' being sold poorly because they were " going out of fashion " because more modern first @-@ person shooters , such as Quake , were " very much about the mouse and [ the ] keyboard " . He went further on to state " Before that , when we did Descent for example , it was perfectly common for people to have joysticks – we sold a lot of copies of Descent . It was around that time [ when ] the more modern FPS with mouse and keyboard came out , as opposed to just keyboard like Wolfenstein [ 3D ] or something . " . 
 Fans of the FreeSpace series have created modifications ( mods ) of FreeSpace 2 . The first mods were just custom campaigns , with series of missions created through <unk> , the mission editor freely packaged with FreeSpace 2 . One such mod which gained notability was Inferno , which sets its story decades after the conclusion of FreeSpace 2 . Released in July 2003 , the mod was hosted on established sites , such as GameSpot and CNET , as part of their FreeSpace 2 contents . 
 = = Source code project = = 
 With the release of the game engine 's source code , the possibilities of changing the game greatly opened up , and the fan community made use of the code to update the game using recent technology . Led by Edward Gardner and Ian Warfield , the FreeSpace 2 Source Code Project was formed to standardize changes and maintain a core engine for others to take advantage of . Using the new fan @-@ updated engine , projects such as Beyond the Red Line , based on the new Battlestar Galactica , and The Babylon Project , based on Babylon 5 , have become possible . PXO , the free Internet gaming service handling SquadWar , was initially acquired by THQ in their 2002 acquisition of Outrage Entertainment ( renamed as Outrage Games ) . The service was continued until July 2003 , when Outrage Games was dissolved and PXO terminated . The components of its website were , however , later handed over to the FreeSpace 2 Source Code Project to help them create a similar service in tracking statistics and rankings . 
 = Demosthenes = 
 Demosthenes ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> <unk> [ <unk> ] ; 384 – 322 BC ) was a Greek statesman and orator of ancient Athens . His orations constitute a significant expression of contemporary Athenian intellectual prowess and provide an insight into the politics and culture of ancient Greece during the 4th century BC . Demosthenes learned rhetoric by studying the speeches of previous great orators . He delivered his first judicial speeches at the age of 20 , in which he argued effectively to gain from his guardians what was left of his inheritance . For a time , Demosthenes made his living as a professional speech @-@ writer ( logographer ) and a lawyer , writing speeches for use in private legal suits . 
 Demosthenes grew interested in politics during his time as a logographer , and in 354 BC he gave his first public political speeches . He went on to devote his most productive years to opposing Macedon 's expansion . He idealized his city and strove throughout his life to restore Athens ' supremacy and motivate his compatriots against Philip II of Macedon . He sought to preserve his city 's freedom and to establish an alliance against Macedon , in an unsuccessful attempt to impede Philip 's plans to expand his influence southward by conquering all the other Greek states . 
 After Philip 's death , Demosthenes played a leading part in his city 's uprising against the new king of Macedonia , Alexander the Great . However , his efforts failed and the revolt was met with a harsh Macedonian reaction . To prevent a similar revolt against his own rule , Alexander 's successor in this region , Antipater , sent his men to track Demosthenes down . Demosthenes took his own life , in order to avoid being arrested by Archias , Antipater 's confidant . 
 The Alexandrian Canon compiled by Aristophanes of Byzantium and Aristarchus of Samothrace recognised Demosthenes as one of the ten greatest Attic orators and <unk> . Longinus likened Demosthenes to a blazing thunderbolt , and argued that he " perfected to the utmost the tone of lofty speech , living passions , <unk> , readiness , speed " . Quintilian extolled him as lex <unk> ( " the standard of oratory " ) , and Cicero said about him that inter omnis <unk> <unk> ( " he stands alone among all the orators " ) , and he also acclaimed him as " the perfect orator " who lacked nothing . 
 = = Early years and personal life = = 
 = = = Family and personal life = = = 
 Demosthenes was born in 384 BC , during the last year of the 98th Olympiad or the first year of the 99th Olympiad . His father — also named Demosthenes — who belonged to the local tribe , <unk> , and lived in the deme of <unk> in the Athenian countryside , was a wealthy sword @-@ maker . Aeschines , Demosthenes ' greatest political rival , maintained that his mother <unk> was a Scythian by blood — an allegation disputed by some modern scholars . Demosthenes was orphaned at the age of seven . Although his father provided well for him , his legal guardians , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , mishandled his inheritance . 
 As soon as Demosthenes came of age in 366 BC , he demanded they render an account of their management . According to Demosthenes , the account revealed the misappropriation of his property . Although his father left an estate of nearly fourteen talents , ( equivalent to about 220 years of a labourer 's income at standard wages , or 11 million dollars in terms of median US annual incomes ) Demosthenes asserted his guardians had left nothing " except the house , and fourteen slaves and thirty silver minae " ( 30 minae = ½ talent ) . At the age of 20 Demosthenes sued his trustees in order to recover his patrimony and delivered five orations : three Against <unk> during 363 and 362 BC and two Against <unk> during 362 and 361 BC . The courts fixed Demosthenes ' damages at ten talents . When all the trials came to an end , he only succeeded in retrieving a portion of his inheritance . 
 According to Pseudo @-@ Plutarch , Demosthenes was married once . The only information about his wife , whose name is unknown , is that she was the daughter of Heliodorus , a prominent citizen . Demosthenes also had a daughter , " the only one who ever called him father " , according to Aeschines in a trenchant remark . His daughter died young and unmarried a few days before Philip II 's death . 
 In his speeches , Aeschines uses pederastic relations of Demosthenes as a means to attack him . In the case of <unk> , a youth from Plataea who lived for a long time in Demosthenes ' house , Aeschines mocks the " scandalous " and " improper " relation . In another speech , Aeschines brings up the pederastic relation of his opponent with a boy called <unk> . The slander that Demosthenes ' wife also slept with the boy suggests that the relationship was contemporary with his marriage . Aeschines claims that Demosthenes made money out of young rich men , such as Aristarchus , the son of Moschus , whom he allegedly deceived with the pretence that he could make him a great orator . Apparently , while still under Demosthenes ' tutelage , Aristarchus killed and mutilated a certain Nicodemus of <unk> . Aeschines accused Demosthenes of complicity in the murder , pointing out that Nicodemus had once pressed a lawsuit accusing Demosthenes of desertion . He also accused Demosthenes of having been such a bad <unk> to Aristarchus so as not even to deserve the name . His crime , according to Aeschines , was to have betrayed his eromenos by pillaging his estate , allegedly pretending to be in love with the youth so as to get his hands on the boy 's inheritance . Nevertheless , the story of Demosthenes ' relations with Aristarchus is still regarded as more than doubtful , and no other pupil of Demosthenes is known by name . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Between his coming of age in 366 BC and the trials that took place in 364 BC , Demosthenes and his guardians negotiated acrimoniously but were unable to reach an agreement , for neither side was willing to make concessions . At the same time , Demosthenes prepared himself for the trials and improved his oratory skill . According to a story repeated by Plutarch , when Demosthenes was an adolescent , his curiosity was noticed by the orator <unk> , who was then at the height of his reputation , having just won a case of considerable importance . According to Friedrich Nietzsche , a German philologist and philosopher , and Constantine Paparrigopoulos , a major modern Greek historian , Demosthenes was a student of Isocrates ; according to Cicero , <unk> and the Roman biographer <unk> , he was a student of Plato . Lucian , a Roman @-@ Syrian rhetorician and satirist , lists the philosophers Aristotle , Theophrastus and Xenocrates among his teachers . These claims are nowadays disputed . According to Plutarch , Demosthenes employed Isaeus as his master in rhetoric , even though Isocrates was then teaching this subject , either because he could not pay Isocrates the prescribed fee or because Demosthenes believed Isaeus 's style better suited a vigorous and astute orator such as himself . Curtius , a German archaeologist and historian , likened the relation between Isaeus and Demosthenes to " an intellectual armed alliance " . 
 It has also been said that Demosthenes paid Isaeus 10 @,@ 000 drachmae ( somewhat over 1 @.@ 5 talents ) on the condition that Isaeus should withdraw from a school of rhetoric which he had opened , and should devote himself wholly to Demosthenes , his new pupil . Another version credits Isaeus with having taught Demosthenes without charge . According to Sir Richard C. Jebb , a British classical scholar , " the intercourse between Isaeus and Demosthenes as teacher and learner can scarcely have been either very intimate or of very long duration " . Konstantinos <unk> , a Greek professor and academician , believes that Isaeus helped Demosthenes edit his initial judicial orations against his guardians . Demosthenes is also said to have admired the historian Thucydides . In the Illiterate Book @-@ <unk> , Lucian mentions eight beautiful copies of Thucydides made by Demosthenes , all in Demosthenes ' own handwriting . These references hint at his respect for a historian he must have assiduously studied . 
 = = = Speech training = = = 
 According to Plutarch , when Demosthenes first addressed himself to the people , he was derided for his strange and uncouth style , " which was <unk> with long sentences and tortured with formal arguments to a most harsh and disagreeable excess " . Some citizens , however , discerned his talent . When he first left the ecclesia ( the Athenian Assembly ) disheartened , an old man named <unk> encouraged him , saying his diction was very much like that of Pericles . Another time , after the ecclesia had refused to hear him and he was going home dejected , an actor named <unk> followed him and entered into a friendly conversation with him . 
 As a boy Demosthenes had a speech impediment : Plutarch refers to a weakness in his voice of " a perplexed and indistinct utterance and a shortness of breath , which , by breaking and <unk> his sentences much obscured the sense and meaning of what he spoke . " There are problems in Plutarch 's account , however , and it is probable that Demosthenes actually suffered <unk> , mispronouncing ρ ( r ) as λ ( l ) . Aeschines taunted him and referred to him in his speeches by the nickname " <unk> " , apparently invented by Demosthenes ' pedagogues or by the little boys with whom he was playing . Demosthenes undertook a disciplined programme to overcome his weaknesses and improve his delivery , including diction , voice and gestures . According to one story , when he was asked to name the three most important elements in oratory , he replied " Delivery , delivery and delivery ! " It is unknown whether such vignettes are factual accounts of events in Demosthenes ' life or merely anecdotes used to illustrate his perseverance and determination . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Legal career = = = 
 To make his living , Demosthenes became a professional litigant , both as a " logographer " , writing speeches for use in private legal suits , and advocate ( " <unk> " ) speaking on another 's behalf . He seems to have been able to manage any kind of case , adapting his skills to almost any client , including wealthy and powerful men . It is not unlikely that he became a teacher of rhetoric and that he brought pupils into court with him . However , though he probably continued writing speeches throughout his career , he stopped working as an advocate once he entered the political arena . 
 Judicial oratory had become a significant literary genre by the second half of the fifth century , as represented in the speeches of Demosthenes ' predecessors , Antiphon and Andocides . <unk> were a unique aspect of the Athenian justice system : evidence for a case was compiled by a magistrate in a preliminary hearing and litigants could present it as they pleased within set speeches ; however , witnesses and documents were popularly mistrusted ( since they could be secured by force or bribery ) , there was little cross @-@ examination during the trial , there were no instructions to the jury from a judge , no conferencing between jurists before voting , the juries were huge ( typically between 201 and 501 members ) , cases depended largely on questions of probable motive , and notions of natural justice were felt to take precedence over written law — conditions that favoured artfully constructed speeches . 
 Since Athenian politicians were often indicted by their opponents , there wasn 't always a clear distinction between " private " and " public " cases , and thus a career as a logographer opened the way for Demosthenes to embark on his political career . An Athenian logographer could remain anonymous , which enabled him to serve personal interests , even if it prejudiced the client . It also left him open to allegations of malpractice . Thus for example Aeschines accused Demosthenes of unethically disclosing his clients ' arguments to their opponents ; in particular , that he wrote a speech for <unk> ( 350 BC ) , a wealthy banker , and then communicated it to Apollodorus , who was bringing a capital charge against <unk> . Plutarch much later supported this accusation , stating that Demosthenes " was thought to have acted dishonorably " and he also accused Demosthenes of writing speeches for both sides . It has often been argued that the deception , if there was one , involved a political quid pro quo , whereby Apollodorus secretly pledged support for unpopular reforms that Demosthenes was pursuing in the greater , public interest ( i.e. the diversion of <unk> Funds to military purposes ) . 
 = = = Early political activity = = = 
 Demosthenes was admitted to his deme as a citizen with full rights probably in 366 BC , and he soon demonstrated an interest in politics . In 363 and 359 BC , he assumed the office of the trierarch , being responsible for the outfitting and maintenance of a trireme . He was among the first ever volunteer trierarchs in 357 BC , sharing the expenses of a ship called Dawn , for which the public inscription still survives . In 348 BC , he became a <unk> , paying the expenses of a theatrical production . 
 Between 355 and 351 BC , Demosthenes continued practising law privately while he was becoming increasingly interested in public affairs . During this period , he wrote Against <unk> and Against <unk> , two fierce attacks on individuals who attempted to repeal certain tax exemptions . In Against Timocrates and Against Aristocrates , he advocated eliminating corruption . All these speeches , which offer early glimpses of his general principles on foreign policy , such as the importance of the navy , of alliances and of national honour , are prosecutions ( graphē <unk> ) against individuals accused of illegally proposing legislative texts . 
 In Demosthenes ' time , different political goals developed around personalities . Instead of electioneering , Athenian politicians used litigation and defamation to remove rivals from government processes . Often they indicted each other for breaches of the statute laws ( graphē <unk> ) , but accusations of bribery and corruption were ubiquitous in all cases , being part of the political dialogue . The orators often resorted to " character assassination " ( <unk> , <unk> ) tactics , both in the courts and in the Assembly . The rancorous and often hilariously exaggerated accusations , satirised by Old Comedy , were sustained by innuendo , inferences about motives , and a complete absence of proof ; as J. H. Vince states " there was no room for chivalry in Athenian political life " . Such rivalry enabled the " demos " or citizen @-@ body to reign supreme as judge , jury and executioner . Demosthenes was to become fully engaged in this kind of litigation and he was also to be instrumental in developing the power of the Areopagus to indict individuals for treason , invoked in the ecclesia by a process called " <unk> " . 
 In 354 BC , Demosthenes delivered his first political oration , On the Navy , in which he espoused moderation and proposed the reform of the <unk> ( boards ) as a source of funding for the Athenian fleet . In 352 BC , he delivered For the Megalopolitans and , in 351 BC , On the Liberty of the Rhodians . In both speeches he opposed Eubulus , the most powerful Athenian statesman of the period 355 to 342 BC . The latter was no pacifist but came to eschew a policy of aggressive interventionism in the internal affairs of the other Greek cities . Contrary to Eubulus 's policy , Demosthenes called for an alliance with Megalopolis against Sparta or Thebes , and for supporting the democratic faction of the Rhodians in their internal strife . His arguments revealed his desire to articulate Athens 's needs and interests through a more activist foreign policy , wherever opportunity might provide . 
 Although his early orations were unsuccessful and reveal a lack of real conviction and of coherent strategic and political prioritisation , Demosthenes established himself as an important political personality and broke with Eubulus 's faction , a prominent member of which was Aeschines . He thus laid the foundations for his future political successes and for becoming the leader of his own " party " ( the issue of whether the modern concept of political parties can be applied in the Athenian democracy is hotly disputed among modern scholars ) . 
 = = = Confrontation with Philip II = = = 
 = = = = First Philippic and the Olynthiacs ( 351 – 349 BC ) = = = = 
 For more details on this topic , see First Philippic and Olynthiacs 
 Most of Demosthenes ' major orations were directed against the growing power of King Philip II of Macedon . Since 357 BC , when Philip seized Amphipolis and Pydna , Athens had been formally at war with the Macedonians . In 352 BC , Demosthenes characterised Philip as the very worst enemy of his city ; his speech presaged the fierce attacks that Demosthenes would launch against the Macedonian king over the ensuing years . A year later he criticised those dismissing Philip as a person of no account and warned that he was as dangerous as the king of Persia . 
 In 352 BC , Athenian troops successfully opposed Philip at Thermopylae , but the Macedonian victory over the Phocians at the Battle of Crocus Field shook Demosthenes . In 351 BC , Demosthenes felt strong enough to express his view concerning the most important foreign policy issue facing Athens at that time : the stance his city should take towards Philip . According to Jacqueline de Romilly , a French philologist and member of the Académie française , the threat of Philip would give Demosthenes ' stances a focus and a raison d 'être ( reason for existence ) . Demosthenes saw the king of Macedon as a menace to the autonomy of all Greek cities and yet he presented him as a monster of Athens 's own creation ; in the First Philippic he reprimanded his fellow citizens as follows : " Even if something happens to him , you will soon raise up a second Philip [ ... ] " . 
 The theme of the First Philippic ( 351 – 350 BC ) was preparedness and the reform of the theoric fund , a mainstay of Eubulus 's policy . In his rousing call for resistance , Demosthenes asked his countrymen to take the necessary action and asserted that " for a free people there can be no greater compulsion than shame for their position " . He thus provided for the first time a plan and specific recommendations for the strategy to be adopted against Philip in the north . Among other things , the plan called for the creation of a rapid @-@ response force , to be created cheaply with each hoplite to be paid only ten drachmas ( two obols per day ) , which was less than the average pay for unskilled labourers in Athens – implying that the hoplite was expected to make up the deficiency in pay by looting . 
 From this moment until 341 BC , all of Demosthenes ' speeches referred to the same issue , the struggle against Philip . In 349 BC , Philip attacked Olynthus , an ally of Athens . In the three Olynthiacs , Demosthenes criticised his compatriots for being idle and urged Athens to help Olynthus . He also insulted Philip by calling him a " barbarian " . Despite Demosthenes ' strong advocacy , the Athenians would not manage to prevent the falling of the city to the Macedonians . Almost simultaneously , probably on Eubulus 's recommendation , they engaged in a war in Euboea against Philip , which ended in stalemate . 
 = = = = Case of Meidias ( 348 BC ) = = = = 
 In 348 BC a peculiar event occurred : Meidias , a wealthy Athenian , publicly slapped Demosthenes , who was at the time a <unk> at the Greater Dionysia , a large religious festival in honour of the god Dionysus . Meidias was a friend of Eubulus and supporter of the unsuccessful excursion in Euboea . He also was an old enemy of Demosthenes ; in 361 BC he had broken violently into his house , with his brother <unk> , to take possession of it . 
 Demosthenes decided to prosecute his wealthy opponent and wrote the judicial oration Against Meidias . This speech gives valuable information about Athenian law at the time and especially about the Greek concept of <unk> ( aggravated assault ) , which was regarded as a crime not only against the city but against society as a whole . He stated that a democratic state perishes if the rule of law is undermined by wealthy and unscrupulous men , and that the citizens acquire power and authority in all state affairs due " to the strength of the laws " . There is no consensus among scholars either on whether Demosthenes finally delivered Against Meidias or on the veracity of Aeschines ' accusation that Demosthenes was bribed to drop the charges . 
 = = = = Peace of Philocrates ( 347 – 345 BC ) = = = = 
 In 348 BC , Philip conquered Olynthus and razed it to the ground ; then conquered the entire Chalcidice and all the states of the <unk> federation that Olynthus had once led . After these Macedonian victories , Athens sued for peace with Macedon . Demosthenes was among those who favoured compromise . In 347 BC , an Athenian delegation , comprising Demosthenes , Aeschines and Philocrates , was officially sent to Pella to negotiate a peace treaty . In his first encounter with Philip , Demosthenes is said to have collapsed from fright . 
 The ecclesia officially accepted Philip 's harsh terms , including the renouncement of their claim to Amphipolis . However , when an Athenian delegation arrived at Pella to put Phillip under oath , which was required to conclude the treaty , he was campaigning abroad . He expected that he would hold safely any Athenian possessions which he might seize before the ratification . Being very anxious about the delay , Demosthenes insisted that the embassy should travel to the place where they would find Philip and swear him in without delay . Despite his suggestions , the Athenian envoys , including himself and Aeschines , remained in Pella , until Philip successfully concluded his campaign in Thrace . 
 Philip swore to the treaty , but he delayed the departure of the Athenian envoys , who had yet to receive the oaths from Macedon 's allies in Thessaly and elsewhere . Finally , peace was sworn at Pherae , where Philip accompanied the Athenian delegation , after he had completed his military preparations to move south . Demosthenes accused the other envoys of venality and of facilitating Philip 's plans with their stance . Just after the conclusion of the Peace of Philocrates , Philip passed Thermopylae , and subdued Phocis ; Athens made no move to support the Phocians . Supported by Thebes and Thessaly , Macedon took control of Phocis 's votes in the Amphictyonic League , a Greek religious organisation formed to support the greater temples of Apollo and Demeter . Despite some reluctance on the part of the Athenian leaders , Athens finally accepted Philip 's entry into the Council of the League . Demosthenes was among those who adopted a pragmatic approach , and recommended this stance in his oration On the Peace . For Edmund M. Burke , this speech landmarks a moment of maturation in Demosthenes ' career : after Philip 's successful campaign in 346 BC , the Athenian statesman realised that , if he was to lead his city against the Macedonians , he had " to adjust his voice , to become less partisan in tone " . 
 = = = = Second and Third <unk> ( 344 – 341 BC ) = = = = 
 For more details on this topic , see Second Philippic , On the Chersonese , Third Philippic 
 In 344 BC Demosthenes travelled to the Peloponnese , in order to detach as many cities as possible from Macedon 's influence , but his efforts were generally unsuccessful . Most of the Peloponnesians saw Philip as the guarantor of their freedom and sent a joint embassy to Athens to express their grievances against Demosthenes ' activities . In response , Demosthenes delivered the Second Philippic , a vehement attack against Philip . In 343 BC Demosthenes delivered On the False Embassy against Aeschines , who was facing a charge of high treason . Nonetheless , Aeschines was acquitted by the narrow margin of thirty votes by a jury which may have numbered as many as 1 @,@ 501 . 
 In 343 BC , Macedonian forces were conducting campaigns in Epirus and , in 342 BC , Philip campaigned in Thrace . He also negotiated with the Athenians an amendment to the Peace of Philocrates . When the Macedonian army approached Chersonese ( now known as the Gallipoli Peninsula ) , an Athenian general named <unk> ravaged the maritime district of Thrace , thereby inciting Philip 's rage . Because of this turbulence , the Athenian Assembly convened . Demosthenes delivered On the Chersonese and convinced the Athenians not to recall <unk> . Also in 342 BC , he delivered the Third Philippic , which is considered to be the best of his political orations . Using all the power of his eloquence , he demanded resolute action against Philip and called for a burst of energy from the Athenian people . He told them that it would be " better to die a thousand times than pay court to Philip " . Demosthenes now dominated Athenian politics and was able to considerably weaken the pro @-@ Macedonian faction of Aeschines . 
 = = = = Battle of Chaeronea ( 338 BC ) = = = = 
 In 341 BC Demosthenes was sent to Byzantium , where he sought to renew its alliance with Athens . Thanks to Demosthenes ' diplomatic manoeuvres , Abydos also entered into an alliance with Athens . These developments worried Philip and increased his anger at Demosthenes . The Assembly , however , laid aside Philip 's grievances against Demosthenes ' conduct and denounced the peace treaty ; so doing , in effect , amounted to an official declaration of war . In 339 BC Philip made his last and most effective bid to conquer southern Greece , assisted by Aeschines ' stance in the Amphictyonic Council . During a meeting of the Council , Philip accused the <unk> Locrians of intruding on consecrated ground . The presiding officer of the Council , a Thessalian named <unk> , proposed the convocation of an Amphictyonic Congress to inflict a harsh punishment upon the Locrians . Aeschines agreed with this proposition and maintained that the Athenians should participate in the Congress . Demosthenes however reversed Aeschines ' initiatives and Athens finally abstained . After the failure of a first military excursion against the Locrians , the summer session of the Amphictyonic Council gave command of the league 's forces to Philip and asked him to lead a second excursion . Philip decided to act at once ; in the winter of 339 – 338 BC , he passed through Thermopylae , entered <unk> and defeated the Locrians . After this significant victory , Philip swiftly entered Phocis in 338 BC . He then turned south @-@ east down the Cephissus valley , seized Elateia , and restored the fortifications of the city . 
 At the same time , Athens orchestrated the creation of an alliance with Euboea , Megara , Achaea , Corinth , Acarnania and other states in the Peloponnese . However the most desirable ally for Athens was Thebes . To secure their allegiance , Demosthenes was sent , by Athens , to the Boeotian city ; Philip also sent a deputation , but Demosthenes succeeded in securing Thebes 's allegiance . Demosthenes ' oration before the Theban people is not extant and , therefore , the arguments he used to convince the Thebans remain unknown . In any case , the alliance came at a price : Thebes 's control of Boeotia was recognised , Thebes was to command solely on land and jointly at sea , and Athens was to pay two thirds of the campaign 's cost . 
 While the Athenians and the Thebans were preparing themselves for war , Philip made a final attempt to appease his enemies , proposing in vain a new peace treaty . After a few trivial encounters between the two sides , which resulted in minor Athenian victories , Philip drew the phalanx of the Athenian and Theban confederates into a plain near Chaeronea , where he defeated them . Demosthenes fought as a mere hoplite . Such was Philip 's hatred for Demosthenes that , according to Diodorus Siculus , the king after his victory sneered at the misfortunes of the Athenian statesman . However , the Athenian orator and statesman <unk> is said to have remarked : " O King , when Fortune has cast you in the role of Agamemnon , are you not ashamed to act the part of Thersites ? [ an obscene soldier of the Greek army during the Trojan War ] " Stung by these words , Philip immediately altered his demeanour . 
 = = = Last political initiatives and death = = = 
 = = = = Confrontation with Alexander = = = = 
 After Chaeronea , Philip inflicted a harsh punishment upon Thebes , but made peace with Athens on very lenient terms . Demosthenes encouraged the fortification of Athens and was chosen by the ecclesia to deliver the Funeral Oration . In 337 BC , Philip created the League of Corinth , a confederation of Greek states under his leadership , and returned to Pella . In 336 BC , Philip was assassinated at the wedding of his daughter , Cleopatra of Macedon , to King Alexander of Epirus . The Macedonian army swiftly proclaimed Alexander III of Macedon , then twenty years old , as the new king of Macedon . Greek cities like Athens and Thebes saw in this change of leadership an opportunity to regain their full independence . Demosthenes celebrated Philip 's assassination and played a leading part in his city 's uprising . According to Aeschines , " it was but the seventh day after the death of his daughter , and though the ceremonies of mourning were not yet completed , he put a garland on his head and white raiment on his body , and there he stood making thank @-@ offerings , violating all decency . " Demosthenes also sent envoys to Attalus , whom he considered to be an internal opponent of Alexander . Nonetheless , Alexander moved swiftly to Thebes , which submitted shortly after his appearance at its gates . When the Athenians learned that Alexander had moved quickly to Boeotia , they panicked and begged the new king of Macedon for mercy . Alexander admonished them but imposed no punishment . 
 In 335 BC Alexander felt free to engage the Thracians and the Illyrians , but , while he was campaigning in the north , Demosthenes spread a rumour — even producing a bloodstained messenger — that Alexander and all of his expeditionary force had been slaughtered by the <unk> . The Thebans and the Athenians rebelled once again , financed by Darius III of Persia , and Demosthenes is said to have received about 300 talents on behalf of Athens and to have faced accusations of embezzlement . Alexander reacted immediately and razed Thebes to the ground . He did not attack Athens , but demanded the exile of all anti @-@ Macedonian politicians , Demosthenes first of all . According to Plutarch , a special Athenian embassy led by Phocion , an opponent of the anti @-@ Macedonian faction , was able to persuade Alexander to relent . 
 = = = = Delivery of On the Crown = = = = 
 Despite the unsuccessful ventures against Philip and Alexander , the Athenians still respected Demosthenes . In 336 BC , the orator Ctesiphon proposed that Athens honour Demosthenes for his services to the city by presenting him , according to custom , with a golden crown . This proposal became a political issue and , in 330 BC , Aeschines prosecuted Ctesiphon on charges of legal irregularities . In his most brilliant speech , On the Crown , Demosthenes effectively defended Ctesiphon and vehemently attacked those who would have preferred peace with Macedon . He was unrepentant about his past actions and policies and insisted that , when in power , the constant aim of his policies was the honour and the ascendancy of his country ; and on every occasion and in all business he preserved his loyalty to Athens . He finally defeated Aeschines , although his enemy 's objections to the crowning were arguably valid from a legal point of view . 
 = = = = Case of Harpalus and death = = = = 
 In 324 BC Harpalus , to whom Alexander had entrusted huge treasures , absconded and sought refuge in Athens . The Assembly had initially refused to accept him , following Demosthenes 's advice , but finally Harpalus entered Athens . He was imprisoned after a proposal of Demosthenes and Phocion , despite the dissent of Hypereides , an anti @-@ Macedonian statesman and former ally of Demosthenes . Additionally , the ecclesia decided to take control of Harpalus 's money , which was entrusted to a committee presided over by Demosthenes . When the committee counted the treasure , they found they only had half the money Harpalus had declared he possessed . Nevertheless , they decided not to disclose the deficit . When Harpalus escaped , the Areopagus conducted an inquiry and charged Demosthenes with mishandling twenty talents . During the trial , Hypereides argued that Demosthenes did not disclose the huge deficit , because he was bribed by Harpalus . Demosthenes was fined and imprisoned , but he soon escaped . It remains unclear whether the accusations against him were just or not . In any case , the Athenians soon repealed the sentence . 
 After Alexander 's death in 323 BC , Demosthenes again urged the Athenians to seek independence from Macedon in what became known as the <unk> War . However , Antipater , Alexander 's successor , quelled all opposition and demanded that the Athenians turn over Demosthenes and Hypereides , among others . Following his request , the ecclesia adopted a decree condemning the most prominent anti @-@ Macedonian agitators to death . Demosthenes escaped to a sanctuary on the island of <unk> ( modern @-@ day Poros ) , where he was later discovered by Archias , a confidant of Antipater . He committed suicide before his capture by taking poison out of a reed , pretending he wanted to write a letter to his family . When Demosthenes felt that the poison was working on his body , he said to Archias : " Now , as soon as you please you may commence the part of Creon in the tragedy , and cast out this body of mine unburied . But , O gracious Neptune , I , for my part , while I am yet alive , arise up and depart out of this sacred place ; though Antipater and the Macedonians have not left so much as the temple unpolluted . " After saying these words , he passed by the altar , fell down and died . Years after Demosthenes 's suicide , the Athenians erected a statue to honour him and decreed that the state should provide meals to his descendants in the <unk> . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Political career = = = 
 Plutarch lauds Demosthenes for not being of a fickle disposition . <unk> historian Theopompus , the biographer insists that for " the same party and post in politics which he held from the beginning , to these he kept constant to the end ; and was so far from leaving them while he lived , that he chose rather to forsake his life than his purpose " . On the other hand , Polybius , a Greek historian of the Mediterranean world , was highly critical of Demosthenes 's policies . Polybius accused him of having launched unjustified verbal attacks on great men of other cities , branding them unjustly as traitors to the Greeks . The historian maintains that Demosthenes measured everything by the interests of his own city , imagining that all the Greeks ought to have their eyes fixed upon Athens . According to Polybius , the only thing the Athenians eventually got by their opposition to Philip was the defeat at Chaeronea . " And had it not been for the king 's magnanimity and regard for his own reputation , their misfortunes would have gone even further , thanks to the policy of Demosthenes " . 
 Paparrigopoulos extols Demosthenes 's patriotism , but criticises him as being short @-@ sighted . According to this critique , Demosthenes should have understood that the ancient Greek states could only survive unified under the leadership of Macedon . Therefore , Demosthenes is accused of misjudging events , opponents and opportunities and of being unable to foresee Philip 's inevitable triumph . He is criticised for having overrated Athens 's capacity to revive and challenge Macedon . His city had lost most of its Aegean allies , whereas Philip had consolidated his hold over Macedonia and was master of enormous mineral wealth . Chris Carey , a professor of Greek in UCL , concludes that Demosthenes was a better orator and political operator than strategist . Nevertheless , the same scholar underscores that " pragmatists " like Aeschines or Phocion had no inspiring vision to rival that of Demosthenes . The orator asked the Athenians to choose that which is just and honourable , before their own safety and preservation . The people preferred Demosthenes 's activism and even the bitter defeat at Chaeronea was regarded as a price worth paying in the attempt to retain freedom and influence . According to Professor of Greek Arthur Wallace <unk> , success may be a poor criterion for judging the actions of people like Demosthenes , who were motivated by the ideal of political liberty . Athens was asked by Philip to sacrifice its freedom and its democracy , while Demosthenes longed for the city 's brilliance . He endeavoured to revive its imperilled values and , thus , he became an " educator of the people " ( in the words of Werner Jaeger ) . 
 The fact that Demosthenes fought at the battle of Chaeronea as a hoplite indicates that he lacked any military skills . According to historian Thomas Babington Macaulay , in his time the division between political and military offices was beginning to be strongly marked . Almost no politician , with the exception of Phocion , was at the same time an apt orator and a competent general . Demosthenes dealt in policies and ideas , and war was not his business . This contrast between Demosthenes 's intellectual prowess and his deficiencies in terms of vigour , stamina , military skill and strategic vision is illustrated by the inscription his countrymen engraved on the base of his statue : 
 Had you for Greece been strong , as wise you were , The Macedonian would not have conquered her . 
 = = = Oratorical skill = = = 
 In Demosthenes 's initial judicial orations , the influence of both Lysias and Isaeus is obvious , but his marked , original style is already revealed . Most of his extant speeches for private cases — written early in his career — show glimpses of talent : a powerful intellectual drive , masterly selection ( and omission ) of facts , and a confident assertion of the justice of his case , all ensuring the dominance of his viewpoint over his rival . However , at this early stage of his career , his writing was not yet remarkable for its subtlety , verbal precision and variety of effects . 
 According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus , a Greek historian and teacher of rhetoric , Demosthenes represented the final stage in the development of Attic prose . Both Dionysius and Cicero assert that Demosthenes brought together the best features of the basic types of style ; he used the middle or normal type style ordinarily and applied the archaic type and the type of plain elegance where they were fitting . In each one of the three types he was better than its special masters . He is , therefore , regarded as a consummate orator , adept in the techniques of oratory , which are brought together in his work . 
 According to the classical scholar Harry Thurston Peck , Demosthenes " affects no learning ; he aims at no elegance ; he seeks no glaring ornaments ; he rarely touches the heart with a soft or melting appeal , and when he does , it is only with an effect in which a third @-@ rate speaker would have surpassed him . He had no wit , no humour , no vivacity , in our acceptance of these terms . The secret of his power is simple , for it lies essentially in the fact that his political principles were interwoven with his very spirit . " In this judgement , Peck agrees with Jaeger , who said that the imminent political decision imbued Demosthenes 's speech with a fascinating artistic power . From his part , George A. Kennedy believes that his political speeches in the ecclesia were to become " the artistic exposition of reasoned views " . 
 Demosthenes was apt at combining abruptness with the extended period , brevity with breadth . Hence , his style <unk> with his fervent commitment . His language is simple and natural , never far @-@ fetched or artificial . According to Jebb , Demosthenes was a true artist who could make his art obey him . For his part , Aeschines stigmatised his intensity , attributing to his rival strings of absurd and incoherent images . Dionysius stated that Demosthenes 's only shortcoming is the lack of humour , although Quintilian regards this deficiency as a virtue . In a now lost letter , Cicero , though an admirer of the Athenian orator , claimed that occasionally Demosthenes " nods " , and elsewhere Cicero also argued that , although he is pre @-@ eminent , Demosthenes sometimes fails to satisfy his ears . The main criticism of Demosthenes 's art , however , seems to have rested chiefly on his known reluctance to speak extempore ; he often declined to comment on subjects he had not studied beforehand . However , he gave the most elaborate preparation to all his speeches and , therefore , his arguments were the products of careful study . He was also famous for his caustic wit . 
 Besides his style , Cicero also admired other aspects of Demosthenes 's works , such as the good prose rhythm , and the way he structured and arranged the material in his orations . According to the Roman statesman , Demosthenes regarded " delivery " ( gestures , voice etc . ) as more important than style . Although he lacked Aeschines 's charming voice and <unk> 's skill at improvisation , he made efficient use of his body to accentuate his words . Thus he managed to project his ideas and arguments much more forcefully . However , the use of physical gestures wasn 't an integral or developed part of rhetorical training in his day . Moreover , his delivery was not accepted by everybody in antiquity : Demetrius Phalereus and the comedians ridiculed Demosthenes 's " theatricality " , whilst Aeschines regarded <unk> of <unk> as superior to him . 
 Demosthenes relied heavily on the difference aspects of ethos , especially <unk> . When presenting himself to the Assembly , he had to depict himself as a credible and wise statesman and adviser in order to be persuasive . One tactic that Demosthenes used during his <unk> was foresight . He pleaded with his audience to predict the potential of being defeated , and to prepare . He appealed to pathos through patriotism and introducing the atrocities that would befall Athens if it was taken over by Philip . He was a master at “ self @-@ fashioning ” by referring to his previous accomplishments , and renewing his credibility . He would also slyly undermine his audience by claiming that they had been wrong to not listen before , however they could redeem themselves if they listened and acted with him presently . 
 Demosthenes tailored his style to be very audience @-@ specific . He took pride in not relying on attractive words but rather simple , effective prose . He was mindful of his arrangement , he used clauses to create patterns that would make seemingly complex sentences easy for the hearer to follow . His tendency to focus on delivery promoted him to use repetition , this would <unk> the importance into the audience ’ s minds ; he also relied on speed and delay to create suspense and interest among the audience when presenting to most important aspects of his speech . One of his most effective skills was his ability to strike a balance : his works were complex so that the audience would not be offended by any elementary language , but the most important parts were clear and easily understood . 
 = = Rhetorical legacy = = 
 Demosthenes 's fame has continued down the ages . Authors and scholars who flourished at Rome , such as Longinus and Caecilius , regarded his oratory as sublime . Juvenal acclaimed him as " <unk> et <unk> <unk> fons " ( a large and overflowing fountain of genius ) , and he inspired Cicero 's speeches against Mark Antony , also called the <unk> . According to Professor of Classics Cecil Wooten , Cicero ended his career by trying to imitate Demosthenes 's political role . Plutarch drew attention in his Life of Demosthenes to the strong similarities between the personalities and careers of Demosthenes and Marcus Tullius Cicero : 
 The divine power seems originally to have designed Demosthenes and Cicero upon the same plan , giving them many similarities in their natural characters , as their passion for distinction and their love of liberty in civil life , and their want of courage in dangers and war , and at the same time also to have added many accidental resemblances . I think there can hardly be found two other orators , who , from small and obscure beginnings , became so great and mighty ; who both contested with kings and tyrants ; both lost their daughters , were driven out of their country , and returned with honor ; who , flying from thence again , were both seized upon by their enemies , and at last ended their lives with the liberty of their countrymen . 
 During the Middle Ages and Renaissance , Demosthenes had a reputation for eloquence . He was read more than any other ancient orator ; only Cicero offered any real competition . French author and lawyer Guillaume du Vair praised his speeches for their artful arrangement and elegant style ; John Jewel , Bishop of Salisbury , and Jacques <unk> , a French Renaissance writer and translator , regarded Demosthenes as a great or even the " supreme " orator . For Thomas Wilson , who first published translation of his speeches into English , Demosthenes was not only an eloquent orator , but , mainly , an authoritative statesman , " a source of wisdom " . 
 In modern history , orators such as Henry Clay would mimic Demosthenes 's technique . His ideas and principles survived , influencing prominent politicians and movements of our times . Hence , he constituted a source of inspiration for the authors of The Federalist Papers ( a series of 85 essays arguing for the ratification of the United States Constitution ) and for the major orators of the French Revolution . French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau was among those who idealised Demosthenes and wrote a book about him . For his part , Friedrich Nietzsche often composed his sentences according to the paradigms of Demosthenes , whose style he admired . 
 = = Works and transmission = = 
 The " publication " and distribution of prose texts was common practice in Athens by the latter half of the fourth century BC and Demosthenes was among the Athenian politicians who set the trend , publishing many or even all of his orations . After his death , texts of his speeches survived in Athens ( possibly forming part of the library of Cicero 's friend , Atticus , though their fate is otherwise unknown ) , and in the Library of Alexandria . However , the speeches that Demosthenes " published " might have differed from the original speeches that were actually delivered ( there are indications that he rewrote them with readers in mind ) and therefore it is possible also that he " published " different versions of any one speech , differences that could have impacted on the Alexandrian edition of his works and thus on all subsequent editions down to the present day . 
 The Alexandrian texts were incorporated into the body of classical Greek literature that was preserved , catalogued and studied by scholars of the Hellenistic period . From then until the fourth century AD , copies of his orations multiplied and they were in a relatively good position to survive the tense period from the sixth until the ninth century AD . In the end , sixty @-@ one orations attributed to Demosthenes survived till the present day ( some however are pseudonymous ) . Friedrich Blass , a German classical scholar , believes that nine more speeches were recorded by the orator , but they are not extant . Modern editions of these speeches are based on four manuscripts of the tenth and eleventh centuries AD . 
 Some of the speeches that comprise the " Demosthenic corpus " are known to have been written by other authors , though scholars differ over which speeches these are . Irrespective of their status , the speeches attributed to Demosthenes are often grouped in three genres first defined by Aristotle : 
 <unk> or political , considering the expediency of future actions — sixteen such speeches are included in the Demosthenic corpus ; 
 <unk> or judicial , assessing the justice of past actions — only about ten of these are cases in which Demosthenes was personally involved , the rest were written for other speakers ; 
 <unk> or <unk> display , attributing praise or blame , often delivered at public ceremonies — only two speeches have been included in the Demosthenic corpus , one a funeral speech that has been dismissed as a " rather poor " example of his work , and the other probably spurious . 
 In addition to the speeches , there are fifty @-@ six prologues ( openings of speeches ) . They were collected for the Library of Alexandria by Callimachus , who believed them genuine . Modern scholars are divided : some reject them , while others , such as Blass , believe they are authentic . Finally , six letters also survive under Demosthenes 's name and their authorship too is hotly debated . 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 6 ) = 
 The sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on the Fox network in the United States on November 8 , 1998 , concluding on the same channel on May 16 , 1999 , and consisted of twenty @-@ two episodes . The season continued on from the 1998 feature film and focused heavily on FBI federal agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) separation from the X @-@ Files Division and the demise of the Syndicate — a " shadow government " group attempting to cover up the existence of extraterrestrials — in the two part episode " Two Fathers " and " One Son " . 
 The season was the first to be filmed in Los Angeles , after production was moved from Vancouver , Canada . This move was done largely on the behest of Duchovny , who wished to be closer to his wife , Téa Leoni . Series creator Chris Carter opposed the move , although series director Kim Manners and Anderson approved of it , although to a less @-@ vocal degree than Duchovny . The first half of the season also saw Mimi Rogers and Chris Owens ' characters — Diana Fowley and Jeffrey Spender , respectively — become recurring characters . 
 Despite debuting with high viewing figures and ranking as the twelfth most watched television series during the 1998 – 99 television year , the season saw a slight decrease in ratings from the previous one , a trend that would continue until its final year . The season received mixed to positive reviews from television critics ; some critics and fans were alienated by the show , due to the different tone taken by most stand @-@ alone episodes after the move to Los Angeles . Rather than adhering to the previous style of " monsters of the week " , they were often romantic , humorous , or a combination of both . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 In Washington , D.C. , Agent Fox Mulder appears before an FBI panel regarding his experiences in Antarctica . Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) tells Mulder that he and Scully have been denied reassignment to the division . Mulder goes to his former basement office , only to discover that Jeffrey Spender ( Chris Owens ) and Diana Fowley ( Mimi Rogers ) have been assigned to the X @-@ Files . Going against orders , Mulder and Scully track down an escaped alien in Phoenix , Arizona while Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) gives chase . Mulder and Scully eventually discover that Cigarette Smoking Man has been using Gibson Praise to locate the creature . Scully brings Gibson to the hospital , where it is determined that he has the alien virus in his blood . Later , Skinner is mysteriously poisoned by a nanorobot infection . The culprit is revealed to be Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , a rogue FBI agent who formerly worked for the Syndicate , who continues to control the potentially debilitating nanotechnology in Skinner 's system in order to achieve his goals . 
 Mulder and Scully later learn of reports of rebel aliens burning doctors who were working on Cassandra Spender ( Veronica Cartwright ) , an alien abductee and mother of Jeffrey Spender . Skinner takes Spender to the scene , where Cassandra asks for Mulder . She informs Mulder and Scully that the aliens are here to destroy all life on Earth . She claims that a rebel force of aliens are mutilating their faces to prevent infection by the black oil . Cigarette Smoking Man reveals everything to Diana Fowley , who agrees to help him and betray Mulder . Cassandra later escapes from a hospital and arrives at Mulder 's apartment , demanding that he shoot her because she is the embodiment of fifty years of work by the Syndicate — an alien @-@ human hybrid that will trigger colonization if the aliens learn of her existence . 
 Fowley arrives and forcibly takes Mulder , Cassandra , and Scully to a CDC facility at Fort Marlene . There , Mulder runs into Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) . Marita tells Mulder that she was subjected to Syndicate @-@ run black oil vaccine tests . Meanwhile , the Syndicate rendezvous at a checkpoint , preparing to be taken away by the Colonists , who are prepping for invasion . However , they are met by the alien rebels , who incinerate them all , including Cassandra ; Cigarette Smoking Man and Fowley escape . Jeffrey Spender is then purportedly killed by Cigarette Smoking Man . 
 Several months later , a metallic artifact with inscriptions is discovered on the beach of Côte d 'Ivoire in Africa . After Mulder examines rubbings of the object , he begins suffering from a headache , seemingly caused by the rubbings . Mulder 's condition worsens , but he gains telepathic abilities . Chuck Burks ( Bill Dow ) tells them that the symbols on the artifact are Navajo . Eventually , Mulder passes into an aggravated delusional state and is placed under observation at a hospital . Hoping to find an answer , Scully rushes to Africa and finds the massive wreck of a large spacecraft partially buried in the beach . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After five successful seasons of The X @-@ Files , series creator Chris Carter wanted to tell the story of the series on a wider scale , which ultimately meant creating a feature film : the 1998 X @-@ Files movie . The film grossed US $ 83 @,@ 898 @,@ 313 in the US and $ 105 @,@ 278 @,@ 110 abroad , giving a total worldwide gross of $ 189 @,@ 176 @,@ 423 . In its opening weekend , showing at 2 @,@ 629 theaters , it earned $ 30 @,@ 138 @,@ 758 which was 35 @.@ 9 % of its total gross . Initially , the fifth season of The X @-@ Files was supposed to be the show 's last . However , the series proved to be so lucrative for Fox that two additional seasons were ordered . Thus , the sixth season of the show began filming . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After five seasons in Vancouver , Canada , production of The X @-@ Files moved to Los Angeles . " The Beginning " was the first episode to be filmed in the new location . The move was instigated by David Duchovny , who portrayed Mulder , in order to ease his opportunity to find movie work as well as to give him a chance to be nearer to his wife , Téa Leoni . Series creator Chris Carter opposed the move , but Fox network officials eventually made the decision to film in California . Indeed , the very first shot of the episode — a long look into the sun — was intended by Carter to " boldly announce the show 's arrival in Southern California " . As a result of the move , the episode featured a largely new group of crew members , hired by Carter , Frank Spotnitz and new co @-@ executive producer Michael Watkins . The show 's crew had to spend five weeks unpacking and cataloging material from the Vancouver film crew . Although the move was unpopular with some members of the cast and crew , both series director Kim Manners and actress Gillian Anderson supported the move , although less vocally than Duchovny . Many fans accused the show of " Hollywood @-@ izing " by adding notable guests stars as well as making the plots simpler and more enjoyable for mass audiences . In addition , Space.com reported that many fans of show loved " the moody ambiance filming around Vancouver lent the series [ during seasons 1 @-@ 5 ] " , which the sixth season reportedly lacked . 
 The move to Los Angeles also meant a drastic price increase for the series . Bruce Harwood , who played Lone Gunman John Fitzgerald Byers noted , " At the time , the exchange rate between Canadian and U.S. dollars was pretty dramatic . Somebody told me that the cost per episode doubled , even tripled , once they moved " . In addition , the move further reduced the amount of expensive special effects the series was able to produce . Writer Vince Gilligan explained " everything in Los Angeles is more expensive across the board . [ … ] It became apparent very quickly to me that we were no longer going to have things such as nuclear submarines descending through the ice and trains exploding in the middle of the woods " . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote five episodes . Spotnitz was promoted to executive producer and wrote five episodes , and wrote the story for a further two episodes . Vince Gilligan was promoted to co @-@ executive producer and wrote seven episodes . John Shiban was promoted to producer and wrote six episodes , and wrote the story for one other episode . New writers in the sixth season included David Amann who joined as executive story editor and wrote two episodes , and Jeffrey Bell who also wrote two episodes . Freelance episodes were written by Daniel Arkin and Jim Guttridge , and a further episode was written by Ken Hawryliw , who was the series ' property master from 1993 to 1998 . Duchovny also wrote his first episode solo , as he previously collaborated with various writers , including Chris Carter , on three other episodes . Other producers included producer Paul Rabwin , co @-@ producer Lori Jo Nemhauser , and Bernadette Caulfield who joined as producer . 
 Producing @-@ directors for the show included producer Rob Bowman , producer Manners , co @-@ executive producer Michael Watkins , and consulting producer Daniel Sackheim , who together directed the bulk of the season 's episodes . Manners directed seven episodes , Bowman directed six , Watkins directed three , and Sackheim directed one . Series creator Chris Carter directed two episodes , while cast member David Duchovny directed his first episode of the series . The remaining two episodes were directed by Peter Markle and Bryan Spicer . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 22 episodes ) a 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 22 episodes ) 
 a ^ Duchovny only contributes his voice to " Three of a Kind " . 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Mitch Pileggi as Deputy Director Walter Skinner ( 8 episodes ) 
 Chris Owens as Jeffrey Spender ( 5 episodes ) 
 William B. Davis as Cigarette Smoking Man ( 5 episodes ) 
 Nicholas Lea as Alex Krycek ( 4 episodes ) 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The sixth season of The X @-@ Files debuted with " The Beginning " on November 8 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was viewed by 20 @.@ 34 million people , a marked increase from the fifth season 's finale , " The End " , which was viewed by 18 @.@ 76 million viewers . However , the debut marked a drastic decrease from the fifth season debut , " Redux " , which garnered 27 @.@ 34 million viewers . As the season continued , ratings continued to drop . The last episode of The X @-@ Files to reach over 20 million viewers was " The Rain King " , which attracted 21 @.@ 24 million . The season hit its nadir with the eighteenth episode , " Milagro " , which was viewed by 15 @.@ 20 million viewers . The season finale , " Biogenesis " , earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , with a 14 share , and was viewed by 15 @.@ 86 viewers , marking a 22 percent drop in viewers when compared to the season premiere , and a 15 @.@ 5 percent drop in viewers when compared to the previous season finale . The season ranked as the twelfth most watched television series during the 1998 – 1999 season , with an average of 16 @.@ 39 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The season received positive reviews from television critics . However some fans were alienated by the show in its sixth season , due to the different tone taken by most stand @-@ alone episodes after the move to Los Angeles . Rather than adhering to the previous style of " monsters of the week " , they were often romantic , humorous , or a combination of both . Several episodes — " Dreamland " and " The Rain King " in particular — were criticized for their reliance on humor or for their lighter stories . Fans on the internet began calling the less @-@ scary episodes " X @-@ Files Lite " . Other episodes were derided for their mediocrity . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique called the episode " Alpha " a " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episode " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , called the episode " Trevor " " The X @-@ Files at its most generic " . 
 However , not all the sixth season episodes were poorly received . The season 's third episode , " Triangle " was largely lauded as a masterpiece by critics . The episode , which was shot in real time to look like it was filmed in four uninterrupted eleven @-@ minute takes , was called a " classic " standalone episode and one of the " highlights of season six " . The " Two Fathers " / " One Son " story @-@ arc , which featured the destruction of the Syndicate , was called one " of the most coherent , [ ... ] almost unbearably tense , hours in the series ' run " by one critic . Finally , the Duchovny @-@ penned " The Unnatural " , which featured the story of an alien who fell in love with baseball , was praised by critics for its plot , directing , and originality . One review praised Duchovny 's directing " excellence " while another referred to its ending as " heartbreaking " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The sixth season earned the series eight Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with one win . It won for Outstanding Makeup for a Series for the episodes " Two Fathers " and " One Son " . Gillian Anderson received her fourth and final nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series , and Veronica Cartwright received her second consecutive nomination for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series . Other nominations included Bill Roe for Outstanding Cinematography for a Series , Mark Snow for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) , Heather MacDougall for Outstanding Single Camera Picture Editing for a Series , Outstanding Art Direction for a Series , and Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . This was the final season the series received Golden Globe nominations , with Gillian Anderson , David Duchovny and the series as a whole receiving nominations . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Siege of St. Augustine ( 1702 ) = 
 The Siege of St. Augustine was an action in Queen Anne 's War during November and December 1702 . It was conducted by English provincial forces from the Province of Carolina and their native allies , under the command of Carolina 's governor James Moore , against the Spanish colonial fortress of Castillo de San Marcos at St. Augustine , in Spanish Florida . 
 After destroying coastal Spanish communities north of St. Augustine , Moore 's forces arrived at St. Augustine on 10 November , and immediately began siege operations . The Spanish governor , José de Zúñiga y la Cerda , had advance warning of their arrival , and withdrew civilians and food supplies into the fortress , and also sent messengers to nearby Spanish and French communities for relief . The English guns did little damage to the fortress walls , prompting Governor Moore to send an appeal to Jamaica for larger guns . The Spanish calls for relief were successful ; a fleet sent from Havana , Cuba landed troops nearby on 29 December . Moore lifted the siege the next day , and was forced to burn many of his boats before retreating to Charles Town in disgrace . 
 = = Background = = 
 English and Spanish colonization efforts in southeastern North America began coming into conflict as early as the middle of the 17th century . The founding in 1670 by the English of Charles Town ( present @-@ day Charleston , South Carolina ) in the recently established ( 1663 ) Province of Carolina heightened tensions . Traders , raiders , and slavers from the new province penetrated into Spanish Florida , leading to raiding and reprisal expeditions on both sides . In 1700 , Carolina 's governor , Joseph Blake , threatened the Spanish that English claims to Pensacola , established by the Spanish in 1698 , would be enforced . Blake 's death later that year interrupted these plans , and he was replaced in 1702 by James Moore . 
 Even before news of the war declarations opening the War of the Spanish Succession arrived in the colonies , Moore proposed an expedition against Spanish Florida 's capital , St. Augustine . News of the war 's formal opening arrived in 1702 , and Moore convinced the provincial assembly in September 1702 to fund an expedition against St. Augustine . Moore raised a force of colonists and Indians , the latter a combination of Yamasee , <unk> , and Alabama warriors , principally led by a Yamasee chief named <unk> . The exact size of these forces varies by source ; accounts provide numbers ranging from 800 to 1 @,@ 200 in strength ; most sources say that about 500 colonists and 300 – 400 Indians took part . Some of this force , primarily the Indians , went overland to Port Royal under the command of Deputy Governor Robert Daniell , while Moore embarked the rest of the force on 14 boats . These forces joined at Port Royal , and Daniell 's force was landed on what is now known as Amelia Island ( it was called Isla Santa Maria by the Spanish , and was part of Florida 's Guale Province ) , while Moore sailed on to Matanzas Bay . 
 The Castillo de San Marcos at St. Augustine was built in the later years of the 17th century , in part because previous English raids demonstrated the inadequacy of wooden fortifications , and to address the threat posed by the founding of Charles Town . The fortress , a fairly conventional star fort , was constructed from soft coquina limestone . Governor Joseph de Zúñiga y <unk> assumed command of the post in 1700 . Natives friendly to the Spanish heard of the recruitment , and word of the expedition reached Zúñiga on October 27 . He ordered the town 's inhabitants into the fort , commandeered all food stores in anticipation of an extended siege , and dispatched messengers to Pensacola , Havana , and the French at Mobile with calls for assistance . Refugees swelled the civilian population to about 1 @,@ 500 , of which only a small number were deemed capable of military action . Zúñiga estimated the food provisions brought in to be sufficient for a siege of three months ' duration . 
 Some of Zúñiga 's men wanted to do battle with the English ; the governor identified , in addition to 174 regulars and 14 artillerymen , 44 Europeans from the population that were fit for action , 123 Indians ( most armed with poor @-@ quality or useless weapons ) , and 57 black men ( freemen , mulattoes , and slaves ) of which only 20 had any experience with weapons . Zúñiga did not consider either the Indians or the Negroes to be trustworthy , and estimated that only about 70 men of this entire force were actually prepared for a battle . He consequently prepared for a siege . His principal concern was the training of the artillerymen , of whom he wrote that they " had no service record , lacked discipline , and have only a slight knowledge of the ... guns which are mounted . " 
 = = English approach = = 
 Daniell 's forces landed on Amelia Island , and began attacks on the northern end of the island at midnight on 3 November , killing two Spanish soldiers and overrunning the village of San Pedro de <unk> . They advanced south , driving southward a flood of refugees and the few Spanish troops on the island . The main settlements at San Felipe and San Marcos were overrun the next day , as the Spanish were in the process of evacuating them . Zúñiga learned of the advance on 5 November , and sent 20 men under Captain Joseph de <unk> north , with instructions to make a stand at San Juan del Puerto , seven leagues from St. Augustine , which Zúñiga saw as the " key to the province of Guale " . The news also prompted Zúñiga to mobilize all able @-@ bodied men over 14 , and order all available food into the fort . 
 <unk> never made it beyond the St. Johns River ; he did capture three enemy soldiers ( two Englishmen and a <unk> Indian ) on 6 November , and returned with them to St. Augustine two days later . Zúñiga learned from these captives that the English had brought three months ' provisions , and that they had only brought smaller cannons ( 6 to 10 pounders ) . 
 In the meantime , Moore sailed south with the fleet . Three ships were sent ahead of the main fleet to blockade the entrance to Matanzas Bay , south of St. Augustine . These were spotted from the fort on 7 November . The next day the main body of the fleet began arriving at the bar outside the St. Augustine inlet . This prompted Zúñiga to order his two frigates , La Gloria and Nuestra Señora de la <unk> y el Niño Jesús , to anchor under the fort 's guns . The Nuestra , which was outside the bar , was unable to cross , and was eventually burned . Sixteen of her men joined the fort 's garrison , providing valuable gunnery skills . 
 Daniell 's force , after being landed , made good progress . The small Spanish force on Amelia Island was unable to check the English advance at San Juan del Puerto , and was dispersed ; some of them took days to reach St. Augustine . Daniels continued to advance , and entered the town of St. Augustine without resistance on 10 November . Eight of the English ships crossed the bar and began landing men that day . As the English began to close the circle around the fortress , a Spanish foraging expedition successfully drove 163 head of cattle through the English lines and into the fort 's ( dry ) moat . 
 = = Siege = = 
 The Spanish guns opened fire on the English as they began siege preparations on 10 November . One of the older Spanish cannon exploded that day , killing three and wounding five . A few days later , Zúñiga ordered a sally to destroy portions of the town within firing range of the fort ; according to later accounts , this action destroyed more than 15 @,@ 000 pesos worth of property . 
 Moore had brought four small cannon , but these made little impression on the coquina walls of the fortress , and the Spanish guns had longer range , keeping most of his forces at bay . Around November 22 , Moore dispatched Deputy Governor Daniell to Jamaica for larger cannons and ammunition . The English continued digging siege trenches , and began firing on the fortress from musket range on November 24 . This cannon fire continued to have little effect , and Moore ordered more of the town torched the next day , including the Franciscan monastery . 
 Since his cannon were not effective against the fort 's walls , Moore attempted a deception to gain entry to the fort . On 14 December a Yamasee couple managed to gain entry to the fort posing as refugees , apparently with the goal of detonating the fort 's powder magazine . However , Zúñiga was suspicious of their behavior and , according to his account of the siege , they were tortured into admitting the plot . 
 By 19 December the English trenches had closed on the fort to the point that they threatened nearby fields from which the Spanish had been collecting forage . As a result , Zúñiga ordered a sally . There was a skirmish , and Spanish casualties were light : one killed and several wounded . 
 = = Relief attempts = = 
 Spanish leaders at San Luis de Apalachee ( present @-@ day Tallahassee , Florida ) began mobilizing when they received the news of the siege . Short on supplies , they appealed to the French at Mobile , who provided critical guns and gunpowder ; the Pensacola garrison also spared ten men . The relief force left San Luis de Apalachee on December 24 , but turned back when news was received that the siege had been lifted . 
 Also on December 24 , sails from a pair of ships were spotted approaching St. Augustine . English records do not indicate what these ships were ; Spanish records show that they were English in origin , but probably not from Jamaica , since the nature of the siege did not change with their arrival . The expedition to Jamaica , having failed in its mission , returned directly to Charles Town . 
 Spanish messengers from Pensacola eventually reported St. Augustine 's plight to Havana . Governor Pedro Nicolás Benítez held a war council on December 2 , in which a relief expedition was organized . A detachment of over 200 infantry under the command of Captain López de <unk> was embarked on a small fleet headed by General Estevan de Berroa in the Black Eagle . Berroa 's fleet arrived outside St. Augustine 's harbor on December 28 . Apparently believing the siege to already be over , Berroa did not land any troops . The next day , Governor Zúñiga sneaked some men out of the fort and made contact with the fleet . Berroa then landed <unk> and about 70 raw recruits on Anastasia Island , about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) below the fort . This action prompted Moore to lift the siege and prepare a retreat . Berroa also dispatched smaller ships to block the southern inlet to Matanzas Bay , trapping some of Moore 's ships in the bay . 
 Moore ordered the remaining buildings in the town , including the church , put to the torch . Some of his men departed north via the mainland , while the rest crossed Matanzas Bay to their boats . Moore burned the eight ships trapped in the bay , and retreated to the north , eventually returning to Charles Town in disgrace . Zúñiga sent men out after the English departure ; they were able to recover three of the English boats that failed to burn completely . 
 Casualty reports made by both sides varied ; historian Charles <unk> notes that all of the numbers reported are probably unreliable . Moore 's report listed only two men killed , while Zúñiga in his report claimed that more than 60 of the English force were killed . Zúñiga claimed only three or four killed and 20 wounded for the Spanish contingent , none of which were caused by English cannon fire . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Moore was forced to resign his post as governor because of the failed raid , and its cost to the province ( which included compensating owners for the loss of their ships ) caused riots in Charles Town . Some of Moore 's contemporary critics accused him of executing the raid for the purpose of seizing slaves or booty ; the Spanish characterized it in religious terms , citing the " English provincial hatred against the Church of God . " Moore continued to be active in the war , leading a small number of Carolinians and a large band of Indians on the destruction of Spanish missions in Florida in 1704 . By 1705 the English and their Indian allies had destroyed 32 Spanish mission communities , and by 1711 there were reported to be only about 400 Indians left in Florida . 
 Governor Zúñiga was rewarded for his successful defense with a special commendation from the king and promotion to the more prestigious and desirable governorship of Cartagena . He made a series of highly critical complaints of General Berroa : the general failed to destroy the English fleet ; he failed to share the plunder taken from the ships burned by the English ; he refused to leave any of his fleet to assist in protection of the town ; and he landed only the weakest and least effective troops in a bid to avoid combat . The general also sailed for Havana on January 8 , barely one week after the siege was lifted . 
 In 1704 Governor Zúñiga convinced some Spanish privateers to raid the Carolina coast in revenge for Moore 's activities . Spanish and French forces , motivated and organized by Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville ( who died shortly before its departure ) , attempted the capture of Charles Town in August 1706 ; their attempts to land forces were successfully repulsed . 
 The Castillo de San Marcos was not subjected to further attacks in the war . The expedition destroyed all but two communities in the provinces of Guale and Timucua ; Spanish Florida never really recovered from the decimation of its population in the following years . St. Augustine was again unsuccessfully besieged in 1740 by forces from the Province of Georgia , and the <unk> underwent numerous renovations and uses in the 18th and 19th centuries . It is now a National Monument managed by the National Park Service , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Edward Everett = 
 Edward Everett ( April 11 , 1794 – January 15 , 1865 ) was an American politician , pastor , educator , diplomat , and orator from Massachusetts . Everett , a Whig , served as U.S. Representative , U.S. Senator , the 15th Governor of Massachusetts , Minister to Great Britain , and United States Secretary of State . He also taught at Harvard University and served as its president . 
 Everett was one of the great American orators of the antebellum and Civil War eras . He is often remembered today as the featured orator at the dedication ceremony of the Gettysburg National Cemetery in 1863 , where he spoke for over two hours — immediately before President Abraham Lincoln delivered his famous , two @-@ minute Gettysburg Address . 
 The son of a pastor , Everett was educated at Harvard , and briefly ministered at Boston 's Brattle Street Church before taking a teaching job at Harvard . The position included preparatory studies in Europe , so Everett spent two years in studies at the University of Göttingen , and another two years traveling around Europe . At Harvard he taught ancient Greek literature for several years before becoming involved in politics , and began an extensive and popular speaking career . He served ten years in the United States Congress before winning election as Governor of Massachusetts in 1835 . As governor he introduced the state Board of Education , the first of its type in the nation . 
 After being defeated in the 1839 election by one vote , Everett was appointed Minister to Great Britain , serving until 1845 . He next became President of Harvard , a job he quickly came to dislike . In 1849 he became an assistant to longtime friend and colleague Daniel Webster , who had been appointed Secretary of State . Upon Webster 's death Everett served as Acting Secretary for a few months . In the later years of his life Everett traveled , giving speeches all over the country . He supported efforts to maintain the Union before the Civil War , running for Vice President on the Constitutional Union Party ticket in 1860 . He was active in supporting the Union effort during the war and supported Lincoln in the 1864 election . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Edward Everett was born on April 11 , 1794 in Dorchester , Massachusetts ( then independent from Boston ) , the fourth of eight children , to the Rev. Oliver Everett and Lucy Hill Everett , the daughter of Alexander Sears Hill . His father was a direct descendant of early colonist Richard Everett , and his mother 's family also had deep colonial roots . His father had served as pastor of New South Church , retiring due to poor health two years before Everett was born . He died in 1802 , when Edward was eight , after which his mother moved the family to Boston . He attended local schools , and then a private school of Ezekiel Webster . During this time Ezekiel 's brother Daniel sometimes taught classes ; Everett and Daniel Webster would later form a close friendship . 
 Everett attended Boston Latin School in 1805 , and then briefly Phillips Exeter Academy , where his older brother Alexander Hill Everett was teaching . At the age of 13 , he was admitted to Harvard College . In 1811 , at age 17 , he graduated as the valedictorian of his class . Unlike some of the other students at the time , Everett was an earnest and diligent student who absorbed all of what was taught . While a student , he was a member of the Hasty Pudding Club . 
 = = Pastor and student = = 
 Uncertain what to do next , Everett was encouraged by his pastor , Joseph Stevens Buckminster of the Brattle Street Church , to study for the ministry . This Everett did under the tutelage of Harvard President John Thornton Kirkland , earning his MA in 1813 . During this time in particular he developed a facility for working with both the written and spoken word . The Reverend Buckminster died in 1812 , and Everett was immediately offered the post at the Brattle Street Church on a probationary basis after his graduation , which was made permanent in November 1813 . Everett dedicated himself to the work , and became a highly popular Unitarian preacher . Listeners wrote of his " florid and affluent fancy " , and his " daring imagery " , while one critic wrote what would become a common criticism of his speaking style : " [ Everett ] spoke like some superior intelligence , <unk> to mortals of what they ought to feel and know , but as if [ he ] himself were too far exalted to require such feelings , and such knowledge himself . " Everett , over the year he served in the pulpit , came to be disenchanted with the somewhat formulaic demands of the required oratory , and with the sometimes parochial constraints the congregation placed on him . 
 The workload also took its toll on young Everett , who around this time acquired the nickname " Ever @-@ at @-@ it " , which would be used throughout his life . For a change of pace , Everett traveled to Washington , D.C. , where he visited with Daniel Webster and other Federalist Party luminaries from Massachusetts . In late 1814 Everett was offered a newly endowed position as professor of Greek literature at Harvard . The position came with authorization to travel for two years in Europe , and Everett readily accepted . He was formally invested as a professor in April 1815 . Everett was also elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1815 . 
 Everett made his way across western Europe , visiting London and the major Dutch cities en route to the German city of Göttingen . There he entered the university , where he studied French , German , Italian , along with Roman law , archaeology , and Greek art . He was a disciplined student , but he and George Ticknor , with whom he had traveled , were also quite sociable . Everett noted that they were viewed by many at the university as curiosities , and were often the focus of attention . He was granted a Ph. D in September 1817 , which he believed to be the first such degree awarded to an American . 
 During his sojourn at Göttingen , Everett traveled to see other German cities , including Hanover , Weimar , Dresden , and Berlin . He received permission from Harvard to extend his time in Europe , and spent two more years traveling across the continent ( from Constantinople and the Black Sea to Paris ) , visiting the major cities of the continent before returning to the United States in 1819 . Among those he met in England were the Prussian diplomat Wilhelm von Humboldt , an influential architect of the Prussian education system , and William Wilberforce , a leading English abolitionist . While in Constantinople Everett acquired a number of ancient Greek texts which are now in the Harvard archives . 
 = = Teacher , writer , and speaker = = 
 Everett took up his teaching duties later in 1819 , hoping to implant the scholarly methods of Germany at Harvard and bring a generally wider appreciation of German literature and culture to the United States . For his Greek class he translated Philipp Karl <unk> 's Greek lexicon . Among his students were future Speaker of U.S. House of Representatives Robert Charles Winthrop , presidential son and future U.S. Representative Charles Francis Adams , and future philosopher and essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson . Emerson had first heard Everett speak at the Brattle Street Church , and idolized him . He wrote that Everett 's voice was " of such rich tones , such precise and perfect utterance , that , although slightly nasal , it was the most mellow and beautiful and correct of all instruments of the time . " 
 In 1820 Everett became editor of the North American Review , a literary magazine to which he had contributed articles while studying in Europe . In addition to editing he made numerous contributions to the magazine , which flourished during his tenure and reached a nationwide audience . He was also instrumental in expanding Harvard 's collections of German language works , including grammars , lexicons , and a twenty @-@ volume edition of the collected works of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , who Everett had visited in Weimar and whose works he championed on the pages of the Review . 
 Everett began his public speaking career while he taught at Harvard , which combined with his editorship of the Review to bring him some national prominence . He preached at a service held in the United States Capitol that brought him wide notice and acclaim in political circles . In 1822 he delivered a series of lectures in Boston on art and antiquities . The series was well attended , and he repeated it in subsequent years . He made a major speech in December 1823 advocating for American support of the Greeks in their struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire . This subject was adopted by Daniel Webster , who also made it the subject of a speech in Congress . ( Everett 's support for Greek independence made him something of a hero in Greece , and his portrait hangs in the National Gallery in Athens . ) This collaboration between Webster and Everett was the start of a lifelong political association between the two men . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 On May 8 , 1822 Edward Everett married Charlotte Gray Brooks ( November 4 , 1800 - July 2 , 1859 ) , the daughter of Peter <unk> Brooks and Ann Gorham , who like Everett were of old New England lineage . Brooks had made a fortune in a variety of business endeavors , including marine insurance , and would financially support Everett when he embarked on his career in politics . Everett would also become associated through the Brooks family with John Quincy Adams ' son Charles Francis , who married one of Charlotte 's sisters . 
 The Everetts had a happy and fruitful marriage , producing six children who survived infancy : 
 Anne Gorham Everett ( March 3 , 1823 at Atkinson Street , Boston , Suffolk County , Massachusetts , USA – October 18 , 1843 at 46 Grosvenor Place , Belgravia , London , England ) 
 Charlotte Brooks Everett ( August 13 , 1825 – December 15 , 1879 ) ; married Captain Henry Augustus Wise USN 
 Grace Webster Everett ( December 24 , 1827 – January 8 , 1836 ) 
 Edward Brooks Everett ( May 6 , 1830 – November 5 , 1861 ) ; married Helen <unk> Adams 
 Henry Sidney Everett ( December 31 , 1834 – October 4 , 1898 ) ; married Katherine <unk> Fay 
 William Everett ( October 10 , 1839 – February 16 , 1910 ) ; U.S. Representative from Massachusetts 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Everett had decided as early as 1821 that he did not particularly like teaching . In July 1824 Everett gave an unexpectedly significant speech at Harvard 's Phi Beta Kappa Society that would alter his career trajectory . Publicity for the event was dominated by the news that the Marquis de Lafayette , the French hero of the American Revolution , would be in attendance , and the hall was packed . The subject of Everett 's speech was " Circumstances of the Favorable Progress of Literature in America " . He pointed out that America 's situation as an expanding nation with a common language and a democratic foundation gave its people a unique and distinctive opportunity for creating truly American literature . Unfettered by Europe 's traditions and bureaucracy , Americans could use the experiences of settling the west to develop a new style of intellectual thought . 
 The crowd reacted with lengthy applause , and not long afterward an informal non @-@ partisan caucus nominated Everett as its candidate for the United States House of Representatives . Other political factions also endorsed his candidacy , and he was easily elected in the November 1824 election . He had expected to continue teaching at Harvard while serving , but was informed by its Board of Overseers that he had been dismissed because of the election victory . He took this news well , even agreeing to refund to the college the costs of his European travels . He continued to remain associated with Harvard , joining the Board of Overseers in 1827 and serving for many years . 
 = = = United States Representative = = = 
 The political situation in the country was quite fluid in the late 1820s . The Federalist Party had collapsed , and the victorious Democratic @-@ Republican Party had become diffuse , resulting in political factionalism in place of party affiliation . Everett was associated with the " National Republican " faction of John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay . He supported Clay 's " National System " — which called for protective tariffs , internal improvements , and a national bank — and the interests of Massachusetts ' propertied class . Everett was re @-@ elected to four additional terms as a National Republican , serving until 1835 . The National Republicans formally became the Whig Party in 1834 . 
 In Congress Everett sat on the House Committee on Foreign Affairs , and on the Committee on Libraries and Public Buildings , both of which he chaired in his last term . Since he was already well known to President Adams , he was a frequent guest at the White House , and came to champion the president 's agenda in the House . He supported tariff legislation that protected Massachusetts ' growing industrial interests , favored renewal of the charter of the Second Bank of the United States , and opposed the Indian Removal Act . 
 Everett 's most controversial action in Congress took place relatively early during his tenure there . In 1826 Congress debated a Constitutional amendment to alter the way the president was elected , so that Congress would not be required to decide ( as it had in the 1824 election ) . Rising in opposition to the amendment on March 9 , 1826 , Everett delivered a three @-@ hour speech in which he generally opposed the need to amend the Constitution . However , he also expounded on the issue of slavery , noting that " the New Testament says ' Slaves obey your masters ' " , and accepting the document even though it contained the Three @-@ Fifths Compromise . 
 Reaction to this speech was highly critical , and Everett was attacked by political friends and foes for this apparent endorsement of slavery . He attempted to justify his statements by pointing out that he rejected the slave trade and the act of kidnapping someone into slavery , but this did not mitigate the damage , and he was heavily criticized for it in the Massachusetts press . Everett would be dogged by the speech for the rest of his political career . 
 = = = Governor of Massachusetts = = = 
 Everett retired from Congress in 1835 , after deciding that he did not really like the rough @-@ and @-@ tumble nature of the proceedings in the House . He had been offered the nomination for Governor of Massachusetts by the Anti @-@ Masonic Party in 1834 ; although he was known to be against secret societies like the Freemasons , he refused , and supported Whig John Davis for governor that year . Davis won the election , which was held in November 1834 . In February 1835 , the state legislature elected Davis to the United States Senate . In an arrangement brokered in part by Daniel Webster , Everett was promised the Whig nomination for governor ( a move that upset Lieutenant Governor Samuel Turell Armstrong , who also sought the nomination ) . Everett easily defeated the perennial Democratic Party candidate , Marcus Morton , in November 1835 . He was re @-@ elected by comfortable margins in the three following years , all facing Morton . 
 In 1836 he was elected a member of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of Massachusetts . 
 One of the most notable achievements of Everett 's tenure was the introduction of a state board of education to improve school quality and the establishment of normal schools for the training of teachers . Based on details of the Prussian education system which Everett had learned about , this groundbreaking accomplishment would be emulated by other states . The state Board of Education was established in 1837 , with reformer Horace Mann as its secretary . The state 's first normal school opened in Lexington the next year ( it afterward moved to Framingham and is now known as Framingham State University ) . 
 Other accomplishments during Everett 's tenure include the authorization of an extension of the railroad system from Worcester to the New York state line , and assistance in the <unk> of border tensions between Maine and the neighboring British ( now Canadian ) province of New Brunswick . Massachusetts was involved in this dispute because , as part of Maine 's separation from the state in 1820 , it retained ownership of public lands in the disputed area . The border issue had been simmering for some years , but tensions rose substantially in the late 1830s as both sides pushed development activity into the disputed area , and the United States refused to accept a mediation proposal made by the Dutch king . In 1838 Everett proposed to President Martin Van Buren that a special commission be established to address the issue . 
 Abolitionism and temperance were two issues that became more politically prominent during Everett 's tenure , and both of those matters , as well as Whig indifference , would play a role in his defeat in the 1839 election . The abolitionist Liberty Party began to take shape in 1838 , and the ill @-@ timed passage of a temperance law banning the sale of less than 15 US gallons ( 57 l ) of alcohol would drive popular support away from the Whigs in 1839 . The election , held November 11 , 1839 , was so close that the results were scrutinized by the ( Whig @-@ dominated ) legislature when it met in January 1840 . A joint legislative committee reported that Morton received exactly one @-@ half the votes cast , sufficient to secure his victory . ( One vote less for Morton would have resulted in the Whig legislature deciding the election . ) Everett refused to contest the results despite calls from the party to do so ; he wrote , " I am willing to let the election go . " 
 = = Diplomatic service = = 
 After leaving office , Everett traveled in Europe with his family for several months . When the Whigs , led by William Henry Harrison , won the 1840 presidential election , Everett was appointed ambassador to Great Britain at the recommendation of his friend Daniel Webster , who had been appointed Secretary of State . Everett was at first charged with handling the northeast border issues he first encountered as governor . A new British administration , friendlier to the United States than the previous one , sent Lord Ashburton to Washington to negotiate directly with Webster , and Everett 's role was reduced to acquiring documents from British records , and pressing the American case to the Foreign Office . In this role Everett was instrumental in acquiring and distributing a map that vindicated the United States from accusations that it had cheated Britain out of land in the 1842 Webster – Ashburton Treaty . 
 Another major issue between the countries was the seizure of American ships by British naval forces interdicting the slave trade off the coast of Africa . Owners of ships accused but acquitted of complicity in the trade filed claims to recover their losses with the British government , and Everett , as ambassador , advanced these cases . In this he was generally successful , given the friendly British stance . One aspect of the slave trade interdiction proposed by Everett found its way into the treaty negotiated by Webster : the stationing of an American squadron off the coast of Africa to cooperate with the British effort . The issue of slaving @-@ related seizures caused some friction at home , especially after Webster was replaced as Secretary of State by a succession of Southern politicians . Everett in particular had to school John C. Calhoun on the diplomatic ramifications of pursuing claims after slaves mutinied aboard a ship plying the American coast and sailed it to the Bahamas . 
 Everett rebuffed several offers for other diplomatic posts proferred by Webster , who was unhappy serving under Tyler and apparently sought the UK ambassadorship as a way to distance himself from the unpopular president ; Webster eventually resigned in 1843 . Everett remained at his post until 1845 , when after the accession of James K. Polk to the presidency he was replaced by Democrat Louis McLane . His last months in the post were occupied with the Oregon boundary dispute , which was eventually resolved by McLane along lines negotiated by Everett . 
 = = Harvard Presidency = = 
 Even before his departure from London , Everett was being considered as a possible successor to Josiah Quincy as President of Harvard . Everett returned to Boston in September 1845 to learn that the Overseers had offered him the post . Although he had some misgivings , principally due to some of the tedious aspects of the job and difficult matter of maintaining student discipline , he accepted the offer , and entered into his duties in February 1846 . The three years he spent there were extremely unhappy . Everett found that Harvard was short of resources , and that he was not popular with the rowdy students . One of his most notable achievements was the expansion of Harvard 's academic programs to include a " school of theoretical and practical science " , then known as the Lawrence Scientific School . 
 Everett 's unhappiness with the post was apparent early on , and by April 1847 he was negotiating with Harvard 's overseers about the conditions of the job . These talks were ultimately unfruitful , and Everett , on the advice of his doctor , resigned the post in December 1848 . He had been suffering for sometime from a number of maladies , some of them prostate @-@ related . In the following years , his health would become increasingly fragile . He was somewhat rejuvenated by a visit to the springs at Sharon Springs , New York . 
 = = Secretary of State and Senator = = 
 When the Whigs won the 1848 national election and returned to power in 1849 , Everett returned to politics . He served as an aide to Daniel Webster , who President Millard Fillmore appointed Secretary of State . When Webster died in October 1852 , Fillmore appointed Everett , apparently at Webster 's request , to serve as Secretary of State during the remaining lame @-@ duck months of his administration . In this post Everett drafted the official letter that accompanied the Perry Expedition to Japan , reversed Webster 's claim denying Peruvian sovereignty over the guano @-@ rich Lobos Islands , and refused to engage the United States in an agreement with the United Kingdom and France to guarantee Spanish control of Cuba . Although he stated that the Fillmore administration had no interest in annexing Cuba , he made it clear that the U.S. did not want to foreclose the option by engaging in an essentially political alliance , and reinforced the notion that the U.S. saw Cuba as its concern and not a matter for outside interference . 
 While he was still serving as Secretary of State , Everett was approached by Massachusetts Whig leaders about running for the United States Senate . He was elected by the state legislature , and took the office on March 4 , 1853 . In the Senate he sat on the Foreign Relations Committee , and on the Committee on Territories . He was opposed to the extension of slavery in the western territories , but was concerned that the radical Free Soil Party 's hardline stance would result in disunion . 
 Everett opposed the 1854 Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act , which allowed the territories to choose whether to allow slavery by popular vote , calling it a " horrible " and " detested " bill . However , because of his health he missed a critical vote on the bill , departing the chamber during a debate that ended up lasting all night . This angered Massachusetts anti @-@ slavery interests , who sent him a strongly @-@ worded petition to submit to the Senate . Because of his distaste for the more extreme elements in the abolition debate , Everett 's speech in support of the petition was weak , for which he was further criticized . The rancor of the situation greatly upset Everett , and he submitted his resignation letter on May 12 , 1854 , after only a little more than one year into his six @-@ year term , once again citing poor health . 
 = = Last years = = 
 Free of political obligations , Everett traveled the country with his family , giving public speeches . One cause he took up was the preservation of George Washington 's home at Mount Vernon . Over several years in the mid @-@ 1850s he toured , speaking about Washington ( whom he compared favorably to Frederick the Great and the Duke of Marlborough ) . Not only did Everett donate the proceeds from this touring ( about $ 70 @,@ 000 ) , he also refused to deduct his travel expenses . He also agreed to write a weekly column for the New York Ledger in exchange for a $ 10 @,@ 000 gift to the Mount Vernon Ladies ' Association . These columns were eventually bound and sold as the Mount Vernon Papers . 
 Everett was disheartened by the sectional divisions between the northern and southern states during the late 1850s . The 1860 election threatened to produce a national crisis , with pro @-@ slavery Southerners splitting the Democratic Party and threatening secession if a Republican was elected President . A group of conservative ex @-@ Whigs organized the Constitutional Union Party , which claimed as its sole principle the preservation of the Union . Supporters of Everett put his name forward as a candidate for president , but the party ended up nominating John Bell , and Everett for Vice President . Everett reluctantly accepted the post , but did not campaign very much . The Bell @-@ Everett ticket received only 39 electoral votes , all from Southern states . 
 In the wake of the election of Abraham Lincoln , seven southern states began seriously debating secession . Everett was an active participant in advancing the unsuccessful Crittenden Compromise in a last @-@ ditch attempt to avoid war during the early months of 1861 . When the American Civil War broke out in April 1861 , he became an active supporter of the Union cause . He did not at first think highly of Lincoln , but came to support him as the war progressed . In 1861 and 1862 Everett toured the northern states , lecturing on the causes of the war , and also wrote on behalf of the Union cause for the New York Ledger . Proposals were put forward that Everett serve as a roving ambassador in Europe to counter Confederate diplomatic initiatives , but these were never brought to fruition . 
 In November 1863 , when the military cemetery at Gettysburg , Pennsylvania was dedicated , Everett , by then widely renowned as the finest orator in the country , was invited to be the featured speaker . In his two @-@ hour formal oration he compared the Battle of Gettysburg to battles of antiquity such as Marathon , and spoke about how opposing sides in previous civil wars ( such as the War of the Roses and the Thirty Years ' War ) were able to reconcile their differences afterward . Everett 's oration was followed by the now far more famous Gettysburg Address of President Lincoln . For his part , Everett was deeply impressed by the concise speech and wrote to Lincoln noting " I should be glad if I could flatter myself that I came as near to the central idea of the occasion , in two hours , as you did in two minutes . " In the 1864 election , Everett supported Lincoln , serving as a presidential elector from Massachusetts for the Republicans . 
 = = Death = = 
 On January 9 , 1865 , Everett spoke at a public meeting in Boston to raise funds for the southern poor in Savannah . At that meeting he caught cold , which he exacerbated four days later by testifying for three hours in a civil dispute concerning property he owned in Winchester , Massachusetts . He died in Boston on January 15 , and was interred at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Edward Everett Square , near his birthplace in Dorchester , is named for him . It is the intersection of Columbia Road , Massachusetts Avenue , East Cottage Street and Boston Street . A marker is placed near where his birthplace stood , and a statue of Everett stands near the square in Richardson Park . Everett 's name appears on the facade of the Boston Public Library 's McKim Building , which he helped found , serving for twelve years as president of its board . His name was also given to his nephew , Edward Everett Hale , as well as Hale 's grandson , the actor Edward Everett Horton . 
 Everett , Massachusetts , separated from Malden in 1870 , was named in his honor , as was the borough of Everett , Pennsylvania , and Mount Everett in western Massachusetts . Elementary schools in Dorchester and in Lincoln , Nebraska are named for him , as was a school in St. Cloud , Minnesota that was torn down in 1887 . Everett donated 130 books to St. Cloud , beginning the community 's first library . 
 = = Film and TV = = 
 In the 2015 documentary film The Gettysburg Address , Edward Everett is portrayed by actor Ed Asner . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Everett , Edward ( 1814 ) . A Defence of Christianity Against the Works of George B. English . Boston : Hilliard and Metcalf . OCLC <unk> . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1820 ) . An Account of Some Greek Manuscripts , <unk> at Constantinople in 1819 and now Belonging to the Library of the University at Cambridge . Memoirs of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1853 ) . Orations and Speeches on Various Occasions , Volume 1 . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1850 ) . Orations and Speeches on Various Occasions , Volume 2 . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1859 ) . Orations and Speeches on Various Occasions , Volume 3 . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1868 ) . Orations and Speeches on Various Occasions , Volume 4 . Boston : Little , Brown . OCLC <unk> . 
 Everett , Edward ( 1860 ) . The Life of George Washington . New York : Sheldon and Company . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Buckeye chicken = 
 The Buckeye is a breed of chicken originating in the U.S. state of Ohio . Created in the late 19th century , Buckeyes are the only American Poultry Association ( APA ) standard breed of chicken known to have been created by a woman , and the only one in the American Class to have a pea comb . As of 2014 , Buckeyes are listed as " Threatened " by The Livestock Conservancy . The breed 's name is derived from Ohio 's nickname of " Buckeye state " , and their mahogany color is said ideally to resemble the seeds of the Ohio Buckeye plant ( <unk> glabra ) . They are a dual @-@ purpose chicken that have a decent laying ability and strong meat production characteristics . Buckeyes are yellow skinned chickens that lay brown eggs . 
 = = History = = 
 The Buckeye was first bred and developed in 1896 , by a Warren , Ohio resident named Nettie Metcalf . They are the only American breed of chicken known to have been developed by a woman , despite the fact that women were customarily given charge of the household poultry flock throughout much of U.S. history . Metcalf crossbred Barred Plymouth Rocks , Buff <unk> , and some black breasted red games to produce the Buckeye . Her goal was a functional breed that could produce well in the bitter Midwest winters . Contrary to popular belief the Buckeye breed was created before the Rhode Island Red breed and Metcalf actually sent birds to the <unk> breeders for them to improve their breed . 
 The Buckeye was admitted to the American Poultry Association 's Standard of Perfection in 1904 . Entrance into the Standard of Perfection signifies official certification as a breed by the Association , and thus allows Buckeyes to be entered into poultry shows and judged according to the breed standard ( as outlined in the Standard of Perfection ) . 
 The recognition of Buckeyes in the Standard has been a significant factor in its survival . In the past , largely due its lack of color variations , the Buckeye has not been an especially popular exhibition breed , but there is growing interest in the exhibition poultry fancy for this dual @-@ purpose variety of bird . Not adopted by commercial operations , the Buckeye has generally been a bird of smaller farm flocks . Today the breed status is listed as threatened by the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy , threatened being defined as Threatened : Fewer than 1 @,@ 000 breeding birds in the United States , with seven or fewer primary breeding flocks , and estimated global population less than 5 @,@ 000 . The breed is also included in the Slow Food USA Ark of Taste , a catalog of heritage foods in danger of extinction . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Buckeye male weighs an average of 9 lb ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) , and the hen 6 @.@ 5 lb ( 2 @.@ 9 kg ) . The breed has yellow skin and lays brown eggs . Its primary color is a mahogany red with black tails ; sometimes males have other dark feathering . According to the breed standard , a Buckeye 's plumage should ideally resemble the hue of an Ohio Buckeye 's seeds . Especially in the hen , the breed is very similar in appearance to the Rhode Island Red . The Buckeye can be differentiated by a bar of slate color on the back feathers close to the body ; the body is also much more compact , with a short yet broad back . 
 The Buckeye is the only purely American breed to sport a pea comb , and this , combined with its stocky build , makes it a supremely cold hardy chicken . Other breeds of fowl developed in the U.S. ( such as the <unk> ) may sport pea combs , but these chickens were primarily created from foreign birds . It also bears some traits of Game fowl in frame and disposition , being assertive in character and a very good forager . Generally calm , the cock birds in rare cases may become aggressive . Despite its game heritage , it tolerates confinement well , although it will be much happier and produce better if allowed to range on grass . The Buckeye is said by breeders to be disinclined towards feather picking . A good meat producer and layer of between 150 to 200 eggs per year , the Buckeye is a dual purpose chicken well – suited to small farmyard and backyard flocks . 
 = 2001 UEFA Cup Final = 
 The 2001 UEFA Cup Final was a football match between Liverpool of England and Alavés of Spain on 16 May 2001 at the Westfalenstadion in Dortmund , Germany . The showpiece event was the final match of the 2000 – 01 edition of Europe 's secondary cup competition , the UEFA Cup . Liverpool were appearing in their third UEFA Cup final , after their appearances in 1973 and 1976 . It also represented the first European final they reached since being banned from Europe following the Heysel Stadium disaster . Alavés were appearing in their first European final . 
 Each team had to progress through six knockout rounds playing 12 matches in total to reach the final . Liverpool 's matches were mainly close affairs , none of their ties were won by more than two goals . The fourth round and semi @-@ final ties against Roma and Barcelona were won 1 – 0 . In contrast , Alavés ties ranged from close affairs to comfortable victories . They won their first round tie against <unk> by one goal , whereas they beat Kaiserslautern 9 – 2 in the semi @-@ final . 
 Watched by a crowd of 48 @,@ 050 , Liverpool took an early lead when Markus Babbel scored in the fourth minute . They extended their lead in the 16th minute when Steven Gerrard scored . Midway through the first half , Iván Alonso scored to bring Alavés within a goal of levelling the match . A few minutes before the end of the first half , Liverpool went 3 – 1 up when Gary McAllister scored from the penalty spot . Minutes after the start of the second half , Javi Moreno scored twice to level the match at 3 – 3 . Liverpool went in front again in the 76th minute when Robbie Fowler scored . With a minute remaining in the match , Alavés equalised thanks to Jordi Cruyff . The match went into extra time , with the first half goalless . With the match heading for a penalty shoot @-@ out , Delfí Geli headed into his own net , as a result , Liverpool won on the golden goal rule . The victory meant Liverpool completed a Treble of Football League Cup , FA Cup and UEFA Cup . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool qualified for the UEFA Cup by finishing fourth in the 1999 – 2000 FA Premier League . Their opposition in the first round were Rapid București of Romania . The first leg was held at Rapid 's home ground <unk> <unk> @-@ Valentin <unk> , Liverpool won 1 – 0 , Nick Barmby scored the winning goal . The second leg at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield finished 0 – 0 , which meant that Liverpool won the tie 1 – 0 on aggregate to progress to the second round . Liverpool 's opposition in the second round was Slovan Liberec of the Czech Republic . The first leg at Anfield was heading for a 0 – 0 draw , until the 87th minute when Emile Heskey scored to give Liverpool a 1 – 0 victory . The second leg was at Liberec 's home ground , the Stadion u <unk> . Liberec took the lead in the first half to level the tie at 1 – 1 . Midway through the first half , Liverpool equalised to make it 1 – 1 on the night and 2 – 1 in their favour in aggregate . Two further goals in the second half by Barmby and Michael Owen , before a late Liberec goal ensured Liverpool won the match 3 – 2 to progress to the third round after a 4 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 Liverpool 's opponents in the third round were Olympiacos of Greece . The first leg was held at Olympiacos ' home ground , the Karaiskakis Stadium . Liverpool were heading for a 2 – 1 victory courtesy of goals from Barmby and Steven Gerrard , until Olympiacos equalised in the last minute to earn a 2 – 2 draw . The second leg at Anfield was won 2 – 0 by Liverpool , with a goal scored in each half by Barmby and Heskey respectively . The victory ensured Liverpool won the tie 4 – 2 on aggregate to progress to the fourth round . 
 Liverpool 's opposition in the fourth round were Italian side Roma . The first leg was held at Roma 's home ground the Stadio Olimpico , where Liverpool had won the European Cup twice in 1977 and 1984 . Incidentally , Roma were the team Liverpool beat to win the European Cup in 1984 . Liverpool were once again successful at the Stadio Olimpico , as they won 2 – 0 courtesy of two Michael Owen second half goals . The second leg at Anfield was a close affair . Roma scored in the 70th minute to take the lead , they now needed to score another goal to take the match into extra @-@ time . They looked like they had the opportunity to do so , when the referee awarded a penalty towards the end of the match after he had adjudged that Markus Babbel had handled the ball . However , moments later , he reversed his decision and instead awarded Roma a corner @-@ kick . Roma were unable to score the necessary goal following the incident and Liverpool progressed to the quarter @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 Portuguese side Porto were the opposition in the quarter @-@ finals . The first leg in Portugal ended 0 – 0 . Liverpool won the second leg at Anfield 2 – 0 with Danny Murphy and Michael Owen scoring in the first half to progress to the semi @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 0 aggregate victory . Liverpool were drawn against Spanish side Barcelona in the semi @-@ finals . Liverpool defended resolutely during the first leg at Barcelona 's ground the Camp Nou to earn a 0 – 0 draw . The second leg at Anfield was equally close , until the 44th minute when Liverpool were awarded a penalty . Gary McAllister scored the subsequent penalty to put Liverpool 1 – 0 up in the match and the tie . However , a Barcelona goal would see them progress as a result of the away goals rule . Liverpool managed to see out the 90 minutes without conceding a goal to progress to their first European final , since they were banned from participating in Europe following the Heysel Stadium disaster at the 1985 European Cup Final . 
 = = = Alavés = = = 
 Alavés qualified for the UEFA Cup by finishing sixth during the 1999 – 2000 La Liga . They were drawn against Turkish team <unk> in the first round . The first leg at Alavés ' home ground the Estadio <unk> finished 0 – 0 . However , the second leg was more entertaining . The match contained seven goals , Alavés won the match 4 – 3 to progress to the second round . Alavés ' opposition in the second round were Lillestrøm of Norway . The first leg was at Lillestrøm 's home ground the Åråsen Stadion . Alavés won the match 3 – 1 with goals from <unk> , Óscar Téllez and Cosmin Contra . The second leg in Spain was a 2 – 2 draw , which ensured that Alavés won the tie 5 – 3 on aggregate to progress to the third round . Another Norwegian team , Rosenborg were their opposition . The first leg in Spain was a 1 – 1 draw . The second leg held at Rosenborg 's ground the Lerkendal Stadion . Alavés took an early lead when Rosenborg player Bent Inge Johnsen scored an own goal . Alavés scored a further two goals in the second half , with Rosenborg scoring a late goal to win the match 3 – 1 and progress to the fourth round courtesy of a 4 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 The opposition in the fourth round were Italian team Internazionale , who had won the competition three times . The first leg in Spain saw Internazionale go ahead 3 – 1 midway through the second half after Álvaro <unk> scored twice and Christian Vieri scored . Alavés fought back to equalise in the 73rd minute after goals from Óscar Téllez and Iván Alonso securing a 3 – 3 draw . The second leg at Internazionale 's home ground the San Siro appeared to heading for a 0 – 0 draw until the 78th minute when Jordi Cruyff scored . A further goal from Ivan Tomić ensured a 2 – 0 victory for Alavés . This meant that they progressed to the quarter @-@ finals at the expense of the three @-@ time winners due to a 5 – 3 aggregate victory . 
 Fellow Spanish side Rayo Vallecano were the opposition in the quarter @-@ finals . Alavés won the first leg at home 3 – 0 . Rayo took a 2 – 0 lead in the second leg at their ground the Estadio Teresa Rivero , but a late Cruyff goal ensured that Alavés would progress to the semi @-@ finals . Their opposition in the semi @-@ finals were German team Kaiserslautern , the first leg in Spain saw four penalties awarded . Three were awarded to Alavés and one to Kaiserslautern , all were scored and a further two goals for Alavés ensured the match finished 5 – 1 to Alavés . The second leg at Kaiserslautern was essentially meaningless as the German team needed to score four goals to stand a chance of reaching the final . It was Alavés who scored four goals , Kaiserslautern scored a consolation goal , but Alavés won the match 4 – 1 to progress to the final in their first season in European courtesy of a 9 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Liverpool went into the match having already won two trophies during the 2000 – 01 season . Their first trophy was the Football League Cup which they had won in February defeating Birmingham City 5 – 4 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the match had finished 1 – 1 . The second trophy was the FA Cup , which they won 2 – 1 . They entered the match with the opportunity to win an unprecedented Treble . 
 Liverpool were appearing in their third UEFA Cup final , both their previous appearances in the final in 1973 and 1976 had resulted in victory . They were also making their first appearance in a European final since their ban from European competition following the Heysel Stadium disaster . Alavés on the other hand were appearing in their first European final in their first season in European competition . Remarkably , the club had been in the Fourth Division of the Spanish league system 11 years ago . As it was their first season in Europe , Alavés had commissioned a special shirt that was pink and bore the names of all their ' socios ' ( members ) as a memento of their qualification for Europe . 
 Liverpool opted for a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with the only change from their FA Cup winning team four days earlier being the inclusion of Gary McAllister at the expense of Vladimír Šmicer . Robbie Fowler who had been disappointed to be a substitute for the FA Cup final was again on the bench . Emile Heskey and Michael Owen were picked to spearhead Liverpool 's attack . Alavés opted to play a 5 – 3 – 2 formation , with Cosmin Contra , Dan Eggen , Antonio Karmona , Óscar Téllez and Delfí Geli in defence . In attack , Martín Astudillo and Jordi Cruyff were chosen to play behind lone striker Javi Moreno . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Liverpool won the toss and kicked @-@ off . Within the first four minutes Liverpool had scored . Markus Babbel headed in a Gary McAllister free @-@ kick to put Liverpool 1 – 0 up . They nearly added to their lead minutes later when Emile Heskey was put through on goal from a McAllister pass , but Alavés goalkeeper Martín Herrera cleared the ball with his feet . Two minutes later , Martín Astudillo was shown a yellow card for a challenge on Heskey . Liverpool player Gary McAllister also received a yellow card after he confronted the Alavés player over his challenge . Alavés first opportunity to score was in the 12th minute . They were awarded a free @-@ kick on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area following a challenge by Stéphane Henchoz . Oscar Téllez curled a shot towards Liverpool 's goal , however , Liverpool goalkeeper Sander Westerveld pushed the ball away from goal . Three minutes later , Michael Owen collected a Dietmar Hamann pass and played a diagonal pass to Steven Gerrard , whose shot beat the Alavés keeper Herrera to put Liverpool 2 – 0 ahead . 
 Minutes later Alavés made the first substitution of the match when Iván Alonso replaced defender Dan Eggen . The change had the desired effect as four minutes later , Alavés scored . Right wing @-@ back Cosmin Contra put the ball into the area form the right side of the pitch and Alonso rose above Babbel to head the ball into the net to make the scoreline 2 – 1 . Immediately afterwards , Alavés were almost level when Contra put another ball into the penalty area , however , Henchoz cleared the ball before an Alavés player could reach it . In the 35th minute , Alavés were again nearly level . Alonso 's header fell to Javi Moreno , who went past Henchoz his shot was saved by Westerveld after it his chest . The rebound fell to Ivan Tomić , but Westerveld again saved his shot . Five minutes later , Liverpool were awarded a penalty . Michael Owen had run into the penalty area past the Alavés defence , he was brought down by Herrera was who was booked for the foul . Gary McAllister took the penalty and scored to put Liverpool 3 – 1 ahead . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 In contrast to the first @-@ half , it was Alavés who started the half the better of the two sides . Contra put a cross from the right side of the pitch into the penalty area , which was met by Moreno , whose header beat Westerveld to make the scoreline 3 – 2 . Four minutes later Alavés had equalised . They were awarded a free @-@ kick 25 yards away from goal and Moreno went straight through the Liverpool wall and into the goal past Westerveld . Liverpool reacted to the scoreline being levelled at 3 – 3 by substituting Stéphane Henchoz with Vladimír Šmicer . Steven Gerrard was placed in the right @-@ back position as a result of the change . Three minutes later , Owen was brought down by defender Antonio Karmona , who was subsequently booked . Liverpool were awarded a free @-@ kick , which Gary McAllister hit into the Alavés wall . In the 64th minute , both sides made substitutions . Liverpool replaced Emile Heskey with Robbie Fowler , while Alavés goalscorer Javi Moreno with Pablo . 
 Eight minutes later , Gary McAllister passed the ball to Fowler who moved towards the centre of the pitch from the left @-@ hand side and hit his shot into the corner of the net to put Liverpool 4 – 3 up with 18 minutes of the match remaining . Two minutes later , Liverpool substituted Michael Owen for Patrik Berger . In the 82nd minute , Alavés had an appeal for a penalty after Hamann was adjudged to have brought Magno down , the Brazilian was subsequently booked for diving . With two minutes remaining , Liverpool goalkeeper Sander Westerveld conceded a corner . The subsequent corner is headed into the goal by Jordi Cruyff to make the scoreline 4 – 4 . Two minutes into injury @-@ time , Contra went down under pressure from Gerrard in the Liverpool penalty area . Again , the referee deemed that there was no penalty . Following this , the referee blew his whistle to signal the end of 90 minutes if play . The match would now go into a 30 @-@ minute extra @-@ time period . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 The golden goal was used during extra @-@ time , which meant that whatever team scored first would win . Liverpool kicked off the first half of extra @-@ time and within three minutes , Alavés looked like they had scored a golden goal . Ivan Alonso had put the ball in the Liverpool goal , but it was ruled out as Alonso was offside . A minute later , Óscar Téllez was booked for fouling Robbie Fowler . Within four minutes , Alavés had been reduced to 10 men . Magno was shown a second yellow card for a two @-@ footed challenge on Markus Babbel . With a minute of the first half of extra @-@ time remaining , Fowler thought he had scored the winning goal , however it was disallowed as he was offside . 
 Alavés kicked off the second half of extra @-@ time and within seconds , Babbel was booked for bringing down Alavés defender Delfí Geli 30 yards from goal . The resulting free @-@ kick was put wide by Hermes <unk> . Three minutes later , Liverpool had a chance to score , but Fowler could not reach Steven Gerrard 's cross and the ball was subsequently cleared from the Alavés penalty area . In the 115th minute of the match , Alavés were reduced to nine men , when Antonio Karmona received a second yellow card for fouling <unk> . McAllister took the resulting free @-@ kick , which was headed into his own goal by Geli . As a result of the golden goal , Liverpool had won the match 5 – 4 to win their third UEFA Cup and complete a Treble . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool 's victory was their third UEFA Cup success , this put them level with Internazionale and Juventus as the teams with the most success in the competition . Their victory also meant they completed a Treble of cup victories , as they had won the Football League Cup and the FA Cup earlier in the season . 
 The match was hailed as one of the most exciting finals in modern times , with Alan Hansen declaring : " the best final ever . " Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier hailed his players after the match : " When you play in a European final , you are looking for immortality . People remember who was playing and when you look at programmes from finals you just recall the facts of the game . These boys have produced a game which will be remembered for a long time — and that is thanks to Alavés too . " Houllier hit back at critics that had labelled Liverpool as boring before the match : " Maybe we are a boring side — as I seem to keep reading — but I will put up with that . We must have scored 122 of our 123 goals on the counter attack , but all I know is that our total this season is the third highest in Liverpool 's history . " 
 The performance of Gary McAllister was lauded after the match with Trevor Brooking stating : " Gary McAllister was outstanding . " Alan Hansen also praised McAllister 's performance : " Gary McAllister was outstanding . At 36 , to keep going the way he did , keep taking those free @-@ kicks and producing it when it counted , was sensational . He fully deserved his man of the match award . " 
 Alavés manager José Manuel <unk> praised his players despite their loss : " Dortmund has seen a great final , and it was possibly the smallest team in the competition that made it great . " <unk> saluted his players for their character especially for equalising twice in the match : " We played with pride and class to get the score back to 4 – 4 at the end of normal time , the result of that , however , was that we were half dead going into extra @-@ time . But we 're the same team as we were two hours ago . One side always has to lose a final , just as one wins . " 
 Despite their success , Liverpool were not celebrating immediately after the match , as they had an important match in the Premier League on the Saturday following the final . The match against Charlton Athletic was a must @-@ win match for Liverpool if they wanted to finish in third place in the league and claim the final UEFA Champions League qualification place . The subsequent match was won 4 – 0 by Liverpool to secure their place in the 2001 – 02 UEFA Champions League . Winning the UEFA Cup entitled Liverpool to compete in the 2001 UEFA Super Cup against Champions League winners Bayern Munich . Liverpool won the match 3 – 2 to secure their second Super Cup victory . 
 = E.V.O. : Search for Eden = 
 E.V.O. : Search for Eden , originally released in Japan as 46 Okunen Monogatari : Harukanaru Eden e ( <unk> <unk> , " 4 @.@ 6 Billion Year Story : To Distant Eden " ) , is a side @-@ scrolling action video game developed by Almanic Corporation and published by Enix for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Released in 1992 for Japanese audiences , the game was later translated and released in North America in 1993 . Combining traditional platforming mechanics with experience and leveling mechanics originating from role playing games , E.V.O. involves the player navigating a creature through a number of side @-@ scrolling levels while undergoing bodily evolution to cope with ever @-@ changing environments . The game is heavily based on Almanic 's original title , 46 Okunen Monogatari : The Shinka Ron , released exclusively in Japan for the PC @-@ 9801 home computer in 1990 . 
 Spanning a period of over a billion years , the game 's story involves Gaia , daughter of the sun and mystical embodiment of the Earth , guiding the player through five distinct geological periods of the planet 's history . Beginning the game as a fish , the player must travel across the planet defeating enemies and gaining the strength to evolve into more powerful and complex organisms before eventually earning a chance to enter the paradise realm of Eden , becoming Gaia 's immortal partner . Crystals with the ability to influence evolution are laden throughout the player 's quest , with the mystery of their origin becoming a secondary factor to the main story . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 E.V.O. is a side @-@ scrolling platformer action game where players must navigate a creature of their own design across a number of environments resembling Earth 's past . The game is divided into five distinct geological periods : the Cambrian Period and the Ordovician Period of the Paleozoic Era ( " The World Before Land " ) from 500 million years ago to 450 million years ago , then the Carboniferous period ( " Early Creatures of Land " ) , the Mesozoic Era ( " Age of Dinosaurs " ) , the late Neogene period ( " Ice Age " ) , and finally the early Quaternary period ( " Early Man " ) . Each period has its own map screen , which is divided into various levels . While each era takes historical liberties with both its inhabitants and time frames , the player 's choices for evolution are dependent on the current era of play , ranging from aquatic bodies during the Age of Fish to mammalian physiology during the Age of Man . During the first two eras you are forced to gain a new body to progress , but once you reach the Age of Dinosaurs , a side quest will give you the option to remain as a reptile , or become a bird , gaining the ability of flight . As you enter the Ice Age as a bird or reptile , you are immediately given the option to become a mammal . You can finish the game as a reptile , bird , or mammal and the outcome is still the same , only the interaction dialogue is affected by your choices . 
 As the player progresses through each level , other organisms are encountered who must be confronted by biting , ramming them with horns , or jumping on them until they are defeated . Defeated enemies leave behind meat which the player can consume to grant them " evolution points " used towards upgrading specific body parts . The body of the character controlled by the player is divided into eight sections which can be upgraded by spending evolution points , making them stronger as well as changing their appearance . New abilities such as tail swings , greater jumping ability and increased movement speed can also be obtained through evolution . 
 During gameplay , the player will also encounter crystals that either display hints and tips , grant large amounts of Evolution Points or transform their character into a unique body for a limited time . As the player takes damage from enemy creatures , one may restore health at any time by either consuming the meat of their foes , eating nearby plant life , or by undergoing selective evolution . At the end of each level , the player must face a stronger boss character in order to progress , requiring much more effort to defeat than a typical foe . There is no game over mechanism , if the player 's character loses all their health points the player is revived by Gaia and sent back to the game 's map screen with a deduction of roughly half of their Evolution Points . The game utilizes a built @-@ in battery backup save system for storing game data . The player may record progress directly to the cartridge to be continued at another time , and store up to fifty previously created creatures using the game 's built @-@ in " Book of Life " feature . Creatures stored in this index have the option to be recalled at any time when the player encounters special crystals during the quest . 
 = = Story = = 
 E.V.O. tells a mythical saga of life 's evolution on Earth , with a subtext of a creation myth and polytheistic evolution . The player takes the role of one of many billions of lifeforms created by Gaia , the nurturing and benevolent daughter of Sol , the Sun . Among the creatures known as life , there is a competition to evolve , and the best lifeform will eventually be granted the privilege of entering the Garden of Eden and becoming the husband and partner of Gaia . As the game progresses , it soon becomes apparent some mysterious external force is interfering with evolution on Earth in a destructive manner . Strange crystals not native to Gaia appear across the planet , and creatures that eat the crystals are transformed into monstrously powerful beings that dominate all other lifeforms , <unk> resources and disrupt the flow of evolution . In each Age the player character is tasked with confronting the species transformed by the crystals and defeating them so that the evolution of life can continue as intended . 
 In the final Age , the Age of Eden , the player learns a mysterious entity is controlling the world 's other lifeforms and sending them against the player . This entity turns out to be Bolbox , a lifeform that has evolved into a freakish and evil advanced being by consuming the crystals , believing itself to be the first human , but in reality is a gigantic single @-@ celled organism . In the game 's final battle , the player and Bolbox fight to determine who will gain entry into Eden and become Gaia 's partner . Bolbox is defeated , and the player joins Gaia in Eden and is granted the gift of intelligence . It is also revealed the crystals were introduced to Earth by an advanced civilization on Mars , who misguidedly wished to help Earth by speeding its evolution with the crystals . Upon realizing the dangers the crystals create , the Martians decide to leave Earth alone and observe until it becomes advanced enough for them to interact with . 
 = = Development = = 
 E.V.O. was developed by Almanic Corporation in early 1992 under the Japanese title 46 Okunen Monogatari ~ Harukanaru Eden e ~ ( literally , " 4 @.@ 6 Billion Year Story : To Distant Eden " ) and was headed by project director Takashi Yoneda , who had designed Quintet 's <unk> three years prior . The title was largely based on the company 's earlier successful role @-@ playing game 46 Okunen Monogatari ~ The Shinka Ron ~ ( literally , " 4 @.@ 6 Billion Year Story : The Theory of Evolution " ) , released for the NEC PC @-@ 9801 home computer in 1990 , and carries over much of the game 's theme , designs and story . Although the design staff had opted to give a fantastic rather than scientific representation of evolutionary theories and planet development , the crew was assisted by teachers from local schools to provide information on geology and biology to the programmers . While some of the game 's designers were similar to that of the original PC @-@ 9801 title , much of the staff for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System version was made up of a younger , less experienced crew , which Yoneda stated made things " interesting " during development . 
 The North American version was translated and marketed by Enix America Corporation . While originally planned for a March 1993 release , the game was beset by last @-@ minute delays for several months until the following June . The company would later hold a promotional contest where players could send in photographs of their favorite customized creatures for a chance to win a free Enix game . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for E.V.O. was originally composed by Koichi Sugiyama for 46 Okunen Monogatari ~ The Shinka Ron ~ . <unk> Takenouchi , a former student of Sugiyama 's , adapted the music for <unk> .. In late 1992 , select pieces from the game were performed by the Tokyo City Philharmonic Orchestra during their second annual Game Music Concert series in Tokyo , Japan . Two of these pieces , " Great Hymn of Nature , Earth " and " Sorrow " were made available on the Orchestra Game Music Concert 2 album the following November . In December of the same year , an official soundtrack for E.V.O. was released exclusively in Japan by Apollon Records . Rather than featuring the same instrumentation present in the game , the 46 Okunen Monogatari Symphonic Synth Suite soundtrack was composed of music also re @-@ recorded and arranged by Takenouchi . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mild but generally positive reviews during its initial release in North America . GamePro magazine praised the game 's originality and overall design but found fault with the visual presentation of the title , stating " although this game has an interesting concept , the sluggish game play and average graphics may make you return to the caves . " The publication also found the background music lacking , stating the game 's compositions ranged from " soothing " to " annoying " . Nintendo Power called attention to the game 's ingenuity and theme , remarking that " [ t ] he idea of this game is great and the weird creatures you can evolve can be both bizarre and hilarious . " However , the magazine felt the game 's representation of the concept of evolution was too fanciful , also stating the process of obtaining power @-@ up items being " tedious " . Nintendo Power would later give the game an honorable mention during its " Top Titles of 1993 " awards segment as one of the most innovative games of the year . 
 Allgame was even less positive about the game , giving it two stars out of five . They praised the challenge that the bosses presented , and the quantity of creatures the player could evolve into , but noted that the game was " marred by mediocre graphics and sluggish gameplay . " Although not officially released in Europe , the game was covered in an import review by Super Play in late 1993 and although they found the game 's strategy components to be " top @-@ notch " , the rest of the game was regarded as " very mediocre " , garnering only a 47 % average score . 
 More contemporary reviews of the game were largely positive . In his 2001 collector 's guide Video Game Bible , author Andy Slaven called the game " wildly underrated ( and highly original ) " . In February 2007 , IGN ranked E.V.O. second in its list of the greatest " Prehistoric Games " of all time , stating " [ n ] o other title before or since has so effectively captured the essence of evolutionary theory in videogame form . " The website additionally likened the title to the then @-@ upcoming and highly anticipated Spore by Maxis Games , calling E.V.O. the " original success story " in life @-@ simulation gaming and the standard for which it would be judged . 
 = Vanilla Ice = 
 Robert Matthew Van Winkle ( born October 31 , 1967 ) , known by his stage name , Vanilla Ice , is an American rapper , actor and television host . Born in South Dallas , and raised in Texas and South Florida , Ice released his debut album , Hooked , in 1989 on Ichiban Records , before signing a contract with SBK Records , a record label of the EMI Group which released a reformatted version of the album under the title To the Extreme . Ice 's 1990 single " Ice Ice Baby " was the first hip hop single to top the Billboard charts . 
 Although Vanilla Ice was successful , he later regretted his business arrangements with SBK , which had paid him to adopt a more commercial appearance to appeal to a mass audience and published fabricated biographical information without his knowledge . After surviving a suicide attempt , Ice was inspired to change his musical style and lifestyle . While his later , less mainstream albums failed to chart or receive much radio airplay , Ice has had a loyal underground following . In 2009 , Ice began hosting The Vanilla Ice Project on DIY Network . His latest album WTF – Wisdom , <unk> & Focus was released in August 2011 . Ice is currently signed to Psychopathic Records . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robert Matthew Van Winkle was born in Dallas , Texas , on October 31 , 1967 . Van Winkle has never known his biological father ; he was given the family name of the man his mother was married to at the time of his birth . When Van Winkle was four , his mother divorced . Afterward , he grew up moving between Dallas and Miami , where his new stepfather worked at a car dealership . Hip hop had an impact on Van Winkle at an early age , saying " It 's a very big passion of mine because I love poetry . I was just heavily influenced by that whole movement and it 's molded me into who I am today . " Between the ages of 13 and 14 , Van Winkle practiced breakdancing , which led to his friends nicknaming him " Vanilla " , as he was the only one in the group that was not African American . Although he disliked the nickname , it stuck . Shortly afterward , Van Winkle started battle rapping at parties and because of his rhymes , his friends started calling him " MC Vanilla . " However , when he became a member of a breakdance troupe , Van Winkle 's stage name was " Vanilla Ice " combining his nickname " Vanilla " with one of his breakdance moves ; " The Ice " . When Ice 's stepfather was offered a better job in Carrollton , Texas , he moved back to Texas with his mother . He attended R. L. Turner High School for a short time before dropping out . When Ice was not learning to ride motorbikes , he was dancing as a street performer with his breakdancing group , now called The Vanilla Ice Posse . Ice wrote " Ice Ice Baby " at the age of 16 , basing its lyrics on a weekend he had with friend and disc jockey D @-@ Shay in South Florida . The lyrics describe Ice and Shay on a drug run that ends in a drive @-@ by shooting while praising Ice 's rhyming skills . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1985 – 1989 ) = = = 
 In 1985 , he was focusing all of his energy on motocross , winning three championships . After breaking his ankle during a race , Ice was not interested in racing professionally for some time , using his spare time to perfect his dance moves and creating his own while his ankle was healing . Ice used his beatboxing and breakdancing skills as a street performer with his friends at local malls during this time . One evening he visited City Lights , a South Dallas night club , where he was dared to go on stage by his friend Squirrel during an Open Mic . He won the crowd over and was asked by City Lights manager John Bush if he wanted to perform regularly , which he accepted . Ice would be joined on stage with his disc jockey D @-@ Shay and Zero as well as Earthquake , the local disc jockey at City Lights . The Vanilla Ice Posse or The V.I.P. would also perform with Ice on stage . As a performer for City Lights , Ice opened up for N.W.A , Public Enemy , The D.O.C. , Tone Lōc , 2 Live Crew , Paula Abdul , Sinbad and MC Hammer . 
 In January 1987 , Ice was stabbed five times during a scuffle outside of City Lights . After spending ten days at the hospital , Ice signed a contract with the owner of City Lights , Tommy Quon and his management company , <unk> . Two years later , Ice would open for EPMD , Ice @-@ T , <unk> , and Sir Mix @-@ A @-@ Lot on the Stop the Violence Tour . Quon saw commercial potential in Ice 's rapping and dancing skills . Buying studio time with Quon 's earnings from City Lights , they recorded songs that had been perfected on stage by Ice and his acquaintances with various producers , including <unk> . The two year production was distributed by an independent record company called Ichiban Records in 1989 . " Play That Funky Music " was released as the album 's first single , with " Ice Ice Baby " appearing as the B @-@ side . Tommy Quon personally sent out the single to various radio stations around the US , but the single was seldom played and when it was , it did not get the reaction Quon was hoping for . When disc jockey Darrell Jaye in Georgia played " Ice Ice Baby " instead of the single 's A @-@ side , the song gained a quick fanbase and other radio stations followed suit . Quon financed $ 8 @,@ 000 for the production of a music video for " Ice Ice Baby " , which received heavy airplay by The Box , increasing public interest in the song . 
 Following the success of " Ice Ice Baby " , record producer Suge Knight and two bodyguards arrived at The Palm in West Hollywood , where Ice was eating . After shoving Ice 's bodyguards aside , Knight and his own bodyguards sat down in front of Ice , staring at him before finally asking " How you doin ' ? " Similar incidents were repeated on several occasions . Eventually , Knight showed up at Ice 's hotel suite on the fifteenth floor of the Bel Age Hotel , accompanied by a member of the Oakland Raiders . According to Ice , Knight took him out on the balcony by himself , and implied that he would throw him off the balcony unless he signed the publishing rights to the song over to Knight ; Knight used Ice 's money to help fund Death Row Records . 
 = = = Mainstream success ( 1990 – 1993 ) = = = 
 On the basis of Ice 's good looks and dance moves , Public Enemy tried to convince their producer , Hank Shocklee , to sign Ice to Def Jam , but Ice later signed a contract with SBK Records in 1990 . SBK remixed and re @-@ recorded Hooked under the title To the Extreme . The reissue contained new artwork and music . According to Ice , SBK paid him to adopt a more commercial , conventional appearance . This led Ice to later regret his business agreements with SBK . 
 To the Extreme became the fastest selling hip hop album of all time , spending sixteen weeks at # 1 on the Billboard 200 and selling eleven million copies . SBK Record executive Monte Lipman stated that he received calls from radio stations reporting over 200 phone calls requesting Ice Ice Baby . SBK wanted Ice on the road as soon as possible . MC Hammer , an old acquaintance from his club days , had Ice on as an opening act on his tour . Reviews of To the Extreme were mixed . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Mim Udovitch gave the album a B , citing " Ice Ice Baby " , " Play That Funky Music " , " Dancin ' " and " It 's a Party " as the album 's highlights . Robert Christgau gave the album a C − rating , writing that Ice 's " suave sexism , fashionably male supremacist rather than dangerously obscene , is no worse than his suave beats " . Criticizing the technique and style of Vanilla Ice , Allrovi reviewer Steve Huey wrote : 
 Ice 's mic technique is actually stronger and more nimble than MC Hammer 's , and he really tries earnestly to show off the skills he does have . Unfortunately , even if he can keep a mid @-@ tempo pace , his flow is rhythmically stiff , and his voice has an odd timbre ; plus , he never seems sure of the proper accent to adopt . He 's able to overcome those flaws somewhat in isolated moments , but they become all too apparent over the course of an entire album . 
 In late 1990 , Ice began an eight @-@ month relationship with Madonna , and appeared in photographs for her book , Sex . In the height of Ice 's popularity , SBK licensed a 12 " doll which was made by THQ . In January 1991 , he was the musical guest on Saturday Night Live . Ice branched out into the film industry with an appearance in the film Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II : The Secret of the <unk> , which he later called " one of the coolest experiences " of his career . Ice was very secretive about his personal life , with the intention of protecting his family . When a Dallas Morning News reporter asked Ice what his mother 's profession was , he replied " None of your fucking business " . In an attempt to rectify this , his former label wrote a fake biography in his name and tried to pass it off as his official life story without his knowledge . While on tour in 1991 , Ice found out that SBK had instigated the publication of the biography which detailed false biographical information , including claims that he had attended school with Luther Campbell and exaggerating his living conditions in Miami , which Ice later had to debunk by himself . 
 Ice 's second major release was the live album Extremely Live , released in March 1991 . The album was a live recording during Vanilla Ice 's performance in Miami during his To The Extreme tour . Premiering new songs like Rollin ' in My 5 @.@ 0 , Road To My Riches and Satisfaction , the album peaked at # 30 on the Billboard 200 , but it received mainly negative reviews , with Entertainment Weekly reviewer David Browne calling it " one of the most ridiculous albums ever released " , comparing it to The Best of Marcel Marceau , an album which consisted of two sides of silence opened by brief applause . According to Browne , Extremely Live " affords you the chance to hear inane stage patter [ ... ] and unaccompanied drumming , during which , one assumes , Ice and his posse are onstage dancing . " Monte Lipman later stated that SBK only released the live disc to make more money from Ice 's fame . In April 1991 , Ice began to film the SBK produced Cool as Ice , in which he played a leading role . 
 Cool as Ice opened on October 18 , 1991 in 393 theaters in the United States , grossing $ 638 @,@ 000 , ranking at # 14 among the week 's new releases . Reviews of the film were negative . Film website Rotten Tomatoes , which compiles reviews from a wide range of critics , gives the film a score of 8 % . Ice received a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst New Star . SBK stated that they overexposed Ice and Ice decided to stop taking their business advice as well as distancing himself from the image that SBK was trying to create for him . In late 1991 , Ice appeared in the Circus of the Stars and Sideshow , driving his motorcycle through a wall of fire . While his fame in the United States had severely dropped , Ice continued touring in 1992 , playing in South America , Europe , Australia and Asia , premiering new songs like " Get Loose " , " The Wrath " , " Now & Forever " , " Where the Dogs At ? ( All Night Long ) " , " Minutes of Power " and " Iceman Party " . After a performance in Acapulco , the city honored Ice with a medal that represented " all the respect and admiration to [ Ice 's ] music and to [ him ] as an artist from the Mexican people " . Ice also served as a spokesperson for Nike and Coca @-@ Cola throughout 1991 and 1992 . In 1993 , Ice toured Eastern @-@ Europe again and premiered songs off his upcoming album in St. Petersburg , Russia in front of President Boris Yeltsin . 
 = = = Mind Blowin , music break and drug abuse ( 1994 – 1996 ) = = = 
 After almost non @-@ stop touring for the previous three years , Ice took a break from music in 1993 and began competing in jet skiing ( becoming the 6th best jet ski racer in the world and obtaining sponsorship from Kawasaki ) as well as resuming Motocross racing . Ice was interested in responding to his critics by having his next album surpass his earlier and popular work . In 1992 , Ice started writing response songs aimed at 3rd Bass and Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch . Together with his disc jockey Zero , the new album started production yet again , scrapping a lot of finished songs and re @-@ doing others . 
 By 1994 , Ice received less publicity and became removed from the public spotlight . After becoming more interested with the Rastafari movement , Ice became a vegetarian , grew dreadlocks and talked more openly about smoking cannabis . On March 22 , 1994 , Ice released his second studio album , Mind Blowin ' . Reviews were unfavorable . Entertainment Weekly reviewer James Bernard called the album " more clunky than funky " . Rolling Stone reviewer Danyel Smith praised the song " Get Loose " as " snappy " , writing that although the lyrics are " inane " , " the song is a thumping party , one of the few places where Ice loosens up . He sounds solid at the beginning of ' The Wrath ' as well [ ... ] In ' Now and Forever , ' a wet dream kind of song , Ice goes back to goofy lyrics . " Allrovi reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that " There isn 't a single moment that establishes a distinct musical identity , and the whole thing is rather embarrassing . " Primus bassist Les Claypool stated in response to Ice 's cannabis @-@ oriented lyrics : " That 's all fine and dandy and cute , but it could be misconstrued and manipulated by the wrong people . " When asked about the drug oriented sound years later , Vanilla Ice said " A lot of the record is drug oriented because I was doing a lot of drugs at the time " . Shortly afterward , SBK went bankrupt . 
 At around this time , Ice began using ecstasy , cocaine and heroin . During periods of heavy drug use , Ice received many tattoos from artist acquaintances . According to Ice , he " was in [ his ] binge days . [ He ] didn 't even realize how many [ he ] was getting " . Ice attempted suicide with a heroin overdose on July 4 , 1994 but was revived by his friends . After being revived , Ice decided that it was time to change his lifestyle . As a symbol of his attempt to begin anew , he got a tattoo of a leaf on his stomach . After expanding his Mind Blowin ’ tour overseas in 1995 , Ice sold his estate in California and took a break from music , rather focusing on <unk> and jet skiing in Florida . By the summer Ice was the world 's No. 6 @-@ ranked sit @-@ down Jet Ski racer , competing nearly every weekend and earning a Kawasaki sponsorship . He met future wife Laura <unk> a year after his suicide attempt at a Fourth of July party in 1995 . 
 Uncertain about his future career , Ice studied real estate and started working on the side renovating and selling houses . In late 1995 , Ice set up a recording studio in Miami and joined a grunge band , Pickin <unk> . The name was set to reflect Ice 's career and how he was healing from his suicide attempt and that he was now " picking up the pieces " . Ice expressed an interest in performing hip hop @-@ influenced rock music , but found that the band was unable to produce the sound he was looking for . In 1996 , longtime associate and friend Monte Lipman signed Ice as an artist for Universal Republic Records . He did guest vocals with no stage name for the song " Boom " by Bloodhound Gang on their CD One Fierce Beer Coaster . Later that year , Ice opened up a Miami @-@ based Extreme sport store that focused mostly on water sports and surfing , which he and girlfriend Laura named after his first mainstream album , ' 2 The Xtreme ' . 
 = = = 1997 – 2001 = = = 
 Ice later developed a friendship with producer Ross Robinson , who had become known for producing music by Deftones , Korn , Limp Bizkit and Sepultura . Robinson and Ice shared an interest in motocross racing . Monte Lipman hoped that Robinson would produce a new Vanilla Ice album . According to Robinson , others had attempted to discourage him from working with Ice , saying it might hurt his reputation . Rather than being dissuaded , their fear encouraged Robinson who agreed to work with Ice . In an interview , Robinson stated " It 's the most punk @-@ rock thing you could do . " Despite not being happy with his old image , Winkle stated that he never had a problem with his older music . Ice decided against changing his stage name to something else , as he felt no need to run from his past , despite being uneasy with some of it and started performing again , booking a hundred shows a year . 
 Ice 's third studio album , Hard to Swallow , featured a darker sound and lyrics than Ice 's previous work as well as various mixtures of different styles of hip hop and hard rock which caught the media 's attention . Ice attracted a whole new audience when he started touring again , some who were even unfamiliar with his more mainstream sound . Despite getting its own audience and going Gold , reviews of the album were generally negative . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote " The most earnest new song , Scars , condemns an abusive father . The sentiments would sound more genuine if Korn hadn 't gotten there first . " Richard Torres of Rolling Stone gave the album two out of five stars , writing that while " nothing , however , can redeem Ice 's wack boasting , " the album " isn 't half @-@ bad . " In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Rob Kemp gave the album three out of five stars , writing that it contained Ice 's " most convincing music " . A lot of executives at <unk> were predicting that the album would do better than ' To The Extreme ' . In promotion of Hard to Swallow , Ice toured with a seven @-@ piece live band which included bassist Scott Shriner . The band opened with rock @-@ oriented material from Hard to Swallow and concluded with older hip hop songs . The setlist also included " Power " , based upon Led Zeppelin 's " Immigrant Song " . Ice said that writing the songs and performing them were like therapy , as he had tried to hide his anger when making his older songs but Robinson was the first producer who told him to use it to create . 
 Vanilla Ice was a member of the softball team The Hip Hop Stars alongside Dr. Dre , Snoop Dogg and Method Man in a 1999 game shown on MTV Rock N ' Jock . Later in 1999 , MTV asked Vanilla Ice to join their cast to " retire " the music video for " Ice Ice Baby " on the MTV special 25 Lame , in which Ice himself was asked to destroy the video 's master tape . When Ice was given a baseball bat , he ended up destroying not only the film but the show 's entire set as well . In 2001 , DJ <unk> remixed " Ice Ice Baby " with Vanilla Ice re @-@ doing his vocals for the track . Ice Ice Baby 2001 was released as a single and music video for the European market spawning a wave of new overseas interest in Vanilla Ice . 
 Having attracted a following outside of his former mainstream audience , Ice began recording independently , despite still being signed at Universal . During a recording session , Ice met the all @-@ female American hard rock band from Southern California , Betty Blowtorch . The late Bianca Halstead bonded with Ice and asked if he wanted to contribute a rap interlude to their track Size Queen . On Ice 's collaboration with the band , lead vocalist and bassist Halstead was quoted saying " I asked him if he could rap over [ the track ] and he said he can rap over anything . And he could ! " Per his stepfather 's request , Ice started working with his former manager Tommy Quon again , while hoping to re @-@ create some of the magic that they worked hard on in the early 90 's , Ice denied any interest in trying to become big again and that his only passion was music , not fame . 
 In May 2000 , Ice wrestled in a match promoted by Juggalo Championship Wrestling , then known as Juggalo <unk> Wrestling , filling in for Insane Clown Posse member Shaggy 2 Dope , who had been injured during a match . MTV News reported that Insane Clown Posse would make an appearance on Ice 's next album , tentatively titled Bomb Tha System . In October 2000 , Ice announced that his next album would be titled <unk> , and that Chuck D was confirmed to appear on the album . It was initially planned as a double album featuring a disc containing rock @-@ oriented material and a disc of hip hop songs . In July 2001 , Ice performed at the second Gathering of the Juggalos . On October 23 , 2001 , <unk> and Bomb Tha System were released as a together as Bi @-@ Polar . The album also featured La the Darkman , Perla , Insane Poetry and Bob <unk> . Bradley Torreano of Allrovi disliked the album , criticizing it as " wildly uneven and at times hilariously bad " , but also stating " Vanilla Ice is still better than a lot of the rap @-@ metal bands that erupted in 2000 / 2001 . " and the rap beats on Bomb Tha System " are surprisingly solid " . In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Rob Kemp gave the album one out of five stars , calling the album " utterly listless " . According to a Sony BMG executive , sales of Bi @-@ Polar were " not bad ... for Vanilla Ice . That 's pretty respectable . Seriously . " 
 = = = Independent releases ( 2002 – 2009 ) = = = 
 With Quon back as manager , Ice was scheduled to appear in various reality TV programs . Ice , still an entertainer at heart , felt that the experience would be good for him . In 2002 he appeared on Celebrity Boxing , fighting Todd Bridges under the name ' Bi @-@ Polar ' . In 2003 , he appeared in five episodes of Hollywood Squares , eight episodes on ' The Farm ' and three episodes of Celebrity Bull Riding Challenge as well as a cameo in The New Guy in 2002 . Around this time , Vanilla Ice also returned to the world of motocross . He auditioned for the 2002 X Games in the freestyle division and placed seventh at the 2003 Suzuki Crossover challenge , according to Sports Illustrated . He told the magazine that the track " is where I 'm happiest . " 
 In 2003 , Ice contributed vocals to " Off the Chain " by <unk> , a side project of Iron Maiden drummer Nicko McBrain and Anthrax guitarist Dan Spitz . A demo of the song was leaked in June . In 2003 , <unk> reissued Bomb Tha System ( the second part of " Bi @-@ Polar " ) under the title Hot Sex , which was a single from the original album . 
 From January to February 2004 , Ice appeared on the reality television series The Surreal Life . Although much of the series was staged , Ice found the experience to be therapeutic , stating that a comment made by Tammy Faye Messner during filming ; " We are who we are because of who we were " helped him accept his past . 
 On August 2 , 2005 , Ice released his fifth studio album , Platinum Underground . Ice stated that the title of the album reflected the fact that he could maintain a fanbase without mainstream airplay . Allrovi reviewer Rob Theakston panned the album , writing that it " has more bad spots in it than most " . Ice made a song titled Ninja Rap 2 which was set to be a hardcore remix . Aside the name , the song has very little connection to Ice 's original 1991 single , but rather talks about his appreciation to his fans , his love to perform at clubs and playing at the Gathering of the Juggalos with Insane Clown Posse . Ninja Rap 2 was the first song to be released from Platinum Underground and was available to download for free off of Ice 's official website . 
 In 2007 , Ice returned to a spin @-@ off of The Surreal Life titled The Surreal Life : Fame Games where he again trashed the set after being voted off . In September 2008 , Ice signed a contract with Cleopatra Records , recording the cover album Vanilla Ice Is Back ! at the label 's request . The album was released on November 4 , 2008 , and contained covers of songs by Public Enemy , House of Pain , Bob Marley , and Cypress Hill . IGN reviewer Spence D. called the album " an embarrassing endeavor that sounds like it should have stayed locked inside Ice 's studio ( or at the very least leaked on YouTube and passed off as a piss take ) . " On February 27 , 2009 , Ice performed as part of a joint performance with MC Hammer in Orem , Utah called " Hammer Pants And Ice " , which featured twenty four dancers and a full choir . 
 = = = Recent endeavors ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 In August 2009 , Ice announced on his official Twitter account that he had signed a contract with <unk> Records ; however , Ice later left the label . Ice was a special musical guest at the 2010 National Television Awards in January , performing with Jedward for their remix and debut single " Under Pressure ( Ice Ice Baby ) " . Ice also recorded his verse for their album Planet Jedward and appeared in the music video . Vanilla Ice was a part of The <unk> concert tour with Turbo B and MC Hammer , playing worldwide in late 2010 . Ice reunited with his former DJ ; Floyd ' Earthquake ' Brown for the shows overseas . In early 2011 , Vanilla Ice appeared on the sixth season of the UK show Dancing on Ice as well as various ice skating tours surrounding the show . 
 In 2009 , Ice started filming a reality television series called The Vanilla Ice Project which premiered on DIY Network on October 14 , 2010 . The season is focused on renovating a house in Palm Beach , Florida with each episode dedicated to a different room in the house . In 2011 , Ice published a book on the subject , Vanilla Ice Project – Real Estate Guide on how to succeed in real estate . The book was made available as a free digital download on his real estate website . The second season aired January 2012 while the third season started airing January 2013 . 
 In June 2011 , Ice filmed a role in the film That 's My Boy ( released in 2012 ) . In the film , Ice portrayed an exaggerated version of himself , called Uncle <unk> . He also worked with Andy Samberg in the movie and while shooting , Ice collaborated both with Samberg and Sandler musically . In August , Ice performed at the 2011 Gathering of the Juggalos , where it was officially announced that he had signed with Psychopathic Records . His sixth studio album , WTF , was released on August 19 through Radium Records . While the record featured an array of different styles , like other recent Vanilla Ice albums , it also featured Ice 's return to Electronica , with songs like " Turn It Up " , " Rock Star Party " , " Nightmare Disco " and " Cadillac Ninjas " . On the new record and its numerous musical genres , Ice was quoted saying " It 's like techno hip @-@ hop . European . I live a lot in Europe , and when I 'm over there I get way into the techno stuff and I get into new music . So I thought I 'd make a record of it . I did the thing and it was a lot of fun " . 
 In December 2011 , Ice played Captain Hook in the Chatham , Kent Central Theatre pantomime production of Peter Pan , a role that previously belonged to Henry Winkler . He also turned on the Christmas lights for Rochester , Kent in Rochester Castle , as part of the promotion for the panto . On May 12 , 2012 , Vanilla Ice helped in the launch of the Mr. Freeze Reverse Blast roller coaster at Six Flags over Texas in Arlington with a free concert for valid daily park ticket or 2012 Season Pass holders . In mid 2013 , Vanilla Ice joined the New Kids on the Block tour alongside Boyz II Men . 
 On September 15 , 2013 , Vanilla Ice performed at the halftime show of a Houston Texans game . Houston went on to lose the remaining fourteen games of the season , leading some players to blame Vanilla Ice for the losing streak . 
 In the Western comedy film The Ridiculous Six , released in 2015 , Ice portrayed Mark Twain . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Vanilla Ice dated Madonna for eight months in 1990 . Ice married Laura <unk> in 1997 ; they have two daughters , <unk> Rain ( born 1998 ) and <unk> Breeze ( born 2000 ) . Ice describes himself as a " Juggalo " , a fan of Psychopathic Records hip hop groups , and was a vegetarian for a short time . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 In August 8 , 1988 , Ice was arrested in South Dallas for illegal drag racing . 
 On June 3 , 1991 , he was arrested in Los Angeles on firearm charges after threatening a homeless man , James N. Gregory , with a pistol . Gregory had approached Ice 's car outside of a supermarket and attempted to sell him a silver chain . Ice and his bodyguard were charged with three weapons offenses . Ice pleaded no contest . 
 In January 2001 , Ice was arrested by police in Davie , Florida for assaulting his wife , Laura . According to the criminal complaint , Ice and his wife argued as they drove on Interstate 595 . Ice admitted to pulling hair from her head to prevent her from jumping out of the truck 's window . He pleaded guilty to charges of disorderly conduct four months later and was sentenced to probation and ordered to attend family therapy sessions . 
 Ice 's pet wallaroo , Bucky , and pet goat , Pancho , escaped from his Port St. Lucie , Florida home in November 2004 . After wandering around local streets for over a week , the animals were caught and returned to Ice . He paid a $ 220 fine for expired pet tags and an undisclosed fine for the escape of the animals . 
 Ice appeared in West Palm Beach court on September 2007 to be arraigned for driving with an expired license . In the months leading up to the court hearing , Ice had been pulled over for doing 74 in a 45 @-@ mph zone , violating high @-@ occupancy vehicle lane restrictions and having illegally tinted car windows . 
 On April 10 , 2008 , Ice was arrested in Palm Beach County on a battery charge for allegedly kicking and hitting his wife . He was released the following day after she declared that her husband had only pushed her . In court , the couple 's neighbor , Frank Morales , stated that it was merely a verbal argument . Ice was ordered by a Florida court to stay away from his wife following his arrest , and to communicate with his children only if Morales accompanied him . The judge told Ice that he could only contact his wife via telephone . On April 29 , 2008 , Ice 's lawyers , Bradford Cohen and Joseph <unk> , were able to get the case dropped after providing the state attorney with evidence that conflicted with what was originally reported . 
 In February 2015 , Ice was arrested and charged with burglary residence and grand theft after he allegedly stole furniture , a pool heater , bicycles and other items from a Florida home he believed to be vacant . He later accepted a plea deal which would result in the charges being dropped following his completion of 100 hours of community service and payment of restitution to the estate of the homeowner . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 As of the late 2000s , Ice 's live performances feature a mix of newer , rock and techno @-@ influenced material and old @-@ school hip hop . Ice performs with a live drummer and DJ , and sometimes sprays his audience with bottled water . Ice 's performances often feature an inflatable grim reaper balloon , a dancer in a clown mask , and confetti thrown into the audience . Describing his performances , Ice stated " It 's high energy , stage diving , pyrotechnics , girls showing their breasts . It 's crazy party atmosphere . " 
 Ice stated that his musical style was influenced by underground music , rather than mainstream music , and that his influences included hip hop and funk artists such as Funkadelic , Rick James , Roger Troutman , Egyptian Lover and Parliament . Ice is a big fan of 50 's and 60 's reggae and Bob Marley 's work and has also stated that he enjoys Rage Against the Machine , Slipknot , and System of a Down . 
 Ice sometimes plays bass , drums and keyboards on studio recordings . Vanilla Ice referred to his mainstream music as " above @-@ ground " rather than underground , as he tried to make danceable beats and removed expletives so that the songs could reach a wider audience . A lot of his early hits had Ice boasting sexual conquests , in 1991 , Ice was quoted " I rap about what I know . Girls and stuff . That 's what is going through my head . " 
 When asked about his darker sound in 2002 , Ice replied ; " Music is about reflection and I ’ m just reflecting my life and everything it ’ s been and there ’ s no way I ’ m going to be able to stress what I want and mean over a break beat , you know , it ’ s too emotional and it ’ s too intense , so you have to have the intensity of the band , it ’ s like a symphony , you know , you have to build on the intense parts , and so it just wasn ’ t going to happen , to come extreme over some hip hop record , so to exorcise my demons I had to have the band . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Along with Beastie Boys , 3rd Bass , and House of Pain , Ice was one of the earliest white rappers to attain major success . Chuck D has credited Ice as a regional breakthrough , stating " He broke through in the mid @-@ South , in a Southern area in Texas , in something that was kind of indigenous to that hip @-@ hop culture down there . He just doesn ’ t get credit for it . " In 1991 , 3rd Bass released a single called " Pop Goes the Weasel " , and in the lyrics comparing Ice unfavorably to Elvis Presley . The song 's music video featured Henry Rollins as Ice , who is depicted as being assaulted by 3rd Bass . Ice responded to " Pop Goes the Weasel " with his 1992 song " The Wrath " . Del tha <unk> Homosapien referred to Ice in the lyrics of " <unk> ' on Your Steps " , which appeared on his 1991 debut album I Wish My Brother George Was Here . Similar to ' Pop Goes the Weasel ' , the song negatively makes a connection between Ice and Elvis , while saying Ice alongside MC Hammer are mocking hip hop by being commercial . Vanilla Ice answered back to most of his critics in the song Hit ' em Hard . 
 Vanilla Ice appears as a video game character in Championship Motocross released in 2001 on PlayStation 2 . The hairstylist character in Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas is also molded after Vanilla Ice . Former Ultimate Fighting Championship light heavyweight champion Chuck ' The Iceman ' Lidell used Ice 's song Too Cold for his entrance to the ring . In 2007 , Nike released Vanilla Ice shoes for their Fallen Heroes pack . Rapper G @-@ Child , best known for her appearance on ego trip 's The ( White ) Rapper Show , has credited Ice as being a major influence on her work . After meeting Ice in 2000 , G @-@ Child performed freestyle raps at six of Ice 's performances , and opened for him four times . The late rapper Ol ' Dirty Bastard appeared on stage with Vanilla Ice during the 2004 Gathering of the Juggalos and expressed interest in working on a song together after stating that he was Ice 's " greatest fan " . In March 2009 , Ice participated in a Virgin Mobile advertising campaign titled " Right Music Wrongs " , apologizing for his 1990s image . As part of the campaign , Ice was placed on " trial " , and was voted innocent by users of the campaign website . He also appeared in a commercial for the South African light beer Castle Lite . In 2010 , Vanilla Ice was featured on the debut single of the Irish duo Jedward , a mashup of " Under Pressure " and " Ice Ice Baby " . " Under Pressure ( Ice Ice Baby ) " was released in the United Kingdom on January 31 , 2010 via download and as a physical single on February 15 , 2010 . In 2010 , Serbian musicians <unk> <unk> and <unk> released the single and music video <unk> Power . The music video and song feature various references to Vanilla Ice , including the performers dancing next to a graffiti mural of Ice . The video has reached two million views on YouTube . 
 After signing with Psychopathic Records , Violent J mentioned that Insane Clown Posse were longtime fans of Ice 's work ; “ We were bumping him way before " Ice Ice Baby " blew up . We were bumping him when he had his first record out on Ichiban . Shaggy had the vinyl and we used to bump that shit up in his room . It felt like two summers before that shit blew up . ” " <unk> <unk> Pani " ( Cold Cold Water ) by Baba Sehgal was inspired heavily by Vanilla Ice 's music and style . Rapper Riff Raff has mentioned in interviews that Vanilla Ice was one of his biggest influence . 
 Eminem has often name @-@ dropped Vanilla Ice in his songs . Starting during taped freestyles he did with rapper Proof in 1992 where they performed against each other portraying Ice and MC Hammer , respectively . In his first single " Just Don 't Give a Fuck " , Eminem mentions Ice alongside Everlast , boasting in a playful manner that he 's a better rapper . In " Role Model " , Eminem says he ripped out Vanilla Ice 's dreadlocks . Ice responded to in a magazine interview with Vibe saying that Eminem " raps like a girl " . While Vanilla Ice and Eminem neither look at their responses as an actual beef , Eminem did reply to the quote in his song " Marshall Mathers " which also featured a verbal attack on the Insane Clown Posse . Eminem mentioned Ice again in the song " Purple Pills " in 2001 , which caused Vanilla Ice 's only response in song . On his album Bi @-@ Polar , Ice mentions Eminem in a positive light ( " Hip Hop Rules " ) and in a negative light ( " Exhale " ) , however , Ice stated that he has no bad feelings towards Eminem . In a 2002 interview , Vanilla Ice stated that he thought Eminem 's references were flattering , going on to say " I give him credit , I think he ’ s talented , I think he ’ s a killer rapper , you know I don ’ t compare myself to him because he ’ s another white rapper , I don 't compare myself to any other rapper period , I don ’ t colorize hip hop , it ’ s stupid , but for people who are doing that are just looking through the eyes of a racial standpoint , and it really shouldn ’ t be looked at that way , you ’ re looking at two musicians that are in a broad brand of hip hop , so you don ’ t need to compare us two . Following me , any white rapper is going to have to hear ' oh , you think you ’ re Vanilla Ice ? ' , so I am sure he ’ s heard that . " In April 2009 , Ice appeared in the music video for Eminem 's song " We Made You " . In the 2011 single " Fast Lane " , Eminem raps about riding in his car while listening to " Ice Ice Baby " . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current 
 DJ Dirty <unk> – turntables 
 Kool Keith – drums 
 Krazy Klown – dancer and background vocals 
 Maniac – dancer 
 Former 
 Earthquake ( 1987 – 2014 ) – turntables and background vocals 
 DJ Don 't Play ( 1985 – 2009 ) – turntables and background vocals 
 Zero ( 1985 – 2014 ) – turntables and background vocals 
 D @-@ Shay ( 1985 – 1991 ) – turntables and drums 
 Clint Barlow – drums ( 2004 @-@ 2011 ) 
 Tha Hit Man ( 1997 – 2005 ) – drums 
 Boom ( 1990 – 1995 ) – drums 
 <unk> ( 2000 – 2004 ) – bass 
 Doug Ardito ( 1998 – 2001 ) – bass 
 Scott G. Shriner ( 1997 – 1999 ) – bass 
 <unk> / Rod @-@ J ( 1991 – 2004 ) – Hype Man and background vocals 
 Chill ( 1992 – 1994 ) – Hype Man and background vocals 
 Hi @-@ Tec ( 1985 – 1995 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 Koko ( 1985 – 2010 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 Squirrel ( 1985 – 1995 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 Twist ( 1987 – 1993 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 E @-@ Rock ( 1987 – 1991 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 Juice ( 1989 – 1991 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 Ste ~ bo ( 1990 – 1992 ) – dancer and background vocals 
 = = Discography = = 
 Hooked ( 1989 ) 
 To the Extreme ( 1990 ) 
 Extremely Live ( 1991 ) 
 Mind Blowin ' ( 1994 ) 
 Hard to Swallow ( 1998 ) 
 Bi @-@ Polar ( 2001 ) 
 Platinum Underground ( 2005 ) 
 Vanilla Ice Is Back ! ( 2008 ) 
 W.T.F. ( Wisdom , <unk> and Focus ) ( 2011 ) 
 Ice ( TBA ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 American Music Awards 
 Grammy Awards 
 People 's Choice Awards 
 The Factual Entertainment Awards 
 Golden Raspberry Awards 
 = Mamilla = 
 Mamilla ( Hebrew : <unk> ) is a neighbourhood of Jerusalem that was established in the late 19th century outside the Old City , west of the Jaffa Gate . Until 1948 it was a mixed Jewish @-@ Arab business district . Between 1948 and 1967 , it was located along the armistice line between the Israeli and Jordanian @-@ held sector of the city , and many buildings were destroyed by Jordanian shelling . The Israeli government approved an urban renewal project for Mamilla , apportioning land for residential and commercial zones , including hotels and office space . The Mamilla Mall opened in 2007 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The neighbourhood of Mamilla is located within the northwest extension of the Hinnom Valley , which extends from the southwest corner of the Old City along the city 's western wall . The neighbourhood is bounded by the Jaffa Gate and Jaffa Road to the east and north , the downtown and <unk> neighbourhood above it to the west , and <unk> Moshe 's upward slope along its southwestern edge . Its total area is 120 dunam ( 0 @.@ 12 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 05 sq mi ) ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ottoman era = = = 
 In the late 19th century , the area around the Old City walls was barren and undeveloped . It was only notable for the junction of paths that would become Jaffa Road and the highway to Jaffa , with the road to Hebron outside the Jaffa Gate . Among its first structures was the Hospice Saint Vincent de Paul , part of the emerging French Compound . The early building developed as an extension of the adjacent souk along the city walls at the Jaffa Gate as a quarter for merchants and artisans . It became home for commerce and residences that could not find room within the overcrowded Old City , and several of Jerusalem 's prominent modern businesses , like Hotel Fast , were first built here . In 1908 , the Ottoman authorities erected a clock tower above Jaffa Gate . The British removed it a decade later . 
 = = = British Mandate era = = = 
 The British arrival in Jerusalem heralded a rational philosophy of infrastructure planning and development . It respected cultural and historic heritage and attempted to preserve such elements within the blossoming construction of the modern city . The city walls were identified as such an element , so British workers acted to clear away the stalls on their perimeter and maintain an open area between the walls and the rest of the New City in the interest of an aesthetically pleasing visual basin . By the same token , planners demolished the Ottoman clock tower to preserve a historic skyline . 
 Following the approval of the 1947 UN Partition Plan , an Arab mob ransacked and burned much of the district and stabbed some of its Jewish residents in the course of the 1947 Jerusalem riots , one of the events leading to the area 's decades @-@ long stagnation . 
 = = = Jordanian era = = = 
 As the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War commenced , the neighbourhood 's location between Israeli and Jordanian forces made it a combat zone , leading to the flight of both Jewish and Arab residents . On May 22 , 1948 the US Consul , Thomas C. Wasson , was assassinated shortly after leaving the French Consulate in the Mamilla district . After the signing of the 1949 Armistice Agreements and division of Jerusalem , the western three @-@ quarters of Mamilla were held by Israel and the eastern quarter became a no man 's land of barbed @-@ wire and concrete barricades between Israeli and Jordanian lines . The active and hostile border subjected Mamilla to Jordanian sniper and guerilla attacks , and even stones thrown by Arab Legionnaires from the Old City walls above . The neighbourhood was one of several border areas in the city to experience a sharp decline , and subsequently became home to families of new immigrants with many children and of weak financial abilities , as well as dirty light industry like auto repair . In Mamilla in this period , the residents were primarily Kurdish immigrants and their Israeli children . 
 = = = Reunification and urban renewal plans = = = 
 After the Six @-@ Day War , Jerusalem 's municipal borders were expanded to include the Old City and beyond . Barricades that had lined the border were torn down . Many buildings on Mamilla 's eastern end were in shambles from the fighting and lack of maintenance . Several historic buildings were condemned . One was the Stern House , which housed Zionist leader Theodor Herzl on his 1898 visit . However , popular outcry brought Supreme Court involvement which led to the temporary dismantling and reassembly nearby of this historical landmark . 
 The 1970s saw numerous proposals for rehabilitating the neighbourhood , and it was defined as a zone of high @-@ priority for reconstruction efforts . The administration responsible for preservation and construction in the Old City took Mamilla under its jurisdiction as well , both because of its proximity and its possession of many of the same considerations that the British weighed when regulating its development . A 1972 master @-@ plan for revitalising the city centre transferred 100 of the 120 dunams ( 0 @.@ 1 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 04 sq mi ) ) to Karta , the municipal firm led by architects Gilbert Weil and Moshe Safdie charged with the project , and called for the destruction of almost every building save the French Hospice St. Vincent de Paul . The plan called for a subterranean street system , over @-@ ground buildings for offices and stores , a pedestrian promenade , parking for 1 @,@ 000 cars , and a bus terminal . 
 This plan evoked massive criticism throughout the city government , although mayor Teddy Kollek lent full political backing to the plan . When deputy mayor Meron <unk> commissioned a more conservative plan under architect David Kroyanker based on <unk> , the mayor immediately filed it away without any discussion . Karta evicted 700 families , communal institutions , and businesses , placing them in the then @-@ developing neighbourhoods of Baka and Neve Yaakov , and moved the industry to Talpiot , the seed of its current industrial zone . The evictions cost the Israeli government over $ 60 million and were only completed in 1988 , when Mamilla ceased to exist as a neighbourhood and instead became a " compound " slated for future construction . 
 The evicted residents were mostly Jewish immigrants from Arab states whose weak financial status left them vulnerable to Kollek 's plan . The following steep increase in real @-@ estate values of formerly depressed areas like Mamilla near the former armistice line and the Old City was perceived by evicted Mizrahi Jews as an injustice . This became a key issue in 1970s Israeli social upheaval and the founding of the Black Panthers movement in Israel . 
 After 16 years of controversy , during which the half @-@ constructed Mamilla project remained an eyesore in the heart of the city , a revised plan drawn up by architect Moshe Safdie incorporating elements of Kroyanker 's conservative design moved forward in 1986 . The new plan called for the compound to be divided into four areas : an open @-@ air mall with mixed @-@ use 3 @-@ 6 storey buildings and a multi @-@ storey car park , terraced residential housing , and two hotels along its border with the downtown . The British Ladbroke Group plc , which controls the Hilton Hotels Corporation , won the bid to build the project 's main hotel ( originally Hilton Jerusalem and now David Citadel Hotel ) and its housing , which it built as a luxury gated community named David 's Village ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , Kfar David ) . 
 Numerous disputes between Karta and Ladbroke led the British firm to exit the project , and its shares were assumed by Alfred Akirov 's Alrov company . However , further objections from many sources — including religious groups opposed to an entertainment area so close to the Old City and possible operation on the Jewish Sabbath — kept construction at a crawl . Both Alrov and Karta accused each other of breach of contract and sued . After years of frozen construction and drawn @-@ out mediation , the Jerusalem district court found parts of both parties ' complaints to be justified and ordered 100 million NIS paid to Alrov by Karta , which allowed construction to resume . 
 May 28 , 2007 saw the opening of phase one of the shopping mall and part of the 600 @-@ meter promenade . The completion of the remainder of the promenade , the Stern House rebuilding , and the other construction , including the 207 @-@ room five @-@ star second hotel , is scheduled to be completed in the spring of 2008 . 
 Like several other luxury neighbourhoods in the city , apartments in the David 's Village development are mostly owned by foreigners who visit for only a few days or weeks a year . Critics contend that this makes it a ghost town in the city centre . 
 Mamilla is also the location of the projected Simon Wiesenthal Center 's Center for Human Dignity , a controversial project because its construction would require building on part of an old Muslim cemetery . 
 = = = Mamilla Mall = = = 
 The $ 150 million , pedestrian @-@ only Mamilla shopping mall has been touted as a luxury destination in the style of Los Angeles ' Rodeo Drive or The Grove . Its commercial space is leased at $ 40 to $ 80 per square metre to 140 businesses , including international names like Rolex , MAC , H. Stern , Nike , Polo Ralph Lauren , Nautica , <unk> , and Tommy Hilfiger , as well as local chains like Castro , Ronen Chen , Steimatzky Books , and Cafe Rimon . The mall is also slated to house an IMAX theatre . The first Gap store in Israel opened in Mamilla Mall in August 2009 . 
 = = = Teddy Fountain = = = 
 The Teddy Fountain opened on the valley slope in 2013 . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Uri <unk> ( born 1957 ) , football ( soccer ) player and manager 
 = Effects of tropical cyclones = 
 The main effects of tropical cyclones include heavy rain , strong wind , large storm surges at landfall , and tornadoes . The destruction from a tropical cyclone depends mainly on its intensity , its size , and its location . Tropical cyclones act to remove forest canopy as well as change the landscape near coastal areas , by moving and reshaping sand dunes and causing extensive erosion along the coast . Even well inland , heavy rainfall can lead to mudslides and landslides in mountainous areas . Their effects can be sensed over time by studying the concentration of the Oxygen @-@ 18 isotope within caves within the vicinity of cyclones ' paths being very hazardous to people 's life . 
 After the cyclone has passed , devastation often continues . Standing water can cause the spread of disease , and transportation or communication infrastructure may have been destroyed , hampering clean @-@ up and rescue efforts . Nearly two million people have died globally due to tropical cyclones . Despite their devastating effects , tropical cyclones are also beneficial , by potentially bringing rain to dry areas and moving heat from the tropics poleward . Out at sea , ships take advantage of their known characteristics by navigating through their weaker , western half . 
 When a cyclone hits it causes PST hazards . PST is an acronym standing for Primary , Secondary and Tertiary . A primary hazard involves destructive winds , debris and storm surge . Secondary hazard is flooding , fires and of course fresh water flooding . Finally Tertiary hazards involves food prices that go majorly up and other long term hazards like water poisoning . 
 = = At sea = = 
 A mature tropical cyclone can release heat at a rate upwards of <unk> watts . Tropical cyclones on the open sea cause large waves , heavy rain , and high winds , disrupting international shipping and , at times , causing shipwrecks . Generally , after its passage , a tropical cyclone stirs up ocean water , lowering sea surface temperatures behind it . This cool wake can cause the region to be less favorable for a subsequent tropical cyclone . On rare occasions , tropical cyclones may actually do the opposite . 2005 's Hurricane Dennis blew warm water behind it , contributing to the unprecedented intensity of Hurricane Emily , which followed it closely . Hurricanes help to maintain the global heat balance by moving warm , moist tropical air to the mid @-@ latitudes and polar regions . Were it not for the movement of heat poleward ( through other means as well as hurricanes ) , the tropical regions would be unbearably hot . 
 = = = North American colonization = = = 
 Shipwrecks are common with the passage of strong tropical cyclones . Such shipwrecks can change the course of history , as well as influence art and literature . A hurricane led to a victory of the Spanish over the French for control of Fort Caroline , and ultimately the Atlantic coast of North America , in 1565 . The Sea Venture was wrecked near Bermuda in 1609 which led to the colonization of Bermuda and provided the inspiration for Shakespeare 's The Tempest . 
 = = = Shipping = = = 
 Mariners have a way to safely navigate around tropical cyclones . They split tropical cyclones in two , based on their direction of motion , and maneuver to avoid the right segment of the cyclone in the Northern Hemisphere ( the left in the Southern Hemisphere ) . Sailors term the right side the dangerous semicircle since the heaviest rain and strongest winds and seas were located in this half of the storm , as the cyclone 's translation speed and its rotational wind are additive . The other half of the tropical cyclone is called the navigable semicircle since weather conditions are lessened ( subtractive ) in this portion of the storm ( but are still potentially quite hazardous ) . The rules of thumb for ship travel when a tropical cyclone is in their vicinity are to avoid them if at all possible and do not cross their forecast path ( crossing the T ) . Those traveling through the dangerous semicircle are advised to keep to the true wind on the starboard bow and make as much headway as possible . Ships moving through the navigable semicircle are advised to keep the true wind on the starboard quarter while making as much headway as possible . 
 = = Upon landfall = = 
 The most significant effects of a tropical cyclone occur when they cross coastlines , making landfall . 
 = = = Strong winds = = = 
 Strong winds can damage or destroy vehicles , buildings , bridges , personal property and other outside objects , turning loose debris into deadly flying projectiles . In the United States , major hurricanes comprise just 21 % of all land falling tropical cyclones , but account for 83 % of all damage . Tropical cyclones often knock out power to tens or hundreds of thousands of people , preventing vital communication and hampering rescue efforts . Tropical cyclones often destroy key bridges , overpasses , and roads , complicating efforts to transport food , clean water , and medicine to the areas that need it . Furthermore , the damage caused by tropical cyclones to buildings and dwellings can result in economic damage to a region , and to a diaspora of the population of the region . 
 = = = Storm surge = = = 
 The storm surge , or the increase in sea level due to the cyclone , is typically the worst effect from landfalling tropical cyclones , historically resulting in 90 % of tropical cyclone deaths . The relatively quick surge in sea level can move miles / kilometers inland , flooding homes and cutting off escape routes . The storm surges and winds of hurricanes may be destructive to human @-@ made structures , but they also stir up the waters of coastal estuaries , which are typically important fish breeding locales . 
 = = = Heavy rainfall = = = 
 The thunderstorm activity in a tropical cyclone produces intense rainfall , potentially resulting in flooding , mudslides , and landslides . Inland areas are particularly vulnerable to freshwater flooding , due to residents not preparing adequately . Heavy inland rainfall eventually flows into coastal estuaries , damaging marine life in coastal estuaries . The wet environment in the aftermath of a tropical cyclone , combined with the destruction of sanitation facilities and a warm tropical climate , can induce epidemics of disease which claim lives long after the storm passes . Infections of cuts and bruises can be greatly amplified by wading in sewage @-@ polluted water . Large areas of standing water caused by flooding also contribute to mosquito @-@ borne illnesses . Furthermore , crowded evacuees in shelters increase the risk of disease propagation . 
 Although cyclones take an enormous toll in lives and personal property , they may be important factors in the precipitation regimes of places they affect and bring much @-@ needed precipitation to otherwise dry regions . Hurricanes in the eastern north Pacific often supply moisture to the Southwestern United States and parts of Mexico . Japan receives over half of its rainfall from typhoons . Hurricane Camille averted drought conditions and ended water deficits along much of its path , though it also killed 259 people and caused $ 9 @.@ 14 billion ( 2005 USD ) in damage . 
 On the other hand , the occurrence of tropical cyclones can cause tremendous variability in rainfall over the areas they affect : indeed cyclones are the primary cause of the most extreme rainfall variability in the world , observed in places such as Onslow and Port Hedland in subtropical Australia where the annual rainfall can range from practically nothing with no cyclones to over 1 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 39 in ) if cyclones are abundant . 
 = = = Tornadoes = = = 
 The broad rotation of a land falling tropical cyclone often spawns tornadoes , particularly in their right front quadrant . While these tornadoes are normally not as strong as their non @-@ tropical counterparts , heavy damage or loss of life can still occur . Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices , which persist until landfall . 
 = = Deaths = = 
 During the last two centuries , tropical cyclones have been responsible for the deaths of about 1 @.@ 9 million people worldwide . It is estimated that 10 @,@ 000 people per year perish due to tropical cyclones . The deadliest tropical cyclone was the 1970 Bhola cyclone , which had a death toll of anywhere from 300 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 lives . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Before Hurricane Katrina , the average death rate for tropical cyclones in the United States was decreasing . The main cause of storm @-@ related fatalities was shifting away from storm surge and towards freshwater flooding . However , the median death rate per storm had increased through 1979 , with a lull during the 1980 @-@ 1995 period . This was due to greater numbers of people moving to the coastal margins and into harm 's way . Despite advances in warning strategies and reduction in track forecast error , this increase in fatalities is expected to continue for as long as people migrate towards the shore . 
 = = Reconstruction and repopulation = = 
 While tropical cyclones may well seriously damage settlement , total destruction encourages rebuilding . For example , the destruction wrought by Hurricane Camille on the Gulf coast spurred redevelopment , greatly increasing local property values . Research indicates that the typical hurricane strike raises real house prices for a number of years , with a maximum effect of between 3 percent to 4 percent three years after occurrence . However , disaster response officials point out that redevelopment encourages more people to live in clearly dangerous areas subject to future deadly storms . Hurricane Katrina is the most obvious example , as it devastated the region that had been revitalized after Hurricane Camille . Many former residents and businesses do relocate to inland areas away from the threat of future hurricanes as well . 
 In isolated areas with small populations , tropical cyclones may cause enough casualties to contribute to the founder 's effect as survivors repopulate their place . For example , around 1775 , a typhoon hit <unk> Atoll , and in combination with a subsequent famine , reduced the island 's population to a low level . Several generations after the disaster , as many as 10 % of <unk> have a genetic form of color @-@ blindness called <unk> . This is due to one of the survivors of the depopulation brought on by the typhoon having a mutated gene , which the population bottleneck caused to be at a higher @-@ than @-@ usual level in succeeding generations . 
 = = Effects on natural resources = = 
 = = = Geomorphology = = = 
 Tropical cyclones reshape the geology near the coast by eroding sand from the beach as well as offshore , rearranging coral , and changing dune configuration onshore . Their rain water gets absorbed into stalagmites within caves , creating a record of past tropical cyclone impacts . 
 = = = = Coastal ridges = = = = 
 Waves and storm surges accompanying tropical cyclones erode undersea sands , erode shell deposits , break off corals from near shore reefs in their paths , and carry all this detritus landwards in a rolling wave of material that is deposited onshore , above highest astronomical tide as a ridge of sand , shell and coral . For example , each severe tropical cyclone ( i.e. Category 4 @-@ 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale ) crossing northeast Australia 's tropical coastline since the last significant change in sea levels ( about 5000 years ago ) has ' emplaced ' such ridges within the coastal landscape forming , in some places , series of ridges and a geomorphological record of highest magnitude cyclones hitting the coast over 3000 – 5000 years . 
 Eyewitness accounts verify ridges of this kind are formed by severe tropical cyclones and two clear examples cited are the 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) long , 35 metres ( 115 ft ) wide , 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) high coral shingle ridge deposited on Funafuti Atoll ( Central South Pacific ) by Cyclone Bebe in October 1972 , and the large coral shingle ridge deposited on Jaluit Atoll ( Marshall Islands ) by Typhoon Ophelia in January 1958 . In tropical northeast Australia , an intense tropical cyclone hit in March 1918 ( crossing over the town of Innisfail ) , at which time there were eyewitness accounts of a 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) to 5 @.@ 1 metres ( 17 ft ) high ridge of pumice being deposited by that cyclone 's surge as it crossed the coast . ) . 
 = = = = Limestone cave stalagmites = = = = 
 When tropical cyclones cross land , thin layers of calcium carbonate of unusually ' light ' Oxygen isotope ( Oxygen @-@ 18 ) composition are deposited onto stalagmites in limestone caves up to 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) from the cyclone 's path . 
 As the cloud tops of tropical cyclones are high and cold , and their air is humid - their rainwater is ' lighter ' . In other words , the rainfall contains significantly higher quantities of <unk> Oxygen @-@ 18 than other tropical rainfall . The isotopically lighter rainwater soaks into the ground , percolates down into caves , and , within a couple of weeks , Oxygen @-@ 18 transfers from the water into calcium carbonate , before being deposited in thin layers or ' rings ' within stalagmites . A succession of such events created within stalagmites maintain a record of cyclones tracking within a 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) radius of caves going back centuries , millennia , or even millions of years . 
 At <unk> <unk> <unk> cave in central Belize , researchers drilling stalagmites with a computer- controlled dental drill accurately identified and verified evidence of isotopically light rainfall for 11 tropical cyclones occurring over a 23 year period ( 1978 – 2001 ) . 
 At the <unk> limestone caves in northeast Australia ( 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) inland from Cairns ) researchers identified and matched evidence of isotopically light rainfall with 100 years of cyclone records , and from this have created a record of tropical cyclones from 2004 back to 1200 A.D. ( an 800 year record ) . 
 = = = Landscapes = = = 
 Severe tropical cyclones defoliate tropical forest canopy trees , remove vines and epiphytes from the trees , break tree crown stems , and cause tree falls . The degree of damage they do along their paths , at a landscape level ( i.e. > 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) ) , can be catastrophic yet variable and patchy . Trees break at 42 m / s , regardless of size and type . <unk> trees and scattering forest debris also provides fuel for wildfires , such as a blaze that lasted three months in 1989 and burned 460 square miles ( 1 @,@ 200 km2 ) of forest that had been stripped by Hurricane Gilbert . 
 Wind velocity gradients or horizontal wind shear ( size of cyclone , the intensity of cyclone , proximity to the cyclone , and local scale cyclonic convection effects ) . 
 Degree of exposure ( windward exposure , leeward acceleration , or local topographic sheltering / shading ) ; and 
 Ecosystem species composition and forest structure 
 Assessments of cyclone damage done to tropical rainforest landscapes in northeast Australia , have produced the following typology for describing and ' mapping ' the variable impacts they have along their paths , as follows : 
 Severe and extensive closest to the centre of cyclone : impact appears to be <unk> and is evidenced by crowns of most trees having been broken , smashed or <unk> 
 Severe and localised closer to the cyclone centre than its edge : direction of the destructive winds is clearly identifiable , and severe canopy disruption is limited to the windward aspect of these forested areas 
 Moderate canopy disturbance closer to cyclone edge than its centre : most of the tree stems are still standing , with only some <unk> , and most of the damage is the defoliation of the canopy and branch breakage ; 
 Slight canopy disturbance closest to cyclone edge : occasional stem fall or branch breakage , with most of the damage consisting of loss of foliage on the forest edges only , subsequently followed by leaf damage and heavy leaf litter falls . 
 = Dawn of Mana = 
 Dawn of Mana , originally released in Japan as Seiken Densetsu 4 , is a 2006 action @-@ adventure game for the PlayStation 2 . It was developed and published by Square Enix . It is the eighth game of the Mana series and the third entry in the World of Mana subseries , following the release of Children of Mana nine months prior and Friends of Mana two months prior . Set in a high fantasy universe , Dawn of Mana follows a young hero , Keldric , as he journeys to close a portal to a land of darkness that has been opened in the base of the Tree of Mana and is corrupting the world . 
 While it contains some small role @-@ playing elements , Dawn of Mana diverges from the prior two @-@ dimensional action role @-@ playing game titles of the series to focus directly on action @-@ adventure gameplay in a full 3D world . Incorporating the Havok physics engine , the gameplay focuses on the player grabbing and throwing objects and monsters in order to startle enemies before attacking them with a sword and magic . Keldric grows more powerful as the player journeys through an area , only to reset to his base abilities with each new zone unless difficult extra challenges are met . Unlike many of its predecessors , the game does not feature any cooperative multiplayer component . 
 Dawn of Mana was designed , directed , and produced by series creator Koichi Ishii . The script was written by Ryo Akagi , based on a story created by Masato Kato , and the music was composed by an group led by Kenji Ito . The game was a moderate commercial success : it sold 229 @,@ 000 copies in its first ten days of release in Japan , and over 410 @,@ 000 copies worldwide by the end of 2008 . While critics praised the graphics and music as beautiful and lush , they found the leveling system annoying , the combat controls difficult and frustrating , and the story trite . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike previous games in the Mana series , Dawn of Mana takes place in a full three @-@ dimensional world , in which the player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures . The player controls the main character , Keldric , and is followed for almost all of the game by a fairy spirit , Faye . Unlike previous games in the series , Dawn is an action @-@ adventure game , rather than an action role @-@ playing game ; as such , gameplay is focused on movement and attacking enemies , rather than leveling @-@ up character statistics . Keldric is able to run , roll , and jump through the game world . Keldric has access to a vine @-@ like plant attached to his arm , which can be used at any time as either a sword , a whip , or a slingshot . The sword can be used to hit enemies and objects , the whip can grab and throw enemies and objects , and the slingshot can throw collectible pebbles as projectiles . Faye can cast magic spells , selectable by the player . 
 The combat system in Dawn of Mana is called the Mono system , based around the Havok physic engine . Almost all objects in the game , including enemies , are moveable , allowing Keldric to throw objects at enemies , or even throw other monsters . Keldric can either throw objects in the direction he is facing , or can target a specific enemy or object to aim at them . When something is thrown near an enemy , they Panic , resulting in a counter over their head that counts down to zero to end the Panic . While panicked , enemies take more damage from attacks and spells . Defeating enemies when they are panicked gives the player two types of medals , which can either boost the player 's health and attack damage , or mana and magic damage . Throwing multiple objects can Panic enemies more ; when the Panic meter is greater than 99 the player can receive better medals . Defeating enemies also grants experience points , which raise Keldric and Faye 's level up to a maximum of four , granting higher health , mana , and damage , and granting new spells and attacks . In addition to being throwable , many objects in the game are also destructible . 
 The game is divided into eight chapters and a prologue ; at the end of each chapter , the player is graded on their performance , and all of their statistics and medals are reset . The only items which carry over between chapters are emblems , which are given to the player for achieving high scores in a chapter or defeating hidden monsters . High scores are achieved by defeating more enemies , and defeating enemies with high Panic meters . In addition to the main game is a challenge arena , accessible through the main menu , where Keldric can fight timed battles against powerful foes . Keldric can fight alongside AI @-@ controlled pets in these challenges , found in eggs throughout the game . The challenge arena also contains a shop , which contains emblems , eggs , and bonuses like extra music or higher game difficulties , which can be bought with money dropped by enemies throughout the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dawn of Mana opens on the fictional island of Illusia , a place where the giant Mana Tree lies dormant . Much of the story takes place on Fa 'Diel , a continent composed of the five nations of Jadd , Topple , Ishe , Wendell , and Lorimar . At the start of the game Ritzia , a Maiden in charge of tending to the Tree , and Keldric , her knight and the player @-@ controlled character , have left their village to find Ritzia 's missing pet . While they are out , Illusia is attacked by King Stroud of Lorimar . The pair rush to the Tree of Mana , thinking that Stroud intends to attack the legendary beast that lies sleeping underneath its roots . While searching for the beast , Keldric finds a seed of the Tree , which attaches to his arm and can transform into a slingshot , a whip , or a sword . They also find Faye , a spirit child , who can cast magic and joins them . When they reach the center of the labyrinth of roots , Stroud 's men catch up to them ; they had been searching for Ritzia , not the beast . Stroud intends to open a portal to <unk> , a land of darkness sealed away for centuries , and believes Ritzia is part of the key as a Maiden had been a part of opening the portal before . Stroud leaves with Ritzia to find the rest of the key , and Keldric and Faye chase after them . 
 Keldric and Faye , with the help of the great beast , Flammie , force the <unk> army to leave the village . They chase after Stroud , catching up to him at the coast . There they free Ritzia , only to be attacked by Stroud , wielding the other part of the key — the Sword of Mana . Keldric is thrown off of Stroud 's airship , and the <unk> invade Illusia again . Stroud opens the portal , and a wave of dark energy is released , transforming the Tree , turning the people of Illusia into monsters called <unk> , and releasing dark monsters from <unk> . Keldric and Faye flee , and head for Fa 'Diel . 
 A year of wandering later , the dark energy has begun to affect other countries in Fa 'Diel . Keldric discovers in Jadd that Ritzia plans to release the <unk> energy to cover the whole world . He and Faye journey back to Illusia , only to discover Ritzia seemingly possessed and saying that it is their destiny to rule the world . After she runs away , Keldric meets a masked stranger who tells him that he was the one to close the portal centuries ago , sealing up the Maiden who had opened it , Anise , inside . He also reveals that Stroud is Keldric 's older brother . When Keldric and Faye reach the portal , they find Stroud and Ritzia fighting . Stroud is trying to prevent Ritzia , possessed by Anise , from destroying the world , but is being mutated by the dark energy . Keldric defeats the mutated Stroud , and then fights Ritzia . Realizing that the only way to close the portal is to defeat Anise , he is forced to kill Ritzia along with her . The spirits of Ritzia and Faye then merge with the Tree of Mana , the portal is sealed , and Illusia is restored . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2003 , Square Enix began a drive to begin developing " polymorphic content " , a marketing and sales strategy to " [ provide ] well @-@ known properties on several platforms , allowing exposure of the products to as wide an audience as possible " . The first of these was the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , and Square Enix intended to have campaigns for other series whereby multiple games in different genres would be developed simultaneously . In early 2005 , Square Enix announced a " World of Mana " project , the application of this " polymorphic content " idea to the Mana franchise , which would include several games across different genres and platforms . These games , as with the rest of the series , would not be direct sequels or prequels to one another , even if appearing so at first glance , but would instead share thematic connections . The third release in this project and the eighth release in the Mana series was announced in September 2005 as Seiken Densetsu 4 , the first 3D game in the series , though no other details were given in favor of promoting the first game , Children of Mana . 
 Dawn of Mana was designed , directed , and produced by series creator Koichi Ishii . The script was written by Ryo Akagi , based on a story created by Masato Kato . The main objective of the development team was to convert the entire Mana world into a 3D environment , rather than just starting from scratch graphically and adding new elements to the gameplay . Ishii had previously wanted to make the 1999 PlayStation game Legend of Mana a 3D game , but the console had been unable to handle his vision of the player interacting with natural shaped objects in a full 3D world . He wanted to create a Mana title that could explore " the feeling of touch " in a game . After seeing the Havok physics engine in a demo of Half @-@ Life 2 at E3 in 2004 , Ishii decided to use the system in Dawn to give players a visual link between environments , objects , and characters . He hoped the physics engine and 3D graphics would allow him " to create a world where players utilize a variety of actions to alter the world and the objects contained within " . Although Ishii has said that the games in the series are only thematically connected , he has also asserted in an interview that Dawn is set ten years before Children of Mana , which depicts the aftermath of the " cataclysm " of Dawn . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Dawn of Mana was composed by Kenji Ito , while Tsuyoshi Sekito and Masayoshi Soken contributed numerous tracks and Grammy Award @-@ winning musician and film composer Ryuichi Sakamoto wrote the theme song , " Dawn of Mana " . Tracks originally composed for earlier games in the series by Ito , Hiroki Kikuta , and Yoko Shimomura were also arranged for Dawn of Mana by the main three composers . Sekito focused on the game 's boss themes , while Soken worked on other battle music . Ito had previously composed the music for the first game in the Mana series , Final Fantasy Adventure ( 1991 ) , as well as its 2003 remake Sword of Mana , and for the 2006 Children of Mana . This was the first soundtrack in the Mana series to feature work by Sekito , Soken , or Sakamoto , though Sekito and Soken had worked for Square Enix previously on other titles . The music of the game covers a range of styles , including rock , classical , and orchestral . Sakamoto drew inspiration for the theme song from the image of the Mana tree shown at the title screen of the game . The album Seiken Densetsu 4 Original Soundtrack <unk> collects 106 tracks from Children of Mana on four discs and is nearly four and a half hours in length . It was published by Square Enix on January 24 , 2007 . A promotional album , Breath of Mana , was released along with preorders of the game in Japan on December 21 , 2006 . The thirteen @-@ minute disc contains five orchestral and piano songs , all composed by Ito , three of which did not appear on the full soundtrack album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dawn of Mana sold over 229 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006 , ten days after release , and was the top @-@ selling PlayStation 2 title in Japan during its release week . As of November 2008 it had sold over 340 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . The game sold 70 @,@ 000 copies in North America by November 2007 . 
 Upon its release , Dawn of Mana received generally poor reviews over a wide range , with numerical scores that range from 30 to 80 out of 100 . Reviewers praised Dawn of Mana 's graphics and character design ; GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd called it colorful and " pretty " , and praised the particle effects , while a reviewer for GameTrailers noted the " gorgeous in @-@ game cinematics " . Gabe Graziani of GameSpy also called out the cinematics in his review , calling them " beautifully rendered and animated " and the highlight of the game . IGN 's Jeff Haynes liked the scale and variety of the 3D environments and called out the character models as worthy of praise . Andrew Fitch of 1UP.com , however , described the level design as " chaotic " despite the " charming , candy @-@ coated graphics " . Joe Juba and Matt Miller of Game Informer said that the environments are " pretty bland " , but praised the rest of the graphics heavily . Michael Beckett of RPGamer said that " Dawn of Mana 's visual style is highly impressive " and especially praised the character design and color palette . The music was also praised ; VanOrd called it " the highlight of the sound design " and the GameTrailers reviewer claimed that Dawn of Mana had a " lush soundtrack filling every moment of the game " . Beckett also praised the music , and noted the callbacks in the largely orchestral score to previous games in the Mana series . 
 The gameplay was heavily criticized by reviewers such as Fitch of 1UP.com , who disliked both the way the character abilities reset with every new area and the " inane " and " mundane " system for collecting emblems , criticisms echoed by GameSpot 's VanOrd . The GameTrailers review added that the way the character 's levels and abilities reset in each area " zaps the sense of accomplishment from the game as a whole " . Haynes of IGN also found issues with the targeting system for attacking enemies at range , finding it ineffective , and also criticized the leveling system and the game 's map . Graziani of GameSpy felt the targeting system was one of the worst parts of Dawn of Mana , along with the camera system — a complaint also raised by Haynes . Both Fitch and VanOrd focused their criticisms of the controls on the Havok physics engine , which they felt was poorly utilized and left the player feeling out of control — unable to aim when throwing objects or easily control the character during the game 's jumping sections . Juba of Game Informer felt that the physics engine left the controls " laughably uncooperative " . 
 The game 's story was also not seen as a highlight ; Graziani called it " trite " and " fan service " , while Fitch deemed it " a bit of a Neverending Story rip @-@ off " , though a charming one . Beckett of RPGamer called it " a somewhat trite tale of boy chases girl " and noted " a general lack of closure to the story " . Juba of Game Informer , however , deemed it an " interesting plot " . Both the GameTrailers review and VanOrd praised the " charm " of the characters , though VanOrd noted that they were making up for an unoriginal plot . Overall , several reviewers felt that Dawn of Mana was a divergence from the rest of the series that did not add as much as it took away ; even the notably high @-@ scoring Japanese Famitsu review felt that the change in gameplay would confuse fans and other players . 
 = Brandon Graham = 
 Brandon Lee Graham ( born April 3 , 1988 ) is an American football defensive end for the Philadelphia Eagles of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was drafted by the Eagles in the first round of the 2010 NFL Draft with the thirteenth selection in the draft and the first from the Big Ten Conference . He played college football at Michigan . 
 Graham was the 2009 Big Ten Conference co @-@ MVP as recognized by the Chicago Tribune Silver Football award . He was the 2009 FBS tackles ( TFLs ) for a loss ( per game ) champion after finishing second in 2008 by .01 TFL per game . He was the 2008 & 2009 Big Ten Conference TFL ( total ) champion . 
 After completing his career as defensive end for the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team , he had a total of 29 @.@ 5 career sacks and 56 career TFLs for the Michigan Wolverines football team . In 2008 , he led the Big Ten Conference in TFLs ( 20 in 11 games ) . In 2009 , he posted 26 TFLs and 10 @.@ 5 sacks in 12 games . As a member of the 2008 Michigan Wolverines football team he earned Second @-@ team 2008 Big Ten All @-@ conference recognition from both the coaches and the media . He was a finalist for the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football Hendricks Award . He was a First @-@ team 2009 All @-@ Big Ten selection by the coaches and media . He was named to several First @-@ team and Second @-@ team 2009 All @-@ America lists by various publications . Graham was also named MVP of the 2010 Senior Bowl . 
 In high school , he was a highly decorated and highly rated linebacker who served as captain for the 2006 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl . He was listed on numerous All @-@ American lists and was a finalists for some of the highest individual honors a high school football player can earn . 
 = = Early years = = 
 As a youth , Graham played football for the Police Athletic League Detroit Giants for seven years until joining the eighth grade team . Born and raised in Detroit , Graham attended Crockett Vocational Tech , a school that began participating in Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) football competitions in 1996 and that did not have a proper locker room for its football team before moving in his senior season . Since the football field had no lights , parents had to shine their car lights on the field for late practices . At Crockett , <unk> who had been playing competitive football since age seven , was expected to make an immediate impact upon joining the football team 's starting lineup as a sophomore , and at the end of the season he was recognized as an honorable mention lineman 2003 All @-@ Detroit selection by The Detroit News . 
 As a junior , Graham served as linebacker , offensive guard , placekicker and punter for his team , and he led his team to the MHSAA state championships , while becoming one of three juniors named to the 2004 First @-@ team All @-@ Detroit team with one source listing him as a placekicker and the other as a linebacker on the team . Crockett won Detroit Public School League Division 1 championship game at Ford Field and entered the Division 5 MHSAA semifinals with a 12 – 0 record , but Crockett lost 9 – 0 to defending state champion Lumen Christi Catholic High School . In addition to recording 91 tackles ( 20 for a loss ) , he maintained a 3 @.@ 8 grade point average . In one game , he posted twelve tackles , four sacks , four forced fumbles , two blocked punts and scored on a 78 @-@ yard fake punt . He was selected for the Associated Press first @-@ team Class B all @-@ state team as a linebacker . 
 In high school , Rivals.com ranked Graham as the top class of 2006 high school football prospect in the state of Michigan , the number two inside linebacker prospect and the overall fifteenth best prospect in the nation . Scout.com listed him as the number three linebacker in the nation and described him as the number one overall prospect in the midwest . Scout also described him as " arguably the best inside linebacker in the nation " . ESPNU ranked him as the number two inside linebacker and number thirty @-@ one prospect in the nation . Recruiting analyst Tom Lemming , listed Graham as the best linebacker in the country for USA Today . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution listed him at 15th among their national top 25 prospects . 
 Entering his senior season , he was the overwhelming selection as the best high school football player in the state of Michigan according The Detroit News . He had run a 4 @.@ 43 @-@ second 40 @-@ yard dash at the Nike Summer football camp . As a senior , he intended to also play tight end and fullback . One Detroit News preseason analysts listed him at linebacker , tight end and offensive guard . During the season , after missing four weeks to a knee injury , Graham was chosen as one of 78 players to participate in the January 7 , 2006 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl at the Alamodome . He was also named as a finalist for both the Parade All @-@ America High School player of the year ( The high school equivalent of the Heisman Trophy ) and the Walter Payton Trophy . He was elected captain of the East team at the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl and recorded four tackles as well as a blocked field goal in the game that also featured two of his Michigan teammates : ( Justin Boren and Stevie Brown ) . There were only 16 finalists for the Parade award , including future Michigan teammate Stephen Schilling and future Heisman @-@ winner Tim Tebow . Graham led his team to a rematch against Lumen Christi , which they lost 35 – 21 in the MHSAA Division 5 district championship game . In Graham 's three years at Crockett , they went undefeated in the regular season and as a senior he was again selected to the All @-@ Detroit first @-@ team as a linebacker . Graham was also selected as to the Associated Press Class B All @-@ State football team as its player of the year . The Detroit News selected him to the All @-@ Class state Dream Team . He was also selected as the All @-@ class statewide best linebacker as part of the inaugural class of The Michigan Prep Football Great 8 awarded by the Mid @-@ Michigan Touchdown Club for being best at his position in the state . By his senior year , he had a 3 @.@ 2 grade point average . 
 Since Graham was the first Michigan athlete to play in the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl , he was not aware that he was violating Michigan state rules by participating in an out @-@ of @-@ state all @-@ star game . He had to surrender his high school athletic eligibility for the winter and spring seasons . During his time away from athletics , he <unk> and added 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) . Although he had been recruited as a linebacker , with the additional weight he was moved to defensive end . As he lost the excess weight he began to realize that he could excel at a lighter weight . 
 For his athletic excellence , Graham received many honors . Among the recognition he received are Parade Magazine All @-@ American , EA Sports All @-@ American , USA Today All @-@ USA High School All @-@ America first team ( No. 14 player in the nation by USA Today ) , Michigan Gatorade Player of the Year , first player from the state of Michigan to play in the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl , 2005 Detroit News No. 1 Blue Chip prospect , and No. 2 on the Detroit Free Press Best of the Midwest rankings . Additionally , he was recognized as one of ten top prep athletes in Michigan in 2005 @-@ 2006 , including men and women from all sports , as a 2006 McDonald 's @-@ Powerade Tomorrow 's Winners honoree at the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame dinner . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Lloyd Carr era = = = 
 Graham arrived at Michigan measuring 295 pounds ( 134 kg ) and 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) . Graham was initially listed as a linebacker at Michigan , but before the 2006 NCAA Division I FBS football season started for the 2006 Michigan Wolverines football team he switched to defensive end . Graham was ( along with Greg Matthews , Carlos Brown , Brandon Minor and Stevie Brown ) one of five true freshmen to play in the season opening game . Graham was the backup for 2006 Lombardi Award and 2006 Ted Hendricks Award winner LaMarr Woodley . Graham also performed as a reserve defensive tackle during the season . Graham made his first tackle for Michigan on October 28 against Northwestern and recorded his first sack and forced fumble on November 11 against Indiana . 
 As the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team prepared for the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season , Graham got some unusual news off the field when he found out that he had been given a perfect 99 rating in the NCAA 2008 EA Sports even though his star teammates Chad Henne , Jake Long and Mike Hart had not . Also , off the field , Graham was issued a ticket playing loud music in a vehicle on July 24 and missed the September 18 court date after pleading not guilty . This caused a judge to issue an arrest warrant for failing to appear in court on a disorderly conduct charge . The charges were dropped under the belief that he had been misidentified . At the start of training camp , he weighed 262 pounds ( 119 kg ) and was the projected starter at defensive end . Although projected to as the starter , Graham played sparingly in the opening game loss to two @-@ time defending FCS champions Appalachian State Mountaineers on September 1 . Head coach Lloyd Carr noted his disfavor with Graham at the start of the season : " Brandon , he needs to get focused , " Carr said , " and do the things that he 's capable of doing . " He was disappointed in Graham 's efforts in practice . In the third game , on September 15 against Notre Dame Graham recorded 3 @.@ 5 sacks in the rivalry game to help lead Michigan to its first win of the season . The following week he had 1 @.@ 5 sacks , a forced fumble and a fumble recovery in a victory against Penn State . Over the course of the season , he started six games at defensive end . He led the team in sacks with 8 @.@ 5 and was second in forced fumbles with 3 . He ranked seventh in the Big Ten for both statistics . He was a mid @-@ season Ted Hendricks Award watch list candidate . 
 = = = Rich Rodriguez era = = = 
 Graham , who had been troubled by conditioning issues the prior season arrived at spring practice in very good shape , which pleased newly arrived head coach Rich Rodriguez , who was welcomed by a defensive line composed entirely of returning starters , including Graham . Graham began the 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season as a Hendricks award watch list candidate for the 2008 Michigan Wolverines football team . However , the team began the season unranked in the Associated Press poll for the first time in 23 years . On September 27 Graham had 3 sacks and 2 forced fumbles against the Wisconsin Badgers , and he was named Big Ten Conference Defensive Player of the Week . Prior to the October 25 Paul Bunyan Trophy game against Michigan State , Graham guaranteed a victory . Although the team lost 35 – 21 , Graham again recorded three sacks . Graham finished the season with 10 sacks . He led the Big Ten with 20 tackles for a loss ( TFL ) and 1 @.@ 82 TFLs per game and was second with 0 @.@ 91 sacks / game . He ranked second nationally in tackles for loss and tied for eleventh in sacks . After the season , he was recognized as a 2008 Second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection by both the coaches and the media . Graham was selected as the team Most Valuable Player . 
 Graham began the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season as a watch lists candidate for the Bednarik Award , Hendricks Award , Lombardi Award , Lott Trophy , and Nagurski Trophy for the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team . He was also selected by ESPN as the 10th best player in the Big Ten Conference before the season started . He concluded the season as the Chicago Tribune Silver Football recipient as the Big Ten co @-@ MVP ( with Daryll Clark ) . He was the seventh defensive player to earn the award and second in the last 25 years as well as the first co @-@ recipient . Graham was the first player from a losing team in eight years and only the second player to win who was not either Big Ten offensive or defensive player of the year . He posted 26 TFLs in 12 games , which led the nation with 2 @.@ 17 average tackles for a loss per game ( ahead of conference rival O 'Brien Schofield who was second with 1 @.@ 884 ) . His total of 10 @.@ 5 sacks ranked fourth in the Big Ten Conference . Four times during the season , he recorded multiple sack games and he had three solo TFLs in four games . He ended his career at Michigan with 9 TFLs ( 8 solo and 2 assists ) in his final two games , including a career @-@ high 5 solo TFLs against Ohio State in the 2009 rivalry game , which was the final game of his career . Graham was one of seven finalists for the Hendricks Award . At the conclusion of the season he was a 2009 First @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten selection by the coaches and media . He was a First @-@ team 2009 College Football All @-@ America Team selection by ESPN , Rivals.com and Scout.com , and he was a Second @-@ team All @-@ American defensive line selection by the Walter Camp Football Foundation , Associated Press , Sports Illustrated , College Football News and The Sporting News . He was an honorable mention All @-@ American by Pro Football Weekly ( which had no second team ) . Graham was again selected as the team MVP , which made him the school 's first defensive player to be two @-@ time MVP . As of December 2009 , Graham was the only Big Ten player on Mel Kiper 's " Big Board " Top 25 . Brandon Graham earned MVP honors at the January 30 , 2010 Senior Bowl with five tackles , two sacks , one forced fumble . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 At the NFL Combine , Graham ranked 8th among defensive linemen with a 4 @.@ 72 40 @-@ yard dash and 10th in the bench press with 31 . 
 = = = Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 Graham was drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles 13th overall after trading up in the 2010 NFL Draft . Graham decided to wear number 54 for the Eagles immediately after the draft , but changed his mind and chose number 55 . Graham shares the same sports agent ( Joel Segal ) as former teammate Michael Vick . He was the first Big Ten Conference player selected in the 2010 NFL Draft . He agreed to terms on a five @-@ year contract on July 29 , 2010 . Graham recorded his first NFL sack against the Detroit Lions in a week 2 win on September 19 , 2010 . After suffering a torn anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) in a week 14 game against the Dallas Cowboys , Graham was placed on the injured reserve list on December 14 . He underwent microfracture surgery on his right knee on December 21 . Graham was placed on the active / physically unable to perform list on July 28 , 2011 , before the start of training camp . He was removed him from the physically unable to perform list so he could return to practice on October 24 and activated on November 5 , 2011 . In 2013 , Graham moved from defensive end to linebacker . Many people had predicted he would become a linebacker at the pro level back when he was still in college . After coming close to signing with the New York Giants , in 2015 Graham signed a 4 @-@ year $ 26 million contract with $ 14 million guaranteed with the Eagles to remain with the team . 
 = = = NFL stats = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Graham is married to <unk> Graham . 
 = Hurricane Fefa = 
 Hurricane Fefa was a major Pacific hurricane of the 1991 Pacific hurricane season that despite causing minimal effects its name was removed from the list of tropical cyclone names . The sixth tropical storm , fourth hurricane , and second major hurricane of the season , the storm developed from a tropical wave on July 29 about 975 miles ( 1 @,@ 575 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas . It moved west @-@ northwestward , and under generally favorable conditions it strengthened to attain peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) on August 2 . Fefa turned to the west towards Hawaii , and slowly weakened until dissipating near the island of Hawaii . 
 The hurricane produced rough surf , moderate wind gusts , and locally heavy rainfall during its passage over Hawaii . No damages or deaths were reported . Two people were injured in the island of Hawaii due to lightning strikes from the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on July 17 . It tracked across the unfavorable Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without development , and after crossing Central America , it entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 25 . The cloud pattern and convection began to become better organized on July 28 , and shortly thereafter a mid @-@ level circulation developed . It continued to organize , and subsequent to the development of a low @-@ level circulation it formed into Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E while located about 975 miles ( 1 @,@ 575 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas on July 29 . Operationally , tropical cyclone advisories were not initiated until visible satellite images confirmed the low @-@ level circulation twelve hours after the depression formed . 
 Located over warm waters with fair upper level outflow , the depression quickly intensified and attained tropical storm status twelve hours after forming . Upon strengthening into a tropical storm , Fefa developed a curved cloud band over the southern and eastern portion of the center . The storm slowly strengthened as it tracked west @-@ northwestward , a motion due to the presence of a high @-@ pressure ridge to its north . Fefa initially strengthened slowly ; on the day after it became a tropical storm the center was located on the western edge of the deep convection . On July 31 , convection began increasing over the center , and it is estimated it intensified into a hurricane later that day while located about 710 miles ( 1 @,@ 145 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . 
 Initially , Fefa was forecast to intensify slightly after reaching hurricane status to reach peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . However , it quickly intensified after a large , ragged eye developed early on August 1 . On August 2 , the eye organized further , and Fefa strengthened to attain a peak intensity of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) while located about 940 miles ( 1 @,@ 510 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cabo San Lucas . Based on higher Dvorak numbers , the hurricane could have peaked with winds stronger than 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Fefa encountered cooler waters shortly after peaking in intensity , and subsequently began to weaken . The hurricane gradually weakened as it turned more to the west , a change in motion due to building high pressures to its north , and on August 3 the winds of Fefa dropped to 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) due to cooler water and dry air . 
 As Fefa turned more to the west , it paralleled the cooler waters , allowing the eye to remain distinct as the hurricane remained well @-@ organized . Despite moving over marginally warm sea surface temperatures and becoming involved with the Stratocumulus cloud field to its north , the hurricane restrengthened on August 4 to reach a secondary peak intensity of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) while located about 1 @,@ 265 miles ( 2 @,@ 070 km ) east @-@ southeast of Hilo , Hawai 'i . After maintaining 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) winds for about 18 hours , Fefa weakened slightly due to increasing wind shear from a cold @-@ core trough as it entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center area of responsibility . As the shear increased , the cyclone weakened more rapidly , and on August 6 it weakened to a tropical storm while located about 650 miles ( 1 @,@ 060 km ) east of the island of Hawaii . Initially , forecasters predicted Fefa to turn to the northwest to the north of the Hawaiian Islands . However , the storm continued moving almost due westward as it steadily weakened . Aircraft reconnaissance flew into Fefa three times as it neared Hawaii . Late on August 7 , Fefa weakened to a tropical depression a short distance of the island of Hawaii , and early on August 8 the depression began dissipating and degenerated into a tropical wave after moving onshore . The remnants tracked west @-@ northwestward and passed south of the Hawaiian Islands until dissipating on August 9 to the northwest of Kauai . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The prolonged westward track of Hurricane Fefa produced swells of up to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) in height . The swells hit eastward facing beaches along the island of Hawaii . The swells washed debris and sea water onto coastal roads near <unk> Black Sand Beach , resulting in the roads being closed following the storm . Southwestern Maui experienced rough surf , as well . Despite being a weak tropical depression and a tropical wave while moving through the Hawaiian Islands , Fefa produced locally strong wind gusts of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in the islands of Hawaii and Maui . 
 Prior to moving across the island of Hawaii , strong thunderstorms developed in the northeastern portion of the remnant circulation of Fefa . The thunderstorms developed further as they moved over the slopes of Mauna Kea and Kohala . The thunderstorms produced heavy rainfall in areas , resulting in flash flooding in Kohala and Hamakua . Hurricane Fefa resulted in no known deaths . Lightning from the storm caused two injuries . A man in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park was hurt when lightning struck where he was walking . A man in Hilo was burnt when lightning moved through telephone wires . The storm resulted in no reported damage . 
 The name Fefa was removed after this storm and replaced with Felicia in the 1997 season . The reason for the name retirement is unknown , as the storm itself caused little damage . Possible reasons listed for the removal of the name are pronunciation ambiguity , a socially unacceptable meaning in another language , or because the storm name represented a significant human disaster . 
 = You Must Love Me = 
 " You Must Love Me " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna . It was written by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice , for the 1996 film adaptation of the musical , Evita , based on the life of Argentinian leader Eva Perón . The song was released on October 27 , 1996 , by Warner Bros. as the lead single from the film 's soundtrack . After years of not working together due to their individual projects , Webber and Rice collaborated on creating a new track for the film , with the hopes of obtaining an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song . According to Webber , the song 's main inspiration was to showcase Perón 's emotional state at the time as well as her relationship with husband Juan Perón . 
 Madonna , who starred in the titular role of the film , had tried to change the lyrics of the track to create a sympathetic portrayal of Perón , but was unsuccessful . She also undertook vocal lessons to record the songs for the film . " You Must Love Me " features instrumentation from cello and piano which accompanies Madonna 's vocals . The song garnered positive response from music critics , many of them highlighting Madonna 's enhanced singing ability . It went on to win the Golden Globe and the Academy Award for Best Original Song in 1997 . 
 Commercially , " You Must Love Me " became a top @-@ ten hit in some countries including Finland , Italy and the United Kingdom , while reaching the top @-@ twenty in the United States . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 physical units . A music video , directed by Alan Parker , was released as promotion for the single . Madonna has performed the song at the 69th Academy Awards and on her 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In 1996 , Madonna starred in the film Evita , playing the role of Eva Perón , the Spiritual Leader of the Nation of Argentina . For a long time , Madonna had desired to play Perón and even wrote a letter to director Alan Parker , explaining how she would be perfect for the part . After securing the role , she underwent vocal training with coach Joan Layder since Evita required the actors to sing their own parts . Layder noted that the singer " had to use her voice in a way she 's never used it before . Evita is real musical theater — its operatic , in a sense . Madonna developed an upper register that she didn 't know she had . " 
 " You Must Love Me " was written by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice , who had reunited for Evita after a ten @-@ year creative separation due to their individual projects . It was written specifically for the film , so that it would contain new material and be eligible for an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song . Madonna noted it as her favorite song from the film , recalling that the idea for " You Must Love Me " grew when Parker re @-@ arranged the ending of the film from the original play , with the hopes of reuniting Rice and Webber to create new music . According to Webber , the main inspiration behind the song was to showcase Perón 's emotional state at the time as well as her relationship with husband Juan Perón ; " [ Eva ] is dying and she knows she 's dying . One reason she is saying , ' You must love me ' , is out of desperation . She 's also saying , ' You must love me because you must have always loved me ' , so it 's a little word play , I guess , which Tim Rice has written " . It was released as the soundtrack 's first official single on October 27 , 1996 . Since its release , the song has been included in several productions of the play , including the 2006 London production and the 2012 Broadway revival . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Recording sessions for the film 's songs and soundtrack began on September 1995 , and took place at the CTS Studios in London with Madonna accompanied by co @-@ actors Antonio Banderas and Jonathan Pryce . However , trouble arose as Madonna was not completely comfortable with laying down a " guide vocal " simultaneously with an 84 piece orchestra inside the studio . She was used to singing over a pre @-@ recorded track and not have musicians listen to her . Also , unlike her previous soundtrack releases , she had little to no control over the project ; " I 'm used to writing my own songs and I go into a studio , choose the musicians and say what sounds good or doesn 't [ ... ] To work on forty @-@ six songs with everyone involved and not have a big say was a big adjustment " , she recalled . An emergency meeting was held between Parker , Webber and Madonna where it was decided that the singer would record her part in a more contemporary studio while the orchestration would take place somewhere else . She also had alternate days off from the recording . 
 " You Must Love Me " starts with the sound of orchestra and piano , as Madonna sings the opening verses . She continues singing the lyrics , which talk about Perón 's discovery that her husband Juan had actually loved her all along and not merely seen her as a political prop . When presented to Madonna , her reaction to the lyrics was negative since she wanted to have a sympathetic portrayal of Perón , rather than the " shrewd manipulator " like character that Parker had in mind . She was also concerned about her own image , and was successful in getting many of the portions in the script altered . However , Rice declined to change the song , but rewrote it five to six times . He recalled , " I remember taking the lyrics to Madonna and she was trying to change them ... The scene can be interpreted in different ways , but my lyrics were kept , thank God ! " 
 Other instrumentation for the song includes cello , which was played by a live orchestra . As the song moves towards the chorus , the piano sounds stop and the cello plays with Madonna belting out the lyrics : " Deep in my heart , I 'm concealing , Things that I 'm longing to say , Scared to confess what I 'm feeling , Frightened you 'll slip away " , when the piano and the orchestra sounds come back again . It proceeds in the same way and gradually fades out . " You Must Love Me " is set in common time , with a moderate tempo of 92 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B ♭ major , with Madonna 's vocals spanning from G3 to B ♭ 4 . The song has a basic sequence of B ♭ – E ♭ / B ♭ – F ♭ / B ♭ – B ♭ in the beginning and changes to B ♭ – F ♭ when Madonna sings the opening verse " Where do we go from here ? " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
