 " You Must Love Me " received generally positive reviews from critics . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , wrote : " Who can deny that her voice has remarkable and unmistakable presence when heard during ' You Must Love Me ' ? " . Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , appreciated the song 's addition to the soundtrack and found " pathos " in Madonna 's vocals . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic felt that " Even with the faults , Evita has its merits , including the written @-@ for @-@ film ballad ' You Must Love Me ' " . Peter Keough , from the Boston Phoenix , wrote that " [ ' You Must Love Me ' ] is an aching farewell that dispels the illusion of a romance @-@ of @-@ convenience to reveal the inescapable love and tragedy beneath " . Teresa Huang from The Tech , said it was " a beautiful addition to an already powerful score " . 
 Larry Flick , from Billboard , called it " a momentous musical event [ ... ] a bittersweet and quietly theatrical ballad [ written ] specifically for Madonna " . Kathleen <unk> , also from Billboard , said that " [ Madonna ] delivers what is by far one of the strongest vocal performances of her career , comfortably scaling to the song 's demanding soprano heights while infusing it with delicate , heart @-@ rending emotion . This bodes well for the creative potency of the rest of the soundtrack " . Matthew Jacobs from The Huffington Post , placed it at number 61 of his list " The Definitive Ranking Of Madonna Singles " . He explained that " [ t ] he vocal training Madonna endured for the movie pays off in this soprano serenade " , but also noted that it " doesn 't do much outside of the film " . Spin 's Annie Zaleski noted that " [ Madonna 's ] performances on the Evita soundtrack demonstrated her astronomical growth as a vocalist " , citing " her fragile @-@ sounding pleas on the Oscar @-@ winning ' You Must Love Me ' " as an example . 
 On her review of Evita , Janet Maslin from The New York Times commented that " Mr. Lloyd Webber and Mr. Rice have contributed a lilting new song , ' You Must Love Me ' , that 's as suitable for weddings as it is for running South American countries " . Entertainment Weekly 's David Browne gave the song a rating of B and opined that " [ ' You Must Love Me ' ] is no ' Live to Tell ' or ' Take a Bow ' . But this simple , elegantly arranged showpiece from Evita is clearly intended to promote both the film and her new adult , matriarchal image " . J. D. Considine , from The Baltimore Sun , said it was one of the " big songs " from the soundtrack . Peter Travers from Rolling Stone , hailed it " sympathy @-@ begging " . The song won the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 54th ceremony , which took place on January 19 , 1997 . Two months later , it was awarded the Academy Award for Best Original Song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " You Must Love Me " was serviced to radio on October 9 , 1996 . It was met with a positive response , garnering 118 plays the first week , and debuting at number 55 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart . The CD single was released on October 29 , following public demands about the song ; " Rainbow High " from the film was added as its B @-@ side . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 22 the week of November 14 , 1996 , ultimately peaking at number 18 after two weeks . It ranked at number 99 on the year end chart for 1997 . According to Billboard , " You Must Love Me " was Madonna 's fourth highest debuting single of her career , following " You 'll See " ( number 8 in 1995 ) , " Erotica " ( number 13 in 1992 ) and " Rescue Me " ( number 15 in 1990 ) . It was also the highest charting Webber @-@ Rice collaboration since Helen Reddy 's rendition of " I Don 't Know How to Love Him " , which reached number 13 in 1971 . It eventually received a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on October 22 , 1998 , for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the song debuted at number 36 on the RPM Top Singles chart , and reached a peak of number 11 on the week of December 16 , 1996 . It was present for a total of 14 weeks on the chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song reached a peak of number 10 on the UK Singles Chart the week of November 2 , 1996 , and was present on the top 100 for a total of 9 weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , the song had sold 90 @,@ 428 copies by August 2008 in there . In Australia , " You Must Love Me " peaked at number 11 on the ARIA Singles Chart the week of November 10 , 1996 , staying on this position for one week and a total of 9 weeks on the chart . In Italy , it reached the fourth position of the FIMI Singles Chart . On the year @-@ end Italian charts , it was ranked at number 39 . " You Must Love Me " reached a peak of number 4 in Finland , and also reached a peak of number 21 on the Irish Singles Chart , where it remained for 2 weeks . In Germany , it became one of Madonna 's lowest charting singles , peaking at number 78 . 
 = = Promotion and cover version = = 
 The music video for " You Must Love Me " was directed by Parker and features the singer performing the song inside a small room ; interspersed with footage and scenes from Evita . As Madonna was eight months pregnant with her daughter Lourdes Maria , her stomach remained hidden behind a piano . The music video was included as a bonus feature on the 15th Anniversary Edition blu @-@ ray of the film , released on June 19 , 2012 . On March 24 , 1997 , Madonna performed the song at the 69th Academy Awards dressed in a full @-@ length , strapless Christian Dior gown . According to choreographer Otis <unk> , they wanted to portray the singer in a restrained manner , hence the accompaniment in the stage was just a spotlight on her and a piano to her left . Writing for The Philadelphia Inquirer , movie critic Carrie Rickey felt Madonna " gave a restrained performance of the number " . 
 Madonna did not perform the song again until her Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) . She appeared on stage wearing a black Givenchy dress , with pink colored ribbons around her neck and black stockings on her legs and performed an acoustic , guitar @-@ driven version of the song sitting on a stool . She was backed by 4 musicians who were dressed in gypsy clothes . As she performed the song , scenes from Evita played on the backdrop screens . The performance received positive feedback from critics with Ricardo Baca , from The Denver Post , writing that " her courageous , late @-@ set take on ' You Must Love Me ' — from the filmed version of the Broadway musical Evita — was spot @-@ on and gorgeous with its string accompaniment " . On the Buenos Aires stop of the tour , after performing " You Must Love Me " , Madonna also sang " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " from the film . The performances of both songs in the city were recorded in the live CD @-@ DVD titled , Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2010 ) . Singer Brooke White covered the song on the seventh season of American Idol . She marked Idol history that night when , after forgetting the lyrics to the song , she stopped after the first verse to start over from the beginning . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 US CD / Cassette / 7 " Single 
 " You Must Love Me " ( Single Version ) – 3 : 09 
 " Rainbow High " – 2 : 27 
 UK CD Single 
 " You Must Love Me " ( Single Version ) – 3 : 09 
 " Rainbow High " – 2 : 27 
 " You Must Love Me / I 'd Be Surprisingly Good For You " ( Orchestral Version ) – 4 : 27 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals , mixing 
 Tim Rice – writer 
 Andrew Lloyd Webber – writer , producer 
 Alan Parker – producer 
 Nigel Wright – producer , mixing 
 David Reitzas – mixing 
 John Mauceri – conductor 
 David Caddick and Mike Dixon – additional conductors 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Shortwave listening = 
 Shortwave listening , or <unk> , is the hobby of listening to shortwave radio broadcasts located on frequencies between 1700 kHz and 30 MHz . Listeners range from casual users seeking international news and entertainment programming , to hobbyists immersed in the technical aspects of radio reception and collecting official confirmations ( QSL cards ) that document their reception of distant broadcasts ( DXing ) . In some developing countries , shortwave listening enables remote communities to obtain regional programming traditionally provided by local medium wave AM broadcasters . One 2002 estimate placed the number of shortwave listeners worldwide in the hundreds of millions . 
 The practice of long @-@ distance radio listening began in the 1920s when shortwave broadcasters were first established in the US and Europe . Audiences discovered that international programming was available on the shortwave bands of many consumer radio receivers , and a number of magazines and listener clubs catering to the practice arose as a result . Shortwave listening was especially popular during times of international conflict such as World War II , the Korean War and the Persian Gulf War . 
 Listeners use inexpensive portable " world band " radio receivers to access the shortwave bands , and some advanced hobbyists employ specialized communications receivers featuring digital technology designed for optimum reception of shortwave signals , along with outdoor antennas to enhance performance . 
 With the advent of the internet , many international broadcasters have scaled back or terminated their shortwave transmissions in favor of web @-@ based program distribution , while others are moving from traditional analog to digital broadcasting modes in order to allow more efficient delivery of shortwave programming . The number of organized shortwave listening clubs has diminished along with printed magazines devoted to the hobby ; however , many enthusiasts continue to exchange information and news on the web . 
 = = History = = 
 The practice of listening to distant stations in the medium wave AM broadcast band was carried over to the shortwave bands . Frank Conrad , an early pioneer of medium wave broadcasting with KDKA in Pittsburgh , instituted some of the first shortwave broadcasts around 1921 . Stations affiliated with General Electric and Crosley followed shortly after . 
 United States shortwave broadcasters began transmitting popular radio programs in an attempt to attract foreign audiences . During the 1930s , new shortwave receivers appeared on the market as well as popular shortwave magazines and clubs . Shortwave stations often offered unique QSL cards for DXers . 
 In Europe , shortwave broadcasts from Britain and the Netherlands such as Philips Radio 's <unk> began around 1927 . Germany , Italy , the Soviet Union , Britain , and many other countries soon followed , and some classic shortwave broadcasters got their start . The BBC began on shortwave as the " BBC Empire Service " in 1932 . Its broadcasts were aimed principally at English speakers . Radio Moscow was broadcasting on shortwave in English , French , German , Italian and Arabic by 1939 . The Voice of America ( or VOA ) began broadcasting in 1942 after its entry into World War II using the Yankee Doodle musical theme . 
 While technically minded shortwave listening hobbyists dwindled during the war years due in part to the demands of military service , casual listeners seeking war news from foreign broadcasters increased . Shortwave receiver manufacturers contributed to war production . Zenith launched the multi @-@ band Trans @-@ Oceanic series of radios in 1942 . In some other countries , during the war , listening to foreign stations was a criminal offense . Established in 1939 , 35 @-@ kilowatt Chinese shortwave station <unk> broadcast programming aimed at listening @-@ restricted Japan . The station was often bombed by the Japanese . 
 CBS began a shortwave listening program in September 1939 , on an experimental basis , at the National Lawn Tennis Championships at West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills , New York . Engineers installed equipment at the CBS booth when the location was found to have good reception , and monitors relayed European shortwave news to CBS headquarters in New York between tennis matches . Throughout World War II , CBS captured Allied and enemy shortwave communications from more than 60 international stations via secretly located receivers . Translations of intercepted broadcasts were <unk> to all New York newspapers , Associated Press , United Press International and International News Service , and in turn disseminated to newspapers and radio stations throughout the United States . Major headline news frequently resulted , since big stories often broke first on radio . 
 Shortwave listeners notified families of prisoners of war when studio announcers at stations in Axis powers countries , such as Germany and Japan , read prisoner @-@ written messages . Allied monitors notified families , but many shortwave listeners were often first to report the broadcasts . Listeners in other countries also monitored POW messages . Americans were actively discouraged from listening to these reports , however , since broadcasting the names of a few American prisoners was regarded as a propaganda trick to build up the listening audience for Axis radio programs . In May 1943 Jack Gerber , director of the CBS listening post , told journalist William L. Shirer that the International Red Cross was the only reliable source of information on prisoners , and expressed concern at receiving six or seven letters a week requesting transcripts of German broadcasts in which service members may have been mentioned : 
 The only reason the Nazis put on prisoner broadcasts is to get people justifiably anxious about relatives reported missing at the front to listen to their propaganda . Although many of the messages undoubtedly are true , they represent but a small fraction of our prisoners and we have no assurance that many of them are not faked from papers picked up on the battlefield . What concerns some of us is the consequences of listening to Nazi broadcasts unless you are a well @-@ trained listener ( and often , even if you are ) . Nazi arguments often sound plausible . A person may listen to them with all the skepticism in the world , knowing that every word is a lie . But if the content is sufficiently sensational ( and it often is ) the source may be forgotten in time , and out pops the Nazi lie , all unsuspecting . 
 New Zealand shortwave listeners reported POW voices broadcast over Radio Peking during the Korean War . 
 In the 1950s and 60s , shortwave DX columns in US magazines such as Popular Electronics ′ " Tuning the Short Wave Bands " and Electronics Illustrated ′ s " The Listener " became news sources for serious radio listeners . Popular Electronics ′ " <unk> Monitor Registration " program , begun in 1959 , even offered callsign @-@ like identifiers to hobbyists . A number of specialty radio clubs such as the Newark News Radio Club also arose during these decades and provided hobbyists with an exchange of DX news and information . When Popular Electronics and similar magazines expanded coverage of new electronics topics in the 1970s , this led to the cancellation of several long @-@ time shortwave listening columns . 
 Beginning with Sweden Calling DXers on Radio Sweden in 1948 ( there was a slightly earlier short @-@ lived program from Radio Australia ) , many shortwave radio stations began programs providing news . Some of the other prominent DX programs were Radio Netherlands ' DX Jukebox ( which became Media Network ) , the <unk> Digest on Radio Canada International , and the Swiss Shortwave Merry @-@ go @-@ round on Swiss Radio International . 
 An example of notable shortwave programming was the Happy Station Show , popularly called the “ world ’ s longest @-@ running shortwave radio program ” . The show originated on Philips Radio 's <unk> shortwave station in 1928 , continuing until 1940 . After World War II Radio Netherlands broadcast the show from 1946 until it terminated in 1995 . Producer and presenter Keith Perron “ resurrected ” Happy Station on March 12 , 2009 . Although no longer associated with Radio Netherlands , the new effort proclaims itself as “ transmitted globally via shortwave , podcasting and Internet streaming radio ” . 
 During the Persian Gulf War in the 1990s , many Americans tuned into foreign news broadcasts on shortwave . Some electronics retailers even reported a " run " on portable shortwave receivers due to the increased interest at the time . 
 = = Practices = = 
 Listening to shortwave broadcast stations for news and information programming is common , but for many shortwave listeners ( abbreviated as " <unk> " ) , the goal is to receive as many stations from as many countries as possible , also known as DXing . " DXers " routinely test the limits of their antenna systems , radios and radio propagation knowledge . Specialized interests of shortwave listeners may include listening for shortwave utility , or " ute " , transmissions such as shipping , sailing , naval , aviation , or military signals , listening for intelligence signals ( numbers stations ) , or tuning in amateur radio stations . 
 Listeners often obtain QSL cards ( which confirm contact ) from ham operators , broadcasters or utility stations as trophies of the hobby . Traditionally , listeners would send letters to the station with reception reports and requests for schedules . Many stations now accept E @-@ mails or provide reception report forms on their Web sites . Reception reports give valuable information about propagation and interference to a station 's engineers . 
 There have been several publications dedicated to providing information to shortwave listeners , including the magazines Popular Communications ( now a " digital supplement " to CQ Amateur Radio magazine ) , Monitoring Times ( now defunct ) , and The Spectrum Monitor , a digital @-@ only publication , in the United States , and the annual publications Passport to World Band Radio ( now defunct ) and the World Radio TV Handbook ( <unk> ) . In addition , stations can provide broadcast schedules through the mail or E @-@ mail . There are also shortwave radio programs dedicated to shortwave listening and DXing , such as the U.S.-based World of Radio and DXing With Cumbre , but recently these programs have been curtailed or dropped by many international broadcasters . As of 2007 , Radio Habana Cuba still hosts a program called DXers Unlimited . 
 There are estimated to be millions of shortwave listeners . In 2002 , according to the National Association Of Shortwave Broadcasters , for estimated numbers of households with at least one shortwave set in working order , Asia led with a large majority , followed by Europe , Sub Saharan Africa , and the former Soviet Union , respectively . The total estimated number of households worldwide with at least one shortwave set in working order was said to be 600 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . <unk> are varied , with no common age or occupation . David Letterman is an admitted fan of the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) . 
 Some developing countries use shortwave as a means of receiving local and regional programming . China and Russia <unk> some domestic channels on shortwave that target listeners in far off provinces . Shortwave listening is also used as an educational tool in classrooms . Poor sound reproduction , unreliable signal quality , and inflexibility of access are seen as disadvantages . 
 Some humanitarian organizations like Ears to Our World distribute portable , self @-@ powered shortwave radios to less developed parts of the globe , enabling people in remote , impoverished parts of the world to get educational programming , local and international news , emergency information and music . Recently , the group was involved in sending radios to Haiti so victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake could stay abreast of local disaster recovery efforts . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = Shortwave radio receivers = = = 
 <unk> for shortwave reception generally have higher performance than those intended for the local AM or FM broadcast band , since dependable reception of shortwave signals requires a radio with increased sensitivity , selectivity , and stability . Modern shortwave radio receivers are relatively inexpensive and easily accessible , and many hobbyists use portable " world band " receivers and built @-@ in telescopic antennas . 
 Serious hobbyists may use expensive communications receivers and outdoor antenna located away from electrical noise sources , such as a dipole made from wire and insulators . 
 Features typical of modern solid state communications receivers : 
 500 kHz to 30 MHz frequency coverage 
 <unk> type - double , triple or quad conversion 
 Multiple RF and IF stages 
 A crystal controlled IF stage 
 BFO product detector for SSB and CW reception 
 Signal strength meter 
 RF gain control ; AVC / AGC adjustments 
 Antenna tuner 
 Bandwidth filters 
 BFO tuning ; audio limiters or <unk> . 
 Frequency display dials - analog or digital . 
 Older vacuum tube @-@ based communications receivers are affectionately known as <unk> for their large size and weight . Such receivers include the Collins R @-@ 390 and R @-@ 390A , the RCA AR @-@ 88 , the Racal RA @-@ <unk> and the Marconi <unk> . However , even modern solid @-@ state receivers can be very large and heavy , such as the Plessey <unk> , the <unk> <unk> or the Rohde & Schwarz <unk> . 
 A feature coming into wide use in modern shortwave receivers is DSP technology , short for digital signal processing . DSP is the use of digital means to process signals , and a primary benefit in shortwave receivers is the ability to tailor the bandwidth of the receiver to current reception conditions and to the type of signal being listened to . A typical analog @-@ only receiver may have a limited number of fixed bandwidths , or only one , but a DSP receiver may have 40 or more individually selectable filters . 
 Another important trend in modern shortwave listening is the use of " PC radios " , or radios that are designed to be controlled by a standard personal computer . These radios as the name suggests are controlled by specialized PC software using a serial port connected to the radio . A PC radio may not have a front @-@ panel at all , and may be designed exclusively for computer control , which reduces cost . In pure software defined radios , all filtering , modulation and signal manipulation is done in software , usually by a PC <unk> or by a dedicated piece of DSP hardware . 
 = = Future of shortwave listening = = 
 The rise of the internet influenced many broadcasters to cease their shortwave transmissions in favor of broadcasting over the world wide web . When BBC World Service discontinued service to Europe , North America , Australasia , and the Caribbean , it generated many protests and activist groups such as the Coalition to Save the BBC World Service . In the US , the shifting of resources from shortwave to Internet and television by the Broadcasting Board of Governors , which oversees U.S. international broadcasting , has also resulted in reduced broadcasting hours in the English language . Although most of the prominent broadcasters continue to scale back their analog shortwave transmissions or completely terminate them , shortwave is still very common and active in developing regions such as parts of Africa . 
 Some international broadcasters have turned to a digital mode of broadcasting called Digital Radio Mondiale for their shortwave outlets . One reason is that digital shortwave broadcasts using DRM can cover the same geographic region with much less transmitter power — roughly one @-@ fifth the power — than traditional AM mode broadcasts , significantly reducing the electricity cost of operating a station . A traditional AM ( analog ) international shortwave station can have a power rating of 50 kilowatts to as much as one million watts per transmitter , with typical power levels in the 50 – 500 kilowatt range . Endorsed by the ITU , it has been approved as an international standard for digital broadcasts on the HF ( shortwave ) bands . A DRM broadcast rivals FM mono quality and can also send graphic images and web pages via a separate information channel . 
 Shortwave listening also remains popular with some expatriates who tune in shortwave transmissions from their homeland . Additionally , a number of remotely controlled shortwave receivers located around the world are available to users on the web . While radio hobbyists report that the number of shortwave listening clubs has diminished and printed magazines devoted to the hobby are few , enthusiasts such as Glenn Hauser and others continue to populate web sites , and originate podcasts dedicated to the pursuit . 
 = Fred Shero = 
 Frederick Alexander " The Fog " Shero ( October 23 , 1925 – November 24 , 1990 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player , coach , and general manager . He played for the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . However , he spent most of his playing career in the minor leagues . Following his playing career , he went into coaching , spending 13 years coaching in the minor leagues before making it to the NHL . As an NHL head coach , Shero won the Stanley Cup twice with the Philadelphia Flyers ( 1974 and 1975 ) and reached the Stanley Cup Finals three times in Philadelphia ( 1974 , 1975 , and 1976 ) . He also had four consecutive seasons of having a 0 @.@ 700 or better winning percentage and remains the Flyers all @-@ time leader in coaching victories . Shero controversially left the Flyers following the 1977 – 78 season to become the head coach of the New York Rangers , whom he led to the Stanley Cup Finals in his first season . He resigned from the Rangers after coaching for less than three seasons . Shero had a unique style of coaching that led to several innovations that are still used today . He was the first coach to hire a full @-@ time assistant coach , employ systems , have his players use in season strength training , study film , and he was one of the first coaches to utilize a morning skate . In 2013 Shero was recognized for his contributions when he was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame as a builder . 
 He was known for his enigmatic and introverted personality often appearing or disappearing from a room unnoticed , or being completely lost in thought . He often left philosophical sayings on a chalkboard as a way of provoking thought or as a motivational tool . Prior to game six of the 1974 Stanley Cup Finals , Shero wrote his now famous quote " Win today and we walk together forever " – a statement that continues to be quoted to this day . His son , Ray Shero , also pursued a career in hockey and was the general manager of the Pittsburgh Penguins from 2006 – 2014 and is the current ( as of May 2015 ) general manager of the New Jersey Devils . . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 As a 17 @-@ year @-@ old Shero was signed by the New York Rangers to a professional contract . He spent the first year of his contract in the minors splitting time between the New York Rovers and the Brooklyn Crescents in the Eastern Amateur Hockey League . The following season Shero served in the Royal Canadian Navy during World War II , although he continued to play hockey for the Navy as a member of HMCS Chippawa . Upon returning to the Rangers organization , Shero continued to play in the minors for another two seasons before reaching National Hockey League ( NHL ) . On October 16 , 1947 , he made his NHL debut at the Montreal Forum against the defending Stanley Cup Champion Montreal Canadiens in the 1947 – 48 season opener . However , he only played 19 games with the Rangers that year while splitting time with the St. Paul Saints in the United States Hockey League . It was during this time that he would first garner the nickname " The Fog " . Although more often associated with his loner personality and propensity for being lost in thought , the nickname actually began during a 1948 game in St. Paul , Minnesota . High humidity on indoor ice surfaces can result in fog . One night in St. Paul the fog was so thick that Shero was the only player who claimed to be able to see the puck thus earning him the name " Freddy the Fog " . 
 The 1948 – 49 season saw Shero become a regular in the Rangers line up as well as his first NHL post @-@ season action . The following season Shero set career highs in games played , assists , and points , while the Rangers qualified for the post @-@ season in the fourth and final position . Despite being the lowest seeded team , the Rangers made it to the Stanley Cup Finals by <unk> the Montreal Canadiens in the first round . In the Finals the Rangers met up with the Detroit Red Wings , and on April 23 , 1950 , the Rangers lost game seven in double overtime . It was the last NHL game Shero ever played . On May 14 , 1951 , the Rangers traded Shero to the American Hockey League 's ( AHL ) Cleveland Barons . Upon his return to the minors Shero enjoyed team success as a player winning back @-@ to @-@ back Calder Cups with the Barons in 1953 and 1954 . Shero was also named an AHL Second Team All @-@ Star in 1954 . However , he only played one more season with the Barons before moving to the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) with the Winnipeg Warriors for the 1955 – 56 season . Shero captained the Warriors to the WHL championship , in his first season with the club . He played with the Warriors again during the 1956 – 57 season , but moved to the Quebec Hockey League ( QHL ) where he played for the Shawinigan Cataractes in 1957 – 58 . During the 1957 – 58 QHL season Shero first began coaching . He served as a player / assistant coach for the Cataracts and helped them capture the QHL championship . He retired from playing in 1958 . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After retiring as a player , Shero continued to coach and began a 13 @-@ year coaching career in the minor leagues . During his time in the minors , Shero proved to be a winning coach accumulating six first @-@ place finishes , five second @-@ place finishes and twice finishing third in various leagues . He also coached the St. Paul Saints to the IHL championship , The Turner Cup , in 1960 and 1961 . In 1964 , he coached the St. Paul Rangers to the CPHL championship finals . The following season Shero began his AHL coaching career with the Buffalo Bisons whom he led to a Calder Cup Championship in 1970 , while winning the Louis A. R. <unk> Memorial Award as AHL coach of the year . For the 1970 – 71 season Shero again changed teams this time coaching in the Central Hockey League with the Omaha Knights , winning the league Championship . Although in the Rangers farm system for several years and winning at various levels , Shero was never seriously considered to replace Emile Francis as head coach , due to Shero 's perceived alcohol problem and a belief that he was an ineffective communicator . 
 = = = Philadelphia Flyers ( 1971 – 1978 ) = = = 
 In 1971 the Philadelphia Flyers were looking for a new coach , and general manager Keith Allen suggested Shero to owner Ed Snider . When asked if he knew Shero , Allen admitted to only knowing him by reputation . He knew Shero always had a winning record , plus he had a " gut feeling " he was the right man for the job . Snider agreed to bring in Shero because he trusted Allen 's judgment . Thus Shero became the third coach in Flyers history ; he had high hopes for the Season predicting that the Flyers would finish no worse than second in the West Division . The 1971 – 72 season was disappointing for Shero as the Flyers finished in 5th place in the West with a 26 – 38 – 14 record . The Flyers 66 points were actually a decrease of 7 points in the standings and they missed the playoffs for the second time in three years . Shero 's " Fog " nickname was also re @-@ established during the year following a game at the Omni Coliseum in Atlanta when he left the arena through a door with no re @-@ entry and became locked outside prior to the post @-@ game press conference . At the press conference no one knew where Shero was and reporters unsuccessfully searched the arena for him . 
 In the off @-@ season Shero decided that the team would be more successful if he coached them like he had coached his minor league teams . Upon being elevated to the NHL , he had decided not to employ systems like he did in the minors , stating that he had too much respect for NHL players . However , he decided that since he had the same kind of players on the Flyers as he did in the minors , he would use the same systems , becoming the first coach to employ systems . 
 In 1972 – 73 Shero hired Mike Nykoluk as an assistant coach on a one @-@ year tryout basis . Although assistant coaches are common today , Nykoluk was the first full @-@ time assistant coach in the league , and the decision to hire him led to rumors that Shero must not be much of a coach if he needed help . However , with the additional help Shero guided the Flyers to their first winning season in franchise history , and Nykoluk stayed on as assistant throughout Shero 's tenure . Prior to a game during the 72 – 73 season Shero wrote a quote about commitment on the dressing room blackboard , and the team won the game . From then on Shero wrote inspirational quotes prior to games . After finishing second in the West Division they faced off with the Minnesota North Stars whom they defeated 4 @-@ 2 winning the first playoff series in Flyers history . In the second round the Flyers matched up with the Montreal Canadiens , who defeated Philadelphia 4 @-@ 1 . 
 = = = = Stanley Cup years = = = = 
 The following season Shero led the Flyers to a 50 – 16 – 12 record , first place in the Western Division . The 112 point total also placed the Flyers just one point behind the Boston Bruins for first overall in the NHL . It also marked the first time in franchise history that the Flyers posted a winning percentage over 0 @.@ 700 . The division title and high winning percentage accompanied by a 27 @-@ point increase from the previous season led to Shero winning the inaugural Jack Adams Award for coach of the year . In the 1974 playoffs the Flyers ' first round match @-@ up was against the Atlanta Flames . Following a game three win in which the Flyers went up 3 @-@ 0 , Shero was involved in an infamous incident . Known for taking late night walks and stopping at local bars and pubs for a drink , Shero decided to go for one of those walks following the game three victory . Though no one knows for sure what happened , Shero was allegedly mugged . Shero didn 't divulge any information about what really happened but police responded to a disturbance call at 2 a.m. outside the Flyers hotel . Shero was found with a broken thumb and cuts and bruises to his face . Flyers ' management sent him home to recuperate and assistant coach Nykoluk coached the team in the series winning game . In the Semi @-@ final round the Flyers were considered underdogs to the New York Rangers . However , the Flyers had home ice advantage . In the seven game series the home team won every game , giving the Flyers a 4 @-@ 3 series win . It marked the first time an expansion team defeated an Original Six team in a playoff series . The Flyers advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals where they played the Boston Bruins . Prior to game one Shero devised an unconventional game plan . The Flyers were to dump the puck to Bobby Orr 's side of the rink . Orr was considered to be one of the league 's best players , and the plan was to make him skate hard back to get the puck . In addition the team was to be physically hard on him . Any player who had the opportunity was to check , bump or put a stick on Orr , in an attempt to wear him down . Bobby Clarke later recalled that the strategy did work although it did take some time . Clarke stated that Orr was the best player on the ice in game five , but in game six Orr wasn 't the factor he had been in other games . Going into game six , the Flyers had a chance to win the Stanley Cup . Prior to the game Shero wrote his famous quote " Win today , and we walk together forever " on the dressing room blackboard for inspiration to the players . The quote is still used today . The Flyers went on to win game six and the series , thus becoming the first expansion team to win the Stanley Cup . Following the series Flyers ' goaltender Bernie Parent was named Conn Smythe as playoff MVP . During the official presentation Parent was given a new car , which he promptly gave to Shero . 
 In the 1974 – 75 season Shero led the Flyers to a 51 – 18 – 11 record . They won the newly formed Patrick Division , were first in the new Campbell Conference , and first overall in the NHL . In their opening series the Flyers swept the Toronto Maple Leafs , setting up a semi @-@ final match @-@ up against the New York Islanders . After taking a 3 – 0 series led , the Flyers lost three straight to set up a deciding seventh game . Before game seven , Shero wrote a quote by Dag Hammarskjöld – " Only he deserves power who every day justifies it . " on the blackboard . Though Shero never admitted it , the quote was believed to be directed at centre Rick MacLeish who had underperformed in the series . MacLeish responded and in game seven he registered a hat @-@ trick as the Flyers won the game 4 – 1 . The win set up a Stanley Cup Finals match @-@ up with Buffalo . Shero and the coaching staff again devised a game plan . This time it was to stop Buffalo 's French Connection line . The first part of the plan was to keep Sabre 's centre Gilbert Perreault out of the middle of the rink and to take away his passing options . The Flyers ' centres were instructed to play close to Perreault and be physical against him , to the point where it bordered on a penalty . The second part involved wearing down the French connection . Shero made numerous line changes to keep fresh players out against the Sabre 's trio . A perfect example of this part of the strategy was in game one . The French Connection took a 97 @-@ second shift and the Flyers made three line changes during that time . Shero 's strategy worked , and the Flyers won their second consecutive Stanley Cup . 
 In 1975 – 76 Shero guided the Flyers to a 51 – 13 – 16 record highlighted by a 36 – 2 – 2 home ice record . Again they won the Patrick division and finished first overall in the Campbell Conference . The season saw the club set franchise records in points and winning percentage . The season also witnessed an exhibition game , that would become one of the most famous games in Flyers history . In 1976 the Soviet Red Army team toured North America and played four games against NHL clubs . On January 11 , 1976 , the Russians matched up against the Flyers at the Spectrum in Philadelphia . Entering the game the Red Army team was unbeaten , defeating both Boston and the Rangers and registering a tie against the Canadiens . Shero had studied the Soviet style of play , even traveling to the Soviet Union during different off @-@ seasons . Shero even implemented some of the Russian style into his own system , altering it slightly . With his knowledge of the Russian system , Shero devised a game plan . The Russian system involved making several passes often to where a player had just moved from . Shero instructed the Flyers ' players not to chase the puck , but rather hold their positions . While in the offensive zone the Flyer forwards were to hold the puck as much as possible to avoid counter @-@ attacks . The Flyers won the game by a final of 4 – 1 and outshot the Red Army 49 – 13 . The victory led some to see the Flyers as the best team in the world . Following the playoffs that distinction would not last . Bernie Parent had suffered a back injury that limited him to eleven regular season games ; he was able to return for the first @-@ round series win versus Toronto . But the pain became too much for Parent to continue to play in subsequent series , and Shero was forced to use his back @-@ up goaltender , Wayne Stephenson . The Flyers were also without second @-@ line centre MacLeish , resulting in a depletion of scoring depth . Despite these setbacks Shero led Philadelphia past Boston in the semi @-@ finals and back to the Stanley Cup Finals . However , the Flyers fell short of winning three straight cups , losing to Montreal in four consecutive games . 
 In the 1976 – 77 season the Flyers ' win total slipped from 51 to 48 , but they still managed a 0 @.@ 700 winning percentage . This marked the fourth consecutive year of having a 0 @.@ 700 or better win percentage – once again winning their division and finishing first in the Campbell Conference . In the post season the Flyers again reached the semi @-@ finals , but lost to the Bruins in four straight games . The following season the Flyers ' record fell to 45 – 20 – 15 finishing second to the Islanders in both the division and the Conference . Shero again led the Flyers to the semi @-@ finals , where they lost to the Bruins once more . At the end of the season Shero , who had one more year left on his contract , submitted a letter of resignation stating that the Flyers needed a change whether they realized it or not . Flyers management had previously heard rumors about Shero wanting to leave Philadelphia and re @-@ join the Rangers organization , and refused to accept his letter of resignation . Shero then signed a $ 250 @,@ 000 , five @-@ year contract with the Rangers to be their new Head Coach and General Manager , believing he no longer had a contractual agreement to the Flyers . A few weeks after signing Shero , the Rangers gave the Flyers their first @-@ round pick in the 1978 draft ( Ken <unk> ) and cash as compensation , allowing the Rangers to avoid tampering charges . 
 = = = New York Rangers ( 1978 – 1980 ) and beyond = = = 
 In his first season with the Rangers , Shero led them to a 40 – 29 – 11 record – an increase of ten wins over the previous season . The Rangers excelled during the playoffs that year , defeating the Los Angeles Kings in their first round match @-@ up , then knocking off Shero 's former club Philadelphia . In the semi @-@ finals the Rangers upset their cross town rival Islanders to reach the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 1972 . The Rangers matched up against the Montreal Canadiens in the Finals . After upsetting Montreal in game one of the finals , Phil Esposito asked Shero to get the team out of town prior to game two , two nights later . Shero decided against such a move and several Rangers ' players were rumored to have " partied hard " following the win . The Rangers took a 2 – 0 lead in game two before losing the game and eventually the series , 4 – 1 . In the 1979 – 80 season the Rangers record dipped to 38 – 32 – 10 , good for fourth place in the Campbell conference . In the playoffs the Rangers defeated the Flames in round one , but lost a playoff rematch to the Flyers , 4 – 1 , in round two . After the season Shero was honored with the Lester Patrick Trophy for his contributions to the growth of hockey in the United States , an award he shared with the " Miracle on Ice " 1980 U.S. Olympic ice hockey Team . The next season the Rangers suffered injuries to key players resulting in a 4 – 13 – 3 start . Shero decided to step down from both his positions and was replaced by Craig Patrick . 
 In 1982 , Shero failed in an attempt to become the Detroit Red Wings head coach . A year later he was diagnosed with stomach cancer . He underwent surgery but remained healthy enough to start his new position as color analyst for the New Jersey Devils radio broadcasts . In 1987 Shero decided he wanted to experience coaching in Europe and spent one season coaching Tilburg Trappers in the Netherlands . With his health declining Shero returned to the Flyers ' organization as a special assistant in 1989 . The reunion was to help him with his medical costs , but it was also something that was very important to Shero on a personal level , as it was a return to the organization he had the most success with . On March 22 , 1990 , Shero was elected into the Flyers ' Hall of Fame . Eight months later on November , 24 Shero died at Cooper Hospital in Camden , New Jersey . He was 65 . 
 His passing did not diminish his popularity in Philadelphia and in a 1999 Philadelphia Daily News poll , he was selected as the city 's greatest professional coach / manager , beating out other notable coaches such as : Connie Mack of MLB Philadelphia Athletics , Dick Vermeil , and Greasy Neale of the NFL Philadelphia Eagles . In 2010 there was a push to get him elected into the Hockey Hall of Fame , which included an online petition at <unk> Shero was eventually elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame as a builder in 2013 . He remains the winningest coach in Flyers history with 308 wins , plus 48 more in playoff competition . 
 = = Coaching style = = 
 Shero 's introverted , enigmatic personality had an effect on the way in which he coached players . Shero often communicated with his players by way of notes left in their lockers . When he did talk to them , he was known for never yelling . He believed that when coaches yell they do it for their own sake . He always defended his player whether it was in the press or even against management . He always tried to make sure his players were focused during the game . He often asked them how much time was left in the period to force them to pay attention . He had a unique take on practice as well . If the team was winning then he worked the team hard . If they were losing then there would be a low key practice . He believed that he could get more out of players when they were winning . He often had drills designed to let the players have fun , stating that " Hockey is a child 's game played by men . Since it 's a child 's game it ought to be fun " . To have fun the Flyers occasionally had 12 @-@ on @-@ 12 games with the winning team earning a small monetary reward . He sometimes had the players perform drills that lacked purpose which the team performed until a player questioned the validity of the drill . At that point Shero stopped the drill and praised the player for being alert . Shero was notoriously bad with names . On one occasion it led to him trading for the wrong player . While GM of the Rangers Shero traded for Cam Connor believing it was Colin Campbell . Upon his arrival Conner had to explain that he was a winger and not a defenceman . 
 Often credited with using fighting and intimidation as a tactic , Shero never coached players to fight . He valued team toughness and insisted that players take the body and follow through with their checks . When it came to fighting Shero was quoted as saying " I swear I have never told a player to attack another player . In fact , I have told my players if they ever hear me saying something like this , they can break a stick over my skull . I ask only that they play aggressively . " In an interview in the HBO documentary Broad Street Bullies Shero states that he had a team that liked fighting so he let them fight . Demonstrating his personal coaching philosophy that " You have to learn to win with what you got or you don 't win at all . " 
 Shero was an innovator , aside from being the first coach to employ systems , and known as one of the first Western coaches to study Soviet influences , he was the first coach to study film . His son Ray even recalls his father breaking down games from radio broadcasts . He was also the first to have his players use in season strength training , with the use of an Apollo machine , a precursor to Nautilus equipment . As well as one of the first coaches to adopt the morning skate . He was one of the first coaches to have a game plan specifically designed on how to attack opposing teams , although not all of them worked to plan . Bernie Parent recalls a game against Montreal in which Shero decided to out skate the highly skilled Canadiens . After the first period , during which the Flyers ' goaltender faced 21 shots , he jokingly summed it up by saying , " the Zamboni didn 't even need to resurface the other end of the ice . " Yet it illustrates Shero 's understanding that he didn 't know everything about coaching and his pursuit to learn more . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Shero was the son of Russian immigrants who moved to Winnipeg to avoid religious persecution . He was often bullied for being the son of an immigrant and went out of his way to avoid some of other children in his neighborhood . Shero credited his childhood experiences as a reason why he tended to be a loner . As a child Shero took up boxing and at age 13 he became a Canadian Bantamweight champion . His success gave him a chance to become a professional boxer , but he decided to play hockey instead . When he signed his first professional contract with the Rangers , his father cautioned him that " hockey players are looking for work when they are 30 . " When he left Winnipeg 's Isaac Newton High School to go off to New York to play for the Rovers , he continued his education in his new surroundings . 
 In 1957 , Shero was introduced to his future wife , Mariette , by his teammate Eddie Johnston in Shawinigan Falls , Quebec . Mariette was the sister of a woman Johnston was dating , at the time . Johnston recalled that Shero told him that he was going to marry Mariette after their first date , which he did shortly thereafter . Fred and Mariette had two sons , Rejean ( Ray ) and Jean @-@ Paul . Ray Shero also pursued a career in hockey and is the current general manager of the New Jersey Devils . 
 Fascinated by the law , Shero contemplated retiring from coaching to attend law school following the Flyers Stanley Cup victory , believing he had nothing left to prove in hockey . Although he remained in coaching he did take a correspondence course in law . Known to spend time at his local library , Shero enjoyed the works of William Shakespeare and Charles Dickens , and prided himself for being " the very first New York Ranger ever to hold a New York Public Library card . " Among other interests was playing the violin . 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 EAHL First All @-@ Star Team ( 1947 ) 
 Calder Cup ( AHL ) Championships ( 1953 , 1954 , and 1970 ) 
 AHL Second All @-@ Star Team ( 1954 ) 
 WHL Championship ( 1956 ) 
 Turner Cup ( IHL ) Championships ( 1960 , 1961 ) 
 Louis A. R. <unk> Memorial Award for AHL Coach of the Year ( 1970 ) 
 CHL championship ( 1971 ) 
 Stanley Cup championships ( 1974 and 1975 ) 
 Jack Adams Award for NHL coach of the year ( 1974 ) 
 Lester Patrick Trophy winner ( 1980 ) 
 Inducted to the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame in 1985 
 Inducted to the Flyers Hall of Fame in 1990 
 Inducted to the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1999 
 Inducted to the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame in 2008 
 Inducted to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2013 
 = = = NHL coaching record = = = 
 = Typhoon Dan ( 1989 ) = 
 Typhoon Dan , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Saling , was the third of a series of tropical cyclones that impacted the Philippines and Vietnam in October 1989 . The storm developed on October 6 , and tracked generally westward throughout its course . After crossing Luzon , the typhoon emerged into the South China Sea and reached its peak intensity , with sustained 10 @-@ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , 1 @-@ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , and a minimum barometric pressure of 960 millibars . The storm moved ashore in central Vietnam and dissipated after moving inland . The storm caused extensive damage throughout its course . In the Philippines , Dan left hundreds of thousands homeless and killed 58 people . Power outages were extensive in the Manila region . In Vietnam , the storm 's high winds and heavy rains caused extensive damage and loss of life . More than 500 @,@ 000 structures were damaged or destroyed and at least 43 people were killed across the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 6 , 1989 , a tropical disturbance formed in the monsoon trough near the island of Chuuk . An advisory by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed the system as having a " poor " chance to develop due to strong wind shear in the region . A day later , the potential of development was adjusted to " fair " . On October 8 , the wind shear relented and a well @-@ defined band persisted near the storm 's center of circulation . As a result , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued . That same day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the storm as a tropical depression . At 1200 UTC , the JTWC issued their first warning on Tropical Depression <unk> . At the time , it was centered about 70 mi ( 110 km ) northeast of Yap . 
 About 18 hours later , the depression was upgraded to a tropical storm and given the name Dan . The cyclone moved westward at 17 to 23 mph ( 27 to 37 km / h ) , and convection continued to mature . Outflow was good across most of the system , except the northwestern corner where it was restricted by interaction with a nearby typhoon . Due to the cyclone 's proximity to the Philippines , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm , assigning it with the local name Saling . The JMA upgraded it to a tropical storm on October 9 ; both agencies recognized it as a typhoon the next day after an eye became visible and outflow improved in the northwestern quadrant . Dan made landfall on the southeastern coast of Luzon in the Philippines , and its center tracked just south of the Ninoy Aquino International Airport . 
 Dan crossed over the island and emerged into the South China Sea , having lost its eye feature and weakened back into a tropical storm . Convection soon redeveloped as the storm moved northwestward through warm waters . The JTWC reports that Dan reattained typhoon status at 0000 UTC on October 12 , although it according to the JMA it did so 24 hours earlier . The typhoon continued to intensify , and the JTWC estimates that it reached its peak intensity at 0600 UTC , with 1 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . The JMA indicates that Dan peaked slightly afterward , with 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure reading of 960 millibars . 
 The storm passed about 70 mi ( 110 km ) south of Hainan Island and weakened somewhat . Increased wind shear further deteriorated the system as it approached the coast of Vietnam . The storm moved inland at around 1200 UTC on October 13 , at which point the JMA downgraded it to a severe tropical storm and the JTWC issued their final advisory on the disturbance . The circulation ultimately dissipated over the mountainous terrain and its remnants continued to move westward into Laos . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Although it was relatively weak , the storm caused severe damage . In the Philippines , 58 fatalities from the cyclone were reported , with an additional 121 injuries . In total , 682 @,@ 699 people , or 135 @,@ 245 families , were affected by the typhoon , and 49 @,@ 972 houses sustained damage . Monetary storm damage is placed at $ 59 @.@ 2 million . The storm triggered flooding and landslides , while high winds , estimated up to 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) brought down trees and powerlines . The second typhoon to strike the country within a week , Dan forced schools and government offices to close . Approximately 250 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and dozens of fishermen went missing offshore . In the Manila area , near @-@ total power loss was reported . President Corazon Aquino issued a " state of calamity " there and in surrounding areas . In the wake of the storm , the nation 's military provided $ 300 @,@ 000 worth of food for residents in evacuation centers . The Department of Social Welfare and Development also provided $ 371 @,@ 000 worth of emergency relief assistance to 2 @,@ 700 families displaced by the storm . Despite the scale of damage from Dan and other typhoons in the region , no request for international assistance was made by the Philippine Government . As the storm progressed westward , it buffeted Hainan Island with gale @-@ force winds and exacerbated damage caused by Typhoons Angela and Brian . Collectively , the three storms were responsible for 63 fatalities on the island , most of which were attributed to Brian . 
 Damage in Vietnam was also extensive . The high winds , reportedly blowing at 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , ripped roofs off houses . Large storm tides along the coast pushed flood waters ashore . At least 43 people were killed and another 466 were injured by the storm throughout Vietnam . The most severe damage took place in Hà Tĩnh Province where 34 fatalities took place . In the province alone , 43 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and another 500 @,@ 000 were damaged . Extensive flooding across the province submerged 330 @,@ 000 acres ( 130 @,@ 000 ha ) of crops and killed thousands of cattle . In Hải Hưng Province , two people were killed and approximately 60 percent of the homes were damaged or destroyed . Another seven people perished in Thái Bình Province due to strong winds . 
 = Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe = 
 Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe is a crossover fighting video game between Mortal Kombat and the DC Comics fictional universe , developed by Midway Games and Warner Bros. Games . The game was released on November 16 , 2008 and contains characters from both franchises . Its story was written by comic writers Jimmy Palmiotti and Justin Gray . Despite being a crossover , the game is considered to be the eighth installment in the main Mortal Kombat series , as confirmed by the naming of the tenth entry by this count : Mortal Kombat X. 
 The game takes place after Raiden , Earthrealm 's god of thunder , and Superman , protector of Earth , repel invasions from both their worlds . An attack by both Raiden and Superman simultaneously in their separate universes causes the merging of the Mortal Kombat and DC villains , Shao Kahn and Darkseid , resulting in the creation of Dark Kahn , whose mere existence causes the two universes to begin merging ; if allowed to continue , it would result in the destruction of both . Characters from both universes begin to fluctuate in power , becoming stronger or weaker . 
 Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was developed using Epic Games ' Unreal Engine 3 and is available for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 platforms . It is the first Mortal Kombat title developed solely for seventh generation video game consoles . Most reviewers agreed that Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was entertaining and made good use of its DC Universe license , but the game 's lack of unlockable features as opposed to past installments of Mortal Kombat and toned @-@ down finishing moves garnered some criticism . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game features a story mode , playable from two different perspectives . The perspectives consist of one segment from the DC Universe side , and one from the Mortal Kombat side , each split up into various chapters . Depending on which side players choose , the characters from one universe see those from the opposite universe as the invaders of their own . Ed Boon , creative director of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe and co @-@ creator of the Mortal Kombat franchise , did confirm that the player would have the ability to play as all the characters in the story mode at one point during development , but the story mode ultimately lacked story arcs for a few characters . Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe also contains a mode called " Kombo Challenge " . Its aspect is individual to the Versus and Story modes , where players must perform ten <unk> combos of increasing difficulty . 
 Intertwined within fight matches , which are played in a 3D fighter style , are new gameplay modes , such as " Free @-@ Fall Kombat " or " Falling Kombat , " which are activated automatically after throwing the opponent to a lower level in the arena . The players can fight in the air during the fall in a quasi @-@ mini @-@ game , with one player having to hit certain buttons to be above the other during the fall and land on the other player when the fall ends . " Klose Kombat " is a mode the players can enter during a fight , causing the characters to lock with each other and the perspective to change to a close @-@ up shot of the two , to make for an interval of close @-@ quarters fighting . A " Test Your Might " mini @-@ game is also worked into the gameplay ; while fighting in certain areas , the player can smash the opponent through a series of walls and engage in a tug @-@ of @-@ war with the damage meter at the top of the screen . The player on the offense presses buttons to increase damage given , while the player on the defense presses buttons to decrease damage taken . 
 Another in @-@ fight feature called " Rage mode " is introduced in Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe . The Rage mode is governed by a rage meter placed below the player 's health meter that fills progressively every time the player receives damage or attacks . Once the meter is completely filled , Rage mode can be activated and lasts for several seconds . Rage mode enables the player to break the opponent 's guard on the second hit , prevents the attacker from experiencing hit stun , knockdown or pop @-@ up , and increases the damage of an attacker 's moves . During fights , characters show permanent signs of damage , such as bruises , scrapes , bleeding , and broken or torn clothing . All of the characters except Darkseid , Shao Kahn , and Dark Kahn have finishing moves ; the Mortal Kombat characters and the DC villains can execute Fatalities , while the DC heroes can execute moves called " heroic brutalities , " which function in the same manner but do not kill opponents , in order to stay in tone with the heroes who have an established reputation of never taking a life . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Shao Kahn 's invasion of Earthrealm is halted by Raiden 's forces of light , Raiden blasts and sends Kahn through a portal . At exactly the same time on Earth , Superman stops Darkseid 's <unk> invasion by blasting Darkseid with his heat vision as he enters a boom tube . These acts do not destroy either of them , but merge them into Dark Kahn , and causes the DC and Mortal Kombat universes to merge . As this happens , the characters ' abilities fluctuate , causing violent " rage " outbreaks that are actually the feelings of Dark Kahn being infused in the characters from afar . Because of this , certain characters gain either strength or vulnerability . This allows for such things as the possibility of Superman being defeated due to his vulnerability to magic , and giving the Joker the ability to fight skilled martial artists such as his nemesis Batman and Deathstroke . With each world thinking that the other is responsible for the merger , they fight each other until only one fighter from each side remains : Raiden and Superman . In the final battle , the two fight while Dark Kahn feeds on their rage . Both realizing that the other is not working with Dark Kahn , they overcome their rage for each other and defeat their fused enemy , restoring the two worlds to their normal separation . While everyone else has been sent to their original universe , Darkseid and Shao Kahn have been switched and are both rendered powerless . In the end , they both face eternal imprisonment in the other 's universe ; Darkseid is restrained in the Netherealm , while Shao Kahn is trapped in the Phantom Zone . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 = = Development = = 
 Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was Midway Games 's last project before filing for bankruptcy and selling the rights to Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment the following year in 2009 . In February 2007 , Midway Games announced they were planning a new game in the Mortal Kombat franchise , inspired by seeing a showcase of Gears of War . " Mortal Kombat 8 " would have been " dark , gritty , serious " and a " back to basics reboot " of the series . Eventually , during the planning process , a deal with DC Comics was made and this project was cancelled , thus leading to the development of a different game . An announcement in April 2008 confirmed the game as a crossover , and a trailer was released . The only notable aspect that remained from the original project was the use of the Unreal Engine 3 , also used in Gears of War . 
 Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was co @-@ published by Midway Games and Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment and was the final Mortal Kombat title to be developed under the Midway label prior to its purchase by Warner Bros. Interactive . Midway used <unk> software to develop Mortal Kombat vs DC Universe , according to Maurice Patel , entertainment industry manager at <unk> , and Illuminate Labs products for lighting . 
 The use of a DC license in Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe imposed some restrictions on the characteristic violence in Mortal Kombat games . Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was thus restricted to a " Teen " rating . Therefore , various Fatalities such as Sub @-@ Zero 's " Spine Rip " were replaced due to their violent nature . In order to keep that rating , two of the Fatalities in Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe were censored in North America . In the United Kingdom version of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe , both the Joker and Deathstroke 's first Fatality depict them each finishing their opponent with a gunshot to the head , both shown uncut from a distance . The North American version has the camera quickly pan toward the victor before the shot is fired , thereby cutting the victim out of the shot completely . Additionally , one of Kitana 's Fatalities which involved impaling the opponent in the head and the torso with her <unk> was modified so that both <unk> impaled her opponent 's chest instead . 
 According to interviews , the characters were chosen for their popularity , and for parallels between them from both universes . Boon has said that some of the characters ' abilities , especially those from the DC Universe , had been toned down to make them balanced within Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe . For example , Boon specifically mentioned that Superman became vulnerable because of magic . Boon revealed that two new characters were developed as downloadable content , Quan Chi from Mortal Kombat and Harley Quinn from DC comics but had been discarded . He had also hinted earlier at the prospect of Kung Lao and Doomsday being downloadable characters . 
 = = Release = = 
 For the release of the Kollector 's Edition of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe , a new cover was created by Alex Ross . Also included in the Kollector 's Edition is a 16 @-@ page comic book prequel , Beginnings , which was illustrated by Mortal Kombat co @-@ creator John Tobias . 
 Downloadable content ( DLC ) had been confirmed by Major Nelson , but was canceled due to Midway 's financial issues . Ed Boon had stated that they would have been updating Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe periodically with new content all the way up to the release of the next installment of the Mortal Kombat series : " I 'd like to have [ DLC ] as soon as possible . I think that might be a great Christmas gift to reinvigorate the game " . Ed Boon said on his Twitter account that the plan for DLC had been scrapped , which occurred because , as clarified by 1UP , Midway had filed for bankruptcy and was purchased by Warner Bros. Interactive after the suggestion of downloadable content . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Adam Sessler of X @-@ Play stated : " Whether it 's a decade @-@ late answer to the Marvel vs. Capcom team up games or an off @-@ the @-@ cuff boardroom joke gone wildly too far , Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe is destined to make just about anyone 's shortlist of bizarre video game team @-@ ups . Still , sometimes two disparate things can merge to create a unique synergy that makes the melding work , however unlikely it may have seemed at the outset . " In GamePro , Sid Shuman called it " surprisingly enjoyable . " Wired.com 's preview stated that the concept of the game was " nose @-@ <unk> ludicrous " , noting that Superman 's powers could be used to easily defeat a character with the comment , " from Sub @-@ Zero to Well @-@ Done in eight seconds flat . " ABC News praised the game 's story because it did " a great job of giving players a cohesive , if far @-@ fetched , story line that 's fun if not engaging , " as well as " comic book @-@ like " dialogue . Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe 's Kombo Challenge mode was criticized as a thin and frustrating mode with combos that required very precise timing . The modes of Klose Kombat and Free @-@ fall Kombat were praised as concepts but were criticized in their execution as they appeared to slow the gameplay down and took the player out of the fast gameplay experience . Critics noted that the change in the amount of gore was disappointing to longtime fans of the series who were used to the " insane amounts of gore . " 
 The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry approved of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe because of its departure from the earlier M @-@ rated games of the series praising its " simpler play , familiar graphics and adjustable gore content " but still not recommending it for younger players . In 2008 , GamePro , ranked it as the 15th best fighting game out of 18 . 
 Midway Games announced that as of January 26 , 2009 , Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe had shipped 1 @.@ 8 million copies since its release in mid November 2008 , not including the sales of the Kollector 's Edition . The chief operating officer of GameStop stated that the Kollector 's Edition of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe made up 55 % of the game 's total sales at GameStop locations in its first week . In their 10 @-@ K filing , Midway Games revealed the title had sold over 1 @.@ 9 million units , making it one of the company 's most successful titles since 2002 . According to Wired.com , Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe also " holds the distinction of being the most pre @-@ ordered MK game of all time . " In a ranking by Rentrak , the Xbox 360 version of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe was the sixth most rented game of 2009 . 
 = The Boat Race 1874 = 
 The 31st Boat Race took place on the 28 March 1874 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Oxford rower Joseph William Chitty , Cambridge won by three and a half lengths in their fifth consecutive victory . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Oxford by three lengths in the previous year 's race , while Oxford led overall with sixteen wins to Cambridge 's fourteen . 
 Cambridge were coached by John Graham Chambers ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1862 and 1863 races , and was non @-@ rowing boat club president for the 1865 race ) , William Henry Lowe ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1868 , 1870 and 1871 races ) and John Goldie ( the Cambridge boat club president and rower for the 1869 , 1870 and 1871 races ) . Oxford 's coach was S. D. Darbishire ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in 1868 , 1869 and 1870 ) . 
 Cambridge opted not to use the boat built for them by Harry Clasper specifically for the race , in favour of one constructed by <unk> which had been used by 1st Trinity Boat Club . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 10 @.@ 625 lb ( 74 @.@ 5 kg ) , 1 @.@ 5 pounds ( 0 @.@ 7 kg ) more than their opponents . Oxford saw the return of two former Blues in William Edward Sherwood and A. W. Nicholson ( who was rowing in his third Boat Race ) . Cambridge 's crew included five Blues , with James Brooks Close and Charles Stokes Read returning for a third time . 
 The Light Blue crew included Australian George Francis Armytage , the only non @-@ British participant in the race , who had been educated at Geelong Grammar School . Author and former Oxford rower G. C. Drinkwater described the Oxford crew as " something of a disappointment " while declaring that Cambridge were " a very fine crew " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex side of the river , handing the Surrey station to Oxford . The race started at <unk> and was " rowed on an exceptionally sluggish tide " . Cambridge made a good start and held a half @-@ length lead at Hammersmith Bridge . As the bend of the river began to give advantage to the Surrey side , Oxford drew back into contention and the crews were level at the bottom of Chiswick Reach . The position of moored barges provided a good course and smooth water for the Dark Blues who took a half @-@ length lead . 
 Despite this , fatigue began to set in to the Oxford crew and Cambridge came back into contention . With a steady rhythm , the Light Blues were level at the Bathing Place of Athens and held a clear water advantage by The Bull 's Head pub . A length ahead by Barnes Bridge , Cambridge pulled further ahead to win by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 22 minutes 35 seconds . It was Cambridge 's fifth consecutive victory and took the overall record to 16 – 15 in favour of Oxford . 
 = HMS Gallant ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Gallant ( <unk> ) was a G @-@ class destroyer , built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 the ship spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Gallant was transferred from the Mediterranean Fleet shortly after the beginning of World War II to the British Isles , to escort shipping in local waters . She was slightly damaged by German aircraft during the evacuation of Allied troops from Dunkirk at the end of May 1940 . Following repairs , Gallant was transferred to Gibraltar and served with Force H for several months . In November , the ship was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet , where she escorted several convoys . She struck a mine in January 1941 and was towed to Malta for repairs . These were proved extensive and Gallant was further damaged by near @-@ misses during an air raid in April 1942 , before they were completed . The additional damage made the ship uneconomical to repair so she was scuttled as a blockship in 1943 . Her wreck was broken up in 1953 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Gallant displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Gallant carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but it increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft defence Gallant had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One rail and two depth charge throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Gallant was laid down by Alexander Stephen and Sons in Glasgow , Scotland on 15 September 1934 , launched on 26 September 1935 and completed on 25 February 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 252 @,@ 920 . She was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . Gallant patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . She pulled off a Spanish merchantman that had grounded between Almeria and Málaga on 20 December 1936 . The ship was attacked by a Spanish Nationalist aircraft off Cape San Antonio on 6 April 1937 , but was not damaged . The next month she returned to Great Britain for an overhaul at Sheerness between 31 May and 21 July 1937 . 
 When World War II began in September 1939 , Gallant was in the Mediterranean , but she and her entire flotilla were transferred to the Western Approaches Command at Plymouth in October . After a boiler cleaning , the ship was reassigned at the end of the month to the Nore Command in Harwich for patrol and escort duties . On 2 February 1940 Gallant and her sister ship , Griffin , rescued the crew from the oil tanker British Councillor which was sinking after it had struck a mine . Gallant took over escorting Convoy HN 12 after the destroyer Duchess was sunk on 18 February and she rescued 12 survivors from the Swedish ship Santos near Duncansby Head a week later . On 20 March 1940 she escorted the armed merchant cruisers Cilicia and Carinthia after they collided . The ship was refitted at Southampton between 28 March and 30 April and rejoined her flotilla at Harwich the next day . During the evening of 9 / 10 May , Gallant and the destroyer Bulldog rescued most of the crew of the destroyer Kelly after the latter ship was torpedoed by a German E @-@ boat in the North Sea . 
 While Gallant was participating in the Dunkirk evacuation , a near miss by a bomb on 29 May knocked out her steering and caused minor damage to her hull and electrical systems . She was repaired at Hull and encountered a German mine @-@ laying sortie on the evening of 5 / 6 June off Lowestoft when in company with the destroyer Walpole . Later in June the ship was refitted in Chatham Dockyard with a 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) ) anti @-@ aircraft gun that replaced the rear torpedo tube mount . 
 After her refit Gallant was transferred to the 13th Destroyer Flotilla of the North Atlantic Command , arriving at Gibraltar on 30 July . On her voyage south the ship escorted the aircraft carrier Argus which was loaded with a dozen Hawker Hurricane fighters . During Operation Hurry , Gallant , and three other destroyers , escorted Argus to a position south @-@ west of Sardinia so the carrier could fly off her Hurricanes to Malta on 2 August . After her return to Gibraltar the ship was transferred to Force H. On 20 October , Gallant , her sister Griffin and the destroyer Hotspur sank the Italian submarine Lafolè east of Gibraltar . The ship escorted the battleship Barham and the cruisers Berwick and Glasgow during Operation Coat in early November as they joined the Mediterranean Fleet . Gallant herself was transferred to the 14th Destroyer Flotilla at Malta on 10 November . She participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November during Operation Collar . 
 On 10 January 1941 , during Operation Excess , the Italian torpedo boats Circe and Vega attempted an attack on the Allied convoy off Pantellaria . Right after the engagement , in which Vega was sunk , Gallant struck a mine that detonated her forward magazine , because the Italian action pushed the British convoy too much south of their pre @-@ established route . The explosion blew the bow off the ship , killing 65 and injuring 15 more of her crew . Her sister Griffin rescued most of the survivors and the destroyer HMS Mohawk towed her stern @-@ first to Malta . The ship was slowly repaired and in October 1941 it was estimated that they would be completed in June 1942 . However , on 5 April 1942 , she was extensively damaged by bomb splinters by an air raid on Valletta and had to be beached at Pinto 's Wharf to prevent her from sinking . She was judged to be a constructive total loss and any usable equipment was stripped from her hulk . Gallant was expended as a blockship at St Paul 's Island in September 1943 , with the wreck being broken up in 1953 . 
 = Bal maiden = 
 A bal maiden , from the Cornish language bal , a mine , and the English " maiden " , a young or unmarried woman , was a female manual labourer working in the mining industries of Cornwall and western Devon , at the south @-@ western extremity of Great Britain . The term has been in use since at least the early 18th century . At least 55 @,@ 000 women and girls worked as bal maidens , and the actual number is likely to have been much higher . 
 While women worked in coal mines elsewhere in Britain , either on the surface or underground , bal maidens worked only on the surface . It is likely that Cornish women had worked in metal mining since antiquity , but the first records of female mine workers date from the 13th century . After the Black Death in the 14th century , mining declined , and no records of female workers have been found from then until the late 17th century . Industrial improvements , the end of Crown control of metal mines , and rising demand for raw materials caused a boom in Cornish mining in the late 17th and early 18th centuries . Increasing numbers of women and girls were recruited to the mines from about 1720 , processing ore sent up by the male miners underground . The discovery of cheaper sources of copper in North Wales in the 1770s triggered a crash in the copper price , and many mines closed . 
 As the Industrial Revolution began in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , the Welsh metal mines declined and mining in Cornwall and Devon became viable once more . Women and girls were recruited in large numbers for work in ore processing . Women and children accounted for up to half the workers in the area 's copper mines . Although machinery was capable of performing much of the work done by bal maidens , the industry grew so quickly that the number of women and girls working grew steadily even though their numbers fell as a proportion of the workforce to 15 – 20 % by 1850 . At the peak of the Cornish mining boom , in around 1860 , at least 6000 bal maidens were working at the region 's mines ; the actual number is likely to have been much higher . While it was not unusual for girls to become bal maidens at the age of six and to work into old age , they generally began at around age 10 or 11 and left work once they married . 
 From the 1860s Cornish mines faced competition from cheap metal imports , and legislation introduced in the 1870s limited the use of child labour . The Cornish mining system went into terminal decline , leading to a collapse of the local economy and mass emigration both overseas and to other parts of the United Kingdom . In 1891 the number of bal maidens had fallen to half its peak , and by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 very few remained in employment . In 1921 Dolcoath mine , the last employer of bal maidens , ceased operations , bringing the tradition to an end . Other than women recruited for ore processing at Geevor as a result of labour shortages during the Second World War , and a very limited number of female workers after the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 banned the practice of recruiting only male mineworkers , women never again performed manual labour in Cornish mines . The last surviving bal maiden died in 1968 , and with the closure of South <unk> tin mine in 1998 , Cornish metals mining came to an end . 
 = = Background = = 
 For at least 3 @,@ 000 years from antiquity until the late 20th century mining of tin and copper played a significant part in the economy of Cornwall . Cornwall , the northern part of Iberia and the Ore Mountains ( the modern border between the Czech Republic and Germany ) are the only places in Europe in which major tin deposits are found near the surface . As tin is an essential ingredient of bronze , Cornwall was of great economic significance in Bronze Age Europe despite its relative isolation . Mining by the Roman Empire led to the Iberian mines becoming depleted by the 3rd century AD , leaving Cornwall and neighbouring Devon the most significant sources of tin in Europe . While it appears from surviving evidence that after the decline of the Bronze Age civilisations copper production ceased in Cornwall , it seems that the tin mines were in continuous operation throughout the Roman period and the Middle Ages . 
 The primitive early mines of Cornwall and Devon probably were operated by local extended families , with the men , women and children all working . Men and boys probably worked both above the surface and below ground , and women and girls worked only above ground ; there is no archaeological evidence for women and children working underground in Bronze Age Britain , although some mines from the period contain tunnels so small that only children or very short adults could have worked in them . 
 At some point between the death of Cnut the Great in 1035 and the death of Edward the Confessor in early 1066 , the independent Kingdom of Cornwall was annexed by the neighbouring Kingdom of Wessex , a part of the Kingdom of England . In late 1066 Cornwall , along with the rest of the lands under the control of the English king , was conquered by the Normans and came under the control of William the Conqueror . By the late 12th century the metal mines were brought under the control of the Crown ; operation of the tin mines was devolved to the Lord Warden of the Stannaries , and mining of other metals was directly controlled by the Crown as Mines Royal . 
 = = = Female mine workers in the Middle Ages = = = 
 Although women and girls probably worked in mining since antiquity , the earliest known written references to female manual labourers in mining are in the 13th and 14th century records of the royal lead and silver mines at Bere Alston , on the border between Devon and Cornwall . ( The mines were bordered on three sides by a loop of the River Tamar , since 936 the traditional boundary between Devon and Cornwall . The mines themselves were on the Devon side of the border at Bere Alston itself , but the surface @-@ level smelters were on the Cornish side at <unk> as there was a <unk> supply of timber for use in the furnaces . ) Although the mining itself was carried out by men , female workers were employed to sort ore for crushing , to prepare the bone ash used as a flux during the smelting process , and for general manual labour . An adult woman was paid up to one penny per day , and young girls between 1 ⁄ 2 and 2 ⁄ 3 of a penny . Miners and other skilled labourers at Bere Alston were recruited from throughout England and Wales , and from the evidence of surnames in the records it appears that many of the female labourers were the wives and daughters of these incomers rather than locally recruited women . 
 During and after the Black Death the area 's population collapsed . Those miners who had survived the pandemic left mining to work in farming , in which wages had doubled owing to the severe labour shortage , and the mines of Bere Alston were abandoned . 
 Although women and girls were almost certainly employed at the lead and silver mine at Bere Alston , and also a few records have so far been of female workers at tin works on Bodmin Moor and around Redruth and Marazion in the 14th century . It does not appear that significant numbers of female labourers worked in Cornwall 's mining industry until the early 18th century , as no records have yet been discovered for this period . 
 = = Mechanisation and the 18th century copper boom = = 
 In 1678 Clement Clerke introduced the coal @-@ powered reverberatory furnace , greatly increasing the quantity of metal extractable from ore . The Mines Royal Act 1689 ended Crown ownership of Cornwall 's mines , allowing private investors and local families to begin mining operations . At the same time , the Nine Years ' War ( 1688 – 97 ) and the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1701 – 14 ) caused high demand for metals . As a consequence the Midlands , with easy river and canal access to the coal mines of Wales and northern England and to the metal mines of Cornwall , became a major centre for metallurgy . Ore was shipped from Cornwall up the River Severn to smelters in Gloucestershire where it was refined and sold on to the factories surrounding Birmingham . Financiers and entrepreneurs began investing in and reorganising the mines of Cornwall . With a shortage of manual labour in rural and lightly @-@ populated Cornwall , and with a prevalent belief that women and children were best suited to ore separation ( which required dexterity and good observation skills but little in the way of physical strength ) , the large @-@ scale recruitment of women and girls to the mines began . It is around this time that the term " bal maiden " appears to have come into common usage , derived from the Old Cornish bal ( mine ) . A significant proportion of Cornwall 's young women quickly became involved in mining ; by 1736 the vicar of <unk> was complaining that he was unable to hire servants as the young women of the town were " employed about copper " . 
 In around 1720 , two key innovations revolutionised the Cornish mining industry . The whim , a horse @-@ powered mechanism for lifting ore to the surface , made mining in deep shafts practical , and the horse @-@ powered pump allowed mining beneath the water table . 
 = = = Role of 18th century bal maidens = = = 
 With the need for expensive machinery and horses and for large numbers of workers at each mine , the traditional operation of mines by extended families or by individual entrepreneurs became impractical , and the new deep @-@ level mines came under the ownership of groups of investors and of mining companies . A group of people known as a " tribute team " ( often a single extended family ) would bid for the right to work a specified portion of the mine ; the men and older boys would dig in the appointed section , and the women , girls and young boys would dress the ore sent up by the men . In later years the practice of bal maidens dressing only the ore sent up by the men of their tribute team was abandoned , and they would instead be paid a flat wage by the mine owner to dress any ore sent up , and the tribute team which had sent up the ore would be billed for the work done . Typical work for a bal maiden in this period was picking ore from rubble , breaking and separating the ore , and carrying ore and metal . Generally girls under 12 would sort the ore , older girls would separate the ore , and grown women would carry out the heavy manual labour of breaking rocks with hammers and of transporting ore between various pieces of apparatus . As the bal maidens of the smaller tribute teams often did not have the time to dress all the ore sent up , or it was not financially worthwhile to pay for the poorer quality ore to be processed , large quantities of poor quality ore were discarded unprocessed in waste heaps . On those occasions when improved extraction techniques or rises in the price of metals made it worthwhile to process this discarded ore , sometimes separate tribute teams would bid for the right to dress and process this rubble . As the practice of using tribute teams declined in the early 19th century , the mine owners themselves would hire bal maidens to dress this waste ore . 
 Records from the Pool Adit copper mine at <unk> ( the most successful of the early copper mines ) show in 1729 , 25 bal maidens and three males worked as ' pickers ' sorting high quality from poor quality ore , earning a flat rate of 4d per day and typically working 20 days per month . ( Records do not show the ages of the pickers at Pool Adit , but the male pickers are likely to have been boys too young for heavy labour . ) In 1730 Pool Adit employed 30 female and four male pickers , and by 1731 the figures had risen to 55 female and five male , typically working 22 to 26 days per month . The number of bal maidens employed in the industry rose dramatically , and by the early 1770s Dolcoath , by then the most significant of the Cornish copper mines , employed around 220 bal maidens on the copper dressing floors alone . 
 It appears that during the 18th century copper boom , it was customary throughout the Cornish mining industry to use bal maidens purely as casual labour . There are no records of bal maidens being contracted to a particular mine or paid a piece @-@ rate for the amount of work done . Instead , mine accounts invariably show them being paid a fixed daily rate and employed only as and when they were needed . When poor weather conditions made surface @-@ level work impossible , water shortages meant water @-@ powered machinery could not operate , or accidents in the mines caused a temporary closure , the bal maidens would be suspended . 
 In the 1770s and 1780s the discovery of copper at Parys Mountain in Anglesey which could be cheaply extracted by opencast mining led to a crash in the copper price , and expensive deep mining began to become unviable . As the copper boom came to an end , the mines began to close . In 1788 mining ceased at Dolcoath itself , although some bal maidens continued to be employed picking through the large quantities of ore which had already been brought to the surface . 
 = = Industrialisation and the 19th century copper boom = = 
 At the end of the 18th century the copper mining industry of North Wales centred around Parys Mountain declined , and the depression in the British copper market ended . As the price rose , the Cornish mines began to reopen . By this time , the Industrial Revolution had begun , bringing with it new attitudes towards organisation and efficiency . While the mine managers of the 18th century generally treated bal maidens as useful only for breaking and sorting ore , the managers of these new mines sought to use all their employees as efficiently as possible . 
 While 18th century metal mines had worked on the principle of adult men digging the ore and women and children picking and cobbing the ore ready for smelting , in the new large @-@ scale mines of the early 19th century working practices changed . The strenuous underground work was still carried out by male workers , as was breaking large rocks with heavy hammers ( ' <unk> ' ) . In copper mines , very young girls , and sick and injured older women , carried out the simple work of picking . Girls in their late teens forced the broken ore through a broad mesh to sort the ore ( ' riddling ' ) , and used hammers to break the large chunks of ore left by the riddling process into smaller chunks . Girls in their mid @-@ teens <unk> the resulting chunks , separating the valuable ore from waste rock . Grown women would carry out the heavy manual labour of breaking rocks with hammers ( ' spalling ' ) , of crushing sorted ore to small grains ready for smelting ( ' bucking ' ) and of transporting ore between various pieces of apparatus . An experienced bal maiden working as a <unk> would produce approximately one ton ( 2240 lb ; 1016 kg ) of broken ore per day , depending on the type of stone . In the tin mines , in which ore could be crushed far more finely than copper before smelting , cobbing and bucking did not take place . Instead , the chunks of spalled ore were mechanically stamped to fine grains , and washed into a series of collecting pits to separate the coarse ' rough ' from the fine ' slimes ' . The resulting rough and slimes were separated out on large wooden frames ( ' <unk> ' and ' framing ' respectively ) , to extract the tin ore from the surrounding dust and grit . 
 Following the introduction of the mechanical ore crusher in 1804 the tasks traditionally carried out by bal maidens began to be mechanised . Despite this , the rapid growth of the mines in comparison to the slow spread of mechanisation meant the number of bal maidens appears to have risen steadily , although statistics for the number of women employed in the mines in the early days of industrialisation are incomplete and a few are contradictory . 
 = = = Total numbers = = = 
 Because records from the period are incomplete and inconsistent in format , the total number of bal maidens working in this period is unclear . Estimates for the total number employed at the end of the 18th century range from 1 @,@ 200 to 5 @,@ 000 , with women and children constituting up to half the total number of people working in copper mining and a lower proportion in the less labour @-@ intensive tin mining . Mayers ( 2008 ) estimates that at a minimum 55 @,@ 000 women and girls in total worked as bal maidens between 1720 and 1921 , based on an estimate of each working an average of 10 years , with the number peaking in the early 1860s at at least 7 @,@ 000 . The actual figures are likely to have been considerably higher ; not all mines recorded male and female workers separately , and after 1872 there may have been deliberate under @-@ reporting of the number of children working , owing to legal restrictions on their employment . These estimates do not include female workers performing non @-@ manual administrative work at the mines , nor those in related industries such as slate and china clay quarrying . 
 Although the proportion of bal maidens in the workforce fell steadily , the mining boom of the first half of the 19th century took the total number to between 4 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 400 by the 1840s . The 1841 Census ( the first full census of England ) shows 3 @,@ 250 women working in the mines , but the mine returns of the same year show over 5 @,@ 000 women in the tin , lead and copper mines of Cornwall and West Devon . Increased mechanisation of the ore dressing process and public concerns over subjecting women and children to the harsh working conditions of the mines meant that the proportion of bal maidens in the workforce continued to fall , and it is generally accepted that by 1850 between 15 and 20 % of mine workers were female . By the 1861 census , coinciding with the peak of the Cornish mining industry , a minimum of 6 @,@ 000 women were working in mining in Cornwall , at least 2 @,@ 500 of whom worked within a five @-@ mile radius of Camborne . Although employed primarily in copper and tin mines , bal maidens also worked in lead , zinc , manganese , iron , antimony , wolfram , and uranium mines , and in slate and china clay quarries . 
 = = = Typical work = = = 
 Women typically began working at the mines at around the age of 10 or 11 , although there are some cases of girls starting work at as young as six , and in areas such as Camborne with a high demand for workers it was not unusual for girls to start work at age seven or eight . ( Charles Foster Barham 's enquiry of 1841 found an average age for starting work of 12 . ) Until the 1870s Cornwall was largely unaffected by legislation which limited child labour in mines elsewhere in the United Kingdom , and the typical ages of bal maidens remained virtually unchanged between the 1841 census and the 1871 census . Women would typically remain at the mine until they married ; while this generally meant that they stopped working at between the ages of 19 and 24 , it was not unusual for unmarried women and widows to continue working into their 60s and 70s ; and a 93 @-@ year @-@ old bal maiden was recorded in the 1891 census . A typical working day would last from 7 @.@ 00 am to 5 @.@ 00 pm in summer and from dawn to dusk in winter , ( ore dressing by candle @-@ light was not cost effective ) with a lunch break of either half an hour or an hour at noon . Lunch typically consisted of pasties , <unk> ( hard pasties made with unleavened barley flour and filled with pork , potato or dried fruit ) or fish eaten cold or warmed in ovens attached to the mine 's furnaces , along with <unk> or pennyroyal tea , and it was not usual even for workers who lived near their workplace to go home for meals . Although still not paid on a piece @-@ rate basis , each bal maiden would be expected to meet a daily quota to earn her pay ; some mines operated on the basis that once the quota had been met the bal maidens were allowed to go home , meaning the working day could finish up to two hours early . Although at a few tin mines at which water @-@ powered machinery was in continuous operation bal maidens would work seven days a week , in the vast majority of the industry they were not expected to work on Sundays . As well as the religious holidays observed in the rest of the United Kingdom , Cornish miners also celebrated St Piran 's Day ( 5 March ) and <unk> Thursday ( the Thursday before Christmas ) , purportedly the day on which St Piran rediscovered tin @-@ smelting . Other than religious holidays and parish feast days , Cornish miners had no holidays until labour reforms in the early 20th century . 
 Typical pay in the 1840s and 1850s would be 4d per day for younger girls , rising to 8d – 1s per day for full @-@ grown women engaged in skilled bucking work . ( Wages varied by region owing to differing levels of supply and demand for workers ; in Kea and <unk> the average wage for women and girls was as high as 18s in 1841 . ) As they were employed as casual labour , bal maidens were not tied to any particular mine , and it was not unusual for them to transfer to other mines offering better pay or conditions . Some mines may have paid a monthly loyalty bonus in an effort to retain their workers . The workers could be fined for bad language , failure to work hard enough , absenteeism and other misdemeanours . As their pay was dependent on the profitability of the mine , it was not unusual early in the 19th century for bal maidens to work for long periods ( in at least one case , a laundry woman , 11 months ) without pay , and to receive their pay in arrears once the mine returned to profit . While some younger bal maidens would attend school before starting work and , in 1841 , around a quarter of bal maidens attended Sunday schools , illiteracy was rife . When Charles Foster Barham 's reported to the 1842 Royal Commission into the Employment of Children at the Mines he found that less than half of bal maidens he interviewed were able to read to any extent . Some mines subsidised basic education for the children of their employees . Mining families generally valued education so highly that they would often try to send at least one child to school , but any education children did receive tended to be curtailed once they became old enough to work in the mines . 
 Unlike the coal mines of Wales and northern England , the Cornish mines generally did not provide housing for their workers , largely owing to the casual nature of work under the tribute team system . Bal maidens would typically travel to the mines from their family homes , some families building homes near the mine . ( Until the Inclosure Acts of the late 18th and early 19th centuries , anyone moving to an area had the right to build a house on common land , provided they could build it overnight . ) They would generally remain living with their families until marriage . ( Much of early 19th century Cornwall retained the old custom of ' keeping company ' , by which a couple would not be formally married until the woman became pregnant , and the woman would continue to work and to live with her family until that time . ) While some lived at or near the mine at which they worked , mine workers typically walked three to four miles ( five to seven km ) to and from work each day . The miners ' cottages were generally crowded and squalid , sometimes with ten or more people living in each small cottage , while the abstraction of the region 's water supplies for use in the mines led to serious problems with sanitation and the provision of fresh water . 
 During the European food crisis of the 1840s , food prices rose sharply to around three times the pre @-@ crisis prices , and the relatively low @-@ paid bal maidens of Devon Great Consols demanded increased pay to cover food costs . While the mine owners initially met their demands , once the food price stabilised the pay rate was then reduced to previous levels causing around 200 bal maidens and boys to walkout . On their return to work the next day all the striking workers were summarily dismissed and either replaced with new workers , or re @-@ hired at an even lower pay rate than before . Bal maidens went on strike on at least six other occasions in the 19th century , but Cornwall 's high unemployment meant the strikes were generally unsuccessful as workers could easily be replaced . 
 = = = Working conditions = = = 
 From the 1840s onwards more mines provided crude shelters to protect surface workers from the worst of the weather , but at many others work at surface @-@ level took place in the open air . Workers were generally expected to remain at their posts except in the most extreme weather conditions . Bal maidens wore gooks , a specialised bonnet which covered the shoulders and extended over the face to protect from rain , bright sunlight , flying debris and loud noise . In the winter the gook was made of felt , and in summer of cotton . Working in close proximity to heavy industrial machinery , they wore shorter dresses or skirts than the ankle @-@ length clothing typical of the period , and their exposed lower legs were wrapped in protective coverings . Their arms were sometimes protected by hessian sleeves worn over their clothes . Some bal maidens working in cobbing and bucking wore rubber tubing on the fingers of one hand as protection from their hammer . While working bal maidens wore a waist @-@ length hessian apron ( ' <unk> ' ) over their clothes , and those who could afford it would have a white <unk> ( flax and hemp ) apron for wearing to and from work . These working clothes were accessorised with flowers , bows , ribbons , jewellery and other decoration . Until the end of the 19th century the working clothing of a bal maiden changed very little . 
 Although less dangerous than work below ground , some bal maidens suffered poor health . Tuberculosis and bronchitis were endemic in the mining communities , and would exacerbated by constant exposure to high levels of mineral dust . Constant work with damp ore might have led to rheumatic problems . The extraction of arsenic from the tin and copper ores sometimes led to exposure to arsenic fumes . Constant bending , lifting , and carrying often led to muscular strains . The need to hold chunks of ore with one hand while hammering them with the other led to some bal maidens suffering permanent damage to their left hands . The noise generated by industrial machinery , particularly after the introduction of the steam engine , could cause hearing difficulties , with some groups of bal maidens developing private sign languages . <unk> fumes , notably arsenic , lead and antimony could cause digestive problems , bowel disorders and amenorrhoea and other disruptions of the reproductive system . Barley <unk> also caused digestive problems . 
 While some of the larger mines provided separate eating areas for bal maidens , others obliged male and female workers to eat together , a cause of consternation among some observers concerned that exposure to the " coarse joking " and " rude behaviour " of men had a negative effect on the " modesty and delicacy " expected of women . Other contemporary concerns were that heavy protective clothing led them to be unfeminine , that working in the constant view of men caused the bal maidens to have an unhealthy interest in their own appearance and attractiveness , that spending long hours at work meant that they did not have time to learn the skills to be good housewives . ( Barham 's 1841 investigations found no evidence to the claim that bal maidens grew up to be poor housewives , concluding that " they are for the most part tender mothers and industrious wives [ and ] the laborious occupations to which they have been inured make household duties appear comparatively light " . ) Other contemporary observers noted that bal maidens were generally good natured and well behaved , and often devoutly religious , but it is well @-@ documented that bal maidens typically took great pride in their own appearance and clothing . Many contemporary observers commented on the high fashion of the clothing worn by bal maidens on Sundays and holidays ; although the disposable income of a bal maiden was low , they would sometimes form " dress clubs " to buy fashionable clothing which they would take turns wearing . 
 Despite the hardships and relatively low pay , Barham 's 1841 investigation into the Cornish mining industry found that bal maidens generally enjoyed their work , and that those who had been in other jobs tended to prefer work at the mines . Mining had shorter hours than domestic service and was less affected by seasonal variations than farm working , the other two jobs employing significant numbers of women , and it was far easier for workers to live at home and travel to work each day , rather than lodging in their master 's house or on a remote farm . Outdoor work was considered healthier than work in enclosed and smoky mines and factories , and it was sometimes believed that women who had worked as bal maidens from a young age were healthier than they would otherwise have been . From the 1780s onwards Cornwall suffered severe unemployment and poverty , and there were always large numbers of women and girls volunteering for work at the mines . The practice of giving preference to the wives , widows and children of dead or invalid miners allowed families to remain in their local area and to avoid destitution following the loss of the family 's main breadwinner ; work as a bal maiden also provided an opportunity for girls and young women to escape workhouses and gain financial independence . ( As well as the benefits to the community of giving work to the families of invalid or dead miners , recruitment from within mining families benefited the mine owners also . The wives and children of miners could be expected to understand mining terminology and techniques , and would generally have been regular visitors to the mines delivering food to their husbands and thus be familiar with the mine 's layout . ) 
 = = Decline = = 
 In around 1865 , faced with increased competition from overseas mines and with the most productive copper mines becoming exhausted , the Cornish mining industry went into terminal decline . By 1880 the level of Cornish copper production was at around a quarter of its 1860 level . As production fell , the numbers of employees in the mines fell with it . Much of the copper industry collapsed , causing a movement within Cornwall from the copper to the tin mining . While some bal maidens continued to work at the mines , many worked in tin streaming in the rivers and streams flowing from the tin mining areas . In those copper mines which survived , investment in new machinery virtually ceased , so employment of some bal maidens continued . The tin industry , which was still economically successful , began to invest in new machinery to replace manual ore dressing , drastically reducing the number of female workers . By 1870 the number of bal maidens in work had fallen by around 50 % . 
 At the same time as the Cornish mining industry went into decline , public opposition to the use of female and child labour in mines was rising . The <unk> Mines Regulation Act 1872 brought the mines of Cornwall under the provisions of the Mines Act 1842 , which had previously applied only to coal mines , limiting the use of child labour in the mines and thus increasing costs . The Act prohibited women from working underground , which the bal maidens did not do , but it also forbade any child under ten from working in any mine , even on the surface . The passing of the Factory and Workshop Act 1878 drastically limited the use of female and child labour . The employment of children under 10 was banned outright , the maximum working hours for children aged 10 – 14 were drastically restricted , and women were banned from working over 56 hours per week . The sudden loss of cheap child labourers made the already weakened mining industries of Cornwall and West Devon even less profitable , and more than half the mines in the area went out of business in the following decade . Some bal maidens continued to work in surviving mines and in tin @-@ streaming , but instability in the metal markets made what remained of the mining industries increasingly unviable . In the 1880s William Ewart Gladstone 's Liberal government tried to ban female labour from mines altogether ; although the Bill was defeated , the number of bal maidens continued to fall . At the 1891 census the number of working bal maidens had fallen to around half its 1850s – 60s peak . By 1895 only 23 mines remained operational compared to 307 in 1873 , and in 1901 Devon Great Consols , the last significant copper mine in Devon and Cornwall , closed . Electrification and the introduction of Frue <unk> at the surviving mines replaced most of the jobs still done by women , and by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 very few bal maidens remained in employment . With wartime shortages of raw materials and many younger men in the armed forces , some bal maidens were temporarily rehired to dress potash ore at a re @-@ opened mine at St Austell , and to re @-@ dress the existing spoil heaps of defunct mines for wolfram and arsenic . 
 = = = Emigration and economic collapse = = = 
 As the metal mining industry on which it depended declined , and prices for staple goods rose sharply resulting from fluctuations in food prices and of the American Civil War , the economy of Cornwall collapsed . Large numbers of Cornish families emigrated to mining districts in other countries and other parts of the United Kingdom ; in some former mining districts as much as 3 ⁄ 4 of the young people moved out in the 20 years following the closure of the local mines . Between 1861 and 1900 at least 35 % of Cornish women aged 15 – 24 moved to other parts of the UK , and over 26 % left the country altogether . Although the male emigrants generally found work in mines in their new places of settlement , or put their mining skills to use digging tunnels for the rapidly growing railway networks , the jobs traditionally done by bal maidens , where they still existed , were usually done by locally recruited men or boys , and the tradition of female Cornish mine labour died out in emigrant families . 
 While a few former bal maidens found alternative employment at local factories , and large numbers emigrated , the unemployment situation in Cornwall remained bad . As early as the 1860s , charitable schemes had begun for training former bal maidens as domestic servants , and as the textile industry of the North of England boomed a concerted effort was made to recruit Cornish women to work in the mills . Large numbers of women took up these offers ; the 1891 census showed 17 @,@ 757 Cornish women living in Devon ( the majority working in domestic service ) , 10 @,@ 005 in London and the surrounding suburbs of Middlesex , and 4 @,@ 439 in Lancashire . In addition , the towns growing around the newly discovered mines of South Australia suffered a serious gender imbalance and made concerted efforts to recruit Cornish women . 
 By the end of the First World War most of the more complicated tasks in the remaining mines had been mechanised , and those bal maidens who remained in work were restricted to simple manual labour of physically moving ore , spalling and overseeing the <unk> frames . A successful 1919 Workers ' Union campaign for a minimum 30s per week wage in the industry virtually doubled the wages of the few remaining bal maidens in Cornwall . Those at Dolcoath were made redundant within weeks of this increase . Dolcoath , the last mine in Cornwall to employ traditional bal maidens , closed in 1921 , bringing the centuries @-@ old tradition to an end . ( The end of the use of bal maidens did not mean the end of female workers in those mines that survived ; women continued to work in administrative roles until the final collapse of the Cornish mining industry in the late 20th century . ) 
 = = = After the closures = = = 
 During the Second World War Britain suffered severe shortages of raw materials . While consideration was given to reopening the closed mines , this was not deemed viable and instead the few remaining mines increased their production . As many male workers were away on military service , some women were briefly employed in tin @-@ picking at Geevor , and in ore @-@ dressing at the Great Rock iron mine on Dartmoor , during and after the war until around 1952 . Other than a very limited number of female workers after the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 ended the policy of recruiting only men for underground work in the few surviving mines , the Geevor pickers were the last female manual labourers in the Cornish mining industry . 
 Minnie Andrews ( born in Camborne in 1874 ) , who had begun work as a racker at the age of nine , was believed to have been the last surviving former bal maiden ( other than the Geevor pickers ) , when she died in March 1968 . In 1998 South <unk> , Europe 's last operational tin mine , closed , bringing metal mining in Cornwall to an end . 
 = Wear My Kiss = 
 " Wear My Kiss " is a song by English girl group Sugababes , released as the third and final single from their seventh studio album , Sweet 7 ( 2010 ) . It also serves as the final official single from the band before they disbanded in 2011 . It was written by Fernando Garibay , Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , and The Jackie Boyz , and produced by Garibay . The song 's development began while the Sugababes travelled to the United States during April 2009 , in which they collaborated with various high @-@ profile producers . The song was re @-@ recorded to feature the vocals of Jade Ewen following the departure of Keisha Buchanan in September 2009 . " Wear My Kiss " is an uptempo pop song that references the items which compose a man 's outfit . 
 Many critics praised the song as radio @-@ friendly and catchy , although some regarded it as uninspiring and average . The single reached the top ten on the charts in the UK , Ireland and Scotland , and also charted in Croatia , the Czech Republic and Slovakia . Its music video was directed by Martin Weisz in December 2009 . The green screen effect was used to produce the video 's scenes , which include clones of the group 's members . Critics commended the video for its futuristic concept . The Sugababes performed " Wear My Kiss " at the Fight Cervical Cancer in Style fundraising event , on Eurovision – Your Country Needs You , and at Chester Rocks in 2011 . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 The Sugababes travelled Los Angeles and New York City in April 2009 to work on their seventh studio album Sweet 7 ( 2010 ) . They signed a record deal with Jay Z 's record label Roc Nation , which resulted in collaborations with high @-@ profile producers including Stargate and RedOne . " Wear My Kiss " was written by Fernando Garibay , Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , Carlos Battey and Steven Battey , the latter two collectively known by their stage name The Jackie Boyz . Garibay produced the song , recorded the Sugababes ' vocals , provided the track 's instrumentation , and completed its programming and arrangement . The Jackie Boyz provide background vocals for the song . Dave Pensado mixed " Wear My Kiss " at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood , California ; AJ Nunez was the assistant . Additional vocal production was provided by Mike Stevens and Marcus Byrne , while additional vocal mixing was completed by Jeremy Wheatley at TwentyOne Studios , London , with assistance from Richard Edgeler . " Wear My Kiss " was recorded and tracked at F2 Studios in Hollywood , California . 
 " Wear My Kiss " is an uptempo pop song . David Balls of Digital Spy described it " a fuzzed @-@ up pop thumper " . The song is composed of " thick " beats , " sexy " verses and " raunchy " lyrics . The chorus features a chanted ' da @-@ da @-@ da ' hook , which according to Al Fox of BBC Music is evocative of the group 's 2003 single " Hole in the Head " . Andy Gill of The Independent noted that the song sees the Sugababes " effectively subjugated to the status of accessories " ; lyrically , the singers compare themselves to a tie , watch and shoes of a man 's outfit . During the pre @-@ hook , group member Heidi Range sings , " I " m just a pretty little thing / That 'll make you wanna sing / Make you wanna buy a ring " . " Wear My Kiss " is reminiscent of songs performed by British girl group Girls Aloud and American recording artist Lady Gaga . 
 = = Release = = 
 In September 2009 , speculation arose that group member Amelle Berrabah had left the Sugababes following reports of tension with band member Keisha Buchanan . However , it was announced on 21 September 2009 that Buchanan , the sole original member of the group , had officially left the Sugababes . Buchanan clarified the departure on her official Twitter account , writing : " I 'm sad to say that I am no longer a part of the Sugababes ... Although it was not my choice to leave , it 's time to enter a new chapter in my life ... Sometimes a breakdown in communication and lack of trust can result in many different things . " Buchanan was replaced by former Eurovision contestant Jade Ewen . As a result of the line @-@ up change , " Wear My Kiss " was re @-@ recorded for the inclusion of vocals from new member Ewen and the removal of vocals from Buchanan . 
 In October 2009 , it was reported that " Wear My Kiss " would be released as the third single from Sweet 7 on 8 February 2010 . The song was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 21 February 2010 as a digital download , and as a CD single the following day . During an interview with David Balls of Digital Spy , group member Heidi Range explained the reason for the song 's release as the album 's third single , saying : " It 's had a really good response from radio and our fans on the website . It 's also quite appropriate as it comes out around Valentine 's Day – there 's a lot of kissing going on then ! " " Wear My Kiss " was remixed by the British music production team 7th Heaven . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Wear My Kiss " received mixed reviews from critics . BBC Music 's Al Fox described it as " a glimmer of brilliance " amongst the album 's other tracks . Alice Wyllie of The Scotsman and David Balls of Digital Spy called the song radio @-@ friendly , while the latter described it as " more comfortably more Sugababes @-@ sounding " than the group 's previous two singles , " Get Sexy " and " About a Girl " . Balls praised the hook as one that " lodges in your brain like shrapnel " . A writer from Daily Record shared a similar opinion , writing : " The big chanted hook won 't go away once it 's in your head " . Andy Gill of The Independent regarded " Wear My Kiss " as one of the album 's better tracks and noted that it practices " a craven form of extreme self @-@ objectification " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian noted that while the album was significantly Americanised , " Wear My Kiss " had " escaped with some quirky Britishness intact " . Khaleej Times wrote that the song proves the Sugababes are " feisty and seductive as ever " and elaborated , " the cut @-@ glass industrialism of the backing track belies the dedication of the trio to the permanent <unk> of pop music " . 
 Johnny Dee of Virgin Media named it one of Sweet 7 's standout tracks but in contrary felt that " trimmed of their former member 's vocals could be by absolutely anyone " . Gavin Martin of Daily Mirror called the song a " sweaty but uninspired thumper " , while Daily Mail writer Danny McElhinney considered it average . A critic from The Visitor regarded " Wear My Kiss " as " limp " in comparison to the group 's older material which he described as " feisty , sassy pop " . Fraser McAlpine from BBC Music gave the song a two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five star rating , and criticised the lack of cohesiveness between the group 's vocals , as well as the formulaic nature of the song . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Wear My Kiss " debuted and peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart for the issue dated 6 March 2010 , with sales of 38 @,@ 209 . It became the group 's third consecutive top ten single and eighteenth top ten single overall . Sweet 7 also became the first Sugababes album since Taller in More Ways ( 2005 ) to produce three top ten singles . The song debuted and peaked at number nine on the Irish Singles Chart , becoming the Sugababes ' ninth top ten single in Ireland . " Wear My Kiss " debuted at number four on the Scottish Singles Chart for the issue dated 6 March 2010 . The song debuted and peaked at number 47 on the Czech Singles Chart , where it charted for eight weeks . It was less successful on the Slovakian Singles Chart and peaked at number 73 . " Wear My Kiss " reached at number 26 on the Croatian Airplay Radio Chart . The song 's commercial performance throughout Europe allowed it to appear on the European Hot 100 Singles chart , where it peaked at number 27 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Wear My Kiss " was directed by Martin Weisz during December 2009 . Weisz also directed the music video for the group 's previous single " About a Girl " . The video for " Wear My Kiss " was expected to premiere in early January 2010 , although a preview was released on 11 January 2010 instead . The video was released on the iTunes Store on 12 March 2010 . The green screen was used to produce it , in which the Sugababes stood in front of a projection of their computer @-@ generated images . All three members wore similar blue , pink and red dresses . It primarily focuses on Sugababes dancing in front of a crowd of clones of themselves . Ewen discussed the experiences while filming the music video with First News , saying : 
 It 's so cool ! On the day we were filming it we just couldn 't picture what it was going to be like . We were literally in a room and had to imagine that there ’ s going to be clones of you – a sea of Sugababes and you 're just like : “ Oh how are they going to do this ? ” When you see it back it 's really amazing . 
 The music video begins with Amelle Berrabah singing the first verse , in which objects appear in the background in reference to the lyrics , including a gold tie and silver watch . When Range sings the lines " make you wanna buy a ring " a diamond appears in the background . During the chorus , clones of members of the band appear as they are dancing . During Ewen 's verse , her reference to shoes prompts a pair of green high heels to emerge in the background . The group begins dancing together in the chorus while clones of them appear again . The video ends with Sugababes dancing while making hand gesture to represent a " kiss " . Ann Lee of Metro described the video as " futuristic " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy praised the video as an " absolute cracker " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Sugababes promoted " Wear My Kiss " on 26 January 2010 with three appearances on television . The following day , the trio performed it at the Fight Cervical Cancer in Style concert . A writer from Belfast Telegraph described their performance as " highly energetic " . Fight Cervical Cancer in Style , a charity fundraising event , was held at Koko in London by Jo 's Trust to raise awareness about the prevalence of cervical cancer among women . Berrabah spoke about the importance of this health issue on stage : 
 We are so passionate about this cause and would urge girls to reduce their risks of cervical cancer – we had no idea how to prevent cervical cancer and actually we always thought it was genetic but through taking part in this campaign , we now realise it is sexually transmitted . By leading a healthy lifestyle , going for regular smears and having a vaccination you can help to reduce the risks hugely . 
 The band performed " Wear My Kiss " during a gig in March 2010 at the Supperclub , London . A journalist from Daily Star wrote , " In her super @-@ mini sequin dress , giraffe @-@ legged Jade Ewen naturally slots in , just like newest single ' Wear My Kiss ' does to the Sugababes ' back catalogue " . They performed the song on BBC 's Eurovision – Your Country Needs You on 12 March 2010 . The song was performed immediately prior to the winner of the show being announced . The Sugababes performed " Wear My Kiss " at Chester Rocks on 2 July 2011 as part of a set list , which included their number one singles " Freak like Me " , " Hole in the Head " and " Push the Button " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded and tracked at F2 Studios , Hollywood , California 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Fernando Garibay , Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , Carlos Battey , Steven Battey 
 Production – Fernando Garibay 
 Vocal recording – Fernando Garibay 
 Instrumentation – Fernando Garibay 
 Programming – Fernando Garibay 
 Arrangement – Fernando Garibay 
 Background vocals – Carlos Battey , Steven Battey 
 Mixing – Dave Pensado at Larrabee Sound Studios , North Hollywood , California 
 Mixing ( assistant ) – AJ Nunez 
 Additional vocal production – Mike Stevens and Marcus Byrne 
 Additional vocal mixing – Jeremy Wheatley at TwentyOne Studios , London , England 
 Assistant – Richard Edgeler 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Sweet 7 , Island Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Waterstones = 
 Waterstones , formerly Waterstone 's , is a British book retailer that operates 275 stores and employs around 3 @,@ 500 staff in the UK and Europe as of February 2014 . Established in 1982 by Tim Waterstone , after whom the company was named , the bookseller expanded rapidly until being sold in 1993 to W H Smith . Bought again in 1998 by Waterstone , EMI & Advent International , the company was taken under the umbrella of HMV Group , which later merged the Dillons and Ottakar 's brands into the company . 
 Following several poor sets of results for the group , HMV put the chain up for sale . In May 2011 , it was announced that A & NN Capital Fund Management , owned by Russian billionaire Alexander Mamut , had bought the chain and appointed James Daunt as managing director . 
 As well as the Waterstones brand , the company owns the London bookseller Hatchards , and Irish shop Hodges Figgis . An average sized Waterstones store sells a range of approximately 30 @,@ 000 individual books , as well as stationery and eBook readers . The bookseller has concession agreements with Costa Coffee , <unk> and Starbucks in some stores and since 2012 , has introduced its own Café W brand . On May 23 , 2016 , Waterstones announced it had sold its ebook business to Rakuten Kobo Inc . , and as of June 14 , 2016 , users must access their ebooks via Kobo 's ebook site . 
 = = History and developments = = 
 = = = Formation & WHSmith : 1982 – 1998 = = = 
 The chain was founded by Tim Waterstone after he was fired by WHSmith . Waterstone had failed to establish WHSmith in the United States . Taking the £ 6000 redundancy payout , he set up his first store in Old Brompton Road , Kensington with the ambition of creating a ' different breed of bookshop ' , using techniques he had seen in the United States . He used literary authors in front of store displays and employed highly literate staff . 
 The model proved successful and the chain set about expanding its store portfolio . By 1989 however , WHSmith had taken a controlling stake in the chain . WHSmith took over full control in 1993 for £ 9 million . Under WHSmith , Waterstones pursued international expansion , opening its first US store in Boston in 1991 , as well as further domestic expansion – opening its 100th UK store in a former chapel in Reading . 
 The chain was part of the eventual dismantling of the Net Book Agreement , when in 1991 , following a promotion by then rivals Dillons , the company decided to pursue its own discounting promotion on selected titles . By 1997 , the agreement had collapsed and been declared illegal . 
 = = = HMV Group : 1998 – 2011 = = = 
 Following an attempt by Tim Waterstone in 1997 to buy the entire WHSmith group , WHSmith sold the Waterstones chain for £ 300 million to HMV Media plc ( now HMV Group ) – a joint venture between EMI and Advent International . This included high street brands HMV and rival Dillons , creating an international entertainment retailer . Waterstone was appointed chairman of the group but stood down in 2001 , citing " concerns for the way the company was being run " . He was replaced by Alan Giles . A year later , all Dillons stores were rebranded as Waterstones , with some sold to rival Ottakar 's making the brand defunct . The chain had also begun pulling out of its US overseas venture . 
 Waterstones launched the Waterstones Books Quarterly magazine in 2001 , containing book reviews and author interviews . In the same year the booksellers ' online operation : <unk> was franchised to Amazon.com , with the company expressing a desire " to concentrate on its high street and campus stores " . The move resulted in the loss of 50 jobs . In 2003 , Waterstones announced it was supporting Dyslexia Action as its chosen charity , helping to raise awareness and understanding for dyslexia . 
 In 2006 Giles stepped down from his position and was replaced by Gerry Johnson as managing director of Waterstones and Simon Fox as group CEO . In April 2006 following two bids by <unk> for the group , Tim Waterstone attempted to buy back the company from HMV for £ 256 million , but later withdrew his offer specifying the conditions set by HMV were " too punitive " to accept . A strategic review in September saw Waterstones pull out of its franchise agreement with Amazon to re @-@ launch its online business , Waterstones.com , independently . The chain also began to pilot a loyalty programme in South West England and Wales . The scheme was successful , launching nationally as The Waterstones Card across its entire store portfolio . 
 Waterstones piloted a brand refresh exercise in selected stores , beginning with Manchester 's Arndale Centre in 2007 . On 19 November 2007 , the chain closed its first branch on Old Brompton Road . Following a consultation , the company 's supply chain was overhauled in 2008 with the implementation of a 150 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 14 @,@ 000 m2 ) warehouse and distribution centre , located in Burton @-@ upon @-@ Trent . Existing direct @-@ to @-@ store deliveries from suppliers were replaced by a centralised warehouse capable of receiving merchandise and sorting an estimated 70 million books per year and 200 staff were made redundant by the process . In September 2008 , Waterstones began selling the Sony Reader in an agreement which saw the booksellers ' branches and Sony Centre stores stock the reader exclusively for two weeks after its release . Waterstones.com began to supply eBooks in the <unk> format . In November 2009 , Waterstones moved into second @-@ hand bookselling in a partnership with <unk> setting up an online reselling tool called Waterstones Marketplace , part of <unk> 
 In January 2010 , HMV Group announced that Waterstones like @-@ for @-@ like sales over the Christmas period were down 8 @.@ 5 per cent on the previous year . This culminated in the resignation of managing director Gerry Johnson with immediate effect . He was replaced by development director Dominic Myers , who was managing director of the British academic bookselling chain Blackwells until 2005 . Myers joined HMV in 2006 to oversee the integration of Ottakar 's into the chain . In response to the decline in sales , he implemented a three @-@ year plan in which branches were tailored to their local market alongside a " rejuvenation " of the company brand and an increase in range . As part of these changes , Waterstones implemented new branding in May 2010 , developed by agency <unk> . The company also moved to support the Rainbow Trust , which provides support to children with life @-@ threatening and terminal illnesses and their families , in the same year . 
 After an announcement that profits would be at the lower end of analysts ' forecasts due to falling sales and a share price fall of 20 % , HMV Group indicated its intention to close a number of Waterstones branches in January 2011 . These stores closures , including two in Dublin , Republic of Ireland and nine others across the United Kingdom occurred in February 2011 . Further branch closures in Luton , Dorking , Lancaster University , Harrods , Gateshead and Norwich Arcade were completed by the end of 2011 . 
 = = = Alexander Mamut & James Daunt : 2011 – present = = = 
 In May 2011 HMV Group announced the sale of Waterstones to A & NN Capital Fund Management , a fund controlled by Russian businessman Alexander Mamut for £ 53 million . The takeover was welcomed by publishers as " a step forward to re @-@ establishing a proper physical presence " . On 29 June 2011 , the sale of Waterstones was completed and approved by the vast majority of shareholders at an emergency general meeting . Mamut appointed James Daunt , founder of Daunt Books , as managing director and a Board of Directors was announced in October 2011 including Miranda Curtis as Chairman . In September 2011 , the bookseller announced that it intended to drop its 3 @-@ for @-@ 2 deal on books after a decade in place . The offer was replaced with a ' bespoke offer ' , based on branches choosing their own pricing structures from available discounts . 
 In January 2012 , the company announced that it would be moving away from the branding developed in 2010 by agency <unk> , and reverting to its original logo . This involved the removal of the apostrophe from its name , saying it would be " a more versatile and practical spelling " . This decision received media coverage , in which the company was subject to criticism . John Richards , of the <unk> Protection Society , said that the change was " just plain wrong " and " grammatically incorrect " while the move sparked outrage on Twitter , involving debate on whether the move was grammatically incorrect or not . James Daunt expressed " Waterstones without an apostrophe is , in a digital world of URLs and email addresses , a more versatile and practical spelling " . Linguist David Crystal on his blog added : " ... if Waterstone 's wants to become Waterstones , that 's up to the firm . It 's nothing to do with expressing possession or plurality or anything to do with meaning . " 
 In the same month , Waterstones confirmed plans to open a Russian language bookshop in its Piccadilly branch , intending to stock 5000 titles with the shop being entirely staffed of Russian @-@ speaking booksellers . The concession , named The Russian Bookshop , opened in March 2012 . 
 Following a decision in late @-@ 2011 to scrap an e @-@ reading offer in @-@ branch , it was announced in May 2012 that Waterstones would be selling the Amazon Kindle across its estate . James Daunt launched the new agreement with Amazon stating that Waterstones would be offering " e @-@ reading services and offer Kindle digital devices " throughout the company 's branches and on its website , with an intention to " make the Kindle experience better " . This announcement was received with surprise across the book industry as it had been suggested that Waterstones was developing a partnership with Barnes & Noble to launch the Nook in the UK , or that the company was developing its own device , but Daunt ' ultimately rejected ' other avenues as Waterstones ' would have been out of the market ' before their implementation . 
 It was also announced in May 2012 that the company would begin a refurbishment plan , with Mamut ' investing tens of millions of pounds ' to fund the refit of a planned 100 stores before the end of the year . The plan saw the introduction of wi @-@ fi into shops , reorganisation of shop sections and space dedicated areas for Kindle devices , and a number of own @-@ brand coffee shops called Café W. The Café W brand was trialled in the Sutton branch , with an expressed aim for around 130 shops over a 3 @-@ year period to be fitted with a café . The announcement also noted the introduction of a ' click @-@ and @-@ collect ' service . 
 The Amazon Kindle officially launched in @-@ branch on 25 October 2012 with an ' outdoor and press advertising campaign ' promoting the launch , with the Kindle Fire and Kindle <unk> model going on sale for the first time in the UK along with older models . The Kindles were tailored with Waterstones screensavers , which led to some complaints and customers attempting to return their devices . In response , the company issued a statement that they believed " ... the screensaver does not constitute advertising and differs substantially to the advertising @-@ supported Kindles available to the US market ... We apologise that this change was made without consultation , and hope it does not detract from or alter your reading experience . " 
 The release of the Kindle coincided with a relaunch of the company 's brand in the same month , pushing the message that the chain was the " nation 's leading bookshop " and producing an exclusive anthology , the Waterstones Red Anthology , to help promote the shops . 
 By the end of 2012 , the Waterstones estate had shrunk to 288 stores , with " commercial reasons " given for the closure of branches in Bromsgrove , Stevenage , Watford , Fleet Street , High Holborn and Epsom among others , with staff being redeployed where possible . In 2012 , Daunt stated that future expansion was being considered , based on the performance of the company . In 2013 , Waterstones partnered with the University of Derby to launch a professional qualification programme for its staff . By 2014 , the chain began to open new stores , with locations in Ringwood and Blackburn . In July 2014 the company opened the Southwold Bookshop , its first branch to be without Waterstones branding . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Dillons = = = 
 Acquired in 1995 by the Thorn EMI group , Dillons was the UK 's second largest bookseller behind Waterstones and was the bookselling arm of EMI 's retail division , which included HMV . Following the demerger of Thorn and EMI in 1996 , the retail arm was divested from the EMI portfolio within a year and spun off into the HMV Media Group , an investment venture between EMI Group and Advent International private equity group . This venture included HMV , Dillons and Waterstones ( the latter bought from W H Smith for £ 300 million ) , combining to make an international entertainment retailer of over 500 stores . Following a rebuffed takeover attempt in 1997 of W H Smith , Tim Waterstone became part of the deal and by May 1998 , following the £ 801 million deal completion , became chairman of the group , with CEO Alan Giles retaining overall control . All Dillons stores were incorporated within the Waterstones brand by 1998 . 
 = = = Ottakar 's = = = 
 In September 2005 HMV Group began attempts to buy rival book chain Ottakar 's . This alarmed publishers and authors who hoped the Office of Fair Trading would refer the takeover bid to the Competition Commission . In March 2006 , the Competition Commission cleared Waterstones for takeover of the Ottakar 's , stating the takeover would " not result in a substantial lessening of competition " , and is " not likely to affect book prices , range of titles offered or quality of service . " Through extensive research they also found that " contrary to widespread perception , Waterstones , like Ottakar 's , operates a book @-@ buying system which mixes central and local input on stock selection . " 
 On 31 May 2006 , Waterstones announced that it had successfully negotiated the takeover of Ottakar 's . HMV chief executive Alan Giles said : " A combined Waterstones and Ottakar 's business will create an exciting , quality bookseller , able to respond better to the increasingly competitive pressures of the retail market . " Ottakar 's chairman Philip Dunne said : " Over the last year the book market has undergone a significant change with new levels of competition from the supermarkets and online retailers impacting all specialist booksellers and in particular those with insufficient scale to compete on equal terms . " 
 Following the takeover , HMV announced that they would be rebranding every branch of Ottakar 's as a Waterstones . In July 2006 , a conversion programme was initiated and within four months , every Ottakar 's store had been relaunched as a Waterstones and had seen the loss of 100 jobs . 
 = = = Books Etc = = = 
 In August 2008 , the now defunct Borders chain agreed to sell eight Books Etc. stores to Waterstones for an undisclosed sum . The takeover , which represented 34 @,@ 000 sq ft of retail space and incurred no staff losses , increased Waterstones ' presence within London to nearly 50 stores , ' crucially [ in ] areas that are not represented by Waterstones bookshops ' . The stores , located in Fleet Street , London Wall , Holborn , Wandsworth , Uxbridge , Finchley Road , and Canary Wharf were rebranded and merged into the Waterstones chain by September 2008 . 
 = = Ethical standards = = 
 = = = Tax = = = 
 Tim Waterstone and James Daunt have been critical of tax avoidance by Amazon.com in the British press . Amazon has received sustained scrutiny for the amount of its overall sales that are reported by its UK subsidiary , in comparison to those ' processed offshore in Luxembourg to avoid UK tax ' . In the 2012 @-@ 13 financial year , Amazon paid £ 3 @.@ 2 million in tax on sales of £ 4 @.@ 2 billion and received £ 2 @.@ 5 million in grants from the government . In the same period , it was revealed that Waterstones paid £ 11 @.@ 9 million in tax , despite an operating loss of £ 25 @.@ 4 million and sales of £ 410 @.@ 4 million . 
 In a report on tax avoidance in the book industry , the magazine Ethical Consumer argued that A & NN Capital Fund Management , Waterstones ' parent company , was located in Bermuda and this ' was likely to be for tax avoidance purposes ' . In response to this , Waterstones issued a clarification on their website reading ‘ As a UK registered and domiciled business , Waterstones fulfils all its tax obligations . This will include both the payment and reporting of all necessary UK taxes , as set out under UK tax legislation . ’ In the 2013 @-@ 14 financial period , the first full year under A & NN , Waterstones reported sales to Companies House of £ 398 @.@ 5 million and an operating loss of £ 12 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Environmental impact = = = 
 Waterstones has worked with the British Safety Council to consider its environmental impact , including factors beyond its carbon footprint . After a 2008 audit , the Council awarded Waterstone ’ s three out of a possible five stars for environmental impact . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Waterstones maintains and supports various literary awards , including the Waterstones Children 's Laureate , the Waterstones Children 's Book Prize , the Waterstones 11 , The Guardian First Book Award and the Pushkin House Russian Book Prize . The company has also received various industry and consumer awards . 
 = = = British Book Industry Awards = = = 
 The Bookseller Industry Awards , formerly the Bookseller Retail Awards , are run by the trade magazine The Bookseller . 
 In 2008 , the company " was lauded for the success of its loyalty card , Writer 's Year promotion , online growth and its Get Selling bookseller training . " 
 Headline <unk> Company of the Year 
 High Street Retailer of the Year 
 Nielsen Book Marketing Campaign of the Year 
 In 2009 , the company took away awards for High Street retailing and in praise of the Liverpool One branch Manager Ian Critchley , who was " applauded by the judges for his " outstanding " work in launching the new shop " 
 High Street Retailer of the Year 
 Wiley Manager of the Year 
 In 2010 , Bookseller Clare Boothby was recognised for her accomplishments at her branch in Dorking 
 Sue Butterworth Young Bookseller of the Year 
 In 2011 , Waterstones was recognised for its expertise in children 's bookselling 
 <unk> Children 's Bookseller of the Year 
 = = = Customer satisfaction = = = 
 At the beginning of 2008 , Waterstones.com was awarded a silver badge for the Best Books Website category at the BT Online Excellence Awards . 
 In a survey of 96 British chains in January 2009 , Waterstones scored 69 % for a Which ? customer satisfaction survey on " products , price , staff and shopping environment and whether they would recommend the shop to a friend " – placing the chain in joint eight position . In May 2011 , another survey commissioned by Which ? on customer satisfaction of 100 High Street brands showed that Waterstones had maintained its position in the top 10 shops with a score of 77 % , placing it in seventh position . 
 Waterstones also fared well in an online survey conducted for the consumer show Secret Shopper on Channel 4 , hosted by Mary Portas . Out of 101 High Street brands , Waterstones ' emerged as an early frontrunner ' and has maintained its top position since . 
 In 2012 , Waterstones won the inaugural " Sports Book Retailer of the Year " category of the British Sports Book Awards . 
 = = = Children 's Book Prize = = = 
 Waterstones continued the Ottakar 's Children 's Book Prize under its own brand and since 2005 , the Waterstones Children 's Book Prize has attempted " to uncover hidden talent in children 's writing " by awarding authors with no more than two previously published books ( adult or children 's fiction ) . 
 2014 <unk> by Katherine Rundell 
 2013 Ketchup Clouds by Annabel Pitcher 
 2012 The Pirates Next Door by Jonny Duddle 
 2011 Artichoke Hearts by Sita Brahmachari 
 2010 The Great Hamster Massacre by Katie Davies 
 2009 The Thirteen Treasures by Michelle Harrison 
 2008 Ways to Live Forever by Sally Nicholls 
 2007 Darkside by Tom Becker 
 2006 The Diamond of Drury Lane by Julia Golding 
 2005 The Cry of the <unk> by Stuart Hill 
 Waterstones is also the main sponsor of The Waterstones Children 's Laureate , previously sponsored by Ottakar 's . The 2011 – 2013 role saw the position carry the Waterstones branding , with the company stating it was ' up weighting [ its ] activity ' and ' supporting the role in stores and online in different ways throughout the year and <unk> 
 = = = The Waterstones 11 = = = 
 Set up in 2011 , the Waterstones 11 was created to promote debut literary fiction from new authors being published in the year ahead . Books were chosen from a list of 100 submitted by publishers , and were announced in January 2011 with in @-@ store and online support , as well as a media campaign for the final 11 . The inaugural 11 included the Orange Prize Winner The Tiger 's Wife by Téa <unk> , Man Booker Prize nominee Pigeon English , by Stephen Kelman and the Edinburgh International Book Festival First Book Award winner When God Was a Rabbit , by Sarah <unk> . The last list was announced in January 2013 , as it was scrapped in January 2014 . 
 = = Locations = = 
 Waterstones has academic and high street stores in Europe including the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland ( with one store in Cork and previously with stores in Dublin and Drogheda ) , and in the Netherlands and Belgium ( including Amsterdam and Brussels ) . Some branches in the company are located in buildings of architectural and historical interest . 
 Flagship superstores 
 Its flagship store on Piccadilly , formerly the Simpsons of Piccadilly department store and notable for its 1930s @-@ Modernist architecture , is the largest shop in the Waterstones estate and claimed to be the largest bookstore in Europe . The main academic branch , formerly the flagship store of Dillons , is located on Gower Street , between University College London and the Student Central , and promoted as Europe 's largest academic bookstore . Aside from these branches , Waterstones operates a number of large stores which are set over multiple floors . Waterstones refer to these stores as ' superstores ' : 
 Piccadilly , London ( formerly Simpsons of Piccadilly ) – flagship branch with six floors and an estimated 8 1 / 2 miles of shelving . In 2012 , the head office of the company was moved to the store . Waterstones also owns the large Hatchards bookshop on the same road . 
 Gower Street , London – academic branch with five floors and 5 miles of shelving 
 Deansgate , Manchester – three floors , with over 100 @,@ 000 books in stock . 
 Milsom Street , Bath – three floors , with over 55 @,@ 000 books in stock . 
 La Scala Cinema , Sauchiehall Street , Glasgow – five floors , set in a former cinema 
 <unk> Gate , Nottingham – four floors , with concessions 
 Large stores 
 Broad Street , Reading , formerly Broad Street Independent Chapel 
 New Street , Birmingham , a grade II listed former Midland Bank building ( 1867 – 1869 ) , designed by Edward Holmes 
 High Street , Birmingham , trading on six floors 
 Fishergate , Preston , formerly Booths ornate grocery and head office 
 St Margaret 's Street , Canterbury , the basement has a display of the buried remains of a Roman bath @-@ house 
 Wool Exchange , Bradford 
 Emerson Chambers , Newcastle upon Tyne 
 Dolphin & Anchor , West Street , Chichester 
 West End Princes Street , Edinburgh 
 The Carlton Cinema , Swansea 
 The <unk> Building , Parliament Row , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent 
 Corn Exchange , Lincoln 
 Cornmarket St , Oxford 
 Midsummer Place , Milton Keynes 
 = Socialist Party USA = 
 The Socialist Party of the United States of America ( SPUSA ) , usually simplified as Socialist Party USA , is a multi @-@ tendency socialist party in the United States . The SPUSA was founded in 1973 as a split from the Socialist Party of America , which had been renamed Social Democrats , USA a year before . 
 The party is officially committed to socialism . The Socialist Party USA , along with its predecessor , has received varying degrees of support when its candidates have competed against those from the Republican and Democratic parties . The party supports independent political action and opposes working within the two larger , capitalism supporting parties . 
 The SPUSA self @-@ describes as opposing all forms of oppression , specifically capitalism and authoritarian forms of communism , the Party advocates for the creation of a " radical democracy that places people 's lives under their own control — a non @-@ racist , classless , feminist socialist society [ ... ] where working people own and control the means of production and distribution through democratically @-@ controlled public agencies , cooperatives , or other collective groups ; where full employment is realized for everyone who wants to work ; where workers have the right to form unions freely , and to strike and engage in other forms of job actions ; and where the production of society is used for the benefit of all humanity , not for the private profit of a few " . 
 The SPUSA 's National Office is located at the AJ Muste Institute in New York . The party has four chartered state organizations in California , Michigan , New Jersey , and New York , as well as eighteen chartered locals throughout the country . 
 In October 2015 , the Socialist Party USA nominated Mimi <unk> for President and Angela Walker for Vice President . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1958 , the Independent Socialist League led by Max Shachtman dissolved to join the Socialist Party of America . Shachtman had written that Soviet communism was a new form of class society , bureaucratic collectivism , in which the ruling class exploited and oppressed the population , and therefore he opposed the spread of communism . Shachtman also argued that democratic socialists should work with activists from labor unions and civil @-@ rights organizations to help build a social @-@ democratic " realignment " of the Democratic Party . Though he died on 4 November 1972 and had little involvement with the Socialist Party in the year proceeding his death , his followers , <unk> as " <unk> " , exercised a tremendous amount of influence on the party . 
 In its 1972 Convention , the Socialist Party changed its name to " Social Democrats , USA " by a vote of 73 to 34 . The change of name was supported by the two co @-@ chairmen , Bayard Rustin and Charles S. Zimmerman ( of the International Ladies Garment Workers ' Union , <unk> ) , and by the First National Vice Chairman , James S. Glaser ; these three were re @-@ elected by acclamation . 
 Renaming the party as SDUSA was meant to be " realistic " . The New York Times observed that the Socialist Party had last sponsored Darlington Hoopes as its candidate for President in the 1956 election , who received only 2 @,@ 121 votes , which were cast in only six states . Because the party no longer sponsored candidates in presidential elections , the name " party " had been " misleading " ; " party " had hindered the recruiting of activists who participated in the Democratic Party , according to the majority report . The name " Socialist " was replaced by " Social Democrats " because many American associated the word " socialism " with Soviet communism . Also , the Party wished to distinguish itself from two small Marxist parties . 
 The Convention elected a national committee of 33 members , with 22 seats for the majority caucus , 8 seats for Harrington 's coalition caucus , 2 for the Debs caucus , and one for the " independent " Samuel H. Friedman , who also had opposed the name change . 
 The convention voted on and adopted proposals for its program by a two @-@ one vote , with the majority caucus winning every vote . On foreign policy , the program called for " firmness toward Communist aggression " . However , on the Vietnam War , the program opposed " any efforts to bomb Hanoi into submission " and to work for a peace agreement that would protect Communist political cadres in South Vietnam from further military or police reprisals . Harrington 's proposal for an immediate cease fire and an immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces was defeated . Harrington complained that , after its previous convention , the Socialist Party had endorsed George McGovern with a statement of " constructive criticism " and had not mobilized enough support for McGovern . 
 After their defeat at the Convention , members of two minority caucuses helped to found new socialist organizations . At most 200 members of the Coalition Caucus joined Michael Harrington in forming the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee , which later became the Democratic Socialists of America . At its start , <unk> had 840 members , of which 2 percent served on its national board in 1973 when SDUSA stated its membership at 1 @,@ 800 , according to a 1973 profile of Harrington . Second , many members of the Debs Caucus joined David McReynolds in reconstituting the Socialist Party USA also in 1973 . 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The Debs Caucus formed the Union for Democratic Socialism , and , on May 30 , 1973 , incorporated the Socialist Party of the United States of America , ( Socialist Party USA ) . Many activists from the local and state branches of the old Socialist Party , including the party 's Wisconsin , California , Illinois , New York City , Philadelphia , and Washington D.C. organizations , participated in the reconstitution of the Socialist Party USA . 
 After its founding , the party promoted itself as the legitimate heir of the Socialist Party of America . Former Mayor of Milwaukee , Frank Zeidler , was elected the first national chairperson of the party . Zeidler also helped re @-@ organizing the party structure during its early years . He was later nominated as the party 's candidacy for the presidential office , with Zeidler believing the party would be able to collaborate with other socialist parties nationwide to spread the message of socialism . 
 = = = Subsequent History = = = 
 Since 1936 , a member of the party was elected to the city council of Iowa City and several members have won tens of thousands of votes when losing elections for statewide offices . In 1992 , Socialist Iowa City Councilwoman Karen <unk> won her re @-@ election with the highest vote in a contested election in the history of the Iowa City Council , and was re @-@ elected until retiring from the Council in 2000 . In 2000 , Socialist Wendell Harris received 19 % of the vote for Mayor of Milwaukee , Wisconsin in the primary . In 2008 , Socialist Jon Osborne pulled in 22 % of the vote for Rhode Island 's 34th District State Senate seat , while listed on the ballot under the Socialist Party USA label . During the 2010 United States Senate elections Dan La Botz of the Socialist Party of Ohio received 25 @,@ 368 ( 0 @.@ 68 % ) votes in Ohio . In 2011 , Socialist Matt Erard was elected to a three @-@ year term on the city of Detroit ’ s Downtown District Citizens ’ District Council . In 2012 , Socialist Pat Noble unseated his incumbent opponent in winning election to the Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education , Socialist John <unk> received 10 % of the vote while running with the party 's ballot label for Indiana 's 39th district State House seat , and Socialist Troy Thompson received 27 % of the vote for Mayor of <unk> , Minnesota . Also in 2012 , candidate Mary Alice Herbert received 13 @.@ 1 % of the vote for Vermont Secretary of State while running with the dual nomination of both the Socialist and Vermont Liberty Union parties . 
 = = = Membership = = = 
 According to the party 's first chairman , Frank Zeidler , the party had around 500 members nationwide in 1975 . The Socialist Party experienced substantial growth during the late 1970s and early to mid @-@ 1980s , expanding from only around 600 dues @-@ paying members to around 1 @,@ 700 . In 2008 , <unk> claimed that the party had around 3 @,@ 000 paying members . However , in 2010 a <unk> article suggested that the organization had only 1 @,@ 000 members with party members claiming it to be an increase in the amount of members . A New York Times article in May 2011 stated that the party has " about 1 @,@ 000 members nationally " . In February 2012 , an article from The Root stated that the Party had a " membership around 1 @,@ 500 " . 
 = = = Current Elected Officials = = = 
 = = = = Local Boards of Education = = = = 
 Pat Noble , member of the Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education 
 = = Ideology = = 
 = = = Positions = = = 
 While some SP members favor a more gradual approach to socialism , most others envision a more sweeping or revolutionary transformation of society from capitalist to socialist through the decisive victory of the working class in the class struggle . Some SP members also advocate revolutionary nonviolence or pacifism , while some consider armed struggle a possible necessity . The Party 's Statement of Principles rejects equating socialism with a " welfare state " and calls for democratic social revolution from below . The party is strongly committed to principles of socialist feminism and strives to further embody such commitment in its organizational structure . Its national constitution requires gender parity among its national co @-@ chairs and co @-@ vice chairs , its national committee members and alternates , and seated members of its <unk> and region @-@ elected delegations to the Party 's biennial national conventions . The Socialist Party also rejected the new healthcare reform law of 2010 approved by the Obama administration , with SP National Co @-@ Chair Billy Wharton claiming it to be " a corporate restructuring of the health insurance industry created to protect the profit margins of private insurance companies " . 
 During his campaign , the Socialist Party candidate for president , Brian Moore , was very vocal against the idea that Barack Obama was a socialist of any kind . He further commented on the issue , saying it was " misleading of the Republicans " to spread that message . In a later statement about Obama 's policies , Wharton called Obama 's 2010 State of the Union Address a " public relations ploy " . He concluded with ; " The time for slick public relations campaigns has ended — the time for building our grassroots movements is more urgent than ever . The Socialist Party USA stands ready to join in such a political revitalization " . 
 = = = = International affairs = = = = 
 The Party 's National Action Committee condemned the Israeli actions during the Gaza War . The party demands that the Federal government of the United States cease providing military aid to the State of Israel as a precondition for peace . The party also seeks to begin an immediate withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan . During the 2008 presidential election , the Socialist Party continued to place a strong emphasis on its full @-@ scale opposition to U.S. wars abroad , with Brian Moore , the presidential candidate , claiming the war was destroying small communities throughout the country . He also criticized what he called " pressure on the local governments " by the Bush administration . The Socialist Party of Connecticut denounced Obama 's troop surge in Afghanistan , claiming that the president was throwing away much needed resources the country needed to get pulled out of the financial crisis . After denouncing him , the state affiliate organized a protest in front of the federal building in Hartford . 
 = = = = Government = = = = 
 SP candidates , such as New Jersey gubernatorial and senate candidate Greg <unk> , have also emphasized immediate public service demands ; these reforms include socializing the U.S. health care system , a steeply graduated income tax , universal rent control , and the elimination of all educational debts and tuition fees . In 1997 , <unk> called auto insurance " a regressive tax against working people " . Moore was also vocal of his support for public healthcare and socialized medicine . Moore believes that capitalism is a system based on both exploitation and selfishness , which operates to serve the interests of corporations and the ruling class , at the expense of workers and the poor . During his presidential campaign he claimed that the lack of available remedy to collapsing economic conditions stems from the capitalist system 's foundation upon " greed " , and advocated its replacement with a new system founded upon economic democracy through social ownership and workers ' control of our reigning industrial and financial institutions . 
 = = Presidential tickets = = 
 † In each line the first note refers to candidates and results , the second ( if any ) to ballot access 
 ( the number of state + D.C. ballots , out of 51 , on which the Socialist Party candidates appeared ) 
 ‡ ^ Endorsed the Citizens Party 's candidates in 1984 . 
 = Pictor = 
 Pictor is a constellation in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere , located between the star Canopus and the Large Magellanic Cloud . Its name is Latin for painter , and is an abbreviation of the older name Equuleus Pictoris ( the " painter 's easel " ) . Normally represented as an easel , Pictor was named by Abbé Nicolas @-@ Louis de Lacaille in the 18th century . The constellation 's brightest star is Alpha Pictoris , a white main @-@ sequence star around 97 light @-@ years away from Earth . Pictor also hosts RR Pictoris , a cataclysmic variable star system that flared up as a nova , reaching apparent ( visual ) magnitude 1 @.@ 2 in 1925 before fading into obscurity . 
 Pictor has attracted attention because of its second @-@ brightest star Beta Pictoris , 63 @.@ 4 light @-@ years distant from Earth , which is surrounded by an unusual dust disk rich in carbon , as well as an exoplanet ( extrasolar planet ) . Another five stars in the constellation have been observed to have planets . Among them is HD 40307 , an orange dwarf that has six planets orbiting it , one of which — HD 40307 g — is a potential super @-@ Earth in the circumstellar habitable zone . Kapteyn 's Star , the nearest star in Pictor to Earth , is a red dwarf located 12 @.@ 76 light @-@ years away that was found to have two super @-@ Earths in orbit in 2014 . Pictor A is a radio galaxy that is shooting an 800 @,@ 000 light @-@ year long jet of plasma from a supermassive black hole at its centre . In 2006 , a gamma @-@ ray burst — GRB <unk> — was observed in Pictor , its extremely long X @-@ ray afterglow detectable for nearly two years . 
 = = History = = 
 The French astronomer Abbé Nicolas @-@ Louis de Lacaille first described Pictor as le <unk> et la Palette ( the easel and palette ) in 1756 , after observing and cataloguing 10 @,@ 000 southern stars during a two @-@ year stay at the Cape of Good Hope . He devised 14 new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe . All but one honored instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment . He gave these constellations Bayer designations , including ten stars in Pictor now named Alpha to Nu Pictoris . He labelled the constellation Equuleus <unk> on his 1763 chart , the word " Equuleus " meaning small horse , or easel — perhaps from an old custom among artists of carrying a canvas on a donkey . The German astronomer Johann Bode called it <unk> Pictoris . The name was shortened to its current form in 1845 by the English astronomer Francis Baily on the suggestion of his countryman Sir John Herschel . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Pictor is a small constellation bordered by Columba to the north , Puppis and Carina to the east , Caelum to the northwest , Dorado to the southwest and Volans to the south . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is " Pic " . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 18 segments ( illustrated in infobox ) . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 04h <unk> and <unk> <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between − 42 @.@ 79 ° and − 64 @.@ 15 ° . Pictor culminates each year at 9 p.m. on 17 March . Its position in the far Southern Celestial Hemisphere means that the whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 26 ° N , and parts become circumpolar south of latitude 35 ° S. 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Pictor is a faint constellation ; its three brightest stars can be seen near the prominent Canopus . Within the constellation 's borders , there are 49 stars brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6 @.@ 5 . Located about 97 light @-@ years away from Earth , Alpha Pictoris is the brightest star in the constellation ; it is a white main @-@ sequence star with an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 3 , and spectral type <unk> . A rapidly spinning star with a projected rotational velocity estimated at 206 km / s , it has a shell of circumstellar gas . Beta Pictoris is another white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> and apparent magnitude 3 @.@ 86 . Located around 63 @.@ 4 light @-@ years distant from Earth , it is a member of the Beta Pictoris moving group — a group of 17 star systems around 12 million years old moving through space together . In 1984 Beta Pictoris was the first star discovered to have a debris disk . Since then , an exoplanet about eight times the mass of Jupiter has been discovered orbiting approximately 8 astronomical units ( AU ) away from the star — a similar distance as that between our Sun and Saturn . The European Southern Observatory ( ESO ) confirmed its presence through the use of direct imagery with the Very Large Telescope in late 2009 . 
 Gamma Pictoris is an orange giant of spectral type K1III that has swollen to 1 @.@ 4 times the diameter of the Sun . Shining with an apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 5 , it lies 174 light @-@ years distant from Earth . HD <unk> , called 47 Pictoris by American astronomer Benjamin Apthorp Gould , is a slightly cooler orange giant , with a spectral type of <unk> and average magnitude 5 @.@ 04 . It has also been suspected of being a variable star . Lacaille mistakenly named this star Mu Doradus , but had recorded its Right Ascension one hour too low . Lacaille named two neighbouring stars Eta Pictoris . Eta2 Pictoris , also known as HR 1663 , is an orange giant of spectral type K5III and apparent magnitude 5 @.@ 05 . 474 light @-@ years distant , it has a diameter 5 @.@ 6 times that of the Sun . Eta1 Pictoris , also known as HR 1649 , is 85 light @-@ years distant and is a main sequence star of spectral type F5V and visual magnitude 5 @.@ 38 . A double star , it has a companion of magnitude 13 ; the two are separated by 11 arcseconds . 
 Located about 1298 light @-@ years from Earth , Delta Pictoris is an eclipsing binary of the Beta Lyrae type . Composed of two blue stars of spectral types <unk> and <unk> , the system has a period of 1 @.@ 67 days , and is observed to dip from apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 65 to 4 @.@ 9 . The stars are oval @-@ shaped as they are gravitationally distorted by each other . TV Pictoris is a spectroscopic binary system composed of an A @-@ type star and an F @-@ type star which rotate around each other in a very close orbit . The latter star is elliptical in shape and itself varies in brightness . The visual magnitude ranges between 7 @.@ 37 and 7 @.@ 53 every 20 hours . 
 Aside from Beta , five other stars in Pictor are known to host planetary systems . AB Pictoris is a BY Draconis variable star with a substellar companion that is either a large planet or a brown dwarf , which was discovered by direct imaging in 2005 . HD 40307 is an orange main sequence star of spectral type <unk> and apparent magnitude 7 @.@ 17 located about 42 light @-@ years away . Doppler spectroscopy with the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher ( HARPS ) indicates that HD 40307 is host to six super @-@ Earth planets , one of which , HD 40307 g , lies in the circumstellar habitable zone of the star , and is not close enough to be tidally locked ( i.e. with the same face always facing the star ) , unlike the other planets in the same system , and many other planets which orbit close to their parent stars . HD <unk> is a complex binary system about 139 light @-@ years distant . The primary is an orange dwarf of spectral type <unk> orbited by a planet roughly 2 @.@ 65 times the mass of Jupiter every 963 days , while the secondary is a red dwarf of spectral type <unk> and orbited by a brown dwarf that is at least 19 times as massive as Jupiter . Both substellar components were discovered by doppler spectroscopy using the CORALIE spectrograph in 2004 and 2002 respectively . Kapteyn 's Star , a nearby red dwarf at the distance of 12 @.@ 78 light @-@ years , has a magnitude of 8 @.@ 8 . It has the largest proper motion of any star in the sky after Barnard 's Star . Moving around the Milky Way in the opposite direction to most other stars , it may have originated in a dwarf galaxy that was merged into the Milky Way , with the main remnant being the Omega Centauri globular cluster . In 2014 analysis of the doppler variations of Kapteyn 's Star with the HARPS spectrograph showed that it hosts two super @-@ Earths — Kapteyn b and Kapteyn c . Kapteyn b is the oldest @-@ known potentially habitable planet , estimated to be possibly 11 billion years old . 
 Located 1 @.@ 5 degrees west southwest of Alpha , RR Pictoris is a cataclysmic variable that flared up as a nova , reaching magnitude 1 @.@ 2 on 9 June 1925 . Six months after its peak brightness , it had faded to be invisible to the unaided eye , and was magnitude 12 @.@ 5 by 1975 . RR Pictoris is a close binary system composed of a white dwarf and secondary star that orbit each other every 3 @.@ 48 hours — so close that the secondary is filling up its Roche lobe with stellar material , which is then transferred onto the first star 's accretion disk . Once this material reaches a critical mass , it ignites and the system brightens tremendously . Calculations from the orbital speed suggest the secondary star is not dense enough for its size to still be on the main sequence , so it also must have begun expanding and cooling already after its core ran out of hydrogen fuel . The RR Pictoris system is estimated to lie around 1300 light @-@ years distant from Earth . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 NGC 1705 is an irregular dwarf galaxy 17 million light @-@ years from Earth . It is one of the most active star forming galaxies in the nearby universe , despite the fact that its rate of star formation peaked around 30 million years ago . Pictor A , around 485 million light @-@ years away , is a double @-@ lobed radio galaxy and a powerful source of radio waves in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere . From a supermassive black hole at its centre , a relativistic jet shoots out to an X @-@ ray hot spot 800 @,@ 000 light years away . SPT @-@ CL <unk> @-@ 5345 is a massive galaxy cluster located around 7 billion light @-@ years away with a mass equivalent to approximately 800 trillion suns . 
 GRB <unk> was a gamma @-@ ray burst that was first observed on 29 July 2006 . It is likely the signal of a type Ic supernova — the core collapse of a massive star . It was also notable for its extraordinarily long X @-@ ray afterglow , detectable 642 days ( nearly two years ) after the original event . The event was remote , with a redshift of 0 @.@ 54 . 
 = Irving Crane = 
 Irving Crane ( November 13 , 1913 – November 17 , 2001 ) , nicknamed " the Deacon " , was an American pool player from Livonia ( near Rochester ) , New York , and ranks among the stellar players in the history of the sport . Considered one of the all @-@ time greats , he is best known for his mastery in the game of straight pool ( 14 @.@ 1 continuous ) at which he won numerous championships , including six world billiards titles . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crane 's fascination with billiards started at age 11 , sparked by play on a toy pool table his brother received as a Christmas gift . Showing interest and ability , his father Scott Crane , a trial lawyer and sportsman , and his mother , a high school teacher , soon replaced their dining room table with a 4 ' by 8 ' pool table . He soon ventured out of the home to practice a couple days each week at Olympic Billiards , a room that was part of a bowling alley in Scottsville , a suburb of Rochester , New York . Crane stated in 1998 : " Other kids , you know they 'd play for twenty minutes or half an hour and they 'd say , ' let 's do something else . ' I could play all day and never get enough . I couldn 't wait to get home from school to play . " 
 Crane 's status as a wunderkind was quickly evident ; although he was entirely self @-@ taught , at 14 he ran 89 balls in straight pool at a local pool room , calling each shot in advance , as is mandatory in straight pool . Following this feat , his parents replaced the smaller table with a full size tournament table . Over the next ten years some of the best players of the era , including Willie Hoppe and Andrew Ponzi , came to practice with the promising champion . Despite consistent play throughout his teenage years , Crane did not enter any tournaments until he was 23 years old . 
 In February 1939 , at age 26 , Crane ran 150 balls and out against his opponent in an exhibition straight pool match on a difficult 5 ' by 10 ' table in Layton , Utah . While this was impressive in and of itself , at the crowd 's urging , he continued his run , ultimately pocketing 309 consecutive balls thus shattering the previous world record of 244 consecutive balls . 
 = = World titles = = 
 This coup was soon followed by his first world title in 1942 . Over the following three decades , Crane won almost two dozen major championships , including the World Crown in 1946 , 1955 , 1966 , 1968 , 1970 and 1972 , the Ballantine International Championship in 1965 , the International <unk> championship in 1968 , and the World Series of Billiards in 1978 at age 65 . Of these triumphs , his win at the 1966 World Crown is the most celebrated . At that tournament he ran 150 and out in the finals , never letting his opponent back to the table after an early safety battle ; an accomplishment that has never been equaled . Crane also holds the record for the most runner @-@ up finishes for the World Crown with 13 . 
 Despite his mastery and world renown , Crane found it hard to make a living solely playing pool , and in 1957 began working as a Cadillac salesman at Valley Cadillac Inc . 333 East Avenue in Rochester , New York . He continued there for 17 years . According to Crane 's daughter , at Rochester 's annual auto show his dealership 's exhibit featured a pool table at which Crane would run balls while answering questions . " Working " for a living was purely a choice of survival . In an interview with Sports Illustrated in 1969 Crane said " If I had to make a choice between selling cars and playing pool , I 'd choose pool ... The only time I 've ever been really happy is when I was at a pool table . " 
 Described as a " tall , lean man with the imperial bearing of the headmaster of Eton , " Crane earned the appellation The Deacon because of his gentlemanly ways , his very cautious approach to the game and his impeccable dress , never approaching a pool table except in a conservative suit . Los Angeles Times sports columnist Jim Murray once said Crane " would make Henry Fonda look furtive . " Highlighting Crane 's both cautious approach and mastery , Mike Sigel , one of pool 's most illustrious players , reportedly asked Crane to play one day when Sigel was a young player . Crane assented and after Sigel broke , Crane ran 200 balls and then played a safety . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Crane 's wife of 64 years , Althea , stated " A lot of people , if it was a hot day and there was no air conditioning , they 'd take off their coat to play . But not Irving Crane . " Rudolph Wanderone , a / k / a Minnesota Fats , once opined , " Irv Crane would have been the only guy to notice the horse under Lady Godiva , " while professional rival Willie Mosconi who had criticized Crane for his cautious style , stated in his 1993 autobiography , Willie 's Game , that " Crane wouldn 't take a shot unless his grandmother could make it . " 
 Crane was inducted into the Billiard Congress of America 's hall of fame in 1978 . In 1999 Crane was ranked as number eight on Billiard Digest 's fifty greatest players of the century . In his entry there he is lauded as having been , along with Mosconi , the " best in the world , flat out " between 1941 and 1956 . In 1980 Crane retired from professional play . He stopped playing entirely in about 1996 . On November 17 , 2001 at age 88 , four days after entering a nursing home , Crane died of natural causes . He was survived by his wife Althea , son Irving , daughter Sandra , three grandchildren , and three great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = Paul Stastny = 
 Paul Stastny ( born December 27 , 1985 ) is a Canadian @-@ born American professional ice hockey center currently playing for the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League . 
 Of Slovak lineage , Stastny is the son of Hockey Hall of Famer Peter Šťastný , who played for the Avalanche 's predecessor , the Quebec Nordiques , and finished his career with the St. Louis Blues . His older brother Yan has played for the Boston Bruins , Edmonton Oilers and St. Louis Blues . His uncles Anton and Marian Stastny both played in the NHL during the 1980s , also for the Nordiques . His surname pronunciation is " <unk> " . 
 Stastny began his junior hockey career with the River City Lancers of the United States Hockey League before moving to the University of Denver Pioneers in 2004 . He won the NCAA Men 's Ice Hockey Championship in his first season playing for the Pioneers . He remained at the University of Denver for one more season . He signed a contract with the Avalanche before the 2006 – 07 NHL season , scored 78 points in 82 games in his rookie season and was nominated for the Calder Memorial Trophy . In 2007 – 08 he was named to his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , but didn 't play because of an appendectomy . As a dual citizen , Stastny has chosen to play for the U.S. in international hockey competitions , which have included the 2004 Viking Cup , the 2007 IIHF World Championship , and the 2010 , 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Early years and family = = 
 Stastny was born in Quebec City , Quebec , to Peter Šťastný ( anglicised to Stastny ) and his wife <unk> , while Peter was playing for the Nordiques . Paul spent his early years in Québec and New Jersey , following his father 's career . Peter joined the St. Louis Blues in 1993 and settled there after finishing his player career , working as a scout for the team . Paul has numerous family relatives who have played in the NHL . He is the son of Czechoslovak defector and Hockey Hall of Fame inductee Peter Šťastný ( surname later anglicised ) , the first European @-@ trained player to reach 1 @,@ 000 points in the NHL , and the nephew of retired NHL players Anton and Marian . Peter and Anton were the first two out of the three brothers to come to North America , in 1980 ; they were smuggled , along with Peter 's pregnant wife with the help of the Québec Nordiques ' owner Marcel Aubut and chief scout Gilles Léger out of Czechoslovakia to Austria . Marián arrived a year later , after Peter and Anton raised the $ 30 @,@ 000 needed to bribe officials of the Czechoslovak government . All 3 played for Quebec from 1981 – 1985 , which was only the third time that 3 brothers played for the same team in the NHL at the same time . The first three brothers who had played for the same team were Reg , Doug and Max Bentley . Followed by the three <unk> brothers , Bill , Barclay and Bob who played with the St. Louis Blues from 1968 – 72 . Paul 's older brother Yan has played for the Boston Bruins , Edmonton Oilers , and St. Louis Blues . He currently plays for HC CSKA Moscow in the KHL . Peter and Paul Stastny currently rank fourth all @-@ time in total scoring by a father @-@ son combination in the NHL . 
 Paul played high school hockey for Chaminade College Preparatory School in St. Louis , Missouri during his freshman and sophomore years in high school , but he left the high school team to play for the Tier III Junior B St. Louis Jr . Blues . He then moved to Omaha , Nebraska to play Tier I junior hockey for the River City Lancers of the United States Hockey League during this last two years of high school , graduating from Millard North High School in Omaha . 
 Born in Canada to a mother with American citizenship , Stastny and his brother Yan have dual Canadian / U.S. citizenship . Paul has two sisters , Katarina and Kristina ( married to Mike Nash ) . He has mentioned " religion , education and the importance of family " as important values in his upbringing , and has spoken about his father 's help in making him a better player . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur career = = = 
 Paul Stastny began his junior ice hockey career in 2002 with the River City Lancers of the United States Hockey League , playing with the team for two seasons , scoring 107 points in 113 games . In 2002 – 03 , the Lancers finished the regular season fourth in the West Division and progressed to the playoffs . After advancing two rounds , the Lancers lost in the Clark Cup final against the Lincoln Stars . In 2003 – 04 , the Lancers finished third in the West Division and lost in the first round of the playoffs against the Sioux City Musketeers . Stastny 's 77 points in 56 games ranked him second in the league behind teammate Mike Howe . 
 Stastny entered the University of Denver to play for the Pioneers in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association of the National Collegiate Athletic Association in 2004 . Despite entering college hockey younger than the usual USHL player , he scored 45 points in 42 games in his first season in Denver to help the Pioneers win the MacNaughton Cup and Broadmoor Trophy . He then helped the team win its second NCAA Men 's Ice Hockey Championship in a row by scoring two power @-@ play goals in the final game at the 2005 Frozen Four tournament against North Dakota . Stastny won the award for WCHA Rookie of the Year and was part of the WCHA All @-@ Rookie Team and the NCAA Championship All @-@ Tournament Team . 
 In 2005 – 06 , Stastny scored 53 points in 39 games and finished 7th overall in the NCAA scoring list , tied with Matt Carle for the Pioneers ' scoring lead . He scored 44 points in 28 conference games to win the WCHA scoring title . 
 He was part of the WCHA First All @-@ Star Team and the NCAA West Second All @-@ American Team , as the Pioneers finished the WCHA regular season in second place and lost in the first round of the playoffs against the Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs . At the end of the season , Stastny left the University of Denver as a business major . 
 = = = Colorado Avalanche = = = 
 Stastny was draft @-@ eligible in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft , but opted out of the draft . Prior to the draft , the NHL Central Scouting Bureau ranked him as the 49th best North @-@ American skater available . Ranked by CSB as the 74th best in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft , he was drafted by the Colorado Avalanche in the second round , 44th overall . Before moving to Denver in 1996 , the Avalanche were the Quebec Nordiques , the team for which his father played from 1980 – 1990 and had his jersey number retired . Stastny signed a multi @-@ year contract with the Avalanche on July 24 , 2006 , and began his professional career in the 2006 – 07 NHL season . 
 Before training camp , it was not expected he would start the season with the Avalanche , but rather for an affiliate team of the Avalanche . However , Steve <unk> 's career @-@ ending heart problem opened a roster spot and Stastny 's play impressed Avalanche coach Joel Quenneville . Stastny started the season with the jersey number 62 until his teammate John @-@ Michael Liles ( switching to # 4 ) changed his to let Stastny use # 26 , the same his father wore when he played for the franchise while it was in Quebec . Stastny had his first NHL assist on a goal by Wojtek Wolski in his third NHL game , on October 8 against the Vancouver Canucks . On October 21 , in his eighth NHL game and first wearing number 26 , Stastny scored his first NHL goal in Montreal against David Aebischer of the Montreal Canadiens . 
 On February 21 , 2007 , Stastny scored two goals and passed Alex Tanguay 's total of 51 points to set a new Avalanche record for points by a rookie . His father holds the franchise record with 109 . Between February 3 and March 17 , he had a 20 @-@ game scoring streak , breaking not only his father 's franchise rookie record of 16 games , but also the NHL rookie record of 17 games that belonged to Teemu Selänne . He scored 11 goals and had 18 assists during that period and became the third @-@ youngest player in NHL history to record a 20 @-@ game scoring streak , following Mario Lemieux and Wayne Gretzky . At the start of the season , Wojtek Wolski was the Avalanche player seen as favorite to contend for the Calder Memorial Trophy ; however , the scoring streak put Stastny into contention as well . Stastny 's play was one of the reasons the Avalanche experienced their best run of the season towards the end , winning 15 of their last 19 games but missing the playoffs by one point . Stastny ended his rookie season with 78 points , finished second to Pittsburgh Penguins ' Evgeni Malkin in the voting for the Calder Memorial Trophy and was named to the 2006 – 07 NHL All @-@ Rookie Team . 
 Coming into his sophomore season , Stastny admitted the pressure would increase during the year . He continued the strong finish of his rookie year , by scoring his first career hat @-@ trick against Marty Turco of the Dallas Stars in the season 's first game and scoring five points for the first time four days later , against the San Jose Sharks . He scored 15 goals and had 28 assists in his first 34 games of the season , and had his 100th NHL point in his 99th NHL game . At the same time , Stastny hit a slump , during which he had one point in eight games . With the Avalanche having lost top players Joe Sakic and Ryan Smyth to injuries , Ryan Kennedy of The Hockey News pointed to Stastny 's inconsistency and wrote it was time for Stastny to step up and be a leader in all aspects . Despite being on the longest scoreless streak of his career , which lasted 10 games , on January 11 , 2008 , the NHL announced Stastny would play at the 56th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game . He scored two goals and three assists in three games before the Colorado Avalanche announced six days later that Stastny would miss approximately 2 – 3 weeks , including his first All @-@ Star Game to have his appendix removed . After recovering from the surgery and returning to skating , he suffered a groin injury during a practice , delaying his return . Stastny ended up missing 15 games , but he scored a goal on his comeback against the Phoenix Coyotes on February 22 . He scored seven goals and had 15 assists until the end of the regular season , missing a game due to flu on March 20 . With 71 points scored , he finished the regular season as the team 's scoring leader and the Avalanche finished 6th in the West , progressing to the playoffs to play against the Minnesota Wild . Stastny failed to score a point until the fifth game , when his game @-@ winning goal gave the Avalanche the lead in the series . Colorado ended the series by winning the sixth game and progressed to meet the Detroit Red Wings in the Western Conference Semifinals . Stastny scored a goal and an assist in the first game of the series , but a depleted Avalanche team was swept in four games . Stastny missed the last game of the series after he injured his knee during the first period of the third game . 
 On November 17 , 2008 , Stastny signed a US $ 33 @-@ million , five @-@ year contract extension with the Avalanche . The contract began in the 2009 – 10 season and runs through 2013 – 14 ; he will be paid an average of $ 6 @.@ 6 million a year . Stastny earned $ 710 @,@ 000 during the 2008 – 09 season . 
 In a December 23 , 2008 game against the Phoenix Coyotes , Paul suffered a fractured forearm after being struck by a shot from Phoenix 's Olli Jokinen in the last regulation minute of the game . He successfully underwent surgery on his arm and missed 24 games , but also his chance to play in the 2009 All @-@ Star Game in Montreal . This was the second consecutive season that he missed such an opportunity . He was injured again later in the season when he broke his foot while blocking a shot during a March 17 , 2009 game against the Minnesota Wild , putting him out of play for the rest of the season . He scored 36 points in just 45 games that year . 
 The 2009 – 10 season proved successful for Stastny and the Avalanche . He stayed uninjured the entire season , and only missed one game as a healthy scratch after the Avalanche clinched a playoff spot the previous evening . His 79 points ( 20 goals , 59 assists ) was a career best , and he led the team in points and assists . Tied with Alexander Ovechkin , only five players in the league ended up with more assists . Stastny 's second career appearance in the post season ended after the San Jose Sharks eliminated the Avs in the first round . On January 26 , 2011 , Stastny was named to his 2nd NHL All @-@ Star Game . He and his father became the 8th father @-@ son duo in NHL history to both play in an All @-@ Star Game . 
 With the delay of the 2012 – 13 season due to the Lockout , Stastny followed his brother 's footsteps to Germany and signed his first European contract with EHC München of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga on November 15 , 2012 . Stastny appeared in 13 games for Red Bull climbing to third among the team with 18 points before returning to the Avalanche upon the tentative lockout resolution on January 6 , 2013 . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues = = = 
 Unable to agree to a new contract with the Avalanche as a free agent , Stastny signed a four @-@ year $ 28 million contract with hometown club and Avalanche rivals , the St. Louis Blues , on July 1 , 2014 . Skating in 74 games in his first season with the Blues , Stastny scored 16 goals to go with 30 assists . 
 = = International play = = 
 Although born in Canada , Stastny is a dual citizen of Canada and the United States . Both he and his brother Yan have chosen to play internationally for the United States . Among the reasons that led him to choose to play for the United States was the possibility to play in an international competition with his brother , who had chosen to play for the United States before Paul . Paul represented the U.S. for the first time in the 2004 Viking Cup , where he won a silver medal playing for the junior team . According to Hockey 's Future , he was one of the most important American talents in the tournament . Stastny played internationally for the United States national ice hockey team for the first time in the 2007 IIHF World Championship . He played seven games , scored four goals and four assists , had two penalty minutes and finished even in plus / minus . The United States lost in the quarterfinals against Finland . Stastny was named the best American player in the 3 – 0 win against Germany , when he scored two goals and had one assist . He was chosen as one of the three best United States players at the tournament , together with Lee <unk> and Toby Petersen . 
 Stastny was selected to play for the U.S. men 's ice hockey team in the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver where he won a silver medal . He scored a goal and two assists over six games . Upon completion of a disappointing 2012 – 13 season with the Avalanche , Stastny accepted an invite the 2013 World Championship event in Finland / Sweden and was selected as Team U.S. Captain . He led the largely unheralded U.S. team , in claiming their country 's first medal at the Championships since 2004 , with shootout victory over Finland for Bronze on May 19 , 2013 . Stastny finished the tournament in second place in individual scoring with 15 points in 10 games , resulting in selection to the World Championship All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Stastny is a left @-@ handed center and was one of the few NHL players known to use a wood stick since 2005 , preferring it through his first four seasons in the NHL . However , he made the switch to a graphite stick to begin his 2010 – 11 NHL season . He considers himself a playmaker , a characteristic he says he inherited from his father . Former Avalanche captain Joe Sakic , who played with Paul and Peter Stastny , sees similarities between the two , namely their strong skating and ability to see the game . Former Avalanche coach Joel Quenneville , who faced Peter during his playing career , has said Paul plays in a similar way and complimented his hockey sense . George <unk> , Stastny 's coach at the University of Denver , has complimented his intelligence , ability to pass and see the ice . Although it has been said that Stastny is a slow skater , <unk> too feels he is a strong skater . Terry Frei of ESPN has said that " ... his game isn 't flashy and eye @-@ popping as much as it is heady , intuitive and efficient " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = Cerebellum = 
 The cerebellum ( Latin for " little brain " ) is a region of the brain that plays an important role in motor control . It may also be involved in some cognitive functions such as attention and language , and in regulating fear and pleasure responses , but its movement @-@ related functions are the most solidly established . The cerebellum does not initiate movement , but contributes to coordination , precision , and accurate timing . It receives input from sensory systems of the spinal cord and from other parts of the brain , and integrates these inputs to fine @-@ tune motor activity . Cerebellar damage produces disorders in fine movement , equilibrium , posture , and motor learning . 
 Anatomically , the cerebellum has the appearance of a separate structure attached to the bottom of the brain , tucked underneath the cerebral hemispheres . Its cortical surface is covered with finely spaced parallel grooves , in striking contrast to the broad irregular convolutions of the cerebral cortex . These parallel grooves conceal the fact that the cerebellar cortex is actually a continuous thin layer of tissue tightly folded in the style of an accordion . Within this thin layer are several types of neurons with a highly regular arrangement , the most important being Purkinje cells and granule cells . This complex neural organization gives rise to a massive signal @-@ processing capability , but almost all of the output from the cerebellar cortex passes through a set of small deep nuclei lying in the white matter interior of the cerebellum . 
 In addition to its direct role in motor control , the cerebellum is necessary for several types of motor learning , most notably learning to adjust to changes in sensorimotor relationships . Several theoretical models have been developed to explain sensorimotor calibration in terms of synaptic plasticity within the cerebellum . These models derive from those formulated by David Marr and James Albus , based on the observation that each cerebellar Purkinje cell receives two dramatically different types of input : one comprises thousands of weak inputs from the parallel fibers of the granule cells ; the other is an extremely strong input from a single climbing fiber . The basic concept of the Marr – Albus theory is that the climbing fiber serves as a " teaching signal " , which induces a long @-@ lasting change in the strength of parallel fiber inputs . Observations of long @-@ term depression in parallel fiber inputs have provided support for theories of this type , but their validity remains controversial . 
 = = Structure = = 
 At the level of gross anatomy , the cerebellum consists of a tightly folded layer of cortex , with white matter underneath and a fluid @-@ filled ventricle at the base . At the microscopic level , there are four deep nuclei embedded in the white matter . Each part of the cortex consists of the same small set of neuronal elements , laid out in a highly stereotyped geometry . At an intermediate level , the cerebellum and its auxiliary structures can be separated into several hundred or thousand independently functioning modules called " microzones " or " microcompartments " . 
 = = = Gross anatomy = = = 
 The cerebellum is located in the posterior cranial fossa . The fourth ventricle , pons and medulla are in front of the cerebellum . It is separated from the overlying cerebrum by a layer of leathery dura mater , the <unk> <unk> ; all of its connections with other parts of the brain travel through the pons . Anatomists classify the cerebellum as part of the metencephalon , which also includes the pons ; the metencephalon is the upper part of the <unk> or " hindbrain " . Like the cerebral cortex , the cerebellum is divided into two hemispheres ; it also contains a narrow midline zone ( the vermis ) . A set of large folds is , by convention , used to divide the overall structure into 10 smaller " lobules " . Because of its large number of tiny granule cells , the cerebellum contains more neurons than the total from the rest of the brain , but takes up only 10 % of the total brain volume . The number of neurons in the cerebellum is related to the number of neurons in the neocortex . There are about 3 @.@ 6 times as many neurons in the cerebellum as in the neocortex , a ratio that is conserved across many different mammalian species . 
 The unusual surface appearance of the cerebellum conceals the fact that most of its volume is made up of a very tightly folded layer of gray matter : the cerebellar cortex . Each ridge or gyrus in this layer is called a folium . It is estimated that , if the human cerebellar cortex were completely unfolded , it would give rise to a layer of neural tissue about 1 meter long and averaging 5 centimeters wide — a total surface area of about 500 square cm , packed within a volume of dimensions 6 cm × 5 cm × 10 cm . Underneath the gray matter of the cortex lies white matter , made up largely of myelinated nerve fibers running to and from the cortex . Embedded within the white matter — which is sometimes called the arbor vitae ( tree of life ) because of its branched , tree @-@ like appearance in cross @-@ section — are four deep cerebellar nuclei , composed of gray matter . 
 Connecting the cerebellum to different parts of the nervous system are three paired cerebellar peduncles . These are the superior cerebellar peduncle , the middle cerebellar peduncle and the inferior cerebellar peduncle , named by their position relative to the vermis . The superior cerebellar peduncle is mainly an output to the cerebral cortex , carrying efferent fibers to upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex . The fibers arise from the deep cerebellar nuclei . The middle cerebellar peduncle is connected to the pons and receives all of its input from the pons mainly from the pontine nuclei . The input to the pons is from the cerebral cortex and is relayed from the pontine nuclei via transverse pontine fibers to the cerebellum . The middle peduncle is the largest of the three and its afferent fibers are grouped into three separate fascicles taking their inputs to different parts of the cerebellum . The inferior cerebellar peduncle receives input from afferent fibers from the vestibular nuclei , spinal cord and the <unk> . Output from the inferior peduncle is via efferent fibers to the vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation . The whole of the cerebellum receives modulatory input from the inferior olivary nucleus via the inferior cerebellar peduncle . 
 = = = = Subdivisions = = = = 
 Based on the surface appearance , three lobes can be distinguished within the cerebellum : the anterior lobe ( above the primary fissure ) , the posterior lobe ( below the primary fissure ) , and the flocculonodular lobe ( below the posterior fissure ) . These lobes divide the cerebellum from rostral to caudal ( in humans , top to bottom ) . In terms of function , however , there is a more important distinction along the medial @-@ to @-@ lateral dimension . Leaving out the flocculonodular lobe , which has distinct connections and functions , the cerebellum can be parsed functionally into a medial sector called the spinocerebellum and a larger lateral sector called the cerebrocerebellum . A narrow strip of protruding tissue along the midline is called the cerebellar vermis . ( <unk> is Latin for " worm " . ) 
 The smallest region , the flocculonodular lobe , is often called the vestibulocerebellum . It is the oldest part in evolutionary terms ( <unk> ) and participates mainly in balance and spatial orientation ; its primary connections are with the vestibular nuclei , although it also receives visual and other sensory input . Damage to this region causes disturbances of balance and gait . 
 The medial zone of the anterior and posterior lobes constitutes the spinocerebellum , also known as <unk> . This sector of the cerebellum functions mainly to fine @-@ tune body and limb movements . It receives proprioceptive input from the dorsal columns of the spinal cord ( including the <unk> tract ) and from the cranial trigeminal nerve , as well as from visual and auditory systems . It sends fibers to deep cerebellar nuclei that , in turn , project to both the cerebral cortex and the brain stem , thus providing modulation of descending motor systems . 
 The lateral zone , which in humans is by far the largest part , constitutes the cerebrocerebellum , also known as neocerebellum . It receives input exclusively from the cerebral cortex ( especially the parietal lobe ) via the pontine nuclei ( forming <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ cerebellar pathways ) , and sends output mainly to the <unk> thalamus ( in turn connected to motor areas of the premotor cortex and primary motor area of the cerebral cortex ) and to the red nucleus . There is disagreement about the best way to describe the functions of the lateral cerebellum : It is thought to be involved in planning movement that is about to occur , in evaluating sensory information for action , and in a number of purely cognitive functions , such as determining the verb which best fits with a certain noun ( as in " sit " for " chair " ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Two types of neuron play dominant roles in the cerebellar circuit : Purkinje cells and granule cells . Three types of axons also play dominant roles : mossy fibers and climbing fibers ( which enter the cerebellum from outside ) , and parallel fibers ( which are the axons of granule cells ) . There are two main pathways through the cerebellar circuit , originating from mossy fibers and climbing fibers , both eventually terminating in the deep cerebellar nuclei . 
 Mossy fibers project directly to the deep nuclei , but also give rise to the following pathway : mossy fibers → granule cells → parallel fibers → Purkinje cells → deep nuclei . Climbing fibers project to Purkinje cells and also send collaterals directly to the deep nuclei . The mossy fiber and climbing fiber inputs each carry fiber @-@ specific information ; the cerebellum also receives dopaminergic , serotonergic , noradrenergic , and cholinergic inputs that presumably perform global modulation . 
 The cerebellar cortex is divided into three layers . At the bottom lies the thick granular layer , densely packed with granule cells , along with interneurons , mainly Golgi cells but also including <unk> cells and unipolar brush cells . In the middle lies the Purkinje layer , a narrow zone that contains the cell bodies of Purkinje cells and Bergmann glial cells . At the top lies the molecular layer , which contains the flattened dendritic trees of Purkinje cells , along with the huge array of parallel fibers penetrating the Purkinje cell dendritic trees at right angles . This outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex also contains two types of inhibitory <unk> : stellate cells and basket cells . Both stellate and basket cells form GABAergic synapses onto Purkinje cell dendrites . 
 = = = = Purkinje cells = = = = 
 Purkinje cells are among the most distinctive neurons in the brain , and one of the earliest types to be recognized — they were first described by the Czech anatomist Jan Evangelista <unk> in 1837 . They are distinguished by the shape of their dendritic tree : The dendrites branch very profusely , but are severely flattened in a plane perpendicular to the cerebellar folds . Thus , the dendrites of a Purkinje cell form a dense planar net , through which parallel fibers pass at right angles . The dendrites are covered with dendritic spines , each of which receives synaptic input from a parallel fiber . Purkinje cells receive more synaptic inputs than any other type of cell in the brain — estimates of the number of spines on a single human Purkinje cell run as high as 200 @,@ 000 . The large , spherical cell bodies of Purkinje cells are packed into a narrow layer ( one cell thick ) of the cerebellar cortex , called the Purkinje layer . After emitting collaterals that affect nearby parts of the cortex , their axons travel into the deep cerebellar nuclei , where they make on the order of 1 @,@ 000 contacts each with several types of nuclear cells , all within a small domain . Purkinje cells use GABA as their neurotransmitter , and therefore exert inhibitory effects on their targets . 
 Purkinje cells form the heart of the cerebellar circuit , and their large size and distinctive activity patterns have made it relatively easy to study their response patterns in behaving animals using extracellular recording techniques . Purkinje cells normally emit action potentials at a high rate even in the absence of the synaptic input . In awake , behaving animals , mean rates averaging around 40 Hz are typical . The spike trains show a mixture of what are called simple and complex spikes . A simple spike is a single action potential followed by a refractory period of about 10 ms ; a complex spike is a stereotyped sequence of action potentials with very short inter @-@ spike intervals and declining amplitudes . Physiological studies have shown that complex spikes ( which occur at baseline rates around 1 Hz and never at rates much higher than 10 Hz ) are reliably associated with climbing fiber activation , while simple spikes are produced by a combination of baseline activity and parallel fiber input . Complex spikes are often followed by a pause of several hundred milliseconds during which simple spike activity is suppressed . 
 = = = = Granule cells = = = = 
 Cerebellar granule cells , in contrast to Purkinje cells , are among the smallest neurons in the brain . They are also easily the most numerous neurons in the brain : In humans , estimates of their total number average around 50 billion , which means that about 3 / 4 of the brain 's neurons are cerebellar granule cells . Their cell bodies are packed into a thick layer at the bottom of the cerebellar cortex . A granule cell emits only four to five dendrites , each of which ends in an enlargement called a dendritic claw . These enlargements are sites of excitatory input from mossy fibers and inhibitory input from Golgi cells . 
 The thin , <unk> axons of granule cells rise vertically to the upper ( molecular ) layer of the cortex , where they split in two , with each branch traveling horizontally to form a parallel fiber ; the splitting of the vertical branch into two horizontal branches gives rise to a distinctive " T " shape . A human parallel fiber runs for an average of 3 mm in each direction from the split , for a total length of about 6 mm ( about 1 / 10 of the total width of the cortical layer ) . As they run along , the parallel fibers pass through the dendritic trees of Purkinje cells , contacting one of every 3 – 5 that they pass , making a total of 80 – 100 synaptic connections with Purkinje cell dendritic spines . Granule cells use glutamate as their neurotransmitter , and therefore exert excitatory effects on their targets . 
 Granule cells receive all of their input from mossy fibers , but outnumber them by 200 to 1 ( in humans ) . Thus , the information in the granule cell population activity state is the same as the information in the mossy fibers , but recoded in a much more expansive way . Because granule cells are so small and so densely packed , it is difficult to record their spike activity in behaving animals , so there is little data to use as a basis for theorizing . The most popular concept of their function was proposed in 1969 by David Marr , who suggested that they could encode combinations of mossy fiber inputs . The idea is that with each granule cell receiving input from only 4 – 5 mossy fibers , a granule cell would not respond if only a single one of its inputs were active , but would respond if more than one were active . This combinatorial coding scheme would potentially allow the cerebellum to make much finer distinctions between input patterns than the mossy fibers alone would permit . 
 = = = = Mossy fibers = = = = 
 Mossy fibers enter the granular layer from their points of origin , many arising from the pontine nuclei , others from the spinal cord , vestibular nuclei etc . In the human cerebellum , the total number of mossy fibers has been estimated at about 200 million . These fibers form excitatory synapses with the granule cells and the cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei . Within the granular layer , a mossy fiber generates a series of enlargements called rosettes . The contacts between mossy fibers and granule cell dendrites take place within structures called glomeruli . Each glomerulus has a mossy fiber rosette at its center , and up to 20 granule cell dendritic claws contacting it . Terminals from Golgi cells infiltrate the structure and make inhibitory synapses onto the granule cell dendrites . The entire assemblage is surrounded by a sheath of glial cells . Each mossy fiber sends collateral branches to several cerebellar <unk> , generating a total of 20 – 30 rosettes ; thus a single mossy fiber makes contact with an estimated 400 – 600 granule cells . 
 = = = = Climbing fibers = = = = 
 Purkinje cells also receive input from the inferior olivary nucleus on the contralateral side of the brainstem via climbing fibers . Although the inferior olive lies in the medulla oblongata and receives input from the spinal cord , brainstem and cerebral cortex , its output goes entirely to the cerebellum . A climbing fiber gives off collaterals to the deep cerebellar nuclei before entering the cerebellar cortex , where it splits into about 10 terminal branches , each of which gives input to a single Purkinje cell . In striking contrast to the 100 @,@ 000 @-@ plus inputs from parallel fibers , each Purkinje cell receives input from exactly one climbing fiber ; but this single fiber " climbs " the dendrites of the Purkinje cell , winding around them and making a total of up to 300 synapses as it goes . The net input is so strong that a single action potential from a climbing fiber is capable of producing an extended complex spike in the Purkinje cell : a burst of several spikes in a row , with diminishing amplitude , followed by a pause during which activity is suppressed . The climbing fiber synapses cover the cell body and proximal dendrites ; this zone is devoid of parallel fiber inputs . 
 Climbing fibers fire at low rates , but a single climbing fiber action potential induces a burst of several action potentials in a target Purkinje cell ( a complex spike ) . The contrast between parallel fiber and climbing fiber inputs to Purkinje cells ( over 100 @,@ 000 of one type versus exactly one of the other type ) is perhaps the most provocative feature of cerebellar anatomy , and has motivated much of the theorizing . In fact , the function of climbing fibers is the most controversial topic concerning the cerebellum . There are two schools of thought , one following Marr and Albus in holding that climbing fiber input serves primarily as a teaching signal , the other holding that its function is to shape cerebellar output directly . Both views have been defended in great length in numerous publications . In the words of one review , " In trying to synthesize the various hypotheses on the function of the climbing fibers , one has the sense of looking at a drawing by Escher . Each point of view seems to account for a certain collection of findings , but when one attempts to put the different views together , a coherent picture of what the climbing fibers are doing does not appear . For the majority of researchers , the climbing fibers signal errors in motor performance , either in the usual manner of discharge frequency modulation or as a single announcement of an ' unexpected event ' . For other investigators , the message lies in the degree of ensemble synchrony and rhythmicity among a population of climbing fibers . " 
 = = = = Deep nuclei = = = = 
 The deep nuclei of the cerebellum are clusters of gray matter lying within the white matter at the core of the cerebellum . They are , with the minor exception of the nearby vestibular nuclei , the sole sources of output from the cerebellum . These nuclei receive collateral projections from mossy fibers and climbing fibers as well as inhibitory input from the Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex . The four nuclei ( dentate , globose , <unk> , and <unk> ) each communicate with different parts of the brain and cerebellar cortex . ( The globose and the <unk> nuclei are also referred to as combined in the interposed nucleus ) . The <unk> and interposed nuclei belong to the spinocerebellum . The dentate nucleus , which in mammals is much larger than the others , is formed as a thin , convoluted layer of gray matter , and communicates exclusively with the lateral parts of the cerebellar cortex . The flocculonodular lobe is the only part of the cerebellar cortex that does not project to the deep nuclei — its output goes to the vestibular nuclei instead . 
 The majority of neurons in the deep nuclei have large cell bodies and spherical dendritic trees with a radius of about 400 μm , and use glutamate as their neurotransmitter . These cells project to a variety of targets outside the cerebellum . Intermixed with them are a lesser number of small cells , which use GABA as a neurotransmitter and project exclusively to the inferior olivary nucleus , the source of climbing fibers . Thus , the <unk> @-@ olivary projection provides an inhibitory feedback to match the excitatory projection of climbing fibers to the nuclei . There is evidence that each small cluster of nuclear cells projects to the same cluster of olivary cells that send climbing fibers to it ; there is strong and matching topography in both directions . 
 When a Purkinje cell axon enters one of the deep nuclei , it branches to make contact with both large and small nuclear cells , but the total number of cells contacted is only about 35 ( in cats ) . Conversely , a single deep nuclear cell receives input from approximately 860 Purkinje cells ( again in cats ) . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 From the viewpoint of gross anatomy , the cerebellar cortex appears to be a homogeneous sheet of tissue , and , from the viewpoint of <unk> , all parts of this sheet appear to have the same internal structure . There are , however , a number of respects in which the structure of the cerebellum is compartmentalized . There are large compartments that are generally known as zones ; these can be divided into smaller compartments known as microzones . 
 The first indications of compartmental structure came from studies of the receptive fields of cells in various parts of the cerebellar cortex . Each body part maps to specific points in the cerebellum , but there are numerous repetitions of the basic map , forming an arrangement that has been called " fractured <unk> " . A clearer indication of compartmentalization is obtained by <unk> the cerebellum for certain types of protein . The best @-@ known of these markers are called " <unk> " , because staining for them gives rise to a complex pattern reminiscent of the stripes on a zebra . The stripes generated by <unk> and other compartmentalization markers are oriented perpendicular to the cerebellar folds — that is , they are narrow in the mediolateral direction , but much more extended in the longitudinal direction . Different markers generate different sets of stripes , the widths and lengths vary as a function of location , but they all have the same general shape . 
 <unk> in the late 1970s proposed that these cortical zones can be partitioned into smaller units called microzones . A microzone is defined as a group of Purkinje cells all having the same <unk> receptive field . <unk> were found to contain on the order of 1000 Purkinje cells each , arranged in a long , narrow strip , oriented perpendicular to the cortical folds . Thus , as the adjoining diagram illustrates , Purkinje cell dendrites are flattened in the same direction as the microzones extend , while parallel fibers cross them at right angles . 
 It is not only receptive fields that define the microzone structure : The climbing fiber input from the inferior olivary nucleus is equally important . The branches of a climbing fiber ( usually numbering about 10 ) usually activate Purkinje cells belonging to the same microzone . Moreover , olivary neurons that send climbing fibers to the same microzone tend to be coupled by gap junctions , which synchronize their activity , causing Purkinje cells within a microzone to show correlated complex spike activity on a millisecond time scale . Also , the Purkinje cells belonging to a microzone all send their axons to the same small cluster of output cells within the deep cerebellar nuclei . Finally , the axons of basket cells are much longer in the longitudinal direction than in the mediolateral direction , causing them to be confined largely to a single microzone . The consequence of all this structure is that cellular interactions within a microzone are much stronger than interactions between different microzones . 
 In 2005 , Richard Apps and Martin <unk> summarized evidence that microzones themselves form part of a larger entity they call a <unk> <unk> . Such a <unk> includes several spatially separated cortical microzones , all of which project to the same group of deep cerebellar neurons , plus a group of coupled olivary neurons that project to all of the included microzones as well as to the deep nuclear area . 
 = = Function = = 
 The strongest clues to the function of the cerebellum have come from examining the consequences of damage to it . Animals and humans with cerebellar dysfunction show , above all , problems with motor control , on the same side of the body as the damaged part of the cerebellum . They continue to be able to generate motor activity , but it loses precision , producing erratic , uncoordinated , or incorrectly timed movements . A standard test of cerebellar function is to reach with the tip of the finger for a target at arm 's length : A healthy person will move the fingertip in a rapid straight trajectory , whereas a person with cerebellar damage will reach slowly and erratically , with many mid @-@ course corrections . Deficits in non @-@ motor functions are more difficult to detect . Thus , the general conclusion reached decades ago is that the basic function of the cerebellum is to calibrate the detailed form of a movement , not to initiate movements or to decide which movements to execute . 
 Prior to the 1990s the function of the cerebellum was almost universally believed to be purely motor @-@ related , but newer findings have brought that view into question . Functional imaging studies have shown cerebellar activation in relation to language , attention , and mental imagery ; correlation studies have shown interactions between the cerebellum and non @-@ motor areas of the cerebral cortex ; and a variety of non @-@ motor symptoms have been recognized in people with damage that appears to be confined to the cerebellum . In particular , the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome has been described in adults and children . Estimates based on functional mapping of the cerebellum using functional MRI suggest that more than half of the cerebellar cortex is interconnected with association zones of the cerebral cortex . 
 Kenji <unk> has argued that the function of the cerebellum is best understood not in terms of what behaviors it is involved in , but rather in terms of what neural computations it performs ; the cerebellum consists of a large number of more or less independent modules , all with the same geometrically regular internal structure , and therefore all , it is presumed , performing the same computation . If the input and output connections of a module are with motor areas ( as many are ) , then the module will be involved in motor behavior ; but , if the connections are with areas involved in non @-@ motor cognition , the module will show other types of behavioral correlates . Thus the cerebellum has been implicated in the regulation of many differing functional traits such as affection , emotion and behavior . The cerebellum , <unk> proposes , is best understood as predictive action selection based on " internal models " of the environment or a device for supervised learning , in contrast to the basal ganglia , which perform reinforcement learning , and the cerebral cortex , which performs unsupervised learning . 
 = = = Principles = = = 
 The comparative simplicity and regularity of the cerebellar anatomy led to an early hope that it might imply a similar simplicity of computational function , as expressed in one of the first books on cerebellar electrophysiology , The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine by John C. Eccles , Masao Ito , and János <unk> . Although a full understanding of cerebellar function has remained elusive , at least four principles have been identified as important : ( 1 ) feedforward processing , ( 2 ) divergence and convergence , ( 3 ) modularity , and ( 4 ) plasticity . 
 <unk> processing : The cerebellum differs from most other parts of the brain ( especially the cerebral cortex ) in that the signal processing is almost entirely feedforward — that is , signals move unidirectionally through the system from input to output , with very little recurrent internal transmission . The small amount of recurrence that does exist consists of mutual inhibition ; there are no mutually excitatory circuits . This feedforward mode of operation means that the cerebellum , in contrast to the cerebral cortex , cannot generate self @-@ sustaining patterns of neural activity . Signals enter the circuit , are processed by each stage in sequential order , and then leave . As Eccles , Ito , and <unk> wrote , " This elimination in the design of all possibility of reverberatory chains of neuronal excitation is undoubtedly a great advantage in the performance of the cerebellum as a computer , because what the rest of the nervous system requires from the cerebellum is presumably not some output expressing the operation of complex reverberatory circuits in the cerebellum but rather a quick and clear response to the input of any particular set of information . " 
 Divergence and convergence : In the human cerebellum , information from 200 million mossy fiber inputs is expanded to 40 billion granule cells , whose parallel fiber outputs then converge onto 15 million Purkinje cells . Because of the way that they are lined up longitudinally , the 1000 or so Purkinje cells belonging to a microzone may receive input from as many as 100 million parallel fibers , and focus their own output down to a group of less than 50 deep nuclear cells . Thus , the cerebellar network receives a modest number of inputs , processes them very extensively through its rigorously structured internal network , and sends out the results via a very limited number of output cells . 
 Modularity : The cerebellar system is functionally divided into more or less independent modules , which probably number in the hundreds to thousands . All modules have a similar internal structure , but different inputs and outputs . A module ( a <unk> <unk> in the terminology of Apps and <unk> ) consists of a small cluster of neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus , a set of long narrow strips of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex ( microzones ) , and a small cluster of neurons in one of the deep cerebellar nuclei . Different modules share input from mossy fibers and parallel fibers , but in other respects they appear to function independently — the output of one module does not appear to significantly influence the activity of other modules . 
 Plasticity : The synapses between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells , and the synapses between mossy fibers and deep nuclear cells , are both susceptible to modification of their strength . In a single cerebellar module , input from as many as a billion parallel fibers converges onto a group of less than 50 deep nuclear cells , and the influence of each parallel fiber on those nuclear cells is adjustable . This arrangement gives tremendous flexibility for fine @-@ tuning the relationship between the cerebellar inputs and outputs . 
 = = = Learning = = = 
 There is considerable evidence that the cerebellum plays an essential role in some types of motor learning . The tasks where the cerebellum most clearly comes into play are those in which it is necessary to make fine adjustments to the way an action is performed . There has , however , been much dispute about whether learning takes place within the cerebellum itself , or whether it merely serves to provide signals that promote learning in other brain structures . Most theories that assign learning to the circuitry of the cerebellum are derived from the ideas of David Marr and James Albus , who postulated that climbing fibers provide a teaching signal that induces synaptic modification in parallel fiber – Purkinje cell synapses . Marr assumed that climbing fiber input would cause synchronously activated parallel fiber inputs to be strengthened . Most subsequent cerebellar @-@ learning models , however , have followed Albus in assuming that climbing fiber activity would be an error signal , and would cause synchronously activated parallel fiber inputs to be weakened . Some of these later models , such as the Adaptive Filter model of Fujita made attempts to understand cerebellar function in terms of optimal control theory . 
 The idea that climbing fiber activity functions as an error signal has been examined in many experimental studies , with some supporting it but others casting doubt . In a pioneering study by Gilbert and Thach from 1977 , Purkinje cells from monkeys learning a reaching task showed increased complex spike activity — which is known to reliably indicate activity of the cell 's climbing fiber input — during periods when performance was poor . Several studies of motor learning in cats observed complex spike activity when there was a mismatch between an intended movement and the movement that was actually executed . Studies of the <unk> – ocular reflex ( which stabilizes the visual image on the retina when the head turns ) found that climbing fiber activity indicated " retinal slip " , although not in a very straightforward way . 
 One of the most extensively studied cerebellar learning tasks is the <unk> conditioning paradigm , in which a neutral conditioned stimulus ( CS ) such as a tone or a light is repeatedly paired with an unconditioned stimulus ( US ) , such as an air puff , that elicits a blink response . After such repeated presentations of the CS and US , the CS will eventually elicit a blink before the US , a conditioned response or CR . Experiments showed that lesions localized either to a specific part of the interposed nucleus ( one of the deep cerebellar nuclei ) or to a few specific points in the cerebellar cortex would abolish learning of a conditionally timed blink response . If cerebellar outputs are pharmacologically inactivated while leaving the inputs and intracellular circuits intact , learning takes place even while the animal fails to show any response , whereas , if <unk> circuits are disrupted , no learning takes place — these facts taken together make a strong case that the learning , indeed , occurs inside the cerebellum . 
 = = = Theories and computational models = = = 
 The large base of knowledge about the anatomical structure and behavioral functions of the cerebellum have made it a fertile ground for theorizing — there are perhaps more theories of the function of the cerebellum than of any other part of the brain . The most basic distinction among them is between " learning theories " and " performance theories " — that is , theories that make use of synaptic plasticity within the cerebellum to account for its role in learning , versus theories that account for aspects of ongoing behavior on the basis of cerebellar signal processing . Several theories of both types have been formulated as mathematical models and simulated using computers . 
 Perhaps the earliest " performance " theory was the " delay line " hypothesis of Valentino Braitenberg . The original theory put forth by Braitenberg and Roger Atwood in 1958 proposed that slow propagation of signals along parallel fibers imposes predictable delays that allow the cerebellum to detect time relationships within a certain window . Experimental data did not support the original form of the theory , but Braitenberg continued to argue for modified versions . The hypothesis that the cerebellum functions essentially as a timing system has also been advocated by Richard Ivry . Another influential " performance " theory is the Tensor network theory of <unk> and <unk> , which provided an advanced mathematical formulation of the idea that the fundamental computation performed by the cerebellum is to transform sensory into motor coordinates . 
 Theories in the " learning " category almost all derive from publications by Marr and Albus . Marr 's 1969 paper proposed that the cerebellum is a device for learning to associate elemental movements encoded by climbing fibers with mossy fiber inputs that encode the sensory context . Albus proposed in 1971 that a cerebellar Purkinje cell functions as a perceptron , a <unk> inspired abstract learning device . The most basic difference between the Marr and Albus theories is that Marr assumed that climbing fiber activity would cause parallel fiber synapses to be strengthened , whereas Albus proposed that they would be weakened . Albus also formulated his version as a software algorithm he called a <unk> ( Cerebellar Model <unk> Controller ) , which has been tested in a number of applications . 
 = = Blood supply = = 
 The cerebellum is provided with blood from three paired major arteries : the superior cerebellar artery ( SCA ) , the anterior inferior cerebellar artery ( AICA ) , and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery ( <unk> ) . The SCA supplies the upper region of the cerebellum . It divides at the upper surface and branches into the pia mater where the branches anastomose with those of the anterior and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries . The AICA supplies the front part of the undersurface of the cerebellum . The <unk> arrives at the undersurface , where it divides into a medial branch and a lateral branch . The medial branch continues backward to the cerebellar notch between the two hemispheres of the cerebellum ; while the lateral branch supplies the under surface of the cerebellum , as far as its lateral border , where it anastomoses with the AICA and the SCA . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 The most salient symptoms of cerebellar dysfunction are motor @-@ related — the specific symptoms depend on which part of the cerebellum is involved and how it is disrupted . Damage to the flocculonodular lobe ( vestibulocerebellum ) may show up as a loss of equilibrium and , in particular , an altered walking gait , with a wide stance that indicates difficulty in balancing . Damage to the lateral zone , or the cerebrocerebellum , results in problems with skilled voluntary and planned movements . This can cause errors in the force , direction , speed and amplitude of movements . Some manifestations include hypotonia ( decreased muscle tone ) , dysarthria ( problems with speech articulation ) , <unk> ( problems judging distances or ranges of movement ) , <unk> ( inability to perform rapid alternating movements ) , impaired check reflex or rebound phenomenon , and intention tremor ( involuntary movement caused by alternating contractions of opposing muscle groups ) . Damage to the midline portion may disrupt whole @-@ body movements , whereas damage localized more laterally is more likely to disrupt fine movements of the hands or limbs . Damage to the upper part of the cerebellum tends to cause gait impairments and other problems with leg coordination ; damage to the lower part is more likely to cause uncoordinated or poorly aimed movements of the arms and hands , as well as difficulties in speed . This complex of motor symptoms is called ataxia . 
 To identify cerebellar problems , neurological examination includes assessment of gait ( a broad @-@ based gait being indicative of ataxia ) , finger @-@ pointing tests and assessment of posture . If cerebellar dysfunction is indicated , a magnetic resonance imaging scan can be used to obtain a detailed picture of any structural alterations that may exist . 
 The list of medical problems that can produce cerebellar damage is long , including stroke , hemorrhage , swelling of the brain ( cerebral edema ) , tumors , alcoholism , physical trauma such as gunshot wounds or explosives , and chronic degenerative conditions such as <unk> atrophy . Some forms of migraine headache may also produce temporary dysfunction of the cerebellum , of variable severity . Infection can result in cerebellar damage in such conditions as the prion diseases and Miller Fisher syndrome , a variant of Guillain – Barré syndrome . 
 = = = Aging = = = 
 The human cerebellum changes with age . These changes may differ from those of other parts of the brain . The cerebellum is the youngest brain region ( and body part ) in centenarians according to an epigenetic biomarker of tissue age known as epigenetic clock : it is about 15 years younger than expected in a centenarian . Further , gene expression patterns in the human cerebellum show less age @-@ related alteration than that in the cerebral cortex . Some studies have reported reductions in numbers of cells or volume of tissue , but the amount of data relating to this question is not very large . 
 = = = Developmental and degenerative disorders = = = 
 Congenital malformation , hereditary disorders , and acquired conditions can affect cerebellar structure and , consequently , cerebellar function . Unless the causative condition is reversible , the only possible treatment is to help people live with their problems . Visualization of the fetal cerebellum by ultrasound scan at 18 to 20 weeks of pregnancy can be used to screen for fetal neural tube defects with a sensitivity rate of up to 99 % . 
 In normal development , endogenous Sonic hedgehog signaling stimulates rapid proliferation of cerebellar granule neuron progenitors ( <unk> ) in the external granule layer ( EGL ) . Cerebellar development occurs during late embryogenesis and the early postnatal period , with <unk> proliferation in the EGL peaking during early development ( postnatal day 7 in the mouse ) . As <unk> terminally differentiate into cerebellum granule cells ( also called cerebellar granule neurons , <unk> ) , they migrate to the internal granule layer ( IGL ) , forming the mature cerebellum ( by post @-@ natal day 20 in the mouse ) . Mutations that abnormally activate Sonic hedgehog signaling predispose to cancer of the cerebellum ( <unk> ) in humans with Gorlin Syndrome and in genetically engineered mouse models . 
 Congenital malformation or underdevelopment ( hypoplasia ) of the cerebellar vermis is a characteristic of both Dandy – Walker syndrome and Joubert syndrome . In very rare cases , the entire cerebellum may be absent . The inherited neurological disorders Machado – Joseph disease , ataxia telangiectasia , and Friedreich 's ataxia cause progressive neurodegeneration linked to cerebellar loss . Congenital brain malformations outside the cerebellum can , in turn , cause herniation of cerebellar tissue , as seen in some forms of Arnold – Chiari malformation . 
 Other conditions that are closely linked to cerebellar degeneration include the idiopathic progressive neurological disorders multiple system atrophy and Ramsay Hunt syndrome type I , and the autoimmune disorder paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration , in which tumors elsewhere in the body elicit an autoimmune response that causes neuronal loss in the cerebellum . Cerebellar atrophy can result from an acute deficiency of vitamin B1 ( thiamine ) as seen in beriberi and in Wernicke – Korsakoff syndrome , or from vitamin E deficiency . 
 Cerebellar atrophy has been observed in many other neurological disorders including Huntington 's disease , multiple sclerosis , essential tremor , progressive myoclonus epilepsy , and Niemann – Pick disease . Cerebellar atrophy can also occur as a result of exposure to toxins including heavy metals or pharmaceutical or recreational drugs . 
 = = Comparative anatomy and evolution = = 
 The circuits in the cerebellum are similar across all classes of vertebrates , including fish , reptiles , birds , and mammals . There is also an analogous brain structure in cephalopods with well @-@ developed brains , such as octopuses . This has been taken as evidence that the cerebellum performs functions important to all animal species with a brain . 
 There is considerable variation in the size and shape of the cerebellum in different vertebrate species . In amphibians , it is little developed , and in lampreys , and hagfish , the cerebellum is barely distinguishable from the brain @-@ stem . Although the spinocerebellum is present in these groups , the primary structures are small , paired @-@ nuclei corresponding to the vestibulocerebellum . The cerebellum is a bit larger in reptiles , considerably larger in birds , and larger yet in mammals . The large paired and convoluted lobes found in humans are typical of mammals , but the cerebellum is , in general , a single median lobe in other groups , and is either smooth or only slightly grooved . In mammals , the neocerebellum is the major part of the cerebellum by mass , but , in other vertebrates , it is typically the spinocerebellum . 
 The cerebellum of cartilaginous and bony fishes is extraordinarily large and complex . In at least one important respect , it differs in internal structure from the mammalian cerebellum : The fish cerebellum does not contain discrete deep cerebellar nuclei . Instead , the primary targets of Purkinje cells are a distinct type of cell distributed across the cerebellar cortex , a type not seen in mammals . In <unk> fish ( a family of weakly <unk> freshwater fish ) , the cerebellum is considerably larger than the rest of the brain put together . The largest part of it is a special structure called the <unk> , which has an unusually regular architecture and receives much of its input from the electrosensory system . 
 The hallmark of the mammalian cerebellum is an expansion of the lateral lobes , whose main interactions are with the neocortex . As monkeys evolved into great apes , the expansion of the lateral lobes continued , in tandem with the expansion of the frontal lobes of the neocortex . In ancestral hominids , and in Homo sapiens until the middle Pleistocene period , the cerebellum continued to expand , but the frontal lobes expanded more rapidly . The most recent period of human evolution , however , may actually have been associated with an increase in the relative size of the cerebellum , as the neocortex reduced its size somewhat while the cerebellum expanded . The size of the human cerebellum , compared to the rest of the brain , has been increasing in size while the cerebrum decreased in size With both the development and implementation of motor tasks , visual @-@ spatial skills and learning taking place in the cerebellum , the growth of the cerebellum is thought to have some form of correlation to greater human cognitive abilities . The lateral hemispheres of the cerebellum are now 2 @.@ 7 times greater in both humans and apes than they are in monkeys . These changes in the cerebellum size cannot be explained by greater muscle mass . They show that either the development of the cerebellum is tightly linked to that of the rest of the brain or that neural activities taking place in the cerebellum were important during Hominidae evolution . Due to the cerebellum 's role in cognitive functions , the increase in its size may have played a role in cognitive expansion . 
 = = = Cerebellum @-@ like structures = = = 
 Most vertebrate species have a cerebellum and one or more cerebellum @-@ like structures , brain areas that resemble the cerebellum in terms of cytoarchitecture and neurochemistry . The only cerebellum @-@ like structure found in mammals is the dorsal cochlear nucleus ( DCN ) , one of the two primary sensory nuclei that receive input directly from the auditory nerve . The DCN is a layered structure , with the bottom layer containing granule cells similar to those of the cerebellum , giving rise to parallel fibers that rise to the superficial layer and travel across it horizontally . The superficial layer contains a set of GABAergic neurons called cartwheel cells that resemble Purkinje cells anatomically and chemically — they receive parallel fiber input , but do not have any inputs that resemble climbing fibers . The output neurons of the DCN are pyramidal cells . They are glutamatergic , but also resemble Purkinje cells in some respects — they have spiny , flattened superficial dendritic trees that receive parallel fiber input , but they also have basal dendrites that receive input from auditory nerve fibers , which travel across the DCN in a direction at right angles to the parallel fibers . The DCN is most highly developed in rodents and other small animals , and is considerably reduced in primates . Its function is not well understood ; the most popular speculations relate it to spatial hearing in one way or another . 
 Most species of fish and amphibians possess a lateral line system that senses pressure waves in water . One of the brain areas that receives primary input from the lateral line organ , the medial <unk> nucleus , has a cerebellum @-@ like structure , with granule cells and parallel fibers . In <unk> fish , the input from the electrosensory system goes to the dorsal <unk> nucleus , which also has a cerebellum @-@ like structure . In ray @-@ finned fishes ( by far the largest group ) , the optic tectum has a layer — the marginal layer — that is cerebellum @-@ like . 
 All of these cerebellum @-@ like structures appear to be primarily sensory @-@ related rather than motor @-@ related . All of them have granule cells that give rise to parallel fibers that connect to Purkinje @-@ like neurons with modifiable synapses , but none have climbing fibers comparable to those of the cerebellum — instead they receive direct input from peripheral sensory organs . None has a demonstrated function , but the most influential speculation is that they serve to transform sensory inputs in some sophisticated way , perhaps to compensate for changes in body posture . In fact , James M. Bower and others have argued , partly on the basis of these structures and partly on the basis of cerebellar studies , that the cerebellum itself is fundamentally a sensory structure , and that it contributes to motor control by moving the body in a way that controls the resulting sensory signals . Despite Bower 's viewpoint , there is also strong evidence that the cerebellum directly influences motor output in mammals . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Descriptions = = = 
 Even the earliest anatomists were able to recognize the cerebellum by its distinctive appearance . Aristotle and Herophilus ( quoted in Galen ) called it the parencephalis , as opposed to the <unk> or brain proper . Galen 's extensive description is the earliest that survives . He speculated that the cerebellum was the source of motor nerves . 
 Further significant developments did not come until the Renaissance . Vesalius discussed the cerebellum briefly , and the anatomy was described more thoroughly by Thomas Willis in 1664 . More anatomical work was done during the 18th century , but it was not until early in the 19th century that the first insights into the function of the cerebellum were obtained . Luigi Rolando in 1809 established the key finding that damage to the cerebellum results in motor disturbances . Jean Pierre <unk> in the first half of the 19th century carried out detailed experimental work , which revealed that animals with cerebellar damage can still move , but with a loss of coordination ( strange movements , awkward gait , and muscular weakness ) , and that recovery after the lesion can be nearly complete unless the lesion is very extensive . By the beginning of the 20th century , it was widely accepted that the primary function of the cerebellum relates to motor control ; the first half of the 20th century produced several detailed descriptions of the clinical symptoms associated with cerebellar disease in humans . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The name cerebellum is a diminutive of cerebrum ( brain ) ; it can be translated literally as little brain . The Latin name is a direct translation of the Ancient Greek <unk> ( parencephalis ) , which was used in the works of Aristotle , the first known writer to describe the structure . No other name is used in the English @-@ language literature , but historically a variety of Greek or Latin @-@ derived names have been used , including cerebrum parvum , <unk> , <unk> , cerebrum <unk> , and parencephalis . 
 = Donn Cabral = 
 Donald " Donn " Cabral is an American cross country and track athlete from Connecticut who went on to star at Princeton University . As a long distance runner he has been most successful in the steeplechase , but has also been a National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) All @-@ American at cross country and the 5000 metres as well as the Ivy League champion at the 3000 metres . He is the current American collegiate steeplechase record holder and was the 2012 NCAA steeplechase champion . He competed in the 2012 Summer Olympic Games in the steeplechase . At Princeton , Cabral was an eight @-@ time NCAA All @-@ American and ten @-@ time individual Ivy League champion . He was a long distance running champion in high school for Glastonbury High School , winning two Class LL championships as a sophomore and then open state and New England championships as a junior and senior . 
 = = Running career = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Early on , Cabral showed interest in Olympic competition and high caliber racing . After watching patriotic flag waving during the 1996 Summer Olympics , Cabral requested that his father wave the American Flag during one of his swim meets as a six @-@ year @-@ old . In his first Manchester Road Race at age 12 , Cabral 's parents placed him in the starting position with the runners who run at an 8 – 9 minute per mile pace , but he complained , " How am I going to win from back here ? " 
 At Glastonbury High School in Glastonbury , Connecticut , Cabral excelled in track and cross country . He was a two @-@ time State Open and New England cross country champion . He was also the indoor track Connecticut 2 mile champion . He ran the fastest high school 1500 metres in the country during his senior year . He also established state records in the 5 @,@ 000 m ( 14 : 32 @.@ 60 ) and the 2 mile run ( 8 : 56 @.@ 35 ) . 
 As a freshman , Cabral was the second slowest runner on the soccer team . He tried out for track to work on his speed . At first he ran the 400 metres in 68 seconds . By the end of the spring , he broke 10 minutes in the 2 mile and was considering joining the cross country team instead of participating in his usual fall sport , soccer . In the summer of 2005 , the cross country coach sent him a letter of encouragement . 
 During his sophomore year , he won the boys Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference ( CIAC ) class LL indoor track two mile run and placed third in the New England Championships . He finished third in the CIAC Cross Country Open Championships and 19th in the New England Championships . His cross country performance earned him the Class LL championship that year . 
 As a junior , Cabral won the CIAC Cross Country Open Championships . He also won the 72nd New England Cross Country Championships at <unk> High School with a 5K race time of 15 : 29 . Glastonbury finished second to Danbury High School in the team competition . At the Foot Locker National Cross Country Championship , Cabral finished 21st with a time of 15 : 57 . 
 In his senior season , Cabral won the 2007 boys CIAC State Open Cross Country Championships . He also won the New England Cross Country Championships . At the Foot Locker National Cross Country Championship at Balboa Park in San Diego , Cabral finished 8th with a time of 15 : 19 , which tied the best ever finish by a Connecticut runner . In May , his 4 : 09 @.@ 80 became the best mile time of the school year for an American high schooler . Cabral placed second in the 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 30 : 50 @.@ 28 ) at the 2008 USA Junior Track & Field championships , qualifying him for the at the IAAF World Junior Championships in Poland . 
 = = = Collegiate = = = 
 During his Princeton running career , Cabral was a three @-@ time NCAA All @-@ American in the steeplechase , two @-@ time outdoor NCAA All @-@ American in the 5000 meter , two @-@ time cross country NCAA All @-@ American , and one @-@ time indoor NCAA All @-@ American in the 5000 meter . As a senior , Cabral became the 2012 NCAA champion in the steeplechase after having been the runner @-@ up to Matt Hughes in the two prior NCAA steeplechase championships . 
 As a freshman , Cabral endured a plantar fascia tear while waterskiing and did not compete in cross country . He did not compete in the steeplechase until his sophomore season at Princeton . In his second time running the event , he won at the 2010 Penn Relays . That year he was the Ivy League outdoor 10 @,@ 000 meter and steeplechase champion and the indoor runner @-@ up in the 3000 meters and 5000 meters . He finished second at the NCAA championships with a time of 8 : 38 @.@ 90 . 
 As a junior in 2011 , he repeated as the Ivy League outdoor 10 @,@ 000 meter and steeplechase champion and became the indoor champion in the 3000 meters and 5000 meters . He was selected as the most outstanding performer at both the indoor and outdoor <unk> meets . That fall , he had been the 2010 Ivy League cross country champion . He finished second at the NCAA championships with a time of 8 : 32 @.@ 14 . At the NCAA national outdoor 5 @,@ 000 meter race , he established a school record of 13 : 40 @.@ 62 that would stand for less than a year . 
 He spent the summer of 2011 training in Park City , Utah . During his senior season , Cabral purchased a high @-@ altitude tent on <unk> that he used in his dormitory room for five months leading up to the 2012 Olympic Trials . This enabled him to sleep and study at a simulated altitude of 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) with the goal of making his body more efficient by depriving himself of oxygen . He spent 10 – 12 hours per day in the tent . In 2012 , he won his third consecutive Ivy League outdoor 10 @,@ 000 meter and steeplechase championships . He also repeated as the indoor champion in the 5000 meters . He won at the NCAA championships with a time of 8 : 35 @.@ 44 . 
 On May 18 , 2012 , while running in the OXY High Performance meet in California , Cabral completed the 3000 metre steeplechase in 8 : 19 @.@ 14 , surpassing Farley Gerber 's American Collegiate record of 8 : 19 @.@ 27 , set for Weber State University in 1984 and smashing his own personal best time of 8 : 32 . The previous Ivy League record of 8 : 29 @.@ 01 had been set by Michael Fadil of Dartmouth College in 1985 . Cabral also holds the Ivy League record for the indoor 5000 metres . 
 Cabral became the 2012 NCAA steeplechase champion on June 8 , 2012 , winning by five seconds and capping an undefeated season in the event . Cabral is Princeton 's first individual track event NCAA champion since William Bonthron 's 1934 championship in the mile run in 1934 . This does excludes field event champions such as Tora Harris ( 2002 high jump ) who had been Princeton 's last NCAA Outdoor Track and Field champion . When combined with the men 's squash team and <unk> Jonathan <unk> , it marked the first academic year that Princeton had three national champions since 2003 . Harris had also been the last track and field Olympian , although no Princeton distance runner had qualified for the Olympics since class of 1906 Princetonian John Eisele earned a silver medal in the steeplechase and a bronze medal in the three @-@ mile at the 1908 Summer Olympics . No Princeton runner had made the Olympics since Bill Stevenson went to the 1924 Summer Olympics . 
 Because athletes in Ivy League competition only have four years of athletic eligibility , Cabral could not participate in NCAA competition for Princeton to use his final year of cross country eligibility . As a result , he intended to enroll in business school at the University of Colorado , where he would continue training with Billy Nelson coach Mark Wetmore . He opted to turn pro rather than attend Colorado . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Cabral finished 17th in the 10 @,@ 000 metres at the 2008 World Junior Championships . In the 2010 NACAC Under @-@ 23 Championships , he won the steeplechase with at time of 8 : 52 @.@ 67 . 
 Although a competitive collegiate runner , Cabral has focused his training on the Olympics . On June 28 , 2012 , Cabral qualified for the 2012 United States Olympic team as a steeplechase participant by finishing second to Evan Jager with a time of 8 : 19 @.@ 81 in the 2012 United States Olympic Trials and surpassing the Olympic A standard time of 8 : 23 @.@ 10 . In an August 3 , 2012 Olympic heat , Cabral finished 4th with a time of 8 : 21 @.@ 46 in his 13 @-@ man heat , earning the last automatic berth to the August 5 finals . Cabral 's time was 10th fastest of the 15 advancing runners ( and of all 39 entrants ) , slower than all six qualifiers from heat 1 and faster than all 4 qualifiers from heat 2 . In the finals , he led at the 1000 meter split with a time of 2 : 52 @.@ 70 , but he finished in eighth place with a time of 8 : 25 @.@ 91 . 
 Instead of continuing his collegiate career at another institution , he decided to go pro as a runner in the summer of 2012 . After graduating from Princeton University in 2012 , he signed with Nike , and is now a professional runner for them . Following the 2012 Olympics and a little time off , Cabral moved to Bellingham , Washington , where he trains with former coach Peter <unk> . 
 At the 2015 World Championships in Beijing , China , Cabral placed 10th in the 3000 metres steeplechase with a time of 8 : 24 @.@ 94 . 
 Donn Cabral placed third in the steeplechase in a time of 8 : 26 @.@ 37 at the 2016 United States Olympic Trials ( track and field ) behind Team USA teammates Hillary Bor and Evan Jager to qualify to represent United States at Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil . 
 = = Personal = = 
 His parents are John Cabral and Deborah <unk> . His father coached him in soccer . At Princeton , Cabral earned his Bachelor of Arts degree in economics . 
 = Euston Road = 
 Euston Road in Central London , England , runs from Marylebone Road to King 's Cross . The road is part of the London Inner Ring Road and forms part of the London congestion charge zone boundary . 
 The road was originally the central section of New Road from Paddington to Islington which opened in 1756 as London 's first bypass providing a route along which to drive cattle to Smithfield Market avoiding central London . Traffic increased when major railway stations , including Euston , opened in the mid @-@ 19th century and led to the road 's renaming in 1857 . Euston Road was widened in the 1960s to cater for the increasing demands of motor traffic , and the Euston Tower was built around that time . The road contains several significant buildings including the Wellcome Library , the British Library and the St. Pancras Renaissance London Hotel . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The road starts as a continuation of the <unk> , a major road through Central London , at its junction with Marylebone Road and Great Portland Street . It meets the northern end of Tottenham Court Road at a large junction where there is an underpass , and ends at King 's Cross with Gray 's Inn Road . The road ahead to Islington is Pentonville Road . 
 The road is part of the London Inner Ring Road and on the edge of the London congestion charge zone . Drivers are not charged for travelling on the road , but may be if they turn south into the zone during its hours of operation . King 's Cross and St Pancras railway stations are at the eastern end of the road , the British Library is nearby , and Euston railway station is a further west . The Euston Tower is a landmark on the road . The old and new headquarters of the Wellcome Trust are on its south side . From west to east the road passes Regent 's Park , Great Portland Street , Warren Street , Euston Square , Euston and King 's Cross St Pancras tube stations . London Bus Route 205 runs along the entire extent of Euston Road from Great Portland Street to King 's Cross . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 18th – 19th century = = = 
 Before the 18th century , the land along which Euston Road runs was fields and farmland . Camden Town was a village retreat for Londoners working in the city . Euston Road was originally part of New Road , promoted by Charles FitzRoy , 2nd Duke of Grafton and enabled by an Act of Parliament passed in 1756 . Construction began in May that year , and it was open to traffic by September . 
 The road provided a new drovers ' road for moving sheep and cattle to Smithfield Market avoiding Oxford Street and Holborn , and ended at St John 's Street , Islington . It provided a quicker route for army units to reach the Essex coast when there was a threat of invasion , without passing through the cities of London and Westminster , and was a barrier between the increasing urban sprawl that threatened to reach places such as Camden Town . The Capper family , who lived on the south side of the proposed route , opposed its construction and complained their crops would be ruined by dust kicked up by cattle along the route . Capper Street , a side street off Tottenham Court Road , is named after the family . A clause in the 1756 Act stipulated that no buildings should be constructed within 50 feet ( 15 m ) of the road , with the result that most of the houses along it lay behind substantial gardens . During the 19th century the law was increasingly ignored . 
 Euston Station opened on the north side of New Road in July 1837 . It was planned by Robert Stephenson on the site of gardens called Euston Grove , and was the first mainline station to open in London . Its entrance , designed by Philip Hardwick , cost £ 35 @,@ 000 ( now 2 @,@ 868 @,@ 000 ) and had the highest portico in London at 72 feet ( 22 m ) . The Great Hall opened in 1849 to improve accommodation for passengers , and a statue of Stephenson 's father , George was installed in 1852 . The Dukes of Grafton had become the main property owners in the area , and in 1857 the central section of the road , between <unk> Street and Kings Cross , was renamed Euston Road after Euston Hall , their country house . The eastern section became Pentonville Road , the western Marylebone Road . The full length of Euston Road was dug up so that the Metropolitan Railway could be built beneath it using a cut @-@ and @-@ cover system and the road was then relaid to a much higher standard . St Pancras station opened in 1867 , with the Midland Grand Hotel in 1873 . The station complex was controversially demolished in 1963 to accommodate British Rail 's facilities . The replacement building opened in 1968 , and now serves 50 million passengers annually . 
 <unk> Village was in the tiny triangle ( less than 2 hectares ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) ) on the north side of Euston Road between Hampstead Road and North Gower Street . It was built in the early 1860s over a former reservoir to provide affordable middle @-@ class terraced housing but its proximity to a main road and the Euston Station complex meant it ultimately catered for the working classes . By 1871 , around 5 @,@ 000 residents were housed in a 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) area . The estate continued to expand throughout the early 20th century in a piecemeal fashion , and attracted Greek , Cypriot and Asian immigrants following World War II . In the 1970s , the estate came under threat from property developers who wanted to demolish it and build offices , which led to demonstrations and protests , including supporters from University College . The plans were cancelled , but the estate was still bulldozed and replaced by tower blocks . 
 = = = 20th – 21st century = = = 
 The area around the junction with Tottenham Court Road suffered significant bomb damage during the Second World War . Patrick Abercrombie 's contemporary Greater London Plan called for a new ring road around Central London called the ' A ' Ring , but post @-@ war budget constraints meant that a medley of existing routes were improved to form the ring road , including Euston Road . An underpass to avoid the junction with Tottenham Court Road was proposed in 1961 , with construction taking place in 1964 . The property developer Joe Levy was keen to develop buildings in the area and bought various properties . When the London County Council ( LCC ) refused planning permission because of the underpass development , Levy , who had outline planning permission , insisted the council pay him £ 1 million if they wanted to compulsorily purchase the site . Over the next four years , Levy bought properties along the north side of Euston Road , and an agreement was reached so that the council built the underpass and he built a complex of two tower blocks with office shops and apartments , the Euston Tower . 
 The tower attracted a number of significant tenants , including <unk> and the independent radio station Capital Radio . The ITV broadcaster Thames Television 's corporate headquarters were based nearby at No. 306 – 316 Euston Road from 1971 to 1992 when the station closed . That building was demolished in 1994 and redeveloped when Thames , now a production company , moved all operations to Teddington Studios . 
 In the early @-@ 21st century , the Greater London Authority commissioned a plan to improve the road from <unk> firm , Terry Farrell and Partners . The original study proposed removing the underpass ( which was subsequently cancelled ) and providing a pedestrian crossing and removing the gyratory system connecting Tottenham Court Road and Gower Street . The scheme was approved by the Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone as " the start of changing the Marylebone to Euston road from a highway into a series of linked public spaces . " The pedestrian crossing opened in March 2010 . Livingstone 's successor , Boris Johnston , favours keeping the Euston Road underpass and declared it to be a good place to test his nerves when cycling around London . 
 In 2015 , Transport for London announced its intention to close one lane in each direction on Euston Road between 2020 and 2026 to accommodate work on High Speed 2 . The decision was condemned by Camden Borough Council as it could affect business and cost more than £ 1 billion in lost revenue . The Automobile Association said the works were the largest ever proposed in London and would affect far more than local traffic due to its Inner Ring Road status . 
 = = Notable buildings = = 
 About halfway along Euston Road , at the junction with Upper Woburn Place , is St Pancras New Church , built in 1822 . Designed by William and Henry Inwood and costing around £ 90 @,@ 000 ( now £ 7 @,@ 396 @,@ 000 ) , it was the most expensive property to be designed in London since St Paul 's Cathedral the previous century . Almost opposite is Euston Road fire station , built 1901 – 2 , in an Arts and Crafts style by Percy Nobbs . The Shaw Theatre opened at No. 100 – 110 in 1971 , in honour of George Bernard Shaw . It was refurbished in 2000 as part of an adjacent Novotel development . The Keith Grant sculpture at the theatre 's front was removed but was subsequently reinstated after protests . 
 The New Hospital for Women moved to No. 144 Euston Road in 1888 , and was rebuilt by J.M. Brydon two years later . It housed 42 beds and was staffed entirely by women , which made it a comfortable environment for gynaecological problems . It was renamed the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital in 1918 following the death of the hospital 's founder , Elizabeth Garrett Anderson , the first woman in England to qualify as a doctor of medicine . The Euston Road premises closed in 1993 , its services transferred to University College Hospital . The current hospital is at No. 235 . The Wellcome Trust , a private medical research charity , was established in 1936 and has premises at No. 183 and No. 210 Euston Road . Its library holds about half a million books , including more than 6 @,@ 000 Sanskrit manuscripts and the largest collection of Hindi and Punjabi medical documents in Europe . Its objects were transferred on permanent loan to the Science Museum in 1976 . The University College London Hospital 's archives are at No 250 Euston Road . 
 The Midland Grand Hotel , fronting St Pancras station , was designed by George Gilbert Scott . It was built mainly with red bricks with a tower at one end and a spire at the other . It closed in 1935 and was repeatedly threatened with demolition until it was Grade I listed in 1967 . It was used as offices and a major restoration was undertaken in the early 1990s . The hotel reopened as the St. Pancras Renaissance London Hotel in 2011 . 
 Camden Town Hall , formerly St Pancras Town Hall opened in 1937 . The Euston Theatre of Varieties was based at No. 37 – 43 . It was renamed the Regent Theatre in 1922 , and converted to a cinema in 1932 . It was demolished in 1950 so that the town hall could be extended . 
 The headquarters of the Religious Society of Friends , better known as the Quakers , is at the Friends House , No. 173 Euston Road . It was built between 1925 – 7 and holds the society 's library dating back to 1673 , including George Fox 's journal covering the foundation of Pennsylvania . Euston Road School was opened at No. 314 in 1934 by William Coldstream , Victor <unk> and Claude Rogers to encourage artwork in an atmosphere different to traditional art schools . The school struggled and closed by the start of World War II . It was demolished in the early 1960s ; the cover shot of the Beatles ' Twist and Shout EP was taken on its remains after <unk> . 
 The British Library moved to No. 96 Euston Road in 1999 into a new complex designed by Colin St John Wilson and opened by Queen Elizabeth II . It was built using more than ten million bricks and covers a floor area of 112 @,@ 000 square metres ( 1 @,@ 210 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . Although it was given a critical reception by architectural critics , visitors have enjoyed the welcoming entrance and praised its internal arrangements . It caters for around 16 @,@ 000 daily visitors . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In Oscar Wilde 's The Picture of Dorian Gray , the characters Sibyl and James Vane live at a " shabby lodgings " on Euston Road . 
 The street is referenced as a property in the United Kingdom edition of the board game Monopoly , which features famous London areas on its gameboard , it is a part of the pale blue set , including Pentonville Road and the only space named after a building , The Angel , Islington . 
 = French destroyer Léopard = 
 The French destroyer Léopard was a Chacal @-@ class destroyer built for the French Navy during the 1920s . She became a training ship in the mid @-@ 1930s before serving as a convoy escort during World War II before the Germans invaded France in May 1940 . After that time , she bombarded advancing German forces near the northern French coast and took part in the Dunkirk evacuation . After the surrender of France , she was seized by the British in July and turned over to the Free French . 
 Léopard escorted convoys in the Western Approaches in 1940 – 41 before beginning a year @-@ long conversion into an escort destroyer . She helped to sink a German submarine before liberating the island of La Réunion in late 1942 . She ran aground near Benghazi just a few weeks after being transferred to the Mediterranean in mid @-@ 1943 . Salvage attempts failed and her wreck was abandoned after it broke in half . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Chacal @-@ class ships were designed to counter the large Italian Leone @-@ class destroyers . They had an overall length of 126 @.@ 8 meters ( 416 ft 0 in ) , a beam of 11 @.@ 1 meters ( 36 ft 5 in ) , and a draft of 4 @.@ 1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) . The ships displaced 2 @,@ 126 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 092 long tons ) at standard and 2 @,@ 980 – 3 @,@ 075 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 933 – 3 @,@ 026 long tons ) at deep load . They were powered by two geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by five du Temple boilers . The turbines were designed to produce 50 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 37 @,@ 000 kW ; 49 @,@ 000 shp ) , which would propel the ship at 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . During her sea trials on 12 May 1927 , Léopard reached 35 @.@ 59 knots ( 65 @.@ 91 km / h ; 40 @.@ 96 mph ) for a single hour . The ships carried 530 metric tons ( 522 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Their crew consisted of 10 officers and 187 crewmen in peacetime and 12 officers and 209 enlisted men in wartime . 
 The main armament of the Chacal @-@ class ships consisted of five Canon de 130 mm modèle 1919 guns in single mounts , one superfiring pair fore and aft of the superstructure and the fifth gun abaft the aft funnel . The guns were numbered ' 1' to ' 5' from front to rear . Their anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of two Canon de 75 mm modèle 1924 guns in single mounts positioned amidships . The ships carried two above @-@ water triple sets of 550 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . A pair of depth charge chutes were built into their stern ; these housed a total of twenty 200 @-@ kilogram ( 440 lb ) depth charges . They were also fitted with four depth @-@ charge throwers for which they carried a dozen 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) depth charges . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Léopard , named after the eponymous feline , was ordered on 26 February 1923 from the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire . She was laid down on 14 August 1923 at their shipyard at Saint @-@ Nazaire , launched on 29 September 1924 , commissioned on 15 June 1927 , completed on 13 October and entered service on 15 November . Completion was delayed by problems with her propulsion machinery and late deliveries by sub @-@ contractors . Léopard was assigned to the 4th Light Division ( Division légère ) ( DL ) of the Second Squadron ( 2ème Escadre ) based at Brest upon completion , together with her sister ships Lynx and Jaguar . The four depth charge throwers were removed in 1932 . The next year , the ship was present when the fleet was reviewed by the President of France , Albert Lebrun , in Cherbourg on 20 July 1933 . About a year later , the 75 @-@ millimeter guns were replaced by four twin mounts for 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft machineguns . On 15 July 1935 , Léopard and her sister Chacal of the 8th DL were assigned to the Naval School ( Ecole Navale ) at Brest . On 12 April 1937 , the 8th DL was redesignated as the 2nd Large Destroyer Division ( 2ème division de contre @-@ torpeilleurs ) ( DCT ) ; their sister Jaguar joined them in September . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 By 7 September 1939 , Léopard was no longer a part of the 2nd DCT and was assigned to the Western Command ( Forces maritimes de l 'Ouest ) for convoy escort duties from October to May 1940 where she guarded convoys traveling between Gibraltar and Brest as well as Casablanca , French Morocco , and Le Verdon @-@ sur @-@ Mer . In early 1940 , the ship had a British Type 123 ASDIC installed ; in addition two depth @-@ charge throwers were reinstalled , No. 3 gun removed , and her depth charge stowage reduced to a dozen 200 kg and eight 100 kg depth charges to improve her stability . 
 By 22 May Léopard was reassigned to the 2nd DCT when the unit was tasked to carry demolition teams to the northernmost French ports ; the ship arrived at Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer that evening . Together with Chacal and eight smaller destroyers , Léopard bombarded advancing German troops as they approached the defenses of Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , firing the last shots of the battle at midday on 24 May . On 28 May , a special flotilla was constituted under the command of Admiral Marcel <unk> , with his flag on the aviso Savorgnan de Brazza , with these ships and a number of smaller units to support the ongoing evacuation of Dunkirk . On 3 June , the contre @-@ torpilleur rescued 19 British soldiers from a boat and delivered them to England . 
 In mid @-@ June , Léopard defended the approaches to Cherbourg and sailed to Portsmouth on 19 June , after the port surrendered to the Germans . The ship was still there when Operation Catapult , a British operation to capture or disable the ships of the French Navy lest the Germans seize them and use them against the British , began on 3 July . She was handed over to the Free French Naval Forces on 31 August . Command of Léopard was given to Lieutenant ( Lieutenant de vaisseau ) Jules <unk> , who went by the nom de guerre of " Jacques Richard " . 
 = = = = Service with the Free French = = = = 
 Léopard was commissioned by the Free French on 3 September although she was under repair until November as the British dockyards were very congested . During this time , the British took the opportunity to improve her anti @-@ aircraft suite . A QF 4 in ( 102 mm ) Mk V AA gun replaced the two 13 @.@ 2 mm machinegun mounts on the platform abaft the rear funnel , the 13 @.@ 2 mm guns on the forecastle were moved to positions abreast the fore funnel , and a pair of 2 @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) Mk II " pom @-@ pom " light AA guns were added on platforms on the side of the forward superstructure . Upon the completion of this refit , she was assigned to convoy escort duties in the Western Approaches . On 24 February 1941 , Léopard rescued 39 survivors of a British cargo ship . 
 On 8 May 1941 , she began a lengthy conversion into an escort destroyer at Kingston upon Hull . Her forward boiler and its funnel were removed and replaced by additional oil storage and additional accommodation for her ratings . They reduced her maximum speed to 31 @.@ 5 knots ( 58 @.@ 3 km / h ; 36 @.@ 2 mph ) , but increased her fuel storage to 780 metric tons ( 770 long tons ; 860 short tons ) which raised her range to 4 @,@ 200 nmi ( 7 @,@ 800 km ; 4 @,@ 800 mi ) , and her crew to 234 ratings . Her troublesome depth charge chutes were sealed off and their machinery was removed ; her stern had to be rebuilt to accommodate two rails at the stern , each with a dozen 251 @-@ kilogram ( 553 lb ) Mk <unk> heavy depth charges , plus an additional four stored below decks . Her two existing depth charge throwers were replaced by four improved Thornycroft Mk IV throwers . The ship carried a total of twenty @-@ four 191 @-@ kilogram ( 421 lb ) Mk VII light depth charges for the throwers . To compensate for the weight of the additional depth charges , her aft torpedo tubes were removed . The 4 @-@ inch gun was replaced by a single 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon light AA gun and two others replaced the " pom @-@ pom " s . These were moved to positions on the upper deck that had formerly been occupied by the 75 mm guns and another gun was added on top of the aft superstructure . A pair of quadruple mounts for Vickers 0 @.@ 5 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) AA machineguns were added on the forward superstructure . A Type 291 search radar was also added . 
 While escorting Convoy <unk> on 11 July 1942 , the frigate HMS Spey spotted the German submarine U @-@ 136 on the surface and made multiple attacks after the U @-@ boat dived . Léopard joined her , as did the sloop HMS Pelican and they sank the submarine at coordinates 33 ° 28 ′ N 23 ° 28 ′ W. The next day Léopard collided with the sloop HMS Lowestoft and had her bow stove in by the British ship . She was repaired in South Africa in September – October . 
 = = = = = Liberation of La Réunion = = = = = 
 Léopard had been selected to convince the Vichy government of La Réunion to join the Free French in June , but the collision and her consequent repairs delayed her mission . On the night of 27 / 28 November , she arrived off the island with 80 troops aboard . They were landed successfully and seized control of Saint @-@ Denis , Réunion , the island 's capital , although the governor fled into the interior . A coast @-@ defense battery engaged the contre @-@ torpilleur and she fired back , with men killed on both sides . The Vichy hold @-@ outs surrendered on the 30th and Léopard remained in the Indian Ocean escorting convoys until March 1943 . 
 She was briefly refitted at <unk> @-@ Suarez , Madagascar from 13 March to mid @-@ April when she was transferred to the Mediterranean . Léopard arrived in Alexandria , Egypt , on 12 May and screened a convoy to Malta shortly afterwards . She departed on 24 May with a convoy returning to Alexandria and accidentally ran aground near Benghazi three days later after aerial attacks disrupted the convoy . The Allies attempted to refloat her , but they failed and the wreck broke in two on 19 June and was declared a total loss on 1 July . 
 = French minelaying cruiser Pluton = 
 Pluton was a fast minelaying cruiser built for the French Navy in the late 1920s . She was also able to carry 1 @,@ 000 troops on her mine deck as a fast troop transport . Shortly after completion she was modified and became a gunnery training ship , replacing the elderly armored cruiser Gueydon . Shortly before the beginning of World War II , she reverted to her original role and most of the gunnery training equipment was removed . She was sent to Casablanca , in French Morocco , when the war began to lay a minefield , but the order was cancelled a day later and she was ordered to disembark her naval mines . She exploded while landing her still @-@ fuzed mines on 13 September 1939 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Marine Nationale decided to build a fast minelayer as part of its 1925 Naval Programme after the British HMS Adventure made her debut in the early 1920s . Pluton was similar in many respects , also being armed with four single destroyer @-@ caliber guns , but was smaller and faster . She could also be used as a fast transport for up to 1 @,@ 000 troops . The sides of the mine deck were normally open to the weather , but metal panels could be used to close it off when carrying troops . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Pluton was 152 @.@ 5 m ( 500 ft 4 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 15 @.@ 5 m ( 50 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 2 m ( 17 ft 1 in ) . Her longitudinally framed hull was subdivided by 15 transverse watertight bulkheads . Duralumin was extensively used in the superstructure to save weight , but this resulted in corrosion problems and strength issues . She was fitted with a single counterbalanced rudder powered by an electric motor that was too weak for the job . Her turning circle was 875 m ( 957 yd ) with 25 ° of rudder at 27 kn ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , larger than that of the 8 @,@ 000 t ( 7 @,@ 900 long tons ) light cruiser Duguay @-@ Trouin which was 30 m ( 98 ft 5 in ) longer . She was totally unarmored and relied upon her watertight subdivision for survival . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Pluton had a two @-@ shaft unit machinery layout with alternating boiler and engine rooms . Her Bréguet single @-@ reduction impulse geared steam turbines were designed for 57 @,@ 000 shp ( 43 @,@ 000 kW ) , but made 64 @,@ 705 shp ( 48 @,@ 251 kW ) on trials . Four small @-@ tube boilers powered the turbines at a pressure of 20 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 000 kPa ; 280 psi ) . An auxiliary boiler was fitted to heat or cool the ship 's magazines and provide drinking water . Each propeller shaft drove a three @-@ bladed 4 @.@ 08 m ( 13 ft 5 in ) bronze three @-@ bladed propeller for a designed speed of 30 kn ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , but she achieved 31 @.@ 4 kn ( 58 @.@ 2 km / h ; 36 @.@ 1 mph ) on trials . 1 @,@ 150 t ( 1 @,@ 130 long tons ) of fuel oil was carried which was originally calculated to provide an endurance of 7 @,@ 770 nmi ( 14 @,@ 390 km ; 8 @,@ 940 mi ) at 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , but it was revised downwards to 4 @,@ 510 nmi ( 8 @,@ 350 km ; 5 @,@ 190 mi ) once she entered service because the demands of her auxiliary machinery had been seriously underestimated . Two 200 @-@ kilowatt turbo generators provided electricity at 235 volts . Two 100 @-@ kilowatt diesel generators were mounted in the aft engine room to provide power while in harbor and a third was installed in a special compartment on the first deck for emergency use . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Pluton was originally intended to carry two single turrets , one each fore and aft , with 203 mm ( 8 in ) guns , four 75 mm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns and four light 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) AA guns . However four 138 mm ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) guns were substituted for the 203 mm guns before construction began and six more 37 mm guns were added in lieu of the 75 mm guns during construction although the <unk> for the 75 mm guns were retained for future use . 
 The four 138 mm 40 @-@ caliber guns were on <unk> mounts with gun shields . Two guns each were fore and aft in superfiring positions on the centerline . Their elevation limits were -10 ° to + 35 ° and they had a 270 ° arc of fire . Their rate of fire was a nominal eight to nine rounds per minute , but proved to be considerably less in service . They had a maximum range of about 18 @,@ 200 m ( 19 @,@ 900 yd ) with a 40 kg ( 88 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 700 m / s ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) . 150 rounds were provided for each gun . One powder and one shell magazine served each pair of guns , each of which had their own individual hoist . 
 Ten 37 mm / 50 cal semi @-@ automatic AA guns were carried by Pluton . Two were fitted on the foredeck , six amidships between the funnels and two on a platform at the stern . 10 @,@ 000 rounds were carried with 144 rounds in ready @-@ use boxes near each gun . The guns could depress 15 ° and elevate to 80 ° . They fired 0 @.@ 725 kg ( 1 @.@ 60 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 810 m / s ( 2 @,@ 657 ft / s ) . Their effective anti @-@ aircraft range was less than 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) . All of these guns — except for the pair on the stern — were removed shortly after Pluton was commissioned in 1932 . 
 Twelve obsolete 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 315 in ) Hotchkiss <unk> machine guns were carried in six twin mounts . Two mounts were on top of the bridge , two atop the after boiler room ventilator housing and two just forward of the tripod mainmast . 48 @,@ 000 rounds were provided for them . They were removed shortly after Pluton was commissioned in 1932 . 
 Pluton was designed to carry 220 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) Sautter @-@ Harlé mines , but had space for 30 extra , for a total of 250 . They were carried on the first deck , or mine deck , using a system of four rails along the sides of the ship and moved via chain @-@ drives . Each pair of rails converged on a turntable at the forward end of the rails and a transverse spur connected the two turntables . The spur facilitated loading mines from one side of the ship and allowed mines to be moved to each of the rails . The rails ended in four ramps at the stern of the ship that sloped down at a 30 ° angle to minimize the shock of impact when the mines were released from the chain drive . Up to 270 of the smaller Bréguet B4 mines could be carried . 
 = = Service = = 
 She entered service with the French Mediterranean Fleet in 1932 . Pluton experienced many teething problems , particularly with the machinery . Shortly after she was commissioned the Navy decided to give her an extra role as a gunnery training ship and she entered Toulon Dockyard for the necessary modifications on 24 October 1932 . Quarters for 40 men were added on the mine deck . Most of the 37 @-@ mm AA guns and all of the 8 mm machine guns were replaced by four 50 @-@ caliber 75 mm Canon de 75 mm Mle 22 or 24 AA guns and 12 13 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) Hotchkiss machine guns on six twin mounts , two mounts where the 37 mm guns had been mounted on the foredeck and four between the funnels . The 75 mm guns had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 5 @.@ 93 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 1 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) at a rate of fire of 8 – 18 rounds per minute and had a maximum effective ceiling of 8 @,@ 000 m ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) . The Hotchkiss guns had a cyclic rate of fire of 450 rounds per minute , but the practical rate was between 200 and 250 rounds per minute to allow for reloading its 30 @-@ round magazines . They had a theoretical ceiling of 4 @,@ 200 m ( 13 @,@ 800 ft ) . A simple fire @-@ control director was added for the 138 mm guns and 15 additional rangefinders were installed for use by the <unk> School . 
 Pluton spent much of 1933 – 1935 in dockyard hands after finishing her first round of modifications on 27 April 1933 . She was refitted four times during this period to add more gunnery equipment and to rectify some of her defects . These included reinforcement of her superstructure where it had been damaged by the muzzle blast from her 138 mm guns and replacement of her corroded aluminum ladders and booms with steel ones . A high @-@ angle fire @-@ control director for her 75 mm guns was added , two of her 75 mm gun were converted to powered , remotely controlled mounts , gun shields were added to the 75 mm guns to protect their crews from blast and facilities for another 40 men was installed on her mine deck . 
 In 1936 , an experimental twin 13 @.@ 2 mm gun mount with a gun shield was added between the starboard 75 @-@ mm guns and more rangefinders were added to bring her total up to 31 . Her boilers and condensers were repaired in a refit between 25 November 1936 and 13 March 1937 . Later that year Pluton had a major refit that involved repair of her turbines , replacement of her 138 mm fire @-@ control director by one of the type used by the 8 @,@ 000 t ( 7 @,@ 900 long tons ) light cruisers and the transfer of the foredeck 13 @.@ 2 mm machine guns to positions on the forward <unk> . Her last refit , from 15 November 1938 – 15 February 1939 , retubed two boilers , enclosed the AA director to protect it from the weather , improved the remote control of the 138 mm guns and added gun shields to each of the twin 13 @.@ 2 mm mounts . 
 Pluton was transferred to Lorient on 10 May 1939 when the French Navy formed the 5e Escadre there which controlled all training ships and planned to convert her into a full @-@ time training ship as consort to the training cruiser Jeanne d 'Arc on 1 June 1940 . She would have been renamed La Tour d 'Auvergne at that time , as the name Pluton was reserved for mine warfare ships in the French Navy . 
 As war approached , it was decided to retain her as a minelayer and most of the extra fire control equipment was removed . She was transferred to Brest as part of the reorganization of the 5e Escadre . She sailed for Casablanca , French Morocco on 2 September with 125 Bréguet mines embarked . She was ordered to lay a defensive minefield there on 4 September , but this order was rescinded the next day , after the mines had already been fuzed , and the ship was ordered to disembark the mines . While landing the mines on 13 September one of them exploded , destroying the ship and killing 186 people . A further 73 crewmen and 47 others were injured and significant damage was caused by flying debris . One gun and some armor was salvaged during the war , but demolition work did not begin until October 1952 and was completed by July 1953 . 
 = Littlest Things = 
