 " Littlest Things " is a song by British recording artist Lily Allen from her debut studio album , Alright , Still . Written by Allen , Mark Ronson and Santi White , the song was released as the third single of the album on 11 December 2006 by Regal Recordings . It incorporates a piano sample from Pierre Bachelet and Herve Roy 's music from Emmanuelle , for which they were credited as co @-@ writers , as the lyrics tackle the singer dealing with the departure of her boyfriend , while reminiscing about their time together . The song was created in a New York studio , after Allen had met Ronson , who was impressed by her previous work and offered her different samples . 
 Contemporary critics gave the song mixed reviews , some claiming it to be Allen 's sweetest lyrical moments , while others accuse it of being a fraud . The single peaked at number twenty @-@ one on the UK Singles Chart , being her first single not to reach the top twenty in the United Kingdom . The accompanying music video portrayed a view over the mundane moments of a dying relationship , with Allen watching herself and her ex @-@ boyfriend together . It was directed by Nima Nourizadeh and was mainly shot in black and white . The song was performed live during her 2007 concert tour and also during her 2009 concert tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 After obtaining commercial success with first two singles , " Smile " and " LDN " , Allen decided to promote the album by releasing " Littlest Things " . The song was composed in New York , where Allen travelled after she had met producer Mark Ronson when at lunch with her then boyfriend , Seb . There , she told him she was a singer and gave him a copy of her demo CD . He was impressed by her song " Smile " and asked her to work together . Regarding the process of composing the song , Ronson stated : 
 We spent a day together and worked on a couple of things , and went to record shops where I played samples to her . Then I wrote the piano and guitar bit to " Littlest Things " , and she sat down and scribbled for about an hour and finished the lyrics . We went into the booth to record the song . She originally wanted to do a Mike Skinner thing , rapping the verse and singing the chorus . But I asked her to sing it all , and she just made up the whole melody on the spot , and sang this amazing solo . At that moment I realised that this girl has a really special gift . 
 In regards to composing the song and its lyrical meaning , Allen noted that , 
 Mark 's got a very good ear . He 's very relaxed in the studio and very thoughtful . There 's not really any pressure working there , because he 's got his own studio so he doesn 't have time constraints . 
 The song was called " Littlest Things " and was about having broken up with my boyfriend , because Seb and I had split up for a few months . We 've since got back together . It must have been quite awkward for Mark because Seb was his friend , but being fresh out of a relationship I wanted to write about what was on my mind . 
 Mark came up with the music first , then I came up with the words and we fitted it all together into a melody . That 's the way I normally make songs – I write everything in the studio – and it obviously means that producers are very important to me . It 's a complete joint effort . 
 = = Music structure and lyrics = = 
 Musically , the song is written in the time signature of common time and set in the key of A minor , having a metronome of 82 beats per minute . It has a basic sequence of Am — D7 — G — Em — Am — F # 7 — B as its chord progression , while the piano and guitar are used for the background music . " Littlest Things " samples elements from " Emmanuelle in the Mirror " and the " Theme from Emmanuelle ( Instrumental ) " , which are written by Pierre Bachelet and Herve Roy for the 1974 French softcore pornographic film Emmanuelle . It does not , though , sample " Karma Police " by Radiohead , contrary to popular misinterpretations . The lyrics describe a post @-@ relationship overview and the way one reminiscences about it . Alex Petridis from The Guardian describes them as dealing with " misery and sex in equal measure " , while reporting that Ronson asked Allen to sing in her London accent . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Littlest Things " has met mixed reviews ; Heather Phares from AllMusic complimented the song , saying the ballad softens Allen 's rough image and celebrates " the mundane moments of a dying relationship " , whereas Blender reporter Jon Dolan considers it a " forlorn single " , where the singer writes about the terror of being in a relationship " with white @-@ knuckled worry over a snip of florid piano from a ’ 70s soft @-@ core porn flick " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine criticised Allen for being a " poser who lacks charisma , bites off of everyone else , and is so sickeningly contemptuous of everyone but herself that it makes the pretty , melancholy piano @-@ and @-@ drum @-@ loop ballad ' Littlest Things ' seem like a farce " . While analysing Alright , Still , The Guardian reviewer , Sophie Heawood , described the lyrics as the " perfect description of missing someone : ' We 'd spend the whole weekend lying in our own dirt / I was just so happy in your boxers and your T @-@ shirt ' . " Mark Pytlik from Pitchfork Media gave a positive review , saying that " ' Littlest Things ' is a supple piano @-@ tickler that provides one of Allen 's sweetest lyrical moments while simultaneously leaving Ms. Dynamite in the dust on the R & B balladeering front " . He believed that the song is made out of Allen 's " comfort zone " of songs such as " Smile " , the result being of " high order , if not a bit more erratic " . IGN reviewer Todd Gilchrist named the song as the album 's " most affecting tune " , while thought it " compiles a sad and beautiful checklist of the intimate moments she no longer shares with her dearly departed boyfriend " . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The single debuted at number fifty @-@ three in the singer 's home country and later rose to twenty @-@ one , which became its peak . It was Allen 's lowest position on the UK Singles Chart at that time , being the only song to miss the top twenty , until " Who 'd Have Known " peaked at thirty @-@ nine in 2009 . Though it did not enter the main chart in the Flanders region of Belgium , the single obtained position thirteen on Ultratip , a continuation of the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Nima Nourizadeh and released on 11 December 2006 . It opens with an aerial shot of a piano which begins to play by itself , and then moves to reveal a film set . Allen stands on a lamppost , wearing a raincoat , with lights , a camera and directors surrounding her . The image zooms into the camera from the studio and turns the video black @-@ and @-@ white , with the story coming to life , as the singer begins the first verse . From the lamppost she is able to see her former self walking down the street with her boyfriend . While they enter a building , a light comes out in one of the windows , revealing their silhouettes kissing . The caption changes , with the two of them dancing , while a man plays the piano in the background ; as he dips her and holds this position , she continues to sing . The camera zooms out to see a heart shaped window surrounding the two that opens and changes to a picture on Allen 's wall . She is alone in a room , staring at a mirror . Her hair is let down and she is wearing a white nightgown . The piano is seen again playing itself , as the image shifts to the window , where Allen is again portrayed leaning against the lamppost in the street , as in the beginning of the video . She again looks at the silhouettes in the window of the building , as it collapses on her , once again changing the scene . This time , the singer is looking through another window , and then turns around to a mirror which captures a door . The former Allen with the raincoat walks through with her boyfriend , as their shadows are seen kissing . The image changes to Allen from the film set , zooming out from the camera 's viewing piece , making the video in colour again . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lead vocals – Lily Allen 
 Written by – Lily Allen , Mark Ronson , Santi White 
 Writers of sample – Pierre Bachelet , Hervé Roy 
 Produced by – Mark Ronson 
 Recorded by – Mark Ronson , Rob Smith 
 Assistant recording – Kieran Panesar 
 Drum programming & samples – Mark Ronson 
 Percussion – Mark Ronson 
 Mastered by – Tim Burrell , Tim Debney 
 Audio mixing – Vaughan Merrick 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Spanish battleship España = 
 España was a Spanish dreadnought battleship , the lead ship of her class . She had two sister ships , Alfonso XIII and Jaime I. España was built by the SECN shipyard ; she was laid down in December 1909 , launched in February 1912 , and completed in October 1913 . She was armed with a main battery of eight 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns and had a top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) 
 España served in the 1st Squadron after her commissioning , along with her two sisters . Spain remained neutral during World War I , so the Spanish fleet did not see action during the conflict . España provided gunfire support during the Rif War in the early 1920s . During these operations , she ran aground off Cape Tres Forcas , Morocco in August 1923 . The Navy was unable to raise the ship , and severe storms destroyed the wreck in 1924 , which led the Navy to abandon her . 
 = = Technical characteristics = = 
 España was 132 @.@ 6 m ( 435 ft ) long at the waterline and 140 m ( 460 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 24 m ( 79 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 8 m ( 26 ft ) ; her freeboard was 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) amidships . Her propulsion system consisted of four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines and twelve Yarrow boilers . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 11 @,@ 600 kW ) and produced a top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . España had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew consisted of 854 officers and enlisted men . 
 España was armed with a main battery of eight 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) / 50 guns , mounted in four twin gun turrets . One turret was placed forward , two were positioned en echelon amidships , and the fourth was aft of the superstructure . This mounting scheme was chosen in preference to superimposed turrets , as was done in the South Carolinas , to save weight and cost . Her secondary battery consisted of twenty 102 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) guns mounted in casemates along the length of the hull . They were too close to the waterline , however , which made them unusable in heavy seas . She was also armed with four 3 @-@ pounder guns and two machine guns . Her armored belt was 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick amidships ; the main battery turrets were protected with the same amount of armor plate . The conning tower had 254 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . Her armored deck was 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The Navy Law of 7 January 1908 authorized construction of España . She was laid down at the Sociedad Española de Construcción Naval shipyard in Ferrol on 6 December 1909 . She was launched on 5 February 1912 , and completed on 23 October 1913 . After their completion , España and her sisters , Alfonso XIII and Jaime I , the three battleships formed the 1st Squadron of the Spanish fleet . Spain remained neutral after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , so España and her sisters were the only European dreadnoughts to avoid the war . In mid @-@ 1915 , España crossed the Atlantic to represent Spain at the opening ceremonies for the Panama Canal . Since the major European navies were occupied with World War I , only Spain and Portugal sent ships to the ceremonies . 
 In 1920 España carried the Spanish representative to the quatercentenary of the discovery of the Straits of Magellan in Chile , in the process becoming the Spanish Navy 's first ship to pass through the Panama Canal . On 29 January 1921 she ran aground in Chilean waters off Puerto Montt on her return to Spain , though she was refloated with some difficulty . Her hull was dented badly for a length of 150 ft ( 46 m ) , and the rocks tore a large hole that was approximately 8 by 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 by 2 @.@ 4 m ) between frames 22 and 36 , and several smaller holes between frames 48 to 56 on the port side and 58 to 76 on the starboard side . Divers effected temporary repairs with concrete in Chile , followed by permanent repairs that were made in Balboa , Panama before she made her return voyage across the Atlantic . During this period , she was assigned to the Training Squadron , along with her two sister ships . Throughout the early 1920s , she provided fire support to the Spanish Army in its campaigns in Morocco during the Rif War . While conducting a bombardment off Cape Tres Forcas near Melilla on 26 August 1923 , she ran hard aground . 
 The Spanish Navy hired two salvage companies to refloat the battleship , but both declined after they surveyed the wreck . Unable to raise her , the Spanish decided to remove as much weight as possible from España in an attempt to lighten her to permit refloating . Her guns were removed and dropped overboard to be picked up later by the salvage vessel <unk> . The battleship 's armor , machinery , and ammunition stores were also removed to lighten her . Her hull was then sealed and partially drained in preparation for raising , but while waiting for the necessary equipment from Italy , several violent storms hit the ship and caused further damage . The battered hull could now no longer be raised , and in November 1924 , she broke in half and was abandoned by the Spanish Navy . The 305 mm and 102 mm guns recovered from España were installed in coastal batteries , some of which remained in service until 1999 before they were retired from service . After the overthrow of King Alfonso XIII , his namesake ship Alfonso XIII , was renamed España in April 1931 . 
 = Greek battleship Kilkis = 
 Kilkis ( Greek : Θ / Κ <unk> ) was a 13 @,@ 000 ton Mississippi @-@ class battleship originally built by the US Navy in 1904 – 1908 . As Mississippi she was purchased by the Greek Navy in 1914 , and renamed her Kilkis , along with her sister Idaho , renamed Lemnos . Kilkis was named for the Battle of Kilkis @-@ <unk> , a crucial engagement of the Second Balkan War . Armed with a main battery of four 12 in ( 305 mm ) guns , Kilkis and her sister were the most powerful vessels in the Greek fleet . 
 The ship saw limited action during World War I. Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I opted to remain neutral until October 1916 , when pressure from the Triple Entente forced him to abdicate in favor of a pro @-@ Entente government . For the remainder of the war , Kilkis operated solely as a harbor defense ship . In the immediately ensuing Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1919 – 1922 , Kilkis supported Greek landings in Turkey and participated in the final Greek sea @-@ borne withdrawal in 1922 . She remained in service into the early 1930s , when she was used for a training ship . During the German invasion of Greece in 1941 , she and her sister were sunk in Salamis by German Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers . The two ships were ultimately raised in the 1950s and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Kilkis was 382 feet ( 116 m ) long overall and had a beam of 77 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 8 in ( 7 @.@ 52 m ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 000 long tons ; 14 @,@ 000 short tons ) as designed and up to 14 @,@ 465 t ( 14 @,@ 237 long tons ; 15 @,@ 945 short tons ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft vertical triple expansion engines and eight coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) and a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Lattice masts were installed in 1909 . She had a crew of 744 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 in ( 305 mm ) L / 45 guns in two twin turrets , one on either end of the superstructure . Eight 8 in ( 203 mm ) L / 45 guns were mounted in four twin turrets , two on other side of the vessel amidships . The secondary battery was rounded out with eight 7 in ( 178 mm ) L / 45 guns mounted individually in casemates along the length of the hull . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was protected by a battery of twelve 3 in ( 76 mm ) L / 50 guns , six 3 @-@ pounder guns and two 1 @-@ pounder guns . The ship 's armament system was completed by two 21 in ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in her hull . Kilkis and Lemnos were the most powerful vessels in the Greek Navy . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Laid down on 12 May 1904 , the ship was launched on 30 September 1905 and commissioned into the United States Navy on 1 January 1908 as USS Mississippi . Greece became engaged in a naval arms race with the Ottoman Empire at the time ; the Ottomans had purchased a pair of German pre @-@ dreadnoughts — Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm and Weissenburg in 1910 — and ordered dreadnought battleships from Britain in 1911 and 1914 . The Greek Navy ordered the dreadnought Salamis from Germany in 1913 and the dreadnought Basileus Konstantinos from France . As a stop @-@ gap measure , the Greeks purchased Mississippi and Idaho from the US Navy , for the sum of $ 12 @,@ 535 @,@ 276 @.@ 58 , on 30 June 1914 . , The two ships were transferred to the Greek Navy in Newport News , Virginia the following month . Kilkis and Lemnos quickly left the United States after their transfer in July , due to the rising tensions in Europe following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria the previous month . After arriving in Greece , Kilkis became the flagship of the Greek fleet . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I , decided to remain neutral . The Entente powers landed troops in Salonika in 1915 , which was a source of tension between France and Greece . Ultimately , the French seized the Greek Navy on 19 October 1916 ( see Noemvriana and National Schism ) . Kilkis was reduced to a skeleton crew and had the breech blocks for her guns removed to render them inoperable . All ammunition and torpedoes were also removed . Ultimately , a pro @-@ Entente government replaced Constantine and declared war on the Central Powers . Kilkis , however , did not see active service with Greece 's new allies , and instead was used solely for harbor defense until the end of the war . 
 After the end of World War I Kilkis saw service during the Greco @-@ Turkish War , where she supported landings to seize Ottoman territory . These operations also included actions to support the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in the Black Sea . While supporting the French and British forces defending Sevastopol in April 1919 , Kilkis observed mutinies on several French battleships . Her crew taunted the French mutineers by hanging a dummy from the yardarm . Kilkis then returned to Greece ; on 5 May 1919 , she and a pair of destroyers escorted a convoy of six troop transports to Smyrna , where the soldiers were disembarked . Kilkis carried Rear Admiral <unk> , who thereafter served as the military governor of the city . The Ottoman Navy had been interned by the Allies after the end of World War I , and so provided no opposition to the Greek Navy 's activities . 
 In March 1920 , Kilkis was stationed in Constantinople as part of an Allied fleet , which was composed primarily of British <unk> . The ships ' crews practiced landing operations to support the garrison occupying the city , but in the event only crews from the British ships went ashore . Kilkis left the theater to represent Greece during the Fleet Review in Spithead to honor King George V on his birthday , 3 June 1920 . In July , Kilkis and a pair of destroyers escorted a convoy carrying 7 @,@ 000 infantrymen , 1 @,@ 000 artillerists , and 4 @,@ 000 mules to <unk> . Among the Greek naval vessels that supported the landings with Kilkis were the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and the destroyers <unk> , Leon , and <unk> , and a hospital ship . Landings also took place at <unk> on the other side of the Sea of Marmora . On 19 July , Kilkis departed with several transport ships and the British seaplane carrier HMS Ark Royal , which provided aerial reconnaissance for the Greek forces . Operations came to a close in September 1922 when the Greek Army was forced to evacuate by sea , along with a sizable number of civilians , from Asia Minor . The fleet transported a total of 250 @,@ 000 soldiers and civilians during the evacuation . Kilkis and Lemnos departed Smyrna on the evening of 8 September . 
 Kilkis underwent repairs and upgrades in 1926 – 1928 but was already obsolete due to low speed and low freeboard . The ship had her boilers re @-@ tubed during this refit . On 29 November 1929 , the Greek navy announced that Kilkis would be withdrawn from service and broken up for scrap . Consequently , in 1930 , Georgios Averof replaced her as the fleet flagship . Nevertheless , Kilkis remained in service with the fleet until 1932 . The ship was then withdrawn from the active fleet and used as a training ship . A failed insurrection in the Greek fleet in March 1935 led to a reduction in the number of personnel in the Navy . As a result , Kilkis and Georgios Averof were removed from active service . After the revolt , Kilkis was used as a training ship for anti @-@ aircraft gunners . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 28 October 1940 , Italy invaded Greece , initiating the Greco @-@ Italian War as part of the Italian <unk> Benito Mussolini 's expansionist program . The Greek army quickly defeated the Italians and pushed them back to Albania . Less than two weeks later , the Italian fleet was badly damaged in the British Raid on Taranto , which significantly reduced the threat the Italian Regia Marina posed to the Greek fleet . From the start of the conflict , Kilkis was used as a floating battery based in Salamis . Spare guns from Kilkis and Lemnos were employed as coastal batteries throughout Greece . 
 On 6 April 1941 , the German Wehrmacht invaded Greece to support its Italian ally in the stalemated conflict . British planners suggested using the ship to block the Corinth Canal by scuttling her at the southern entrance to the canal , but the Greek Navy refused , preferring to use the ship as a barracks ship if they should have to retreat from Salamis . The ship was attacked in Salamis Naval Base by Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers on 23 April 1941 , during the German invasion . Kilkis attempted to get underway to evade the attacks , but she was hit by several bombs and sank in the harbor . Her wreck was refloated and broken up for scrap in the 1950s . 
 = Tropical Storm Etau ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Etau was the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact Japan since Typhoon Tokage in 2004 . Forming on August 8 , 2009 from an area of low pressure , the system gradually intensified into a tropical storm . Tracking in a curved path around the edge of a subtropical ridge , Etau continued to intensify as it neared Japan . By August 11 , the cyclone reached its peak intensity as a hurricane with winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 992 hPa ( mbar ) . Shortly after , Etau began to weaken and was downgraded to a tropical storm early on August 11 . Increasing wind shear led to the center becoming devoid of convection and the system eventually weakened to a tropical depression on August 13 . The remnants of Etau persisted for nearly day before dissipating early on August 14 . 
 Although Etau did not make landfall , the outer bands of the storm produced torrential rainfall in Japan , peaking at 326 @.@ 5 mm ( 12 @.@ 85 in ) . These rains triggered deadly flooding and mudslides , especially in Hyōgo Prefecture . Twenty @-@ eight people were killed by the storm and ¥ 7 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 87 @.@ 5 million ) in damage occurred throughout the affected region . According to the Fire and Disaster Management Agency , a total of 5 @,@ 602 homes were flooded and 183 were destroyed . Following the storm , 600 Japanese soldiers were deployed from Tokyo to assist in cleanup efforts . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Etau originated on August 5 out of an area of low pressure associated with disorganized convective activity located about 550 km ( 280 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Guam . The following day , the system relocated several dozen kilometers to the north . Convective turning began to appear on satellite imagery and a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough ( TUTT ) cell to the north provided a northward component to the system 's movement . Early on August 7 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the developing system as deep convection consolidated around the low pressure system . Around 0000 UTC on August 8 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) designated the system as a tropical depression . 
 Several hours later on August 8 , the JTWC also declared the system a tropical depression , classifying it at 10W . Later that day , convection associated with the depression became disorganized , preventing intensification of the system . The depression generally tracked towards the northwest during the day in response a subtropical ridge to the north . By August 9 , the center of circulation became more defined as convection wrapped around it . Around 1200 UTC , the JMA upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name Etau . The JTWC , however , did not upgrade the system to a tropical storm for several more hours . On August 10 , the JTWC briefly downgraded the storm to a tropical depression . By this time , the system had re @-@ curved to the east around the western periphery of the subtropical ridge . Etau also became slightly disorganized as it began to interact with the baroclinic zone near Japan . Early on August 11 , the JMA reported that the storm winds had peaked at 75 km / h ( 45 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 992 hPa ( mbar ) . Later that day , the storm once more became slightly disorganized due to increased wind shear ; however , the JTWC reported that the storm intensified based on satellite intensity estimates and weather radar imagery from Japan . 
 Later on August 11 , the center of Etau became partially devoid of convection , with only a narrow band of shower and thunderstorm activity persisting to the southeast of the center . Increasing wind shear prevented convection from redeveloping and the storm continued to weaken . Early the following day , the JTWC issued their final advisory on Etau as they reported it had weakened to a tropical depression well to the east of Japan . Roughly 24 hours later , the JMA also downgraded the system to a tropical depression . The final advisory on Etau was issued by the JMA early on August 14 as it slowly tracked northward . 
 = = Preparations , impact and aftermath = = 
 In anticipation of wind gusts up to 126 km / h ( 78 mph ) and heavy rains , Japanese officials evacuated roughly 47 @,@ 000 residents from western regions along the coast as gale warnings were declared by the JMA . Officials also feared that flooding from Tropical Storm Etau would mirror that of Typhoon Morakot in Taiwan where at least 14 were killed in the country 's worst flood in 50 years . Six flights in the country were canceled after a plane was struck by lightning . Fifteen railway services were also canceled due to heavy rains . According to officials in Japan , nearly 140 @,@ 000 people were evacuated to shelters in relation to flooding and landslides produced by Etau . 
 As Tropical Storm Etau brushed Japan on August 10 , torrential rains fell within its outer bands . In a 24 ‑ hour span , a record 326 @.@ 5 mm ( 12 @.@ 85 in ) of rain fell , triggering extensive flooding and landslides . Initial reports stated that 13 people were killed and 10 others were missing due to the storm . Most of the fatalities took place in Hyōgo Prefecture where hundreds of homes were flooded and numerous others were damaged or destroyed by landslides . In some areas , flood waters reached a depth of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . One man drowned after driving his car into a flooded street and being overcome by the water . Another person was killed after her home was destroyed by a landslide in Okayama prefecture . 
 In Tokushima , two people were listed as missing and two others sustained serious injuries . Later news reports stated that up to 18 people were missing following further landslides . The affected region was especially susceptible to landslides due to recent seismic activity , with a magnitude 6 @.@ 4 earthquake taking place on August 10 . By August 11 , one of the missing persons was confirmed to have been killed during the storm . About 800 people were placed in public shelters and 53 @,@ 000 homes were left without running water . By August 12 , a total of 18 people were confirmed to have been killed and nine others were still missing . Three bridges in Tokushima were also washed away . Days later , the Japanese Fire and Disaster Management Agency finalized the death toll at 26 with one other missing , making Etau the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact Hyōgo Prefecture , Japan since Typhoon Tokage in 2004 . Throughout several prefectures , 5 @,@ 602 homes were flooded and 183 were destroyed . Landslides triggered by the storm damaged another 2 @,@ 109 structures , most of which were in Okayama and Hyōgo prefectures . Following severe damages , in the town of Sayo it requested assistance from the national government . As a result , more than 200 troops were deployed to the town . A post @-@ disaster office was also set up by the prime minister 's office crisis management center . An additional 400 troops were deployed to the city by August 11 to assist in rescue efforts . 
 = Magic Alex = 
 Yanni ( later John ) Alexis Mardas ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ; born May 5 , 1942 ) is better known as Magic Alex , the nickname given to him by The Beatles when he was involved with the group between 1965 and 1969 , including being head of Apple Electronics . 
 Mardas arrived in England in 1965 , exhibiting his Kinetic Light Sculptures at the Indica Gallery . He impressed John Lennon with the Nothing Box ; a small plastic box with randomly blinking lights , and allegedly said that he could build a 72 @-@ track tape machine . Mardas was then given the job of designing the new Apple Studio in Savile Row , and was in India with The Beatles at the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 's ashram in India . 
 In the 1970s , the anti @-@ terrorism industry offered bullet @-@ proof vehicles , bugging devices and security hardware , so Mardas set up various companies offering these products to royalty and VIPs . King Hussein of Jordan bought a fleet of cars that Mardas had customised . In 1987 , Mardas was a managing director of Alcom Ltd , which specialised in electronic communications and security . He now lives in Greece . 
 = = London and The Beatles = = 
 The 21 @-@ year @-@ old Yanni Alexis Mardas first arrived in England on a student visa in 1965 , befriending John Dunbar of the Indica Gallery in London , and later moving in with him in a flat on Bentinck Street , which was where Mardas first met Lennon . Known as Yanni Mardas , he found employment as a television repairman . Dunbar later introduced Mardas to Brian Jones , after Mardas exhibited his Kinetic Light Sculptures at the Indica Gallery . Dunbar worked with Mardas on the “ psychedelic light box ” for The Rolling Stones ' three @-@ week tour of Europe in 1967 , although they were not impressed with the results . Dunbar later said : " He was quite cunning in the way he pitched his thing . He knew enough to know how to wind people up and to what extent . He was a fucking TV repairman : Yanni Mardas , none of this ' Magic Alex ' shit ! " 
 Jones introduced Mardas to Lennon , and it was at this point that Mardas impressed Lennon with the Nothing Box ; a small plastic box with randomly blinking lights that Lennon would stare at for hours while under the influence of LSD . Lennon later introduced the renamed John Alexis Mardas as his " new guru " , calling him " Magic Alex " . Mardas allegedly told Lennon about ideas for futuristic electronic devices he was " working on " , which he later denied either promising or discussing : a telephone that responded to its owner 's voice and could identify who was calling , a force field that would surround The Beatles ' homes , an X @-@ ray camera , paint that would make anything invisible , car paint that would change colour by flicking a switch , and wallpaper speakers , which would actually be a part of the wallpaper . Mardas later asked for the V @-@ 12 engines from Lennon 's Rolls @-@ Royce and George Harrison 's Ferrari <unk> car , so he could build a flying saucer . Mardas also denied making these claims . 
 The Beatles set up a company for Mardas called <unk> Ltd . , in September 1967 , and Mardas later became one of the first employees of the newly formed Apple Corps , earning £ 40 a week and receiving 10 % of any profits made from his inventions . 
 The Beatles often called Mardas the " Greek wizard " , and Paul McCartney remembered being interested in his ideas : “ Well , if you [ Mardas ] could do that , we ’ d like one " . It was always , ' We ’ d like one ' ” . Mardas ' ideas were not confined to the realms of electronic wizardry , but included songwriting involvement , with a Lennon @-@ Mardas composition , " What 's the New Mary Jane " , originally meant for inclusion on The White Album . 
 Mardas was given his own laboratory called Apple Electronics , at 34 Boston Place , Westminster , London , and was helped to obtain a British work visa . His pay eventually rose to £ 6 @,@ 000 per year , and an American patent attorney , Alfred <unk> , moved to England to assist Mardas . In a historical TV promo for Apple Corps that 's included on The Beatles Anthology DVD , Mardas is shown wearing a white laboratory assistant 's coat in Apple Electronics ( with loud oscillating noises in the background ) saying , " Hello , I 'm Alexis , from Apple Electronics . I would like to say ' Hello ' to all my brothers around the world , and to all the girls around the world , and to all the electronic people around the world . That is Apple Electronics . " Mardas then turns and points back to a collection of two portable 2 @-@ track recorders in wooden boxes , a 2 @-@ track studio recording machine , voltage meters , a hi @-@ fi amplifier , an oscilloscope and a TV screen showing pulsating psychedelic balloon shapes . A mysterious fire at the laboratory prevented Mardas from presenting his inventions , but he later said : " I 'm a rock gardener , and now I 'm doing electronics . Maybe next year , I make films or poems . I have no formal training in any of these , but this is irrelevant " . 
 = = = Greece = = = 
 The Beatles had tried in 1964 to buy the 14 @-@ acre ( 57 @,@ 000 m2 ) Trinity Island , off the coast of the Greek island of Euboea ( pronounced EV @-@ i @-@ a ) ( resembling a guitar in shape ) but the owners were not interested in a sale . Lennon was still interested in buying or leasing an island to live on together , and discussed it with the other Beatles on 19 July 1967 . Mardas ' father was a major in the Greek secret police , and Mardas explained that through him The Beatles would have access to Greek government connections , which would speed the acquisition of an island , as many islands did have the right certificates of ownership and were subject to government restrictions . On 22 July 1967 , Harrison and his wife , Pattie Boyd , Ringo Starr and Neil Aspinall flew to Athens , where they stayed in Mardas ' parents ' house overnight until Lennon , Cynthia Lennon , and their son , Julian Lennon , McCartney and Jane Asher , Pattie Boyd 's 16 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Paula , Mal Evans and Alistair Taylor set off for Athens . 
 Their chartered yacht , the MV Arvi , was detained in Crete because of bad weather , so the party had to wait in Athens for three days . Taylor complained that on a trip to a small hill village , " We came round a corner of the peaceful road only to find hundreds of photographers clicking away at us " , which Mardas had organised . McCartney later said that while sailing around Greek islands , everybody just sat around and took LSD . They eventually found the 80 @-@ acre ( 320 @,@ 000 m2 ) island of <unk> , which had a small fishing village , four beaches and a large olive grove . Four small neighbouring islands surrounded it ( which were planned as one for each Beatle ) so the island was bought for £ 95 @,@ 000 ( with a 25 % premium ) but was sold for a modest profit a few months later , after all four Beatles lost interest in the idea . 
 = = = Apple Boutique and marriage = = = 
 On 1 August 1967 , Mardas , Aspinall and Derek Taylor , were invited by Harrison to stay at the home of Robert Fitzpatrick , on Blue Jay Way , and on 7 August 1967 , Harrison and his wife visited San Francisco 's Haight @-@ Ashbury district with Mardas . The Apple Boutique , at 94 Baker Street , London , was one of the first business ventures made by The Beatles ' fledgling Apple Corps , and Mardas ( at great expense ) was commissioned to create one of his ideas ; an " artificial sun " which would light up the night @-@ time sky , for the opening on 7 December 1967 . When the time came for Mardas to produce his artificial sun , he claimed that there was not a strong enough energy supply to power it , which was accepted by The Beatles . Mardas appeared ( uncredited ) in the Beatles ' TV movie Magical Mystery Tour , which was first broadcast on BBC1 on Boxing Day in 1967 . On 11 July 1968 , 26 @-@ year @-@ old Mardas married 22 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> <unk> ( the daughter of a respected Greek architect ) at St Sophia 's Church , London . Harrison and his wife attended , and Lennon ( who was there with Yoko Ono ) was joint best man , along with Donovan . 
 = = = Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and India = = = 
 Mardas and Aspinall joined Lennon and Harrison in India , where they were studying meditation under the tutelage of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi , although Starr had flown back to England — complaining the Indian food did not agree with him — and McCartney had left on 24 March 1968 . When Mardas first met the Maharishi , he said sarcastically , " I know you ! Didn ’ t I meet you in Greece years ago ? " 
 Mardas was jealous about the control the Maharishi had over Lennon , and during one of their frequent walks through the woods he asked Lennon why the Maharishi always had an accountant by his side . Lennon replied that The Beatles ( or Lennon and Harrison ) were considering donating a large part of their income to the Maharishi 's bank accounts in Switzerland . When Mardas questioned the Maharishi about this , he offered money to Mardas to build a high @-@ powered radio station , so he could broadcast his teachings to the whole of India . 
 Alcohol was not allowed in the Maharishi 's ashram , but Mardas smuggled some in from Dehra Dun , and later reported to Lennon and Harrison that the Maharishi had sex with a young American student , and had made a sexual advance toward Mia Farrow . This was not fully supported in Farrow 's autobiography What Falls Away ( 1997 ) , writing that she may have misinterpreted the supposed sexual advance . Mardas continued to insist the Maharishi was not what he said he was ; even making Harrison unsure . Lennon mused in 1970 : " Well , it must be true , because if George [ Harrison ] is doubting him , there must be something in it " . Lennon and Harrison confronted the Maharishi , but the startled Maharishi 's answers did not satisfy them , and they decided to leave the camp . Mardas insisted that they ( Lennon , Harrison and their respective wives ) must leave the camp at once , or the Maharishi might send down some " black magic " on them . Mardas then went down to Dehra Dun to organise taxis for the next morning to take them all to Delhi . 
 Cynthia Lennon personally believed that Mardas invented the story about sexual impropriety to undermine the Maharishi 's influence on The Beatles , as Mardas was always jealous of anyone having Lennon 's attention . Harrison and McCartney later offered their apologies to the Maharishi ( McCartney said that he did not believe the accusation at all ) . In 2010 , Mardas issued a statement denying that he had spread rumours . 
 = = = Lennon 's divorce = = = 
 After returning to England in May 1968 , Lennon suggested that Cynthia take a holiday in Greece with Mardas , Donovan , Boyd , and her sister . Lennon said that he would be very busy recording what would become The White Album and that it would do her some good to take a break with Mardas , his girlfriend Jenny Boyd , and others . Cynthia arrived home one day early from Greece on 22 May 1968 . She and Mardas discovered Lennon and Ono sitting cross @-@ legged on the floor , staring into each other 's eyes , and found Ono 's slippers outside the Lennons ' marital bedroom door . Cynthia asked Boyd and Mardas if she could spend the night at their apartment . At the apartment Boyd went straight to bed , but Mardas got Cynthia drunk and tried to convince her that they should both run away together . After Cynthia had been sick in the bathroom she collapsed on a bed in the spare bedroom , but Mardas joined her and tried to kiss her until she ( in her words ) " pushed him away " . Brian Epstein 's personal assistant , Peter Brown , maintains that Cynthia did sleep with Mardas , saying : " She knew it was a mistake the moment it happened , especially with Alex [ Mardas ] , whom she had never trusted , nor even liked " . 
 Lennon went to New York with McCartney shortly after and told Cynthia she could not go with them , so Cynthia went on a trip to Italy with her mother . During Cynthia 's holiday in Italy , an " agitated " Mardas unexpectedly arrived ( pacing up and down outside Cynthia 's hotel until she returned ) , giving the news that Lennon was planning to sue Cynthia for divorce on grounds of adultery , seek sole custody of Julian , and send Cynthia " back to Hoylake " . Mardas also said that he intended to testify in court that Cynthia had committed adultery with him . She said in 2005 : " The mere fact that Magic Alex [ Mardas ] arrived in Italy in the middle of the night without any prior knowledge of where I was staying made me extremely suspicious . I was being coerced into making it easy for John [ Lennon ] and Yoko to accuse me of doing something that would make them not look so bad " . 
 = = = Apple Studio = = = 
 Mardas often said that the Abbey Road studio was " no good " , much to producer George Martin 's annoyance : " The trouble was that Alex was always coming to the studios to see what we were doing and to learn from it , while at the same time saying ‘ These people are so out of date . ’ But I found it very difficult to chuck him out , because the boys liked him so much . Since it was very obvious that I didn ’ t , a minor schism developed " . Mardas boasted that he could build a much better studio , with a 72 @-@ track tape machine , instead of the 4 @-@ track at Abbey Road — which was being updated at the time to an 8 @-@ track — so he was given the job of designing the new Apple Studio in the basement of Apple headquarters in Savile Row . One of Mardas ' more outrageous plans was to replace the acoustic baffles around Starr 's drums with an invisible sonic force field . Starr remembered that Mardas bought some " huge " computers from British Aerospace , which were stored in his barn , but " they never left the barn " , and were later sold as scrap metal . 
 Mardas gave the Beatles regular reports of his progress , but when they required their new studio in January 1969 , during the Get Back project that became Let It Be , they discovered an unusable studio : no 72 @-@ track tape deck ( Mardas had reduced it to 16 tracks ) , no soundproofing , no talkback ( intercom ) system , and not even a patch bay to run the wiring between the control room and the 16 speakers that Mardas had fixed haphazardly to the walls . The only new piece of sound equipment present was a crude mixing console which Mardas had built , which looked ( in the words of Martin 's assistant , Dave Harries ) like " bits of wood and an old oscilloscope " . The console was scrapped after just one session . Harrison said it was " chaos " , and that they had to " rip it all out and start again , " calling it " the biggest disaster of all time . " Harrison 's suspicions of Mardas ' competence had been raised when he saw him wandering around in a white coat with a clipboard , and considered the possibility that Mardas had " just read the latest version of Science Weekly , and used its ideas " . Mardas later stated that he had never been in the basement of Savile Row , as the studio equipment he was building was being tested in Apple Electronics , at Boston Place , Marylebone . 
 The Beatles asked producer Martin to come to the rescue , so he borrowed two four @-@ track recorders from EMI , and long @-@ time Beatles ' engineer Geoff Emerick was given the task of building and setting up a studio with portable equipment . After Allen Klein was brought in to be The Beatles ' manager in 1969 , he closed Apple Electronics , and Mardas left the company . It was later estimated that Mardas ' ideas and projects had cost The Beatles at least £ 300 @,@ 000 ( 3 million British pounds today ) . Starr once approved of one of Mardas ’ ideas : " He [ Mardas ] had an idea to stop people taping our records off the radio – you ’ d have to have a decoder to get the signal , and then we thought we could sell the time and put commercials on instead . We brought EMI and Capitol in from America to look at it , but they weren ’ t interested at all " . 
 = = Security consultant = = 
 In the 1970s , the anti @-@ terrorism industry offered bullet @-@ proof vehicles , bugging devices and security hardware . Mardas set up various companies offering these products to royalty and VIPs , using the former King of Greece as his principal salesman . Ex @-@ King Constantine II of Greece ( then exiled in Britain ) provided contacts to a half a dozen royal families for Mardas , and had close contact with the deposed Shah of Iran , who had moved to Mexico . The Shah was one of the first customers for the customised bullet @-@ proof cars that Mardas was offering , and was believed to have financially assisted Mardas ’ companies . 
 In 1974 , Mardas held an expensive party for the then Spanish heir , Prince Juan Carlos , which secured Mardas a contract . After the assassination of Admiral <unk> Blanco the Spanish royal family thought it should acquire more bullet @-@ proof cars , although one car was shipped to England , where it was parked in Chobham for almost a year as nobody knew how to do the work needed to upgrade it . The second contract ( worth over £ 1 / 2 million ) allowed Mardas to set up new security companies : Alcom Devices Ltd , and Night Vision Systems Ltd ( under the collective name of " Project Alcom " ) in St Albans Mews off Edgware Road , London , to provide a sophisticated communications system for Juan Carlos , so he could be in constant contact with his security services . Mardas employed Arthur Johnson ( known as Johnny Johnson ) , a former <unk> official . 
 The Sultan of Oman ordered six Mercedes 450 limousines in 1977 , but quickly discovered that they were not as safe as he had been led to believe . His ex @-@ SAS bodyguards tested one of the cars in the desert in July 1977 , by firing at them , but a bullet hit an emergency air cylinder , which led to the petrol tank blowing up , burning the whole car . The remaining cars were immediately sent back , with a demand to refund the money spent . King Hussein of Jordan had a fleet of cars that Mardas customised , but carried out a safety test on them with live ammunition in November 1977 . One eyewitness reported that the cars could be more life @-@ threatening than ordinary vehicles , as bullets easily pierced the armour @-@ plating , and the thick armoured glass broke into jagged splinters when struck . Hussein ordered that the cars be restored to their previous state . These failures convinced Mardas and Constantine to look at the growing European market for anti @-@ terrorist protection , setting up a factory in London to produce “ bullet @-@ proof ” cars in 1978 . This was financed by an investment of over £ 1 million through anonymous Monaco and Swiss bank accounts , which were believed to be controlled by the Shah . 
 = = The media and the courts = = 
 On 28 February 1988 , The Observer published an article naming Mardas as an arms dealer , but printed an apology on 30 April 1989 . After an article on 18 September 1988 ( " Joan 's Secret Lover " ) , and another a week later , The People newspaper was taken to court by Mardas , who won £ 75 @,@ 000 in damages . The Daily Mail published an apology and gave an undisclosed sum in damages on 16 January 2004 , after an article on 11 June 2003 , which accused Mardas of dealings that would later resurface in his claim against the New York Times in 2008 . 
 The Independent newspaper apologised on 21 August 2006 , writing that on 14 June 2006 , the paper had wrongly reported Mardas ' involvement with Apple Electronics Ltd . They corrected the earlier piece by writing that Mardas had not been a company employee , but a director and shareholder of Apple Electronics , and was not sacked , but resigned his directorship in May 1971 , while still retaining his shareholding , until giving it to Apple Corps some years later . The paper accepted that Mardas “ did not claim to have invented electric paint , a flying saucer or a recording studio with a ‘ sonic force field ’ or cause his employers to waste money on such ideas . We apologise to Mr. Mardas for these errors " . 
 In 2008 , Mardas won the right to sue the New York Times in England related to an online article which it said he was a charlatan . In a story about the Maharishi , Allan Kozinn had written : " Alexis Mardas , a supposed inventor and charlatan who had become a Beatles ’ insider " . After an appeal , Mardas won the right to continue his case of defamation against the New York Times in 2009 . After the New York Times produced a witness , Sir Harry Evans , who gave evidence supporting the journalistic responsibility of the paper , Mardas said he would not pursue the case further , but only if the paper would publicly explain that by labelling him as a charlatan , it did not mean to imply that he was a conman . On 4 March 2010 , the New York Times published an editor 's update to the 2008 article , saying : " While expressing skepticism about his work as an inventor during that period , the article did not accuse Mr. Mardas of engaging in fraudulent dealings or criminality ... The Times ’ s reporting on those events was attributed to Paul McCartney and based on widely published accounts from books and magazines ... " 
 = = Later years and present = = 
 Mardas put 15 items from his collection of Lennon memorabilia up for sale on 5 May 2004 at Christie 's in South Kensington , London . Among the sale was Lennon ’ s leather collar worn during 1967 and 1968 ( at the launch party for the Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band LP , and on the cover of Lennon and Ono ’ s Unfinished Music No.1 : Two Virgins ) , as well as a custom Vox Kensington guitar , a coloured felt pen drawing called " Strong " , and a pen and ink drawing by Lennon entitled “ Happy Fish ” . Mardas said he planned to donate the money to a charity in Greece . The ' custom Vox Kensington guitar ' later sold at an auction for £ 269 @,@ 000 on 19 May 2013 . Link label Mardas is now living in Athens . 
 = Upminster = 
 Upminster is a suburban town in east London , England , and part of the London Borough of Havering . Located 16 @.@ 5 miles ( 26 @.@ 6 km ) east @-@ northeast of Charing Cross , it is one of the locally important district centres identified in the London Plan , and comprises a number of shopping streets and a large residential area . It was historically , a rural village in Essex and formed an ancient parish . Although peripheral to London , the town has good transport links ; it was first connected to central London by rail in 1885 and has a terminal station on the London Underground network . The economic history of Upminster is characterised by a shift from farming to garden suburb . As part of the suburban growth of London in the 20th century , Upminster significantly expanded and increased in population , becoming part of Hornchurch Urban District in 1934 , and has formed part of Greater London since 1965 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The placename Upminster is first recorded in 1062 as <unk> and is recorded in the 1086 Domesday Book as <unk> . It is formed from Old English upp and <unk> , meaning the large church on high ground . The high ground of the parish church being in relation to the valley of the River Ingrebourne and the Upminster Bridge over the river shares the name . An alternative explanation suggests the upp could refer to the geographical relationship to a church at Barking or Tilbury in Anglo @-@ Saxon times . 
 = = = Economic development = = = 
 There was an ancient farmstead from the 1st century to the 3rd century in the Upminster area , and agriculture was the predominant industry throughout the following centuries . The area was once wooded , but clearances in the 12th century gave more land over to arable farming ; and by the 17th century there were a variety of crops and livestock . There was a growth in market gardening in the 19th century . There have been a number of windmills in Upminster and one of which , a smock mill built in 1803 , remains . Local industry included a tannery , gravel extraction and a brick works that was connected to the railway station by a tramway in 1895 . 
 The London , Tilbury and Southend Railway from Fenchurch Street was extended from Barking to Upminster in 1885 . The underground Whitechapel and Bow Railway opened in 1902 and allowed through services of the District Railway to operate to Upminster . The District converted to electric trains in 1905 and services were cut back to East Ham . Delayed by World War I , electrified tracks were extended by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway to Upminster and through services resumed in 1932 . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Upminster formed an ancient parish of 3 @,@ 369 acres ( 1 @,@ 363 ha ) in the Chafford hundred of Essex . The parish vestry had meetings in the church until 1798 , when they moved to the Bell Inn . The parish was divided into North and South wards by the Hornchurch to Cranham road . In 1836 the vestry lost control of poor relief , with Upminster becoming part of the Romford Poor Law Union and in 1875 the parish became part of Romford rural sanitary district . Following the Local Government Act 1894 , the sanitary district became Romford Rural District and a parish council was formed of nine members , increasing to twelve by 1913 as the population had doubled . The parish council acquired the Clock House building on St Mary 's Lane for use as offices in 1924 . The parish formed part of the London Traffic Area from 1924 and the London Passenger Transport Area from 1933 . In 1934 the parish council was abolished and Upminster was combined with other parishes to form part of Hornchurch Urban District . In 1965 the urban district was abolished and its former area was combined with that of Municipal Borough of Romford ; and since then has formed part of the London Borough of Havering in Greater London . 
 = = = Urban development = = = 
 The parish had three early centres of activity ; the village around the church and the settlements of <unk> and Corbets Tey . The estates of <unk> , New Place and Upminster Hall were purchased during the 17th century by merchants in the City of London . This caused a significant number of buildings in the town to be constructed or improved . Upkeep of the three bridges crossing the Ingrebourne were the responsibility of Upminster , as the adjacent Hornchurch parish was in the Havering liberty and was exempt from responsibility because of its charter . Although the opening of the station was key to the development of the suburb , land was not purchased for development until 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) were secured in 1901 . 
 Electricity was introduced in Upminster in 1926 . Gas main supply came from Romford in 1872 and from 1905 there was gas street lighting . The area was served by good spring water , with mains supply provided by the South Essex Waterworks Company from 1836 . Works on the sewerage system began in 1899 in Upminster village and Corbets Tey . In 1922 sewage works for Upminster and Cranham were opened in Great Warley . Land for Upminster Park was purchased by the parish council in 1929 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The town forms part of the Hornchurch and Upminster UK Parliament constituency , and is covered by the Havering wards of Upminster and Cranham . The current MP is Angela Watkinson . Each ward elects three councillors to Havering London Borough Council . All six councillors elected in 2010 for the two wards were the Upminster and Cranham Residents ' Association candidates and the area is unusual in that the residents ' association is strongly active . From 1945 to 1974 Upminster formed part of the Hornchurch constituency and from 1974 to 2010 it formed part of the Upminster constituency . Upminster is within the Havering and Redbridge London Assembly constituency and the London European Parliament constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Upminster rises to about 200 feet ( 61 m ) above sea level to the north and is about 50 feet ( 15 m ) above sea level to the south . It rests on a layer of loam , above sand and gravel in the south and London Clay to the north . It is bounded in the west by the River Ingrebourne and there is a stream running east @-@ west , just north of Corbets Tey that has been dammed to form a lake . It has formed part of the continuously built @-@ up area of London since the 1930s and is contiguous with Cranham to the east and Hornchurch to the west . To the north and south there is open land that forms part of the Metropolitan Green Belt and there are open spaces formed by Upminster Golf Club and Upminster Hall Playing Field to the north , Upminster Park and Clock House Gardens to the south , and the Ingrebourne Valley linear park to the south west . The town is effectively divided into north and south parts by the railway line . The north is predominantly residential , with the southern part containing the main shopping area . Further south it becomes predominantly residential again . Upminster is a post town in the RM postcode area ; it forms a long protrusion over the M25 motorway and additionally includes North Ockendon , also in Havering , and <unk> in Thurrock . Climate data for Upminster is taken from the nearest weather station at Greenwich , around 12 miles ( 19 @.@ 3 km ) southwest of St Laurence church : 
 = = Demography = = 
 The Havering committee area for Upminster is defined as the wards of Upminster and Cranham . Demographic data is produced by the Office for National Statistics for these wards . All of Upminster is contained within these wards , however they also cover the connected settlement of Cranham and the rural outlier of North Ockendon . In 2001 the population of Upminster ward was 12 @,@ 674 and Cranham ward was 12 @,@ 242 , giving a total population of 25 @,@ 098 . 80 @.@ 95 % in Upminster and 81 @.@ 73 % in Cranham report their religion as Christian , compared to 76 @.@ 13 % for Havering , 58 @.@ 23 % in London and 71 @.@ 74 % in England . 10 @.@ 08 % in Upminster and 10 @.@ 46 % in Cranham report having no religion , compared to 13 @.@ 18 % in Havering , 15 @.@ 76 % in London and 14 @.@ 59 % in England . With a black and minority ethnic population of 3 % in 2001 , Cranham and Upminster wards have the lowest Simpson index for ethnic diversity in London . The level of home ownership is atypically high compared to the rest of London and England , with over 90 % of housing tenure under owner @-@ occupation in both wards . The Upminster ward has one of the lowest levels of deprivation in London . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Upminster is identified in the London Plan as a local district centre with 37 @,@ 000 square metres ( 400 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of commercial floorspace . It is not considered a significant commercial office location . Within Havering , it is identified as one of seven town centres in the borough , with a retail area extending along Station Road , St Mary 's Lane and Corbets Tey Road . The unit sizes are mostly small with the largest outlets the Roomes Fashion and Home department store , the Roomes Furniture and Interiors furniture store , and the Aldi , M & S Simply Food and Waitrose supermarkets . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town is served by Upminster station on the London @-@ Tilbury @-@ Southend Line and the London Underground , in London fare zone 6 . The western part of the town is also served by Upminster Bridge tube station . Upminster and Upminster Bridge are on the District line of the London Underground , with services to Richmond , Ealing Broadway and Wimbledon via central London . The station at Upminster is served by National Rail operator c2c provides services to Fenchurch Street via West Ham ; Shoeburyness via Basildon ; Southend via Chafford Hundred . London Overground operate services to Romford via Emerson Park . There are Transport for London bus services to Hornchurch , Romford , North Ockendon , Lakeside Shopping Centre and Cranham . To the south of Upminster is <unk> Hall Aerodrome . The A127 road to the north is the main radial artery to central London , with the <unk> road terminating in the town . The M25 motorway is located about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the east of the town centre . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Havering Council 's urban strategy recognises that nearby Hornchurch is the main cultural hub of the borough with a large theatre and arts spaces , and Romford offers the largest regional concentration of entertainment facilities . Within Upminster is New Windmill Hall , a flexible entertainment space , built in 1968 , which holds up to 300 people . Upminster forms part of the tourism strategy for the borough . It is the location of Upminster Windmill , one of the few remaining mills in Greater London and is Grade II * listed . There is also the Tithe Barn Museum , containing artifacts of domestic and agricultural use . In the west of Upminster is Hornchurch Stadium , which is the home ground of A.F.C. Hornchurch . Upminster is often associated with Ian Dury and his 1981 album Lord Upminster is named after the town . 
 = = = Speed of sound = = = 
 The speed of sound was first accurately calculated by the Reverend William Derham , Rector of Upminster , thus improving on Newton 's estimates . Derham used a telescope from the tower of the church of St Laurence , Upminster to observe the flash of a distant shotgun being fired , and then measured the time until he heard the gunshot with a half second pendulum . Measurements were made of gunshots from a number of local landmarks , including North Ockendon church . The distance was known by triangulation , and thus the speed that the sound had travelled could be calculated . 
 = Les Horvath = 
 Leslie " Les " Horvath ( October 12 , 1921 – November 14 , 1995 ) was an American football quarterback and halfback who won the Heisman Trophy while playing for Ohio State University in 1944 . Horvath was the first Ohio State player to win the Heisman , an award given to the best college football player in the United States . The school retired his jersey number 22 in 2001 . 
 Horvath grew up in a suburb of Cleveland , Ohio and became a standout high school athlete despite his small stature . He entered Ohio State in 1939 on a work scholarship , but tried out for and made the football team the following year . He played as a reserve halfback on a 1942 team coached by Paul Brown that won Ohio State 's first @-@ ever national championship . Horvath graduated that year and moved to Ohio State 's dental school . In 1944 , however , acting Ohio State football coach Carroll Widdoes asked Horvath to rejoin the team , taking advantage of a World War II @-@ era rule allowing graduate students with remaining eligibility to play . Horvath agreed , and helped lead the Buckeyes to a 9 – 0 record and a second @-@ place showing in the AP Poll . He won the Heisman and was named an All @-@ American after the season . 
 Horvath graduated from dental school in 1945 and served as a dental officer in the U.S. Navy for two years . Following his discharge , he played professionally for the Los Angeles Rams in 1947 and 1948 before being released and signing with the Cleveland Browns in 1949 . The Browns won the All @-@ America Football Conference championship that year . Horvath retired from playing in 1950 and moved to Los Angeles to practice dentistry . He lived there for the rest of his life . Horvath was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1966 and the Ohio State athletics hall of fame in 1977 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Horvath was born to Croatian immigrants in South Bend , Indiana in 1921 ; his family soon moved to Parma , Ohio , a suburb of Cleveland , Ohio . He attended Parma Senior High School starting in 1936 and played on the track , basketball and football teams until the 11th grade . He decided to switch schools because he felt his basketball teammates were not taking the sport seriously . Horvath 's family relocated , and in 1938 he enrolled at James Ford Rhodes High School in Cleveland , one of Parma 's rivals . Playing as a quarterback for the Rhodes Rams , Horvath guided the team to seven straight wins in 1938 , but the team lost to West Technical High School for a chance to be the Cleveland Senate League 's nomination to play in the city championship . He graduated in 1939 . 
 = = College career = = 
 After graduating , Horvath attended Ohio State University on a work scholarship , but managed to make the school 's football team in 1940 . Horvath was small for a football player – he weighed just 160 pounds – but was a quick runner and had a strong arm . Ohio State 's football team was a disappointment in 1940 , however , finishing the season with a 4 – 4 win – loss record under head coach Francis Schmidt . Schmidt was fired after the season and replaced by Paul Brown , an Ohio high school coach who had guided Massillon Washington to a series of undefeated records and state championships . Brown simplified Ohio State 's offense , but imposed a level of discipline and organization that had been absent under Schmidt . Horvath was a reserve halfback in the Buckeyes ' single @-@ wing offense in 1941 , when the team posted a 6 – 1 – 1 win – loss – tie record and finished second in the Big Ten Conference standings . He played in many games , but senior fullback Jack Graf and senior halfback Tom Kinkade got most of the carries for Ohio State . 
 Despite his small frame , Brown recognized Horvath 's potential as a senior in 1942 and made him a regular starter at halfback beside Paul Sarringhaus and fullback Gene Fekete . While Sarringhaus and Fekete were Ohio State 's main offensive weapons , Horvath averaged eight yards per carry in a victory over Pittsburgh and scored two touchdowns and passed for 109 yards in a win over Illinois in Cleveland . Ohio State was ranked first in the country in the AP Poll early in the season , but fell in the rankings after a loss to Wisconsin in October . The team won the rest of its games , however , including a 21 – 7 victory over arch @-@ rival Michigan at the end of the season . Horvath passed to Sarringhaus for a 35 @-@ yard touchdown and caught another 32 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Sarringhaus in the Michigan game . Ohio State 's 9 – 1 record put it on top of the Big Ten standings and in the final AP Poll , giving the school its first @-@ ever national championship . 
 Horvath expected his college football career to be over in 1942 . He finished his undergraduate degree that year and enrolled in a graduate program at The Ohio State University College of Dentistry . Ohio State 's football program , meanwhile , struggled in 1943 after Brown and many of its best players entered the military during World War II . Carroll Widdoes , an assistant under Brown , was appointed the acting head coach and led the team to a 3 – 6 record . 
 The following year , Widdoes asked Horvath to return to the team , taking advantage of a wartime rule that allowed college programs to use graduate students if they had not exhausted their four years of college eligibility . Widdoes promised Horvath a leading role as the team 's left halfback , a level of prominence he had been denied under Brown . Horvath agreed to come back and be a veteran leader for a team that was composed mostly of freshmen because of older players ' service in the war . Horvath had a breakout season in 1944 , gaining 669 rushing yards and 1 @,@ 200 all @-@ purpose yards as the Buckeyes turned in a 9 – 0 record and finished second in the national polls . The highlights of Horvath 's season included scoring the winning touchdown in Ohio State 's annual matchup against Michigan . Calling all of Ohio State 's offensive plays , he was nicknamed the " playing coach " . 
 Horvath was named a first @-@ team All @-@ American by sportswriters and the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten after the season . He was voted by his teammates as Ohio State 's Most Valuable Player . He also won the Heisman Trophy , an award given each year to the best college football player in the country . Horvath was the first Ohio State player to win the Heisman , and he remains the only Heisman winner not to have played football the previous season . In early 1945 , Horvath played in the annual East – West Shrine Game , a college all @-@ star game . While at Ohio State , he was a member of Delta Tau Delta fraternity . 
 = = Military and professional career = = 
 After graduating from Ohio State 's dental school in 1945 , Horvath signed to play for the Cleveland Rams of the National Football League . Horvath , however , applied for a commission to join the U.S. Navy and was sworn in as a junior lieutenant that August . He was sent at first to Naval Station Great Lakes in Illinois for training , where he practiced dentistry and acted as an assistant to Brown , who had entered the Navy and was coaching the base 's football team . Horvath served in Hawaii and coached a football team there that won a service national championship . He later traveled on assignment as far as China as a naval dental officer . 
 Before his discharge from the Navy in 1947 , there was speculation that Horvath may join the Cleveland Browns , a new team coached by Brown in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Horvath was still under contract with the Rams , however , and joined the team , which by then had moved from Cleveland to Los Angeles . Led by quarterback Bob Waterfield , Los Angeles finished the season with a 6 – 6 record in 1947 . Horvath rushed for 68 yards and had three receptions . Horvath had 118 yards of rushing the next season , when the Rams finished with a 6 – 5 – 1 record and took third place in the NFL West division . 
 Horvath , who worked as a dentist in the offseason in Los Angeles , was released by the Rams in 1949 . He signed with the Browns a week later , closing his dental office and moving to Cleveland to reunite with Brown . Horvath , who was used primarily on defense early in the season , had an 84 @-@ yard fumble return for a touchdown in a game against the New York Yankees , and ran for two touchdowns in a November game against the Chicago Hornets . Cleveland finished the season with a 9 – 1 – 2 record and won a fourth straight AAFC championship . The AAFC disbanded after the season and the Browns were absorbed by the NFL , but Horvath decided to quit football to practice dentistry back in California . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Horvath got married after the 1949 season to Shirley Phillips , an airline hostess , and moved back to Los Angeles . He coached little league football and practiced dentistry in Glendale , California , a major Los Angeles suburb , for the rest of his life . His wife died in 1973 , and he got remarried two years later to Ruby <unk> , whom he met in Hawaii while on vacation in 1974 . They were married for 20 years , until Horvath 's death in 1995 of heart failure . 
 Horvath was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1966 and became a member of Ohio State 's athletics hall of fame in 1977 . Ohio State retired his number 22 uniform in 2001 , six years after his death . He was inducted into the Parma Senior High School athletics hall of fame in 2007 . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 1942 AP National Championship ( with the Ohio State Buckeyes ) 
 1944 Heisman Trophy winner 
 1944 First Team All @-@ American 
 1949 AAFC Champion ( with the Cleveland Browns ) 
 College Football Hall of Fame inductee ( class of 1966 ) 
 Ohio State " Block O " Varsity Hall of Fame inductee ( class of 1977 ) 
 Parma Senior High School Hall of Fame inductee ( class of 2007 ) 
 Number retired by Ohio State ( # 22 ) 
 = Greece runestones = 
 The Greece runestones ( Swedish : <unk> ) are about 30 runestones containing information related to voyages made by Norsemen to the Byzantine Empire . They were made during the Viking Age until about 1100 and were engraved in the Old Norse language with Scandinavian runes . All the stones have been found in modern @-@ day Sweden , the majority in Uppland ( 18 runestones ) and Södermanland ( 7 runestones ) . Most were inscribed in memory of members of the Varangian Guard who never returned home , but a few inscriptions mention men who returned with wealth , and a boulder in Ed was engraved on the orders of a former officer of the Guard . 
 On these runestones the word <unk> ( " Greece " ) appears in three inscriptions , the word <unk> ( j ) ar ( " Greeks " ) appears in 25 inscriptions , two stones refer to men as <unk> ( " traveller to Greece " ) and one stone refers to <unk> ( " Greek harbours " ) . Among other runestones which refer to expeditions abroad , the only groups which are comparable in number are the so @-@ called " England runestones " that mention expeditions to England and the 26 Ingvar runestones that refer to a Viking expedition to the Middle East . 
 The stones vary in size from the small whetstone from <unk> which measures 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) × 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) × 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) to the boulder in Ed which is 18 m ( 59 ft ) in circumference . Most of them are adorned with various runestone styles that were in use during the 11th century , and especially styles that were part of the Ringerike style ( eight or nine stones ) and the Urnes style ( eight stones ) . 
 Since the first discoveries by Johannes Bureus in the late 16th century , these runestones have been frequently identified by scholars , with many stones discovered during a national search for historic monuments in the late 17th century . Several stones were documented by Richard Dybeck in the 19th century . The latest stone to be found was in <unk> , near Stockholm , in 1952 . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Scandinavians had served as mercenaries in the Roman army many centuries before the Viking Age , but during the time when the stones were made , there were more contacts between Scandinavia and Byzantium than at any other time . Swedish Viking ships were common on the Black Sea , the Aegean Sea , the Sea of Marmara and on the wider Mediterranean Sea . Greece was home to the Varangian Guard , the elite bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor , and until the Komnenos dynasty in the late 11th century , most members of the Varangian Guard were Swedes . As late as 1195 , Emperor Alexios Angelos sent emissaries to Denmark , Norway and Sweden requesting 1 @,@ 000 warriors from each of the three kingdoms . Stationed in Constantinople , which the Scandinavians referred to as <unk> ( the " Great City " ) , the Guard attracted young Scandinavians of the sort that had composed it since its creation in the late 10th century . 
 The large number of men who departed for the Byzantine Empire is indicated by the fact that the medieval Scandinavian laws still contained laws concerning voyages to Greece when they were written down after the Viking Age . The older version of the <unk> law , which was written down by Eskil Magnusson , the <unk> of Västergötland 1219 – 1225 , stated that " no man may receive an inheritance ( in Sweden ) while he dwells in Greece " . The later version , which was written down from 1250 to 1300 , adds that " no one may inherit from such a person as was not a living heir when he went away " . Also the old Norwegian <unk> contains a similar law : " but if ( a man ) goes to Greece , then he who is next in line to inherit shall hold his property " . 
 About 3 @,@ 000 runestones from the Viking Age have been discovered in Scandinavia of which c . 2 @,@ 700 were raised within what today is Sweden . As many as 1 @,@ 277 of them were raised in the province of Uppland alone . The Viking Age coincided with the Christianisation of Scandinavia , and in many districts c . 50 % of the stone inscriptions have traces of Christianity . In Uppland , c . 70 % of the inscriptions are explicitly Christian , which is shown by engraved crosses or added Christian prayers , while only a few runestones are explicitly pagan . The runestone tradition probably died out before 1100 , and at the latest by 1125 . 
 Among the runestones of the Viking Age , 9 @.@ 1 – 10 % report that they were raised in memory of people who went abroad , and the runestones that mention Greece constitute the largest group of them . In addition , there is a group of three or four runestones that commemorate men who died in southern Italy , and who were probably members of the Varangian Guard . The only group of stones comparable in number to the Greece runestones are those that mention England , followed by the c . 26 Ingvar runestones raised in the wake of the fateful Ingvar expedition to Persia . 
 Blöndal & Benedikz ( 2007 ) note that most of the Greece runestones are from Uppland and relate it to the fact that it was the most common area to start a journey to Greece , and the area from which most Rus ' originated . However , as noted by Jansson ( 1987 ) , the fact that most of these runestones were raised in Uppland and Södermanland does not necessarily mean that their number reflects the composition of the Scandinavians in the Varangian Guard . These two provinces are those that have the greatest concentrations of runic inscriptions . 
 Not all those who are commemorated on the Greece runestones were necessarily members of the Varangian Guard , and some may have gone to Greece as merchants or died there while passing by on a pilgrimage . The fact that a voyage to Greece was associated with great danger is testified by the fact that a woman had a runestone made in memory of herself before she departed on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem : " <unk> <unk> had runes graven for herself ; she would go East and out to Jerusalem . <unk> carved the runes . " However , Blöndal and Benedikz ( 2007 ) state that although there were other reasons for going to Greece , it is certain that most of the runestones were made in memory of members of the Varangian Guard who died there . Still , some runestones tell of men who returned with increased wealth , and an inscription on a boulder in Ed was commissioned by a former captain of the Guard , Ragnvaldr . 
 = = = Purpose = = = 
 The reasons for the runestone tradition are a matter of debate but they include inheritance issues , status and the honouring of the deceased . Several runestones explicitly commemorate inheritance such as the <unk> stone and the <unk> stone , but the vast majority of the runestones only tell who raised the stone and in memory of whom . 
 A common view held by scholars such as Erik Moltke and Sven B. F. Jansson is that the runestones were primarily the result of the many Viking expeditions from Scandinavia , or to cite Jansson ( 1987 ) : 
 When the great expeditions were over , the old trade routes closed , and the Viking ships no longer made ready each spring for voyages to east and west , then that meant the end of the carving and setting up of rune stones in the proper sense of the term . They may be called the monuments of the Viking voyages , and the sensitive reader may catch in many of their inscriptions the Viking 's love of adventure and exploits of boisterous daring . 
 Sawyer ( 2000 ) , on the other hand , reacts against this commonly held view and comments that the vast majority of the runestones were raised in memory of people who are not reported to have died abroad . She argues that few men who went abroad were honoured with memorials and the reason is that the runestones were mainly raised because of concerns at home , such as inheritance issues . Such concerns would have arisen when a family knew that a relative would not return from abroad . 
 = = The runestones = = 
 Below follows a presentation of the Greece runestones based on information collected from the Rundata project , organised according to location . The transcriptions from runic inscriptions into standardised Old Norse are in Old East Norse ( <unk> ) , the Swedish and Danish dialect , to facilitate comparison with the inscriptions , while the English translation provided by Rundata give the names in the standard dialect , Old West Norse ( OWN ) , the Icelandic and Norwegian dialect . 
 = = = Transliteration and transcription = = = 
 There is a long @-@ standing practice of writing transliterations of the runes in Latin characters in boldface and transcribing the text into a normalized form of the language with italic type . This practice exists because the two forms of rendering a runic text have to be kept distinct . By not only showing the original inscription , but also <unk> , transcribing and translating , scholars present the analysis in a way that allows the reader to follow their interpretation of the runes . Every step presents challenges , but most Younger Futhark inscriptions are considered easy to interpret . 
 In transliterations , * , : , × , ' and + represent common word dividers , while ÷ represents less common ones . <unk> , ( ) , represent damaged runes that cannot be identified with certainty , and square brackets , [ ] , represent sequences of runes that have been lost , but can be identified thanks to early descriptions by scholars . A short hyphen , - , indicates that there is a rune or other sign that cannot be identified . A series of three full stops ... shows that runes are assumed to have existed in the position , but have disappeared . The two dividing signs | | divide a rune into two Latin letters , because <unk> often carved a single rune instead of two consecutive ones . § P and § Q introduce two alternative readings of an inscription that concern multiple words , while § A , § B and § C introduce the different parts of an inscription as they may appear on different sides of a runestone . 
 Angle brackets , 〈 〉 , indicate that there is a sequence of runes that cannot be interpreted with certainty . Other special signs are þ and ð , where the first one is the thorn letter which represents a voiceless dental fricative as th in English thing . The second letter is eth which stands for a voiced dental fricative as th in English them . The ʀ sign represents the yr rune , and ô is the same as the Icelandic O caudata <unk> . 
 = = = Nomenclature = = = 
 Every runic inscription is shown with its ID code that is used in scholarly literature to refer to the inscription , and it is only obligatory to give the first two parts of it . The first part is one or two letters that represent the area where the runic inscription appears , e.g. U for Uppland , Sö for Södermanland and DR for Denmark . The second part represents the order in which the inscription is presented in official national publications ( e.g. Sveriges runinskrifter ) . Thus U 73 means that the runestone was the 73rd runic inscription in Uppland that was documented in Sveriges runinskrifter . If the inscription was documented later than the official publication , it is listed according to the publication where it was first described , e.g. Sö Fv1954 ; 20 , where Sö represents Södermanland , Fv stands for the annual publication <unk> , 1954 is the year of the issue of <unk> and 20 is the page in the publication . 
 = = = Uppland = = = 
 There are as many as 18 runestones in Uppland that relate information about men who travelled to Greece , most of whom died there . 
 = = = = U 73 = = = = 
 Runestone U 73 ( location ) was probably erected to explain the order of inheritance from two men who died as Varangians . It is in the style Pr3 which is part of the more general Urnes style . The stone , which is of greyish granite measuring 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) in width , is raised on a slope some 100 m ( 330 ft ) north of <unk> farm , formerly <unk> ( lund ) . The stone was discovered by Johan Peringskiöld during the national search for historic monuments in the late 17th century . The stone shares the same message as U 72 , together with which it once formed a monument , but U 72 was moved to Skansen in 1896 . The latter stone relates that " these stones " were raised by Gerðarr and <unk> in memory of Ernmundr and Ingimundr . Consequently , U 73 's phrase " Inga 's sons " and " they died in Greece " refer to Ernmundr and Ingimundr . Ernmundr and Ingimundr had inherited from their father , but they departed for the Byzantine Empire and died there as Varangians . As they had not fathered any children , their mother Inga inherited their property , and when she died , her brothers Gerðarr and <unk> inherited from her . These two brothers then raised the two memorials in honour of their nephews , which was probably due to the nephews having distinguished themselves in the South . However , it may have also been in gratitude for wealth gathered by the nephews overseas . At the same time , the monument served to document how the property had passed from one clan to another . Sawyer ( 2000 ) , on the other hand , suggests that because the two inscriptions do not mention who commissioned them , the only eventual claimant to the fortune , and the one that had the stones made , may have been the church . The runemaster has been identified as <unk> . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 ' <unk> ' merki ' iru ' gar ' <unk> ' suni ' <unk> ' hon kam ' <unk> × at arfi ' in <unk> × <unk> * <unk> <unk> : at ' arfi × <unk> b <unk> ' <unk> to i kirikium 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> gar æftiʀ syni <unk> . Hon kvam <unk> at arfi , en þæiʀ <unk> <unk> <unk> at arfi , <unk> <unk> . <unk> dou i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " These landmarks are made in memory of Inga 's sons . She came to inherit from them , but these brothers — Gerðarr and his brothers — came to inherit from her . They died in Greece . " 
 = = = = U 104 = = = = 
 Runestone U 104 ( original location ) is in red sandstone measuring 1 @.@ 35 m ( 4 ft 5 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 15 m ( 3 ft 9 in ) in width . It was first documented by Johannes Bureus in 1594 . It was donated as one of a pair ( the other is U 1160 ) to the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford in 1687 upon the request of king James II of England to king Charles XI of Sweden asking for two runestones to add to the Oxford University collection . It is in the Urnes ( <unk> ) style . It was raised by Þorsteinn in memory of his father Sveinn and his brother Þórir , both of whom went to Greece , and lastly in memory of his mother . The stone is signed by the runemaster <unk> whose Old Norse is notable for its unorthodox use of the <unk> rune ( <unk> ) , as in hut for Old Norse <unk> ( " out " ) . The erratic use of the h @-@ phoneme is a dialect trait that has survived and is still characteristic for the modern Swedish dialect of <unk> , one of the regions where <unk> was active . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 ' <unk> ' lit × kera ' merki ' <unk> ' suin ' faþur ' sin ' uk ' <unk> ' <unk> ' ( b ) <unk> ' sin ' þiʀ ' <unk> ' hut ' til ' k — ika ' ( u ) ( k ) ' iftiʀ ' <unk> ' <unk> ' sin ' <unk> risti ' 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> let <unk> <unk> æftiʀ <unk> , faður sinn , ok æftiʀ <unk> , <unk> sinn , þæiʀ <unk> ut til G [ r ] <unk> , ok æftiʀ <unk> , <unk> sina . <unk> risti . 
 English translation : 
 " Þorsteinn let make the landmark after Sveinn , his father , and Þórir , his brother . They were out to Greece . And after <unk> , his mother . <unk> carved . " 
 = = = = U 112 = = = = 
 Runestone U 112 ( location ) , a large boulder measuring 18 m ( 59 ft ) in circumference , is beside a wooded path named <unk> ( " church path " ) in Ed . It has been known to scholars since Johannes Bureus ' first <unk> expedition in 1594 , and it dates to the mid @-@ 11th century . 
 The boulder bears runic inscriptions on two of its sides , referred to as U 112 A and B. The linguistic significance of the inscriptions lies in the use of the <unk> ( <unk> ) rune to denote the velar approximant / ɣ / ( as in Ragnvaldr ) , something that would become common after the close of the Viking Age . The inscription also includes some dotted runes , and the <unk> ( <unk> ) rune is used for the / o / phoneme . 
 The inscriptions are in the Urnes style ( Pr4 ) , and they were commissioned by a former captain of the Varangian Guard named Ragnvaldr in memory of his mother as well as in his own honour . Very few could boast of returning home with the honour of having been the captain of the Varangian Guard . Moreover , the name Ragnvaldr shows that he belonged to the higher echelons of Old Norse society , and that he may have been a relative of the ruling dynasty . 
 Ragnvald 's maternal grandfather , <unk> , is mentioned on two additional runestones in Uppland , U 328 and U 336 . Runestone U 328 relates that Ragnvaldr had two aunts , <unk> and <unk> . Additionally , runestone U 336 adds that Ulf of <unk> , who received three <unk> in England , was <unk> 's paternal nephew and thus Ragnvald 's first cousin . He was probably the same Ragnvaldr whose death is related in the <unk> bro runic inscriptions , which would also connect him to <unk> and the wealthy Jarlabanke clan . 
 Considering Ragnvald 's background , it is not surprising that he rose to become an officer of the Varangian Guard : he was a wealthy chieftain who brought many ambitious soldiers to Greece . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 Side A : * <unk> * lit * rista * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * sina * <unk> * <unk> * to i * <unk> * kuþ hialbi * ant * <unk> * 
 Side B : runa * rista * lit * <unk> * <unk> a × <unk> * <unk> * lis * <unk> * 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Side A : Ragnvaldr let rista runaʀ æftiʀ <unk> , <unk> sina , <unk> <unk> , do i <unk> . Guð hialpi and <unk> . 
 Side B : <unk> rista let Ragnvaldr . <unk> a Grikklandi , vas <unk> <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 Side A : " Ragnvaldr had the runes carved in memory of <unk> , his mother , <unk> 's daughter , ( who ) died in <unk> . May God help her spirit . " 
 Side B : " Ragnvaldr had the runes carved ; ( he ) was in Greece , was commander of the retinue . " 
 = = = = U 136 = = = = 
 Runestone U 136 ( location ) is in the Pr2 ( Ringerike ) style , and it once formed a monument together with U 135 . It is a dark greyish stone that is 1 @.@ 73 m ( 5 ft 8 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 85 m ( 2 ft 9 in ) wide . In 1857 , Richard Dybeck noted that it had been discovered in the soil five years earlier . A small part of it had stuck up above the soil and when the landowner was tilling the land and discovered it , he had it raised again on the same spot . Some pieces were accidentally chipped away by the landowner and the upper parts of some runes were lost . 
 The stone was originally raised by a wealthy lady named <unk> in memory of her husband Eysteinn , and Sawyer ( 2000 ) suggests it to have been one of several stones made in a tug @-@ of @-@ war over inheritance . There is uncertainty as to why Eysteinn went to Greece and Jerusalem , because of the interpretation of the word <unk> ( attested as <unk> in the past tense ) . It means " seek " but it can mean " attack " as on the stones Sö 166 and N 184 , but also " visit " or " travel " . Consequently , Eysteinn has been identified as one of the first Swedes to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem , but Jesch ( 2001 ) notes that judging from the other runic examples , the " attack " sense is more likely . The translation of <unk> as " attack " is also chosen by the Rundata project ( see below ) . It is one of two Jarlabanke Runestones that mention travellers abroad , the other being <unk> , below . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 × <unk> × la ( t ) + <unk> × <unk> × <unk> × [ a ] t <unk> × <unk> sin × is × <unk> × <unk> auk <unk> <unk> i × <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> let ræisa <unk> <unk> at <unk> , bonda sinn , es <unk> <unk> ok ændaðis upp i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> had these stones raised in memory of Eysteinn , her husbandman , who attacked Jerusalem and met his end in Greece . " 
 = = = = U 140 = = = = 
 Runestone U 140 is in <unk> ( location ) , near the <unk> bro Runestones and U 150 . The granite fragment is in Ringerike style ( Pr 2 ) . It was discovered by Richard Dybeck among the foundations of a small building . Dybeck searched without success for the remaining parts . Initially , the fragment was moved to a slope near the road between <unk> and Täby church , but in 1930 , it was moved next to the road . It is one of the Jarlabanke Runestones and it mentions a man who travelled abroad ( compare U 136 , above ) . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 × ... la × b ( a ) ... ... han : <unk> * i kirikium 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 [ Iar ] <unk> [ <unk> ] ... Hann ændaðis i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> ... He met his end in Greece . " 
 = = = = U 201 = = = = 
 Runestone U 201 ( location ) is in the Pr1 ( Ringerike ) type and it was made by the same runemaster as U 276 . The reddish granite stone is walled into the sacristy of <unk> Church c . 0 @.@ 74 m ( 2 ft 5 in ) above the ground , measuring 1 @.@ 17 m ( 3 ft 10 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 16 m ( 3 ft 10 in ) in width . Johannes Bureus ( 1568 – 1652 ) mentioned the stone , but for reasons unknown , it was overlooked during the national search for historic monuments in 1667 – 1684 . Two of the men who are mentioned on the stone have names that are otherwise unknown and they are reconstructed as <unk> and Sunnhvatr based on elements known from other Norse names . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 * þiagn * uk * <unk> * uk * <unk> * uk * <unk> * þiʀ * litu * risa * stin * þina * iftiʀ * <unk> * faþur * sin * on * furs * ut i * krikum * kuþ * <unk> ot ans * ot * uk * salu 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> ok <unk> ( ? ) ok Sunnhvatr ( ? ) ok <unk> þæiʀ letu ræisa stæin þenna æftiʀ <unk> , faður sinn . Hann fors ut i Grikkium . Guð hialpi and hans , and ok salu . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> and <unk> ( ? ) and Sunnhvatr ( ? ) and <unk> , they had this stone raised in memory of <unk> , their father . He perished abroad in Greece . May God help his spirit , spirit and soul . " 
 = = = = U 270 = = = = 
 Runestone U 270 was discovered in <unk> ( location ) near <unk> and depicted by Johan <unk> and assistant , for Johan Peringskiöld , during the national search for historic monuments in 1667 – 84 . Richard Dybeck noted in 1867 that he had seen the runestone intact three years previously , but that it had been used for the construction of a basement in 1866 . Dybeck sued the guilty farmer , and the prosecution was completed by the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters , History and Antiquities . The documentation from the court case shows that it had been standing at the homestead and that it had been blown up three times into small pieces that could be used for the construction of the basement . Reconstruction of the runestone was deemed impossible . The stone was 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 ft 2 in ) tall and 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) wide , and it was raised in memory of a father who appears to have travelled to Greece . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ <unk> <unk> ... ... – * <unk> <unk> * at * <unk> ... faþur * sin <unk> * k ... ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> [ a ] ... ... 〈 <unk> 〉 ok at <unk> ... , faður sinn , <unk> ( ? ) ... 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> ... ... and in memory of <unk> ... her father , ( a ) traveller to Greece ( ? ) ... " 
 = = = = U 358 = = = = 
 The runestone U 358 ( location ) in the RAK style was first mentioned by Richard Dybeck who discovered the stone in the foundation of the belfry of <unk> Church . The parishioners did not allow him to uncover the inscription completely , and they later hid the stone under a thick layer of soil . It was not until 1942 that it was removed from the belfry and was raised anew a few paces away . The stone is in light greyish granite . It is 2 @.@ 05 m ( 6 ft 9 in ) tall above the ground and 0 @.@ 78 m ( 2 ft 7 in ) wide . The contractor of the runestone was named Folkmarr and it is a name that is otherwise unknown from Viking Age Scandinavia , although it is known to have existed after the close of the Viking Age . It was on the other hand a common name in West Germanic languages and especially among the Franks . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> × lit × risa × stin × þina × iftiʀ × <unk> × sun × sin × saʀ × <unk> × uk <unk> <unk> × kuþ × <unk> × ans × ot uk salu 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Folkmarr let ræisa stæin þenna æftiʀ <unk> , sun sinn . <unk> ændaðis ok með Grikkium . Guð hialpi hans and ok salu . 
 English translation : 
 " Folkmarr had this stone raised in memory of <unk> , his son . He also met his end among the Greeks . May God help his spirit and soul . " 
 = = = = U 374 = = = = 
 Runestone U 374 was a runestone that once existed in Örby ( location ) . In 1673 , during the national search for historic monuments , Abraham Winge reported that there were two runestones standing at Örby . In 1684 , Peringskiöld went to Örby in order to document and depict the stones , but he found only one standing ( U 373 ) . Instead he discovered the second , or a third runestone , U 374 , as the bottom part of a fire stove . The use of the stone as a fireplace was detrimental to the inscription , and the last time someone wrote about having seen it was in 1728 . Peringskiöld 's drawing is consequently the only documentation of the inscription that exists . The height of the stone was 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) and its width 0 @.@ 88 m ( 2 ft 11 in ) , and it is attributed to the runemaster Åsmund Kåresson . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ ... litu ' rita : stain þino * iftiʀ * o @-@ hu ... ... an hon fil o <unk> kuþ hi @-@ <unk> sal ... ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 ... letu retta stæin þenna æftiʀ ... ... Hann fell a Grikklandi . Guð hi [ a ] <unk> sal [ u ] . 
 English translation : 
 " ... had this stone erected in memory of ... ... He fell in Greece . May God help ( his ) soul . " 
 = = = = U 431 = = = = 
 Runestone U 431 ( location ) was discovered , like U 430 , in a field belonging to the inn of <unk> when stones were blown up in order to prepare the field for growing crops in 1889 . As the stone was lying with the inscription side downwards , it was blown up and it was not until the shards were picked up that the runes were discovered . The runestone was mended with concrete and moved to the atrium of the church of <unk> . The stone is in bluish grey gneiss , and it measures 1 @.@ 95 m ( 6 ft 5 in ) in height and 0 @.@ 7 m ( 2 ft 4 in ) in width . The surfaces are unusually smooth . It is in the Ringerike ( Pr2 ) style , and it is attributed to the runemaster Åsmund Kåresson . It was raised by a father and mother , <unk> and <unk> , in memory of their son , <unk> , who died " among the Greeks " , and it is very unusual that the mother is mentioned before the father . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 tufa auk <unk> litu rita stin þino ' <unk> <unk> sun sin ' in – hon u ( a ) ʀ ta ( u ) - ( r ) <unk> <unk> ut ' kuþ hialbi <unk> | | salu | | uk | | kuþs m — ( i ) ( ʀ ) 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> ok <unk> letu retta stæin þenna æftiʀ Gunnar , sun sinn . En ... hann vaʀ <unk> [ ð ] r <unk> Grikkium ut . Guð hialpi hans salu ok Guðs m [ <unk> ] iʀ . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> and <unk> had this stone erected in memory of <unk> , their son , and ... He died abroad among the Greeks . May God and God 's mother help his soul . " 
 = = = = U 446 = = = = 
 A fragment of the runestone U 446 in <unk> ( location ) is only attested from a documentation made during the national search for historic monuments in the 17th century , and during the preparation of the Uppland section of Sveriges runinskrifter ( 1940 – 1943 ) scholars searched unsuccessfully for any remains of the stone . The fragment was what remained of the bottom part of a runestone and it appears to have been in two pieces of which one had the first part of the inscription and the second one the last part . The fragment appears to have been c . 1 @.@ 10 m ( 3 ft 7 in ) high and 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) wide and its Urnes style is attributed to either Pr3 or Pr4 . The runes isifara have been interpreted as <unk> @-@ <unk> which means " traveller to Estonia " , which is known from an inscription in Södermanland , but they are left as undeciphered by the Rundata project . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ isifara * auk * ... r * sin * hon tu i krikum ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 〈 isifara 〉 ok ... sinn . Hann do i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " 〈 isifara 〉 and ... their . He died in Greece . " 
 = = = = U 518 = = = = 
 Runestone U 518 ( location ) is in the RAK style and is raised on the southern side of a <unk> slope some 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) north @-@ east of the main building of the homestead Västra <unk> . The stone was made known by Richard Dybeck in several publications in the 1860s , and at the time it had recently been destroyed and was in several pieces of which the bottom part was still in the ground . In 1942 , the stone was mended and raised anew at the original spot . The stone consists of grey and coarse granite . 
 The runestone was made in memory of three men , of whom two died in Greece , while a third one , <unk> , died at a debated location written as i <unk> × nur . Richard Dybeck suggested that it might either refer to the nearby estate of <unk> or lake <unk> , and Sophus Bugge identified the location as " Saaremaa north " ( <unk> nor ) , whereas Erik Brate considered the location to have been Salo in present @-@ day Finland . The contemporary view , as presented in Rundata , derives from a more recent analysis by <unk> ( 1961 ) who consider it to refer to a sound at the island <unk> in Mälaren . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> × uk × suin × <unk> litu × risa × stin × þina × iftiʀ × <unk> × uk × <unk> × uk × <unk> × on × <unk> × i <unk> × nur × ian þiʀ <unk> × ut i × krikum × kuþ <unk> – ʀ ( a ) ot × uk salu 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> ok <unk> þau letu ræisa stæin þenna æftiʀ <unk> ok <unk> ok <unk> . Hann ændaðis i <unk> nor en þæiʀ <unk> ut i Grikkium . Guð hialpi [ <unk> ] <unk> and ok salu . 
 English translation : 
 " Þorgerðr and Sveinn , they had this stone raised in memory of <unk> and <unk> and <unk> . He met his end in the sound of Sila ( <unk> ) , and the others abroad in Greece . May God help their spirits and souls . " 
 = = = = U 540 = = = = 
 Runestone U 540 ( location ) is in the Urnes ( Pr4 ) style and it is attributed to the runemaster Åsmund Kåresson . It is mounted with iron to the northern wall of the church of <unk> @-@ <unk> , but when the stone was first documented by Johannes Bureus in 1638 he noted that it was used as a threshold in the atrium of the church . It was still used as a threshold when Richard Dybeck visited it in 1871 , and he arranged so that the entire inscription was made visible in order to make a cast copy . In 1887 , the parishioners decided to extract both U 540 and U 541 from the church and with financial help from the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters , History and Antiquities the stones were removed and attached outside the northern wall . The stone is of red sandstone and it is 1 @.@ 50 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) high and 1 @.@ 13 m ( 3 ft 8 in ) wide . Several parts of the stone and its inscription have been lost , and it is worn down due to its former use as a threshold . 
 A theory , proposed by Germanist F. A. Braun ( 1910 ) , which is based on the runestones runestone U 513 , U 540 , Sö 179 and Sö 279 , holds the grieving Ingvar to be the same person as Ingvar the Far @-@ Travelled , the son of the Swedish king <unk> the Old . Braun notes that the stones were raised at a <unk> , a royal residence , and the names Eiríkr ( Eric ) and Hákon were rather rare in Sweden , but known from the royal dynasty . <unk> would be <unk> <unk> , who was raised in Russia , while Eiríkr would be one of the two pretenders named Eric , and Hákon would be Håkan the Red . These identifications of the three men Eiríkr , Hákon and Ingvarr also appear in the reference work <unk> <unk> ( 2002 ) , where it adds that Eiríkr is also considered to appear on the <unk> stone and runestone U 20 . It also identifies Hákon with the one who commissioned the runestones Ög 162 and Ög <unk> ; 310 . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> ' auk <unk> ' auk <unk> <unk> <unk> [ <unk> ] r ' <unk> h — ... ... ... <unk> ' <unk> hon uarþ [ tau ] þ ( r ) [ a ] <unk> ' kuþ hialbi <unk> | | salu | | uk | | kuþs <unk> ( ʀ ) 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> ok Hakon ok Ingvarr ok Ragnhildr þau ... ... ... ... Hann varð dauðr a Grikklandi . Guð hialpi hans salu ok Guðs <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 " Eiríkr and Hákon and Ingvarr and Ragnhildr , they ... ... ... ... He died in Greece . May God and God 's mother help his soul . " 
 = = = = U 792 = = = = 
 Runestone U 792 ( location ) is in the Fp style and it is attributed to the runemaster <unk> . The stone is in grey granite and it measures 1 @.@ 65 m ( 5 ft 5 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 19 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) in width . It was originally raised together with a second runestone , with one on each side of the <unk> where the road passed a ford , c . 300 m ( 980 ft ) west of where the farm <unk> is today . The <unk> was the path that newly elected Swedish kings passed when they toured the country in order to be accepted by the local assemblies . The stone was first documented by Johannes Bureus in the 17th century , and later in the same century by Johan Peringskiöld , who considered it to be a remarkable stone raised in memory of a petty king , or war chief , in pagan times . When Richard Dybeck visited the stone , in 1863 , it was reclining considerably , and in 1925 , the stone was reported to have completely fallen down at the bank of the stream . It was not until 1946 that the Swedish National Heritage Board arranged to have it re @-@ erected . It was raised in memory of a man ( probably Haursi ) by his son , <unk> , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law . Haursi had returned from Greece a wealthy man , which left his son heir to a fortune . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 kar lit * risa * stin * <unk> * at * <unk> * faþur * sin * auk * <unk> * at * mah sin * <unk> <unk> * far * <unk> ut i * kri [ k ] um * <unk> * <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Karr let ræisa stæin þenna at Horsa ( ? ) , faður sinn , ok <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) at mag sinn . Fo [ r ] <unk> , <unk> <unk> ut i Grikkium <unk> <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> had this stone raised in memory of Haursi ( ? ) , his father ; and <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) in memory of his kinsman @-@ by @-@ marriage . ( He ) travelled competently ; earned wealth abroad in Greece for his heir . " 
 = = = = U 922 = = = = 
 Runestone U 922 ( location ) is in the Pr4 ( Urnes ) style and it measures 2 @.@ 85 m ( 9 ft 4 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) in width . It is hidden inside the floor in Uppsala Cathedral , next to the tomb of king Gustav Vasa of Sweden . Its existence was first documented by Johannes Bureus in 1594 , and in 1666 , Johannes <unk> commented on the stone as one of many runestones that had been perceived as heathen and which had therefore been used as construction material for the cathedral . <unk> considered U 922 to be the most notable one of these stones and he regretted that parts were under the pillar and that it could thus not be read entirely . In 1675 , Olof <unk> discovered that it had been made in memory of a traveller to Greece , but still the French traveller Aubrey de la <unk> wrote home , in 1712 , that he had been informed that it had been made in memory of a traveller to Jerusalem . The last scholar to report that the inscription was visible was Olof Celsius in 1729 , and it appears that it was soon covered by a new layer of floor . In 1950 , professor Elias Wessén and the county custodian of antiquities requested that it be removed for better analysis together with three other runestones , but the request was rejected by the Royal Board of Construction ( KBS ) because of safety concerns . 
 <unk> also appears on a second runestone in Uppsala Cathedral , U 925 , made by <unk> in memory of his son <unk> who died " in the South " , with " South " likely referring to the Byzantine Empire . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> ' uk <unk> * [ <unk> ' uk <unk> * litu ' risa * stain ' at ] <unk> * faþur [ * sin <unk> * <unk> ' ] sum ' for ' til * <unk> ' hut ' sun ' <unk> * uk * at * <unk> * in <unk> [ * risti * ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Ingimundr ok <unk> , <unk> ok <unk> ( ? ) letu ræisa stæin at <unk> , faður sinn , styrimaðr , sum for til <unk> ut , sunn Iona ( ? ) , ok at <unk> . En <unk> risti . 
 English translation : 
 " Ingimundr and Þórðr ( and ) Jarl and <unk> ( ? ) had the stone raised in memory of <unk> , their father , a captain who travelled abroad to Greece , <unk> 's ( ? ) son ; and in memory of <unk> . And <unk> carved . " 
 = = = = U 956 = = = = 
 Runestone U 956 ( location ) was carved by the runemaster Åsmund Kåresson in runestone style Pr3 or Urnes style . It is one of two surviving inscriptions that indicate Åsmund 's patronym , the other being GS 11 in <unk> . This stone is raised at <unk> near Uppsala , about 80 m ( 260 ft ) east of the crossroads of the road to <unk> and the country road between Uppsala and <unk> . The stone is in grey granite and it has an unusual shape with two flat surfaces and an obtuse angle between them . The inscription is 2 @.@ 27 m ( 7 ft 5 in ) high , of which the upper part is 1 @.@ 37 m ( 4 ft 6 in ) and the lower part 0 @.@ 9 m ( 2 ft 11 in ) , and the width is 0 @.@ 95 m ( 3 ft 1 in ) . 
 U 956 was first documented by Johannes <unk> Rhezelius ( d . 1666 ) , and later by Johan Peringskiöld ( 1710 ) , who commented that the inscription was legible in spite of the stone having been split in two parts . Unlike modern scholars , Peringskiöld connected this stone , like the other Greece runestones , to the Gothic wars in south @-@ eastern Europe from the 3rd century and onwards . Olof Celsius visited the stone three times , and the last time was in 1726 together with his nephew Anders Celsius . Olof Celsius noted that Peringskiöld had been wrong and that the stone was intact , although it gives an impression of being split in two , and the same observation was made by Richard Dybeck in 1866 . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 ' <unk> ' lit * rita stain þino ' <unk> ' <unk> ' <unk> ' <unk> sin kuþ hialbi hos | | salu | | uk | | kuþs u <unk> <unk> kara sun <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> let retta stæin þenna <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> sinn . Guð hialpi hans salu ok Guðs 〈 u 〉 <unk> . <unk> Kara sunn <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> had this stone erected in memory of <unk> , her husband , a traveller to Greece . May God and God 's mother help his soul . Ásmundr Kári ' son marked . " 
 = = = = U 1016 = = = = 
 Runestone U 1016 ( location ) is in light grey and coarse granite , and it is 1 @.@ 91 m ( 6 ft 3 in ) high and 1 @.@ 62 m ( 5 ft 4 in ) wide . The stone stands in a wooded field 5 m ( 16 ft ) west of the road to the village <unk> , 50 m ( 160 ft ) of the crossroads , and about 100 m ( 330 ft ) south @-@ south @-@ east of the farm <unk> . The first scholar to comment on the stone was Johannes Bureus , who visited the stone on June 19 , 1638 . Several other scholars would visit the stone during the following centuries , such as Rhezelius in 1667 , Peringskiöld in 1694 , and Olof Celsius in 1726 and in 1738 . In 1864 , Richard Dybeck noted that the runestone was one of several in the vicinity that had been raised anew during the summer . 
 Parts of the ornamentation have been lost due to flaking , which probably happened during the 17th century , but the inscription is intact . The art on the runestone has tentatively been classified under style Pr2 , but Wessén & Jansson ( 1953 – 1958 ) comment that the ornamentation is considered unusual and it is different from that on most other runestones in the district . Other stones in the same style are the Vang stone and the Alstad stone in Norway , and Sö 280 and U 1146 in Sweden . The style was better suited for wood and metal and it is likely that only few <unk> ever tried to apply it on stone . 
 Similar the inscription on U 1011 , this runic inscription uses the term <unk> as a title that is translated as " captain " . Other runestones use this term apparently to describe working as a steersman on a ship . There have been several different interpretations of parts of the inscription , but the following two interpretations appear in Rundata ( 2008 ) : 
 Latin transliteration : 
 § P * <unk> : <unk> * <unk> : stain : þinsa : <unk> : sunu * sina : sa hit : aki : sims uti furs : <unk> ( i ) * - ( n ) ari * <unk> * : hn krik * : <unk> : haima tu : ... -mu- ... ... ( k ) ( a ) ( r ) ... ( i ) uk ( r ) ( u ) - ( a ) * ... 
 § Q * <unk> : <unk> * <unk> : stain : þinsa : <unk> : sunu * sina : sa hit : aki : sims uti furs : <unk> ( i ) * - ( n ) ari * <unk> * : hn krik * : <unk> : haima tu : ... -mu- ... ... ( k ) ( a ) ( r ) ... ( i ) uk ( r ) ( u ) - ( a ) * ... 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 § P <unk> styrimaðr <unk> stæin þennsa æftiʀ sunu sina . Sa het Aki , sem 's uti fors . <unk> [ k ] <unk> , kvam hann <unk> , <unk> do ... ... hiogg ( ? ) ru [ n ] <unk> ( ? ) ... 
 § Q <unk> styrimaðr <unk> stæin þennsa æftiʀ sunu sina . Sa het Aki , sem 's uti fors . <unk> [ k ] <unk> , kvam hann <unk> . <unk> , <unk> do ... ... hiogg ( ? ) ru [ n ] <unk> ( ? ) ... 
 English translation : 
 § P " Ljótr the captain erected this stone in memory of his sons . He who perished abroad was called <unk> . ( He ) steered a cargo @-@ ship ; he came to Greek harbours ; died at home ... ... cut the runes ... " 
 § Q " Ljótr the captain erected this stone in memory of his sons . He who perished abroad was called <unk> . ( He ) steered a cargo @-@ ship ; he came to Greece . <unk> died at home ... ... cut the runes ... " 
 = = = = U 1087 = = = = 
 Runestone U 1087 ( former location ) was an unusually large and imposing runestone in the Urnes ( Pr4 ) style , but it has disappeared . Before it was lost , it was studied and described by several scholars such as Bureus , Rhezelius , Peringskiöld and lastly by Olof Celsius in 1726 . 
 Peringskiöld commented that the stone was reclining backwards in a hop @-@ garden at the eastern farm of <unk> , which was later confirmed by <unk> in 1726 . <unk> tried to find it , but noted in 1869 that the landowner knew of the runestone , but that the latter had reported it to be completely covered in soil , and in 1951 , a runologist tried to locate the runestone but failed . 
 The inscription had an unusual dotted k @-@ rune in <unk> ( " Greece " ) which it had in common with U 922 , above , but the only difficulty that has arisen in the interpretation of the runes is the sequence <unk> . Rhezelius read it as a name , <unk> , which would have belonged to a third son , whereas <unk> , Peringskiöld , <unk> and Celsius interpreted it as the pronoun <unk> meaning " the other " and referring to <unk> , an interpretation supported by Wessén and Jansson ( 1953 – 1958 ) , and by Rundata ( see below ) . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ <unk> * lit * risa stain * iftiʀ * <unk> * auk * <unk> suni * <unk> * <unk> uarþ tauþr i <unk> * ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> let ræisa stæin æftiʀ <unk> ok <unk> , syni sina . <unk> varð dauðr i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> had the stone raised in memory of Gerðarr and <unk> , her sons . The other ( = the latter ) died in Greece . " 
 = = = Södermanland = = = 
 There are seven runestones in Södermanland that relate of voyages to Greece . Two of them appear to mention commanders of the Varangian Guard and a second talks of a thegn , a high ranking warrior , who fought and died together with Greeks . 
 = = = = Sö Fv1954 ; 20 = = = = 
 The runestone Sö Fv1954 ; 20 ( location ) was discovered in 1952 approximately 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) west @-@ south @-@ west of <unk> manor during the plowing of a field , together with an <unk> stone . It was consequently part of a twin monument and they had been positioned about 2 – 3 m apart on both sides of a locally important road , where they had marked a ford . Both stones had lost their upper parts and the present height of the runestone is 1 @.@ 52 m ( 5 ft 0 in ) ( of which 1 @.@ 33 m ( 4 ft 4 in ) is above ground ) and it is 0 @.@ 55 m ( 1 ft 10 in ) wide . It is classified as being carved in runestone style Fp . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> : lit : risa : stin : i ( f ) ... ... ... ... r : austr : i : kirikium : <unk> <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> let ræisa stæin <unk> [ <unk> ] ... ... [ <unk> ] r austr i Grikkium . <unk> hiogg . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> had the stone raised in memory of ... ... died in the east in Greece . <unk> cut . " 
 = = = = Sö 82 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 82 ( location ) is in granite , and it measures 1 @.@ 18 m ( 3 ft 10 in ) in height and it is 1 @.@ 30 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) wide . It was formerly under a wooden threshold inside <unk> church , and the upper part was hidden under the wall of the atrium . Most of the inscription and the artwork have been destroyed , but what remains is classified as either style Fp or Pr1 ( Ringerike style ) . The inscription partly consists of cipher runes . 
 The stone was raised by Vésteinn in memory of his brother Freysteinn who died in Greece , and according to Omeljan Pritsak , Freysteinn was the commander of a retinue . The wolf @-@ beast image in the center of Sö 82 touches the inscription at the name Freysteinn and has its jaws at the word for " was dead " or " died . " Since one known kenning in Old Norse poetry for being killed in battle was that the " wolf was fed , " the combination of the text and imagery would lead to the conclusion that Freysteinn had died in battle in Greece . 
 Although the memorial stone image includes a Christian cross , the two personal names in the inscription both refer to Norse paganism . Þorsteinn includes as a name element the god Thor and means " Thor 's stone , " while Vésteinn includes the word <unk> , a temple or sanctuary , and when used in a personal name means " holy , " giving the name the meaning " holy stone . " 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ + ] ui — ( a ) n [ × ( b ) a- ] iʀ × ( i ) <unk> + <unk> × <unk> × <unk> × [ is ] ( ʀ ) n × <unk> × <unk> ( × ) [ <unk> × <unk> × <unk> × ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Vi [ st ] <unk> 〈 ba @-@ iʀ 〉 〈 <unk> 〉 æftiʀ <unk> , <unk> sinn , dauðr [ i ] Grikkium . <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) hiogg 〈 <unk> 〉 . 
 English translation : 
 " Vésteinn ... in memory of Freysteinn , his brother , ( who ) died in Greece . <unk> ( ? ) / <unk> ( ? ) cut ... " 
 = = = = Sö 85 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 85 ( location ) is a runestone in style KB that measures 1 @.@ 23 m ( 4 ft 0 in ) in height . The granite stone was discovered at a small brook , but in 1835 the runestone was destroyed . Some pieces were brought to <unk> and <unk> where they were used for the construction of fireplaces . Seven remaining pieces were brought to <unk> in 1855 in order to be protected by a fence , but when a scholarly enquiry took place in 1897 , only four pieces remained . An association of local antiquarians arranged so that the four remaining parts could be reassembled at <unk> . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 : <unk> : auk : ern ... ... [ : faþur sin : han : enta ] <unk> : ut i : krikum ( r ) <unk> : — ... <unk> — — an — — 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> ok <unk> ... ... faður sinn . Hann ændaðis ut i Grikkium ... ... 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> and <unk> ... ... their father . He met his end abroad in Greece . ... ... " 
 = = = = Sö 163 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 163 ( location ) is in the style Fp and it is of grey gneiss measuring 1 @.@ 22 m ( 4 ft 0 in ) in height and 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) in width . The runestone was first documented during the national search for historic monuments in 1667 – 84 and Peringskiöld noted that it was near the village of <unk> between <unk> and the highway . In 1820 , the stone was reported to be severely damaged and mostly hidden in the ground due to its being on the side of a local road . George Stephens reported in 1857 that its former position had been on a barrow at a small path near <unk> , but that it had been moved in 1830 to the avenue of the manor <unk> and <unk> on a wooded slope some 14 paces from the entrance to the highway . 
 The man who raised the stone is named with the runes <unk> and the name was identified as <unk> by Sophus Bugge who identified the first element of the name as the noun <unk> that would be derived from a * <unk> and correspond to Old English <unk> ( " power " , " force " ) . The Old English form is cognate with the Old Icelandic element <unk> ( " force " ) which appears in several Old Norse words in connection with the Norse god Thor . This analysis was accepted by Brate & Wessén although they noted that the name contains ʀ instead of the expected r , whereas the Rundata corpus gives the slightly different form <unk> . 
 The stone was raised in memory of two sons , one of whom went to Greece where he " divided up gold " , an expression that also appears on runestone Sö 165 , below . It can either mean that he was responsible for distributing payment to the members of the Varangian Guard or that he took part in the division of loot . Düwel has suggested that the expression is the eastern route equivalent of <unk> skifti ( " divided payment " ) which appears in the nearby stone Sö 166 that talks of payments to Vikings in England ( see also U 194 , U 241 and U 344 ) . If so , the expression could mean that the man who was commemorated had received payment . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> : stain : at : suni : sina : <unk> : <unk> : for : <unk> : i : <unk> : <unk> : <unk> : 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> stæin at syni sina , <unk> <unk> , for <unk> / <unk> i Grikkium <unk> skifti . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> ( raised ) the stone in memory of his sons , able valiant men . <unk> / <unk> travelled to Greece , divided ( up ) gold . " 
 = = = = Sö 165 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 165 ( location ) is tentatively categorised as being in the RAK style . It is of grey granite and is 1 @.@ 61 m ( 5 ft 3 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 57 m ( 1 ft 10 in ) wide . The runestone was first documented during the national search for historic monuments ( 1667 – 81 ) and then it was raised near a number of raised stones . Later the runestone was moved and raised beside Sö 166 at a ditch southwest of <unk> farm . 
 It was raised by a mother , <unk> , in memory of her son , <unk> . Like runestone Sö 163 , it also reports that the man concerned went to Greece and " divided up gold " which may refer to distributing payment to members of the Varangian guard , the division of loot or having received payment ( compare Sö 163 , above ) . The inscription itself is a poem in fornyrðislag . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 <unk> : <unk> : stain : at : <unk> : uaʀ : <unk> <unk> : uaʀ : han : : i : krikum <unk> skifti : <unk> : <unk> : ant : <unk> : 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> <unk> stæin at <unk> , vaʀ <unk> <unk> . <unk> hann i Grikkium , <unk> skifti . <unk> <unk> and <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 " Guðrún raised the stone in memory of <unk> ; ( he ) was Sveinn 's nephew . He was in Greece , divided ( up ) gold . May Christ help Christians ' spirits . " 
 = = = = Sö 170 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 170 in grey granite is raised north of the former road in <unk> ( location ) , and the stone is 1 @.@ 85 m ( 6 ft 1 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 80 m ( 2 ft 7 in ) wide . Its style is tentatively given as RAK and some of the runes are cipher runes in the form of branch runes . The runic text tells that a man named Báulfr died with the Greeks at a location that has not been clearly identified through several analyses of the cipher runes . <unk> ( 1907 ) suggested that the location is to be read <unk> which was the name of a town in Thessaly and a stronghold in Messenia , also called <unk> . Báulfr is described as being <unk> <unk> or a thegn of strength . The term thegn describes a class of retainer . The phrase <unk> <unk> is used on six other runestones , Sö 90 in <unk> , Sö 112 in <unk> , Sö 151 in <unk> , and Sö 158 in <unk> , and , in its plural form at Sö 367 in <unk> and Sö <unk> ; 295 in <unk> . 
 Omeljan Pritsak ( 1981 ) comments that among those who raised the memorial , the youngest son Guðvér would rise to become the commander of the Varangian Guard in the mid @-@ 11th century , as shown in a second mention of Guðvér on the runestone Sö 217 . That stone was raised in memory of one of the members of Guðvér 's retinue . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 : <unk> : <unk> : <unk> : <unk> : r ... ( s ) <unk> : stain : at : <unk> : faþur sin <unk> þiagn han <unk> <unk> uarþ tu o / þum þa / <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> , Agmundr , <unk> , þæiʀ r [ <unk> ] <unk> stæin at <unk> , faður sinn , <unk> þiagn . Hann með <unk> varð , do a / 〈 þum 〉 þa / 〈 <unk> 〉 . 
 English translation : 
 " Vésteinn , Agmundr ( and ) Guðvér , they raised the stone in memory of Báulfr , their father , a <unk> of strength . He was with the Greeks ; then died with them ( ? ) / at 〈 þum 〉 . " 
 = = = = Sö 345 = = = = 
 Runestone Sö 345 ( location ) was first documented during the national search for historic monuments in 1667 , and it was then used as a doorstep to the porch of <unk> church . It had probably been used for this purpose during a considerable period of time , because according to a drawing that was made a few years later , it was very worn down . In 1830 a church revision noted that it was in a ruined state and so worn that only a few runes remained discernible , and when Hermelin later depicted the stone , he noted that the stone had been cracked in two pieces . In 1896 , the runologist Erik Brate visited the stone and discovered that one of the pieces had disappeared and that the only remaining part was reclining on the church wall . The remaining piece measured 1 @.@ 10 m ( 3 ft 7 in ) and 1 @.@ 15 m ( 3 ft 9 in ) . The stone has since then been reassembled and raised on the cemetery . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 Part A : ... ... in × þinsa × at × kai ( r ) ... ... ... -n * eʀ * e [ n @-@ a ] <unk> × ut – × kr ... 
 Part B : ... ... <unk> × ... 
 Part C : ... ... <unk> : ... 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Part A : ... [ <unk> ] in þennsa at <unk> ... ... [ Ha ] nn eʀ <unk> [ d ] <unk> ut [ i ] Gr [ <unk> ] . 
 Part B : ... [ b ] <unk> ... 
 Part C : ... [ let ] ræisa ... 
 English translation ( parts B and C are probably not part of the monument and are not translated ) : 
 " ... this stone in memory of <unk> ... ... He had met his end abroad in Greece . " 
 = = = Östergötland = = = 
 In Östergötland , there are two runestones that mention Greece . One , the notable Högby Runestone , describes the deaths of several brothers in different parts of Europe . 
 = = = = Ög 81 = = = = 
 The Högby runestone ( location ) is in Ringerike ( Pr1 ) style , and the reddish granite stone measures 3 @.@ 45 m ( 11 @.@ 3 ft ) in height and 0 @.@ 65 m ( 2 ft 2 in ) in width . It was formerly inserted into the outer wall of Högby church with the cross side ( A ) outwards . The church was demolished in 1874 , and then side B of the inscription was discovered . The stone was raised anew on the cemetery of the former church . 
 The runestone commemorates Özurr , one of the first Varangians who is known to have died in the service of the Byzantine Emperor , and he is estimated to have died around 1010 , or in the late 10th century . He was one of the sons of the " good man " Gulli , and the runestone describes a situation that may have been common for Scandinavian families at this time : the stone was made on the orders of <unk> 's niece , Þorgerðr , in memory of her uncles who were all dead . 
 Þorgerðr probably had the stone made as soon as she had learnt that Özurr , the last of her uncles , had died in Greece , and she likely did this to ensure her right of inheritance . The inscription on the reverse side of the stone , relating how her other uncles died , is in fornyrðislag . 
 Her uncle Ásmundr probably died in the Battle of <unk> , in the 980s , and it was probably at the side of king Eric the Victorious . Özurr had entered into the service of a more powerful liege and died for the Byzantine Emperor . Halfdan may have died either on Bornholm or in a <unk> , whereas where Kári died remains uncertain . The most likely interpretation may be that he died on Od , the old name for the north @-@ western cape of Zealand , but it is also possible that it was at Dundee in Scotland . <unk> 's location of death is not given , but Larsson ( 2002 ) comments that it was probably in a way that was not considered as glorious as those of his brothers . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 Side A : * <unk> * <unk> * stin * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * sen * <unk> * <unk> * sin * <unk> * <unk> * austr * i * krikum * 
 Side B : * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * kat * <unk> * syni * <unk> * o * furi * <unk> * treks * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * austr * i krikum * uarþ * o <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * kari * uarþ * at uti * 
 Side C : auk * tauþr * <unk> * <unk> * rist * runaʀ * 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Side A : <unk> ( ? ) <unk> stæin <unk> æftiʀ Assur , sinn <unk> sinn , eʀ ændaðis austr i Grikkium . 
 Side B : <unk> <unk> Gulli gat <unk> syni . <unk> a <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , ændaðis <unk> austr i Grikkium , varð a <unk> Halfdan <unk> , Kari varð at <unk> ( ? ) 
 Side C : ok dauðr Boi . <unk> <unk> runaʀ . 
 English translation : 
 Side A : " Þorgerðr ( ? ) raised this stone in memory of <unk> , her mother 's brother . He met his end in the east in Greece . " 
 Side B : " The good man Gulli got five sons . The brave valiant man Ásmundr fell at <unk> ; <unk> met his end in the east in Greece ; Halfdan was killed at <unk> ( Bornholm ? ) ; Kári was ( killed ) at Oddr ( ? ) ; " 
 Side C : " also dead ( is ) <unk> . <unk> carved the runes . " 
 = = = = Ög 94 = = = = 
 Runestone Ög 94 ( location ) in the style Ringerike ( Pr1 ) , is in reddish granite and it raised on the former cemetery of Harstad church . The stone is 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) high and 1 @.@ 18 m ( 3 ft 10 in ) wide at its base . The toponym <unk> , which is mentioned in the inscription , refers to modern <unk> in the vicinity , and it also appears to mention Greece as the location where the deceased died , and it was probably as a member of the Varangian guard . Additionally , the last part of the inscription that mentions the location of his death is probably a poem in fornyrðislag . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 : <unk> : auk : <unk> : þau : <unk> : <unk> : þ [ i ] ( t ) a : iftiʀ : u @-@ auk : <unk> : <unk> | | i : <unk> : an : uaʀ : <unk> : <unk> : <unk> : i : ki [ ( r ) ] k [ ( i ) ( u ) ( m ) ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 <unk> / <unk> ok Guðmundr þau <unk> <unk> <unk> æftiʀ O [ <unk> ] aug ( ? ) , eʀ <unk> i <unk> . Hann vaʀ bondi <unk> , dauðr i Grikkium ( ? ) . 
 English translation : 
 " <unk> / <unk> and Guðmundr , they raised this monument in memory of <unk> ( ? ) , who lived in <unk> . He was a good husbandman ; ( he ) died in Greece ( ? ) " 
 = = = Västergötland = = = 
 In Västergötland , there are five runestones that tell of eastern voyages but only one of them mentions Greece . 
 = = = = Vg 178 = = = = 
 Runestone Vg 178 ( location ) in style Pr1 used to be outside the church of <unk> in the cemetery , some ten metres north @-@ north @-@ west of the belfry . The stone consists of flaking gneiss measuring 1 @.@ 85 m ( 6 ft 1 in ) in height and 1 @.@ 18 m ( 3 ft 10 in ) in width . 
 The oldest annotation of the stone is in a church inventory from 1829 , and it says that the stone was illegible . <unk> documented in 1861 that it was in the rock fence with the inscription facing the cemetery . When Djurklou visited the stone in 1869 , it was still in the same spot . Djurklou considered its placement to be unhelpful because a part of the runic band was buried in the soil , so he commanded an honourable farmer to select a group of men and remove the stone from the wall . The next time Djurklou visited the location , he found the stone raised in the cemetery . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 : <unk> : <unk> : stin : <unk> : iftiʀ : <unk> : <unk> : sin : auk : ( a ) ( s ) ( a ) : it : <unk> : sin : ian : saʀ : uaʀ : <unk> : sun : saʀ : uarþ : <unk> : i : krikum 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Agmundr <unk> stæin <unk> æftiʀ <unk> , <unk> sinn , ok Asa ( ? ) at bonda sinn , en saʀ vaʀ <unk> sunn . <unk> varð dauðr i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " Agmundr raised this stone in memory of <unk> , his kinsman ; and <unk> ( ? ) in memory of her husbandman . And he was <unk> 's son ; he died in Greece . " 
 = = = Småland = = = 
 There was only one rune stone in Småland that mentioned Greece ( see Sm 46 , below ) . 
 = = = = Sm 46 = = = = 
 Runestone Sm 46 ( location ) was in the style RAK and it was 2 @.@ 05 m ( 6 ft 9 in ) high and 0 @.@ 86 m ( 2 ft 10 in ) wide . 
 The stone was already in a ruined state when <unk> depicted the stone in 1763 . <unk> noted that it had been used as a bridge across a brook and because of this the runes had been worn down so much that most of them were virtually illegible , a statement that is contradicted by later depictions . Since the runestone had passed unnoticed by the <unk> of the 17th century , it is likely that it was used as a bridge . In a traveller 's journal written in 1792 by <unk> , the bottom part of the stone is depicted for the first time , though the artist does not appear to have realised that the two parts belonged together . In 1822 , <unk> arrived to depict it . A surviving yet unsigned drawing is attributed to <unk> ( see illustration ) . In 1922 , the runologist Kinander learnt from a local farmer that some 40 years earlier , the runestone had been seen walled into a bridge that was part of the country road , and the inscription had been upwards . Someone had decided to remove the runestone from the bridge and put it beside the road . Kinander wanted to see the stone and was shown a large worn down stone in the garden of <unk> . However , according to Kinander it was not possible to find any remaining runes on what was supposed to be the runestone . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 [ ... nui <unk> : <unk> : <unk> : iftiʀ suin : sun : sin : im ÷ <unk> ou * tr i krikum ] 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 ... vi <unk> <unk> <unk> æftiʀ <unk> , sun sinn , eʀ ændaðis austr i Grikkium . 
 English translation : 
 " ... <unk> made these monuments in memory of Sveinn , her son , who met his end in the east in Greece . " 
 = = = Gotland = = = 
 Only one runestone mentioning the Byzantine Empire has been found on Gotland . This may be due both to the fact that few rune stones were raised on Gotland in favour of image stones , as well as to the fact that the <unk> dealt mainly in trade , paying a yearly tribute to the Swedes for military protection . 
 = = = = G 216 = = = = 
 G 216 ( original location ) is an 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) long , 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) wide and 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) thick sharpening stone with a runic inscription that was discovered in 1940 . It was found by a worker at a depth of 40 cm ( 16 in ) while he dug a shaft for a telephone wire in a field at <unk> in Roma . It is now at the museum <unk> <unk> with inventory number C <unk> . It has been dated to the late 11th century , and although the interpretation of its message is uncertain , scholars have generally accepted von Friesen 's analysis that it commemorates the travels of two <unk> to Greece , Jerusalem , Iceland and the Muslim world ( Serkland ) . 
 The inscription created a sensation as it mentions four distant countries that were the targets of adventurous Scandinavian expeditions during the Viking Age , but it also stirred some doubts as to its authenticity . However , thorough geological and <unk> analyses dispelled any doubts as to its genuine nature . The stone had the same patina as other Viking Age stones on all its surfaces and carvings , and in addition it has the normal r @-@ rune with an open side stroke , something which is usually overlooked by <unk> . Moreover , v Friesen commented that there could be no expert on Old Swedish that made a forgery while he correctly wrote <unk> as all reference books of the time incorrectly told that the form was <unk> . 
 Jansson , Wessén & <unk> ( 1978 ) comment that the personal name that is considered most interesting by scholars is Ormika , which is otherwise only known from the <unk> , where it was the name of a free farmer who was baptised by the Norwegian king Saint Olaf in 1029 . The first element <unk> ( " serpent " ) is well @-@ known from the Old Norse naming tradition , but the second element is the West Germanic diminutive <unk> , and the lack of the final -n suggests a borrowing from Anglo @-@ Saxon or Old Frisian , although the name is unattested in the West Germanic area . The <unk> appreciate the appearance of the nominative form <unk> ( " Greece " ) as it is otherwise unattested while other case forms are found on a number of runestones . The place name Jerusalem appears in the Old <unk> form <unk> while the western @-@ most dialect of Old Norse , Old Icelandic , has <unk> , and both represent a Scandinavian folk etymological rendering where the first element is interpreted as the name element <unk> ( from an older * <unk> meaning " boar " ) . The inscription also shows the only runic appearance of the name of Iceland , while there are five other runic inscriptions in Sweden that mention Serkland . 
 Latin transliteration : 
 : <unk> : <unk> @-@ r : <unk> : <unk> ( : ) <unk> : <unk> 
 Old Norse transcription : 
 Ormika , <unk> [ t ] r ( ? ) , <unk> , <unk> , Island , <unk> . 
 English translation : 
 " Ormika , <unk> ( ? ) , Greece , Jerusalem , Iceland , Serkland . " 
 = Falsas Esperanzas = 
 " Falsas Esperanzas " ( English : " False Hopes " ) is a song performed by American recording artist Christina Aguilera for her second studio album , Mi Reflejo ( 2000 ) . It was written by Jorge Luis Piloto and released as a single through RCA Records on July 2 , 2001 . The uptempo Latin record was produced by Rudy Pérez and features instrumentation from a horn . 
 " Falsas Esperanzas " received mixed reviews from music critics with some naming it a stand @-@ out track from the album while others were not impressed by it . The single peaked at fifteen on the Productores de Música de España and number seven on the Dutch Tipparade . Aguilera performed " Falsas Esperanzas " at the 2001 Grammy Awards and during her tours Justified and Stripped Tour and The Stripped Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to her manager Steve Kurtz , Aguilera expressed interest in recording a Spanish @-@ language album before she recorded her debut studio album Christina Aguilera ( 1999 ) . Producer Rudy Pérez was approached during the recording sessions of Mi Reflejo and asked to produce a number of tracks . After agreeing , he produced many songs including the Jorge Luis Piloto written piece " Falsas Esperanzas " . 
 " Falsas Esperanzas " is an uptempo Latin song that incorporates elements from Tropical music . Instrumentation of the track comes from a horn done by Venezuelan @-@ American musician by Ed Calle and a few Tropical elements , including a " snazzy " piano performance by Cuban musician Paquito <unk> . " According to music critic Kembrew McLeod , the track features ' bouncy rhythms ' and ' splashes of horns ' . " Sun @-@ Sentinel editor Sean Picolli wrote that the song 's refrain contains a see @-@ saw effect with the lines " No me des ... No me <unk> ... " ( English : " Don 't give me ... Don 't tell me ... " ) . These lines hint toward lyrical themes pertaining to relationship troubles as well as defiance . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Falsas Esperanzas " was released as the third single from Mi Reflejo on July 2 , 2001 in Spain and on July 3 , 2001 in the United States . A remix of the song was released in Germany on July 17 , 2001 . It peaked at number seven on the Dutch Tipparade chart and number fifteen in Spain . Patty Gettelman from Orlando Sentinel thought that the piece had more Latin influence than contemporary Latin hits such as Ricky Martin 's " La Vida Loca " or Lou Bega 's " A Little Bit of Mambo " . David Browne , writing for Entertainment Weekly felt that " Falsas Esperanzas " left Aguilera " room to growl like a " blues singer " . <unk> editor Kembrew <unk> lauded the song as one of Aguilera 's best uptempo songs that " breathe [ s ] life into the album " . Picolli praised the song as the album 's best track , noting : " a dizzy Vegas showstopper ... that <unk> along on Aguilera 's high @-@ flying harmonies and a defiant chorus " . " Falsas Esperanzas " was later included on the Spanish edition of Aguilera 's greatest hits album Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits ( 2008 ) . The song also served as the main theme for the Mexican telenovela Como en el cine . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In December 2000 , she held a one @-@ hour special show on ABC and performed " Falsas Esperanzas " , it was later recorded in a video release entitled My Reflection . Aguilera also gave a performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards in February , performing " Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti " and " Falsas Esperanzas " Leila Cobo of Billboard magazine called Aguilera 's Grammy performance " remarkably mainstream " . During her 2003 Justified and Stripped Tour , her first co @-@ headlining tour with Justin Timberlake , she performed a medley of " Falsas Esperanzas " and " Contigo en la Distancia " . At the end of the performance , a male dancer ripped off the skirt she wore , revealing " tiny " denim shorts underneath . Later , she " saucily " replied , " Just because my album name is Stripped , doesn 't mean you can take my clothes off " . She also performed the medley during the tour 's extension , The Stripped Tour in late 2003 ; it was later included in the DVD release Stripped Live in the U.K .. 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = John L. Helm = 
 John LaRue Helm ( July 4 , 1802 – September 8 , 1867 ) was the 18th and 24th governor of the U.S. state of Kentucky , although his service in that office totaled less than fourteen months . He also represented Hardin County in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly and was chosen to be the Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives four times . In 1838 his sole bid for federal office ended in defeat when his opponent , Willis Green , was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives . 
 Helm was first elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1826 ; between 1826 and 1843 he served eleven one @-@ year terms in the state house . In 1844 he was elected to the state senate , where he served continuously until he was chosen as the Whig Party nominee for lieutenant governor on a ticket with John J. Crittenden , famous for the Crittenden Compromise . The Whigs won the general election and Helm was elevated to governor on July 31 , 1850 , when Crittenden resigned to accept an appointment as United States Attorney General in President Millard Fillmore 's cabinet . After his service as governor Helm became president of the struggling Louisville and Nashville Railroad . He invested thousands of dollars of his own money in the project and convinced residents along the line 's main route to buy stock in the company . In 1859 the line was completed , but the next year Helm resigned over of differences with the board of directors regarding a proposed branch that would extend the line to Memphis , Tennessee . 
 Although he openly opposed secession during the American Civil War , federal military forces labeled Helm a Confederate sympathizer . In September 1862 , he was arrested for this alleged sympathy , but Governor James F. Robinson recognized him as he was being transported to a prison in Louisville and had him released . After the war Helm identified with the Democratic Party , and in 1865 Hardin County voters returned him to the state senate . In 1867 he was the state 's Democratic candidate for governor . Despite his failing health , Helm made a vigorous canvass of the state and won the general election . He was too weak to travel to Frankfort for his inauguration , so state officials administered the oath of office at his home on September 3 , 1867 . He died five days later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 In 1780 Helm 's grandfather , Thomas Helm , emigrated to Kentucky from Prince William County , Virginia and founded the settlement of Helm Station near Elizabethtown , Kentucky in Hardin County , where John L. Helm was born on July 4 , 1802 . He was the eldest of nine children born to George B. Helm , a farmer and politician , and Rebecca LaRue Helm , a descendant of a prominent local pioneer family . 
 Helm attended the area 's public schools and studied with noted educator Duff Green . When Helm was 14 his father fell on hard financial times and Helm returned to work on the family farm . In 1818 he took a better @-@ paying job in the office of Samuel <unk> , the circuit court clerk of Hardin County . While there he read law with <unk> , then entered the law office of Ben Tobin in 1821 . 
 At about this time Helm 's father traveled to Texas to enter into business and rebuild his finances , but he died there in 1822 , leaving Helm responsible for his mother and siblings . He was admitted to the bar in 1823 , the same year Meade County , Kentucky was formed . There were no lawyers in the county yet , so although Helm continued living in Hardin County he was made Meade 's county attorney . His practice grew rapidly and he was soon able to pay off his father 's debts and purchase the Helm homestead . Between 1832 and 1840 he built " Helm Place " on this land and it remained his home for the rest of his life . 
 In 1823 Helm called on Representative Benjamin Hardin . While Hardin and Helm discussed business , Hardin 's 14 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Lucinda , entered the room to show her father a map she had drawn . Helm later claimed it was love at first sight , and began to pursue Lucinda 's affections . They courted for seven years , married in 1830 and had six daughters and five sons together . One of his sons , Benjamin Hardin Helm , was a Confederate general in the Civil War and was killed at the Battle of Chickamauga . 
 = = Political career = = 
 The major political issue in Kentucky during Helm 's legal training was the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . Reeling from the panic of 1819 , Kentuckians had demanded debt relief . In response , the Kentucky General Assembly passed an act that granted debtors a grace period of two years in repaying their debts unless their creditors would accept payment in the devalued notes of the Bank of the Commonwealth . The Kentucky Court of Appeals struck down the law , claiming it was in violation of the Contract Clause of the U.S. Constitution . The angered legislature attempted to impeach the justices on the Court of Appeals , but lacked the necessary two @-@ thirds majority . Instead , they abolished the Court of Appeals and replaced it with a new court , which was stocked with more sympathetic justices by pro @-@ relief governor John Adair . Both courts claimed to be Kentucky 's court of last resort . 
 Throughout 1825 Helm made speeches and distributed pamphlets in Hardin and surrounding counties , espousing the Old Court position . In 1826 he campaigned as a Whig for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives . Helm won the election , and at the age of twenty @-@ four became one of the youngest members to serve in the Kentucky General Assembly . An Old Court majority was elected to both houses of the General Assembly in 1826 , which then passed legislation abolishing the New Court . 
 Helm was re @-@ elected to the state House in 1827 and 1830 , and was re @-@ elected every year from 1833 to 1837 . He served as Speaker of the House in 1835 and 1836 . In 1837 there was a three @-@ way race for speaker between Helm , James Turner Morehead and Robert P. Letcher . After nine ballots Helm withdrew , and Letcher was elected speaker . 
 Helm made his only run for federal office in 1838 and was defeated by Willis Green for a seat in the United States House of Representatives . He returned to the Kentucky House in 1839 and was re @-@ elected in 1842 and 1843 , serving as Speaker of the House both years . In 1843 , the Kentucky General Assembly proposed to create a new county from part of Hardin County and name it Helm County in honor of John L. Helm . Because of the few dissenting votes on this question , Helm declined the honor and proposed instead that the county be called LaRue County after his mother 's family , many of whom still lived in the proposed county . Helm 's suggestion was unanimously adopted . 
 = = = Lieutenant governor and governor = = = 
 In 1844 Helm was elected to the Kentucky Senate , where he served until 1848 . That year he was the Whig candidate for lieutenant governor on a ticket with John J. Crittenden . Helm defeated Democrat John Preston Martin in the general election . The major political question in the state during Helm 's time as lieutenant governor was whether to adopt a new state constitution . As a state senator in 1848 , Helm had voted to allow the state 's citizens to decide the matter in a referendum , but after seeing the document produced by the constitutional convention , he opposed its ratification . In an address to the state senate in 1850 he declared , " I was for reform , and not for revolution . I was for amending the Constitution , and not for obliterating every vital principle in contained . " He especially opposed creating an elective judiciary . His antagonism to the constitution put him at odds with his father @-@ in @-@ law , Benjamin Hardin . The two did not reconcile until 1852 , as Hardin lay on his deathbed . The new constitution was adopted in 1850 , and in June of that year Helm encouraged the people to accept it . 
 Governor Crittenden resigned on July 31 , 1850 to accept President Millard Fillmore 's appointment as attorney general , and Helm ascended to the governorship . As governor , Helm vetoed a legislative plan to cover deficits in the public school fund by drawing money from the state 's sinking fund , but the General Assembly overrode the veto . He urged the legislature to fund a survey of the state 's mineral reserves and a census of the state 's agricultural and manufacturing resources . He called for spending on internal improvements and for raising judges ' salaries to attract more qualified jurists to the bench . He also sought a ban on the carrying of concealed deadly weapons . The legislature did not act on any of these proposed reforms . The only part of Helm 's agenda that did progress through the General Assembly was election reform . 
 = = President of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad = = 
 Helm was a presidential elector for Winfield Scott in the 1852 presidential election . After this he took twelve years off from politics . As early as 1836 , Helm had advocated the construction of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . On October 2 , 1854 , he became the railroad 's second president . The previous president had been forced out of that position after a disagreement with Louisville 's board of aldermen , and construction of the line had almost been abandoned . 
 Helm worked diligently to convince residents along the line 's main route of the economic benefits it would bring . He persuaded many of them to help clear and grade land for the line and accept company stock as payment , and succeeded in selling stock subscriptions to people in the same area . Rising labor costs and troubles transporting materials raised expenses far above the projected budget , and at one point Helm personally redeemed $ 20 @,@ 000 ( $ 530 thousand as of 2016 ) of the company 's bonds . Meanwhile , some observers accused Helm of mismanaging the company . The company 's fortunes improved in 1857 when the city of Louisville provided $ 300 @,@ 000 ( $ 7 @.@ 62 million as of 2016 ) in financial aid and the line was completed on October 18 , 1859 . Due to Helm 's influence , the railroad 's charter required all trains traveling through Elizabethtown to stop there . 
 By the time the line was finished there were public calls from inside and outside the company for Helm to resign , mostly because of his support for a proposed Memphis branch of the railroad . To complete the branch , the Louisville and Nashville would have to complete a line from Bowling Green to Guthrie , Kentucky . There it would join a line owned by the Memphis and Ohio Railroad that began across the state line at Clarksville , Tennessee and extended to Memphis . Supporters believed the branch would economically help both Louisville and Memphis and would lessen their dependence on trade along the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers . Opponents argued that the project was simply a ploy to whip up new support for the struggling railroad . Helm endorsed the Memphis branch in his annual report in 1857 . 
 On February 4 , 1860 , two members of the company 's board of directors wrote a letter requesting Helm 's resignation ; they claimed they had voted for his re @-@ election as president of the company with the understanding that he would resign when the main line between Louisville and Nashville was finished . Helm maintained that he felt an obligation to the citizens of Logan County – many of whom he had personally sold stock to – to remain president until the Memphis branch through their county was built . The rift between Helm and the directors continued to widen , however . Helm resigned on February 21 , 1860 , and was replaced by James Guthrie . The Memphis branch was completed on September 24 , 1860 . 
 = = Civil War and second term as governor = = 
 On January 8 , 1861 Helm chaired a meeting in Louisville that advocated for Kentucky 's neutrality in the Civil War . Helm was an outspoken opponent of secession , but also denounced the election of Abraham Lincoln and his use of military force to subdue the southern states . Because Helm did not condemn his son , Benjamin , for joining the Confederate Army , federal authorities classified him as a southern sympathizer . 
 After learning of the arrest of former governor Charles S. Morehead by federal authorities , Helm fled to Bowling Green , fearing his own arrest . Through the intervention of Warner Underwood he was able to return home on the condition that he swear an oath of allegiance to the Constitution . Nevertheless , federal soldiers repeatedly entered his home , encouraging his slaves to abandon him , and consuming or destroying his crops . Because the state 's courts were closed on account of the war , he was unable to earn a living by practicing law . In short order his once @-@ substantial fortune was expended , and he resorted to borrowing money to support his family . 
 In September 1862 Helm and several other citizens from Hardin County were arrested by Colonel Knox . After several days of confinement in Elizabethtown the prisoners were conducted to Louisville . By chance , Kentucky governor James F. Robinson recognized Helm in the group and negotiated with General Jeremiah Boyle to get him released . Shortly after returning home Helm learned of Benjamin 's death at the Battle of Chickamauga . 
 After the war Helm identified with the Democratic Party , and he returned to the state senate in 1865 . During his tenure he chaired the Committee on Federal Relations and fought against punitive and restrictive laws against ex @-@ Confederates . On January 22 , 1866 he presented to the state senate a protest against the actions of the United States Congress during the Civil War . It denounced the Reconstruction Amendments on the grounds that they granted powers to the federal government that were reserved for the states , and that they were passed while many southern states were not represented in Congress . He also decried the creation and operation of the Freedmen 's Bureau . On January 29 , 1867 , Helm introduced legislation to organize a meeting in Louisville to rally support for President Andrew Johnson and his efforts to restore the Union . 
 The state Democratic Convention met on February 22 , 1867 in Frankfort and chose Helm and John W. Stevenson as the party 's candidates for governor and lieutenant governor , respectively . Helm resigned his seat in the state senate to accept the nomination . Though his health was frail , he determined to canvass the entire state . He continued his call for an end to Civil War bitterness and proscriptions against those who had sided with the Confederacy . He won the general election over Republican Sidney Barnes and a third party candidate , Judge William B. Kinkead . 
 The strenuous campaign took a decisive toll on Helm 's already weakened body . He was too weak to travel to Frankfort for his inauguration , so the oath of office was administered at his home on September 3 , 1867 . Helm 's secretary of state read the governor 's inaugural address at the Hardin County Courthouse . In it Helm repeated his intent to remove political disabilities from ex @-@ Confederates . He also charged that Congress was meddling in the affairs of the states . Though he promised protections for blacks , he opposed the idea of black suffrage . 
 Helm died on September 8 , 1867 , just five days after his inauguration . He was buried in a family graveyard at Helm Place . Helm Place was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on November 9 , 1976 . 
 = Tufted tit @-@ tyrant = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant ( Anairetes parulus ) is a species of bird in the tyrant flycatcher family Tyrannidae . This species is found in western South America ; its range stretches from southern Colombia south along the Andes mountains to Tierra del Fuego . It prefers to live in upper montane forests and shrublands ; however , it is a habitat generalist and can be found across a wide range of ecosystems . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant has three subspecies , including the nominate subspecies Anairetes parulus parulus , A. p. aequatorialis , and A. p. patagonicus , and is very closely related to the Juan Fernández tit @-@ tyrant . It is very small with a distinctive and conspicuous crest . The bird 's head is black overall with white supraloral and postocular stripes . Its dull grayish @-@ brown back contrasts with its white throat and breast that are covered with black streaks and pale , unmarked yellow underbelly . There are few noticeable differences in plumage between the subspecies . It is a vocal flycatcher with a broad repertoire of songs . 
 This tit @-@ tyrant defends its territory only against other tit @-@ tyrants and , except for the southernmost population , is non @-@ migratory . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant feeds mainly on a variety of insects that it hunts on or from small shrubs , typically by perch gleaning . It normally hunts in pairs . The breeding season varies for this bird depending on its geographical location . Two to three eggs are normally laid twice a year in a cup @-@ shaped nest made of root fibers , grasses , and lichens and lined with small feathers . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is listed as a species of least concern due to its large range and population . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant 's genus , Anairetes , is in the tyrant flycatcher family Tyrannidae and is believed to be most closely related to the <unk> genera <unk> and <unk> ; however , there is no definitive evidence supporting this claim . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant was described as Muscicapa parulus by Heinrich von Kittlitz in 1830 from a specimen collected near Valparaíso , Chile . It was later moved from the genus Muscicapa , which today solely contains Old World flycatchers , to Anairetes ; however , this genus was too similar to the pre @-@ existing genus <unk> , so Harry Church Oberholser erected the genus <unk> for it and the other tit @-@ tyrants . However , <unk> was eventually abolished and the tit @-@ tyrants were returned to Anairetes . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is believed to form a superspecies with the Juan Fernández tit @-@ tyrant . Members of the genus Anairetes are commonly known as tit @-@ tyrants because their active foraging behavior and crests are reminiscent of the true tits in the family Paridae , while the genus itself is part of the tyrant flycatcher family . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is known in Spanish as the <unk> , which means " little longhorn " in reference to the bird 's crest . 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant has three described subspecies . Anairetes parulus aequatorialis is the northernmost subspecies and is found in the Andes from southern Colombia to western Bolivia and northern Argentina . It was described by Hans von <unk> and Władysław <unk> in 1884 . The nominate subspecies , A. p. parulus , is found in western Chile and in southwest Argentina south to Tierra del Fuego and was described by Kittlitz in 1830 . The third subspecies , A. p. patagonicus , is found in western Argentina and was described by Austrian ornithologist Carl Eduard <unk> in 1920 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is a small bird , averaging 9 @.@ 5 to 11 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 3 in ) in length and weighing about 6 grams ( 0 @.@ 21 oz ) . Its long , recurved crest is typically conspicuous and is often parted , giving the impression that the bird has two crests . The crest 's feathers are black and emerge from the center of the bird 's black crown , although occasionally there is a small patch of white hidden by the crest . The head is black overall with a white supraloral and postocular stripe . The bird 's iris is creamy white to pale yellow and the bill is black . This tit @-@ tyrant 's back is a dull , grayish brown , and the wings and tail are a duskier shade of this color . The wings also feature two narrow white wingbars , while the outer tail feathers are white . The throat and breast are white and covered in dark gray to black streaks , which thin out further down the breast and along the sides . The belly is a pale yellow which fades as the plumage becomes more worn , while the bird 's legs are black . Males and females are similar in appearance , although females are typically smaller and may have smaller crests . Juvenile tufted tit @-@ tyrants are duller in coloration and have a shorter crest ; the juvenile 's wingbars are also buffy and there is no hidden white spot on the crown . 
 There are few variations in plumage between the three subspecies . Anairetes parulus aequatorialis tends to be browner than the nominate subspecies in its upperparts , with broader and more extensive breast streaks and broader and more distinct white wingbars . A. p. patagonicus has more variation from the nominate subspecies as it is paler gray overall , particularly on the crown , and the wingbars and breast streaks are broader and more distinct . A. p. patagonicus 's underbelly is also a paler yellow to white . 
 This flycatcher has a loud , high @-@ pitched song . It is also known to give a fast chuit @-@ chuit @-@ chuit @-@ chuit @-@ chuit @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> song , and occasionally single notes of chuit are made in a slow series of calls . When foraging in pairs , tufted tit @-@ tyrants have been observed using a <unk> @-@ <unk> call to stay in contact with each other . The species ' contact call has been described as a <unk> @-@ <unk> . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is also known to give a long , weak trill . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant has been recorded in Colombia , Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia , Argentina , and Chile . It is mostly restricted to the Andes mountains throughout the northern portions of its range , while in the south its range broadens to include the coast . It has also been recorded as a vagrant in the Falkland Islands . It is the most abundant and widely distributed of the tit @-@ tyrant species . 
 Its preferred habitat is upper montane forests and shrublands . Despite this preference , it is a habitat generalist and is also found in elfin forest , the edges of cloud forests , Polylepis woodland , brushy forests with <unk> bamboo , disturbed humid scrub , temperate forests , and dry thorn scrub . It seems to move back into fire @-@ stricken areas at a normal rate for páramo birds , neither colonizing recently burned areas nor waiting for the area to completely recover . This tit @-@ tyrant is most frequently found between 1 @,@ 800 and 3 @,@ 500 meters ( 5 @,@ 900 and 11 @,@ 500 ft ) , though it can be found at sea level in Chile and up to 4 @,@ 200 meters ( 13 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Andes . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 This tit @-@ tyrant appears to be territorial in defending what it regards as its feeding territory , although it only displays territorial behavior against other tufted tit @-@ tyrants . Birds defending their territory , either alone or in a pair , tend to begin their defense by calling rapidly and displaying displacement behavior , such as bill wiping or wing flaring . They then raise their crest and chase the other tit @-@ tyrant through the shrubs , occasionally physically attacking the intruder . The victorious tit @-@ tyrant then returns to its normal foraging behavior . The southern subspecies , A. p. patagonicus , migrates to northern Argentina after the breeding season ; the other populations appear to be non @-@ migratory . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is a generalist feeder that eats insects . It is also known to eat seeds in rare circumstances . It is an active forager that hunts in pairs or , after the breeding season , small family groups . It has also been known to feed with mixed @-@ species foraging flocks , although this behavior is abnormal . When this does occur , it is most frequently seen foraging with the thorn @-@ tailed <unk> ; flocks of thirty tufted tit @-@ tyrants in these mixed @-@ species foraging groups have been reported . Birds in pairs tend to feed leapfrog style and maintain constant visual contact with each other . This species feeds at all strata of its habitat from the understory to the canopy . 
 When feeding , this flycatcher makes many short flights from perch to perch , preferring to hunt in shrubs with small leaves , particularly those from the genera <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . A tit @-@ tyrant tends to land near the base of the shrub and make its way upwards while frequently flicking its tail upwards and shuddering its wings . It has also been observed pivoting on its perch throughout this process . While foraging , the tufted tit @-@ tyrant averages three attacks on prey items per minute . Its feeding style has been compared to that of a kinglet . 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant uses three different hunting strategies to catch its prey . Gleaning insects from a perch is its primary hunting strategy ; while gleaning , the bird sits upright with its wings dropped below the tail , which is pointing straight down . From this position the tit @-@ tyrant scans upwards into the vegetation for three to five seconds before attacking , making them surprisingly deliberate hunters for a small flycatcher . 
 The second most prevalent hunting strategy observed is hover gleaning , in which the tit @-@ tyrant flies upwards from its perch and then hovers midair while grabbing prey from the vegetation . A third and less frequently used strategy is <unk> , in which the bird flies away from its shrub to grab prey in midair . Prey can be grabbed either close to the bird 's perch or at a short distance , which often requires the bird to pursue its prey . When pairs flycatch cooperatively , one bird quietly lurks within the shrub while the other snatches nearby insects ; after about a dozen attacks , the birds switch positions . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 This flycatcher typically raises two broods a year . The northern populations nest from January to June , while the southern populations nest from August to January . The male tufted tit @-@ tyrant is aggressive during the breeding season , frequently chasing potential rivals in undulating flights while making a whirring sound . 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant 's nest is built in shrubs or bamboo , often beside a stream , clearings , or path , and is frequently well hidden . The nest is small and compact , and is made in the shape of an open cup . The cup is made of root fibers , lichens , grasses , and the down of thistles , and small feathers line the interior of the cup . The tufted tit @-@ tyrant 's nests are remarkably homogeneous , varying only slightly in composition . Two to three creamy yellow eggs are laid in the nest . The eggs have an average size of 15 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) by 11 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 46 in ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The tufted tit @-@ tyrant is listed as Least Concern because of its large range of 2 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 km2 ( 1 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and stable population , which , although not officially estimated , is believed to be well above 10 @,@ 000 individuals . It is uncommon to locally common throughout its range . This species is considered to have a low sensitivity towards human disturbances in its habitat . 
 = Harvie Krumpet = 
 Harvie Krumpet is a 2003 Australian clay animation comedy @-@ drama short film written , directed and animated by Adam Elliot , and narrated by Geoffrey Rush . It tells the life story of Harvie Krumpet , a Polish @-@ Australian man whose life is plagued by bad luck but who nevertheless remains optimistic . 
 The film was funded by SBS Independent , the Australian Film Commission and Film Victoria , and it was filmed and animated by Adam Elliot and two assistants over 15 months in 2001 – 2003 , using models made of plasticine and other materials . The production was completed in May 2003 and Harvie Krumpet premiered a month later at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival , followed by over 100 subsequent film festival screenings . It won many accolades , including the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 2004 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story revolves around the life of <unk> Milos <unk> , born in Poland in 1922 . As a child , he begins to collect pieces of information he calls " <unk> " , which are presented throughout the film . At the outbreak of World War II , shortly after his parents ' death in a house fire , he migrates to Australia as a refugee , settling in Spotswood , Victoria , and changing his name to Harvie Krumpet . 
 Despite a life filled with bad luck — having Tourette syndrome , being struck by lightning , and losing one of his testicles to cancer — Harvie remains optimistic , living out his own eccentric way of life . In one of the pivotal episodes of his life , Harvie sits in the park next to a statue of Horace while he hears the instructional Carpe diem , which inspires him to make many changes in his life , such as embracing <unk> and embarking on daring rescue missions for animal rights . He marries Val , a nurse he meets in hospital , and they adopt a daughter , Ruby , who has deformed limbs due to the effects of thalidomide . 
 After Ruby moves to America and Val dies of a stroke , Harvie develops Alzheimer 's disease and is placed in a nursing home . Although he briefly considers suicide , he decides to continue living his life to the fullest . The final " <unk> " presented reads : " Life is like a cigarette . Smoke it to the butt " . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 John <unk> as Harvie Krumpet 
 Geoffrey Rush as the Narrator . The filmmakers approached Rush with copies of Elliot 's three previous short films to ask him to be involved in Harvie Krumpet . Rush recorded the narration at the beginning of production on the film , so that his dialogue could be used to guide the animators in determining the length of each shot . When the animation was complete , however , Elliot found that " when we put his voice to the images , his voice came out a bit too cold " , so Rush re @-@ recorded his lines with a " more colourful , emotive performance " . 
 Julie Forsyth as <unk> <unk> . Forsyth , along with the Elwood Primary School choir , also provided vocals for the song " God Is Better than Football " , composed by Keith Binns . 
 <unk> as the Statue of Horace 
 = = Production = = 
 Adam Elliot conceived the idea behind Harvie Krumpet over a ten @-@ year period , and wrote fourteen drafts of the script over three months . He also created a 300 @-@ panel storyboard to visualise the film before the animation began . He described Harvie 's character as " an amalgamation of many people I know " , in addition to being partly autobiographical . Elliot 's development of the plot began with small character details with which he could " work backwards and then find a rhythm to the piece " . Harvie Krumpet marked the first time that Elliot worked with a producer , Melanie Coombs . Financing for the film 's A $ 377 @,@ 000 production budget was split between three production companies : SBS Independent , the Australian Film Commission and Film Victoria . 
 Harvie Krumpet was filmed in Melbourne over 15 months between October 2001 and January 2003 . The film was shot in sequence in three @-@ month blocks , interspersed with three @-@ month blocks of building sets and models . Production began in Elliott 's garage and subsequently took place in three separate studios , moving three times in order to accommodate the growing size of the sets . It was shot on Super 16 mm film using a Bolex camera . Each individual frame was animated , meaning that an average of 3 – 5 seconds ' worth of film was produced in each full day of filming . 
 The film was produced by clay animation using character models each about the size of a wine bottle . The models were first constructed using plasticine before pouring <unk> , a solid material used by mechanics , into moulds to form the bodies . They were then painted to appear like plasticine , and real plasticine around wire was used for the arms . Elliot said he chose to use <unk> since models made from just plasticine would require more maintenance . Some characters had replaceable mouths made of hardened <unk> clay that were attached magnetically to the faces to reflect different facial expressions ; Harvie 's model had more than 30 separate mouth shapes . The design of the models was influenced by Elliot 's tremor , since he needed them to be relatively large and easy to manipulate . He made the models ' eyes particularly large " to fully express the character 's emotion " . He intentionally left fingerprints in the plasticine when manipulating the models to remind the audience that " what they 're seeing is tangible , tactile and it 's not generated through a computer " . He was assisted by Sophie Raymond and Michael Bazeley in constructing and modelling the characters . The sets were largely constructed from wood . 
 Harvie Krumpet was edited by Bill Murphy for eight days spread over several weeks . The original cut of 45 – 50 minutes of footage was reduced to a final cut of less than 23 minutes . Over 2000 sound clips were added during the sound design process and the film was converted to 35 mm film in May 2003 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Harvie Krumpet premiered at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival in June 2003 , where it won three of the festival 's four major prizes , the Prix FIPRESCI , Prix du public and Prix special du jury . Its Australian premiere was at the 2003 Melbourne International Film Festival , where it won the Best Australian Short Award . During 2003 – 2004 , the film was screened at over 100 film festivals around the world , winning 40 awards . At the 76th Academy Awards , the film was awarded Best Animated Short Film , and in Australia it won the Best Short Animation prize at the 45th Australian Film Institute Awards and the Best Animation prize at the 2004 Inside Film Awards . 
 Rob Mackie awarded Harvie Krumpet 4 out of 5 stars in a review for The Guardian , describing it as " both fondly evocative and uproariously funny " . The Sydney Morning Herald critic Sacha <unk> summarised the film as " hilarious , moving and wonderful " , " a melancholy short that doesn 't put a foot wrong " . He praised Elliot 's " meticulous attention to detail and love for his characters " as well as Rush 's narration . 
 = Geography of Ireland = 
 Ireland is an island in northwest Europe in the north Atlantic Ocean . The island lies on the European continental shelf , part of the Eurasian Plate . The island 's main geographical features include low central plains surrounded by coastal mountains . The highest peak is Carrauntoohil ( Irish : <unk> Tuathail ) , which is 1 @,@ 041 metres ( 3 @,@ 415 ft ) above sea level . The western coastline is rugged , with many islands , peninsulas , headlands and bays . The island is bisected by the River Shannon , which at 360 @.@ 5 km ( 224 mi ) with a 102 @.@ 1 km ( 63 mi ) estuary is the longest river in Ireland and flows south from County Cavan in Ulster to meet the Atlantic just south of Limerick . There are a number of sizeable lakes along Ireland 's rivers , of which Lough Neagh is the largest . 
 Politically , the island consists of the Republic of Ireland , with jurisdiction over about five @-@ sixths of the island ; and Northern Ireland , a constituent country ( and an unconfirmed " practical " exclave ) of the United Kingdom , with jurisdiction over the remaining sixth . Located west of the island of Great Britain , it is located at approximately 53 ° N 8 ° W. It has a total area of 84 @,@ 421 km2 ( 32 @,@ 595 sq mi ) . It is separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and from mainland Europe by the Celtic Sea . Ireland and Great Britain , together with nearby islands , are known collectively as the British Isles ; as the term British Isles is controversial in relation to Ireland , the alternative term Britain and Ireland is increasingly preferred . 
 = = Geological development = = 
 The geology of Ireland is diverse . Different regions contain rocks belonging to different geologic periods , dating as far back almost 2 billion years . The oldest known Irish rock is about 1 @.@ 7 billion years old and is found on <unk> Island off the north coast of County Donegal and also at <unk> Head on the Mullet Peninsula . The newer formations are the <unk> and glacial valleys as a result of the last ice age , and the sinkholes and cave formations in the limestone regions of Clare . 
 Ireland 's geographic history covers everything from volcanoes and tropical seas to the ice age . Ireland has been in formed by two distinct parts and slowly joined together , uniting about 440 million years ago . As a result of tectonics and changes in latitude the sea level has risen and fallen . In every area of the country the rocks which formed can be seen as a result . Finally the impact of the glaciers created the views that we see today . This variation in the two areas along with the differences between volcanic areas and shallow seas gives Ireland a range of soils as well . There are wide bogs and free draining brown earths . The mountains are granite , sandstone , limestone with karst like areas and basalt formations . 
 = = Physical geography = = 
 = = = Mountain ranges = = = 
 Ireland consists of a mostly flat low @-@ lying area in the midlands , ringed by mountain ranges such as ( beginning in County Kerry and working counter @-@ clockwise ) the Macgillycuddy 's Reeks , <unk> Mountains , Blackstairs Mountains , Wicklow Mountains , the <unk> , Glens of Antrim , <unk> Mountains , <unk> Mountains , <unk> Mountains , Ox Mountains , <unk> Mountains and the Twelve <unk> / <unk> group . Some mountain ranges are further inland in the south of Ireland , such as the <unk> Mountains ( the highest inland range ) , Silvermine and Slieve Bloom Mountains . The highest peak is Carrauntoohil , 1 @,@ 038 m ( 3 @,@ 405 ft ) high , is in the Macgillycuddy 's Reeks , a range of glacier @-@ carved sandstone mountains . The mountains are not high – only three peaks are over 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) and another 457 exceed 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) . 
 = = = Rivers and lakes = = = 
 The main river in Ireland is the River Shannon , 360 @.@ 5 km ( 224 @.@ 0 mi ) , the longest river in Ireland as well as both the islands of Ireland and Britain , it is a river that separates the boggy midlands of Ireland from the west of the island . The river develops into three lakes along its course , Lough Allen , Lough Ree , and Lough Derg . Of these , Lough Derg is the largest . The River Shannon enters the Atlantic Ocean after Limerick city at the Shannon Estuary . Other major rivers include the River Liffey , River Lee , River Blackwater , River Nore , River Suir , River Barrow , River Bann , River Foyle , River Erne , and River Boyne ( see the list of rivers in Ireland ) . 
 Lough Neagh , in Ulster , is the largest lake in Ireland and the UK . Legend has it that a giant , Fionn mac <unk> , was fighting with another in Scotland , and enraged , scooped out a lump of earth , which he threw . It fell into the Irish Sea , creating the Isle of Man , while the hole filled up with water to become Lough Neagh . Other large lakes include Lough Erne and Lough Corrib . 
 = = = Inlets = = = 
 Beginning with County Donegal , Lough Swilly separates one side of the Inishowen peninsula . Lough Foyle on the other side , is one of Ireland 's larger inlets , situated between County Donegal and County Londonderry . Further round the coast is Belfast Lough , between County Antrim and County Down . Also in County Down is Strangford Lough , actually an inlet partially separating the Ards peninsula from the mainland . Further down the coast , Carlingford Lough is situated between Down and County Louth . 
 Dublin Bay is the next sizeable inlet , while the eastern coast of Ireland is mostly uniform until Wexford Harbour at the mouth of the River Slaney . On the southern coast , Waterford Harbour is situated at the mouth of the River Suir ( into which the other two of the Three Sisters ( River Nore and River Barrow ) flow ) . The next major inlet is Cork Harbour , at the mouth of the River Lee , in which Great Island is situated . 
 <unk> Bay , Bantry Bay , Kenmare estuary and Dingle Bay are all inlets between the peninsulas of County Kerry . North of these is the Shannon Estuary . Between north County Clare and County Galway is Galway Bay . <unk> Bay is located on the coast of County Mayo , south of Achill Island , while <unk> Bay , <unk> Bay and <unk> Fada Conn bays are situated in northwest Connacht , in North Mayo . Killala Bay is on the northeast coast of Mayo . Donegal Bay is a major inlet between County Donegal and County Sligo . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Malin Head is the most northerly point in Ireland , while Mizen Head is one of the most southern points , hence the term " Malin head to Mizen head " ( or the reverse ) is used for anything applying to the island of Ireland as a whole . <unk> Point is another extreme point of Ireland , being the southeastern most point of Ireland . Further along the coast is Hook Head while the Old Head of Kinsale in is one of many headlands along the south coast of Ireland . 
 Loop Head is the headland at which County Clare comes to a point on the west coast of Ireland , with the Atlantic on the north , and further inland on the south , the Shannon estuary . Hag 's Head is another headland further up Clare 's north / western coastline , with the Cliffs of Moher along the coastline north of the point . 
 Erris Head is the northwesternmost point of Connacht . 
 = = = Islands and peninsulas = = = 
 Achill Island , in the northwest , is the largest island off Ireland 's coast . The island is inhabited , and is connected to the mainland by a bridge . Some of the next largest islands are the Aran Islands , off the coast of southern Connacht , host to an Irish @-@ speaking community , or Gaeltacht . Valentia Island off the <unk> peninsula is also one of Ireland 's larger islands , and is relatively settled , as well as being connected by a bridge at its southeastern end . <unk> Island , off the coast of Connemara is a tidal island . 
 Some of the best @-@ known peninsulas in Ireland are in County Kerry ; the Dingle peninsula , the aforementioned <unk> peninsula and the Beara peninsula . The Ards peninsula is one of the larger peninsulas outside Kerry . The Inishowen peninsula in County Donegal includes Ireland 's most northerly point , Malin Head and several important towns including Buncrana on Lough Swilly , <unk> and <unk> on Lough Foyle . Ireland 's most northerly land feature is <unk> island , off Malin Head . Rockall Island may deserve this honour but its status is disputed , being claimed by the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , Denmark ( for the Faroe Islands ) and Iceland . The most southerly point is the Fastnet Rock . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The climate of Ireland is mild , moist and changeable with abundant rainfall and a lack of temperature extremes . Ireland 's climate is defined as a temperate oceanic climate , or Cfb on the Köppen climate classification system , a classification it shares with most of northwest Europe . The country receives generally warm summers and mild winters . It is considerably warmer than other areas on its latitude , because it lies in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean , and as a result is warmed by the North Atlantic Current all year . 
 The influence of the North Atlantic Current also ensures the coastline of Ireland remains ice @-@ free throughout the winter — unlike for example the Sea of Okhotsk and the Labrador Sea which are at a similar latitude . The climate in Ireland does not experience extreme weather , with tornadoes and similar weather features being rare . 
 The prevailing wind blows from the southwest , breaking on the high mountains of the west coast . Rainfall is therefore a particularly prominent part of western Irish life , with Valentia Island , off the west coast of County Kerry , getting almost twice as much annual rainfall as Dublin on the east ( 1 @,@ 400 mm or 55 @.@ 1 in vs. 762 mm or 30 @.@ 0 in ) . 
 January and February are the coldest months of the year , and mean daily air temperatures fall between 4 and 7 ° C ( 39 @.@ 2 and 44 @.@ 6 ° F ) during these months . July and August are the warmest , with mean daily temperatures of 14 to 16 ° C ( 57 @.@ 2 to 60 @.@ 8 ° F ) , whilst mean daily maximums in July and August vary from 17 to 18 ° C ( 62 @.@ 6 to 64 @.@ 4 ° F ) near the coast , to 19 to 20 ° C ( 66 @.@ 2 to 68 @.@ 0 ° F ) inland . The sunniest months are May and June , with an average of five to seven hours sunshine per day . 
 Though extreme weather events in Ireland are comparatively rare when compared with other countries in the European Continent , they do occur . Atlantic depressions , occurring mainly in the months of December , January and February , can occasionally bring winds of up to 160 km / h or 99 mph to Western coastal counties ; while the summer months , and particularly around late July / early August , thunderstorms can develop . 
 The table shows mean climate figures for the Dublin Airport weather station over a thirty @-@ year period . Climate statistics based on the counties of Northern Ireland vary slightly but are not significantly different . 
 = = Political and human geography = = 
 Ireland is divided into four provinces , Connacht , Leinster , Munster and Ulster , and 32 counties . Six of the nine Ulster counties form Northern Ireland and the other 26 form the state , Ireland . The map shows the county boundaries for all 32 counties . 
 From an administrative viewpoint , 21 of the counties in the republic are units of local government . The other six have more than one local council area , producing a total of 31 county @-@ level authorities . County Tipperary had two ridings , North Tipperary and South Tipperary , originally established in 1838 , renamed in 2001 and amalgamated in 2014 . The cities of Dublin , Cork and Galway have city councils and are administered separately from the counties bearing those names . The cities of Limerick and Waterford were merged with their respective county councils in 2014 to form new city and county councils . The remaining part of County Dublin is divided into Dún Laoghaire – <unk> , Fingal , and South Dublin . 
 Electoral areas in Ireland ( the state ) , called constituencies in accordance with Irish law , mostly follow county boundaries . Maintaining links to the county system is a mandatory consideration in the re @-@ organisation of constituency boundaries by a Constituency Commission . 
 In Northern Ireland , a major re @-@ organisation of local government in 1973 replaced the six traditional counties and two county boroughs ( Belfast and Derry ) by 26 single @-@ tier districts , which , apart from Fermanagh cross the traditional county boundaries . The six counties and two county @-@ boroughs remain in use for purposes such as Lieutenancy . In November 2005 , proposals were announced which would see the number of local authorities reduced to seven . The island 's total population of approximately 6 million people is concentrated on the east coast , particularly in Dublin and Belfast and their surrounding areas . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 = = = Bogs = = = 
 Ireland has 12 @,@ 000 km ² ( 4 @,@ 633 miles ² ) of <unk> , consisting of two distinct types , blanket bogs and raised bogs . Blanket bogs are the more widespread of the two types . They are essentially a product of human activity aided by the moist Irish climate . Blanket bogs formed on sites where Neolithic farmers cleared trees for farming . As the land so cleared fell into disuse , the soil began to leach and become more acidic , producing a suitable environment for the growth of heather and rushes . The debris from these plants accumulated and a layer of peat formed . One of the largest expanses of Atlantic blanket bog in Ireland is to be found in County Mayo . 
 Raised bogs are most common in the Shannon basin . They formed when depressions left behind after the ice age filled with water to form lakes . Debris from reeds in these lakes formed a layer at the bottom of the water . This eventually choked the lakes and raised above the surface , forming raised bogs . 
 Since the 17th century , peat has been cut for fuel for domestic heating and cooking and it is called turf when so used . The process accelerated as commercial exploitation of bogs grew . In the 1940s , machines for cutting turf were introduced and larger @-@ scale exploitation became possible . In the Republic , this became the responsibility of a semi @-@ state company called Bord na Móna . In addition to domestic uses , commercially extracted turf is used in a number of industries , especially electricity generation though peat is being combined with biomass for dual @-@ firing electricity generation . 
 In recent years , the high level of bog being destroyed by cutting has raised environmental concerns . The problem is particularly acute for raised bogs as they yield a higher @-@ grade fuel than blanket bogs . Plans are now in place in both the Republic and Northern Ireland to conserve most of the remaining raised bogs on the island . 
 = = = Oil , natural gas and minerals = = = 
 Offshore exploration for natural gas began in 1970 . The first major discovery was the Kinsale Head gas field in 1971 . Next was the smaller <unk> gas field in 1989 , and the Corrib gas field in 1996 . Exploitation of the Corrib project has yet to get off the ground because the controversial proposal to refine the gas onshore , rather than at sea has been met with widespread opposition . Gas from these fields is pumped ashore and used for both domestic and industrial purposes . The Helvick oil field , estimated to contain over 28 million barrels ( 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil , is a 2000 discovery . Ireland is the largest European producer of zinc with three operating zinc @-@ lead mines at Navan , <unk> and <unk> . Other mineral deposits with actual or potential commercial value include gold , silver , gypsum , talc , calcite , dolomite , roofing slate , limestone aggregate , building stone , sand and gravel . 
 In May 2007 the Department of Communications , Marine and Natural Resources ( now replaced by the Department of Communications , Energy and Natural Resources ) reported that there may be volumes over 130 billion barrels ( 2 @.@ 1 × 1010 m3 ) of petroleum and 50 trillion cubic feet ( 1 @,@ 400 km3 ) of natural gas in Irish waters – worth trillions of Euro , if true . The minimum ' guaranteed ' amount of oil in the Irish Atlantic waters is 10 billion barrels ( 1 @.@ 6 × 109 m3 ) , worth over € 450 billion . There are also areas of petroleum and natural gas on shore , for example the Lough Allen basin , with 9 @.@ 4 trillion cubic feet ( 270 km3 ) of gas and 1 @.@ 5 billion barrels ( 240 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil , valued at € 74 @.@ 4 billion . Already some fields are being exploited , such as the Spanish Point field , with 1 @.@ 25 trillion cubic feet ( 35 km3 ) of gas and 206 million barrels ( 32 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil , valued at € 19 @.@ 6 billion . The Corrib Basin is also quite large , worth anything up to € 87 billion , while the <unk> gas field contains 25 trillion cubic feet ( 710 km3 ) of natural gas and 4 @.@ 13 billion barrels ( 657 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of petroleum . 
 In March 2012 the first commercial oil well was drilled 70 km off the Cork coast by Providence Resources . The <unk> oil well is yielding 3500 barrels per day , at current oil prices at $ 120 a barrel <unk> oil well is worth in excess of € <unk> annually . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Mitchell , Frank and Ryan , Michael . Reading the Irish landscape ( 1998 ) . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 055 @-@ 1 
 Whittow , J. B. Geography and Scenery in Ireland ( Penguin Books 1974 ) 
 Holland , Charles , H and Sanders , Ian S. The Geology of Ireland 2nd ed . ( 2009 ) . ISBN <unk> 
 Place @-@ names , Diarmuid O <unk> and Kevin Murray , in The Heritage of Ireland , ed . N. <unk> et al . , The Collins Press , Cork , 2000 , pp. 146 – 155 . 
 A paper landscape : the Ordnance Survey in nineteenth @-@ century Ireland , J.H. Andrews , London , 1975 
 Monasticon <unk> , M. <unk> , 1786 
 Etymological aetiology in Irish tradition , R. Baumgarten , <unk> 41 , pp. 115 – 122 , 1990 
 The Origin and History of Irish names of Places , Patrick Weston Joyce , three volumes , Dublin , 1869 , 1875 , 1913 . 
 Irish Place Names , D. Flanagan and L. Flanagan , Dublin , 1994 
 Census of Ireland : general alphabetical index to the townlands and towns , parishes and <unk> of Ireland , Dublin , 1861 
 The Placenames of Westmeath , Paul Walsh , 1957 
 The Placenames of <unk> , P. Power , Cork , 1952 
 The place @-@ names of county Wicklow , Liam Price , seven volumes , Dublin , 1945 – 67 
 = = = Online = = = 
 Abbot , Patrick . Ireland 's Peat Bogs . Retrieved on 23 January 2008 . 
 Ireland – The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved on 23 January 2008 . 
 <unk> – climate details for Ireland . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 01 @-@ 12 
 = Variable @-@ frequency drive = 
 A variable @-@ frequency drive ( VFD ) ( also termed adjustable @-@ frequency drive , variable speed drive , AC drive , micro drive or inverter drive ) is a type of adjustable @-@ speed drive used in electro @-@ mechanical drive systems to control AC motor speed and torque by varying motor input frequency and voltage . 
 VFDs are used in applications ranging from small appliances to the largest of mine mill drives and compressors . However , around 25 % of the world 's electrical energy is consumed by electric motors in industrial applications , which are especially conducive for energy savings using VFDs in centrifugal load service , and VFDs ' global market penetration for all applications is still relatively small . That lack of penetration highlights significant energy efficiency improvement opportunities for retrofitted and new VFD installations . 
 Over the last four decades , power electronics technology has reduced VFD cost and size and has improved performance through advances in semiconductor switching devices , drive topologies , simulation and control techniques , and control hardware and software . 
 VFDs are available in a number of different low- and medium @-@ voltage AC @-@ AC and DC @-@ AC topologies . 
 = = System description and operation = = 
 A variable @-@ frequency drive is a device used in a drive system consisting of the following three main sub @-@ systems : AC motor , main drive controller assembly , and drive / operator interface . 
 = = = AC Motor = = = 
 The AC electric motor used in a VFD system is usually three @-@ phase induction motor . Some types of single @-@ phase motors can be used , but three @-@ phase motors are usually preferred . Various types of synchronous motors offer advantages in some situations , but three @-@ phase induction motors are suitable for most purposes and are generally the most economical motor choice . Motors that are designed for fixed @-@ speed operation are often used . Elevated @-@ voltage stresses imposed on induction motors that are supplied by VFDs require that such motors be designed for definite @-@ purpose inverter @-@ fed duty in accordance with such requirements as Part 31 of <unk> Standard MG @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Controller = = = 
 The VFD controller is a solid @-@ state power electronics conversion system consisting of three distinct sub @-@ systems : a rectifier bridge converter , a direct current ( DC ) link , and an inverter . Voltage @-@ source inverter ( VSI ) drives ( see ' Generic topologies ' sub @-@ section below ) are by far the most common type of drives . Most drives are AC @-@ AC drives in that they convert AC line input to AC inverter output . However , in some applications such as common DC bus or solar applications , drives are configured as DC @-@ AC drives . The most basic rectifier converter for the VSI drive is configured as a three @-@ phase , six @-@ pulse , full @-@ wave diode bridge . In a VSI drive , the DC link consists of a capacitor which smooths out the converter 's DC output ripple and provides a stiff input to the inverter . This filtered DC voltage is converted to quasi @-@ sinusoidal AC voltage output using the inverter 's active switching elements . VSI drives provide higher power factor and lower harmonic distortion than phase @-@ controlled current @-@ source inverter ( CSI ) and load @-@ <unk> inverter ( LCI ) drives ( see ' Generic topologies ' sub @-@ section below ) . The drive controller can also be configured as a phase converter having single @-@ phase converter input and three @-@ phase inverter output . 
 Controller advances have exploited dramatic increases in the voltage and current ratings and switching frequency of solid @-@ state power devices over the past six decades . Introduced in 1983 , the insulated @-@ gate bipolar transistor ( IGBT ) has in the past two decades come to dominate VFDs as an inverter switching device . 
 In variable @-@ torque applications suited for Volts @-@ per @-@ Hertz ( V / Hz ) drive control , AC motor characteristics require that the voltage magnitude of the inverter 's output to the motor be adjusted to match the required load torque in a linear V / Hz relationship . For example , for 460 V , 60 Hz motors , this linear V / Hz relationship is 460 / 60 
 = 7 @.@ 67 V / Hz . While suitable in wide @-@ ranging applications , V / Hz control is sub @-@ optimal in high @-@ performance applications involving low speed or demanding , dynamic speed regulation , positioning , and reversing load requirements . Some V / Hz control drives can also operate in quadratic V / Hz mode or can even be programmed to suit special multi @-@ point V / Hz paths . 
 The two other drive control platforms , vector control and direct torque control ( DTC ) , adjust the motor voltage magnitude , angle from reference , and frequency so as to precisely control the motor 's magnetic flux and mechanical torque . 
 Although space vector pulse @-@ width modulation ( <unk> ) is becoming increasingly popular , sinusoidal PWM ( <unk> ) is the most straightforward method used to vary drives ' motor voltage ( or current ) and frequency . With <unk> control ( see Fig . 1 ) , quasi @-@ sinusoidal , variable @-@ pulse @-@ width output is constructed from intersections of a saw @-@ toothed carrier signal with a modulating sinusoidal signal which is variable in operating frequency as well as in voltage ( or current ) . 
 Operation of the motors above rated nameplate speed ( base speed ) is possible , but is limited to conditions that do not require more power than the nameplate rating of the motor . This is sometimes called " field weakening " and , for AC motors , means operating at less than rated V / Hz and above rated nameplate speed . Permanent magnet synchronous motors have quite limited field @-@ weakening speed range due to the constant magnet flux linkage . Wound @-@ rotor synchronous motors and induction motors have much wider speed range . For example , a 100 HP , 460 V , 60 Hz , 1775 RPM ( 4 @-@ pole ) induction motor supplied with 460 V , 75 Hz ( 6 @.@ 134 V / Hz ) , would be limited to 60 / 75 = 
 80 % torque at 125 % speed ( 2218 @.@ 75 RPM ) = 100 % power . At higher speeds , the induction motor torque has to be limited further due to the lowering of the breakaway torque of the motor . Thus , rated power can be typically produced only up to 130 @-@ 150 % of the rated nameplate speed . Wound @-@ rotor synchronous motors can be run at even higher speeds . In rolling mill drives , often 200 @-@ 300 % of the base speed is used . The mechanical strength of the rotor limits the maximum speed of the motor . 
 An embedded microprocessor governs the overall operation of the VFD controller . Basic programming of the microprocessor is provided as user @-@ inaccessible firmware . User programming of display , variable , and function block parameters is provided to control , protect , and monitor the VFD , motor , and driven equipment . 
 The basic drive controller can be configured to selectively include such optional power components and accessories as follows : 
 Connected upstream of converter -- circuit breaker or fuses , isolation <unk> , EMC filter , line reactor , passive filter 
 Connected to DC link -- braking chopper , braking resistor 
 Connected downstream of inverter — output reactor , sine wave filter , dV / dt filter . 
 = = = Operator interface = = = 
 The operator interface provides a means for an operator to start and stop the motor and adjust the operating speed . Additional operator control functions might include reversing , and switching between manual speed adjustment and automatic control from an external process control signal . The operator interface often includes an alphanumeric display and / or indication lights and meters to provide information about the operation of the drive . An operator interface keypad and display unit is often provided on the front of the VFD controller as shown in the photograph above . The keypad display can often be cable @-@ connected and mounted a short distance from the VFD controller . Most are also provided with input and output ( I / O ) terminals for connecting push buttons , switches , and other operator interface devices or control signals . A serial communications port is also often available to allow the VFD to be configured , adjusted , monitored , and controlled using a computer . 
 = = = Drive operation = = = 
 Referring to the accompanying chart , drive applications can be categorized as single @-@ quadrant , two @-@ quadrant , or four @-@ quadrant ; the chart 's four quadrants are defined as follows : 
 Quadrant I - Driving or motoring , forward accelerating quadrant with positive speed and torque 
 Quadrant II - Generating or braking , forward braking @-@ decelerating quadrant with positive speed and negative torque 
 Quadrant III - Driving or motoring , reverse accelerating quadrant with negative speed and torque 
 Quadrant IV - Generating or braking , reverse braking @-@ decelerating quadrant with negative speed and positive torque . 
 Most applications involve single @-@ quadrant loads operating in quadrant I , such as in variable @-@ torque ( e.g. centrifugal pumps or fans ) and certain constant @-@ torque ( e.g. <unk> ) loads . 
 Certain applications involve two @-@ quadrant loads operating in quadrant I and II where the speed is positive but the torque changes polarity as in case of a fan decelerating faster than natural mechanical losses . Some sources define two @-@ quadrant drives as loads operating in quadrants I and III where the speed and torque is same ( positive or negative ) polarity in both directions . 
 Certain high @-@ performance applications involve four @-@ quadrant loads ( Quadrants I to IV ) where the speed and torque can be in any direction such as in hoists , elevators , and hilly conveyors . Regeneration can occur only in the drive 's DC link bus when inverter voltage is smaller in magnitude than the motor back @-@ EMF and inverter voltage and back @-@ EMF are the same polarity . 
 In starting a motor , a VFD initially applies a low frequency and voltage , thus avoiding high inrush current associated with direct @-@ on @-@ line starting . After the start of the VFD , the applied frequency and voltage are increased at a controlled rate or ramped up to accelerate the load . This starting method typically allows a motor to develop 150 % of its rated torque while the VFD is drawing less than 50 % of its rated current from the mains in the low @-@ speed range . A VFD can be adjusted to produce a steady 150 % starting torque from standstill right up to full speed . However , motor cooling deteriorates and can result in overheating as speed decreases such that prolonged low @-@ speed operation with significant torque is not usually possible without separately motorized fan ventilation . 
 With a VFD , the stopping sequence is just the opposite as the starting sequence . The frequency and voltage applied to the motor are ramped down at a controlled rate . When the frequency approaches zero , the motor is shut off . A small amount of braking torque is available to help decelerate the load a little faster than it would stop if the motor were simply switched off and allowed to coast . Additional braking torque can be obtained by adding a braking circuit ( resistor controlled by a transistor ) to dissipate the braking energy . With a four @-@ quadrant rectifier ( active front @-@ end ) , the VFD is able to brake the load by applying a reverse torque and injecting the energy back to the AC line . 
 = = Benefits = = 
 = = = Energy savings = = = 
 Many fixed @-@ speed motor load applications that are supplied direct from AC line power can save energy when they are operated at variable speed by means of VFD . Such energy cost savings are especially pronounced in variable @-@ torque centrifugal fan and pump applications , where the load 's torque and power vary with the square and cube , respectively , of the speed . This change gives a large power reduction compared to fixed @-@ speed operation for a relatively small reduction in speed . For example , at 63 % speed a motor load consumes only 25 % of its full @-@ speed power . This reduction is in accordance with affinity laws that define the relationship between various centrifugal load variables . 
 In the United States , an estimated 60 @-@ 65 % of electrical energy is used to supply motors , 75 % of which are variable @-@ torque fan , pump , and compressor loads . Eighteen percent of the energy used in the 40 million motors in the U.S. could be saved by efficient energy improvement technologies such as VFDs . 
 Only about 3 % of the total installed base of AC motors are provided with AC drives . However , it is estimated that drive technology is adopted in as many as 30 @-@ 40 % of all newly installed motors . 
 An energy consumption breakdown of the global population of AC motor installations is as shown in the following table : 
 = = = Control performance = = = 
 AC drives are used to bring about process and quality improvements in industrial and commercial applications ' acceleration , flow , monitoring , pressure , speed , temperature , tension , and torque . 
 Fixed @-@ speed loads subject the motor to a high starting torque and to current surges that are up to eight times the full @-@ load current . AC drives instead gradually ramp the motor up to operating speed to lessen mechanical and electrical stress , reducing maintenance and repair costs , and extending the life of the motor and the driven equipment . 
 Variable @-@ speed drives can also run a motor in specialized patterns to further minimize mechanical and electrical stress . For example , an S @-@ curve pattern can be applied to a conveyor application for smoother deceleration and acceleration control , which reduces the backlash that can occur when a conveyor is accelerating or decelerating . 
 Performance factors tending to favor the use of DC drives over AC drives include such requirements as continuous operation at low speed , four @-@ quadrant operation with regeneration , frequent acceleration and deceleration routines , and need for the motor to be protected for a hazardous area . The following table compares AC and DC drives according to certain key parameters : 
 ^ High @-@ frequency injection 
 = = VFD types and ratings = = 
 = = = Generic topologies = = = 
 AC drives can be classified according to the following generic topologies : 
 Voltage @-@ source inverter ( VSI ) drive topologies ( see image ) : In a VSI drive , the DC output of the diode @-@ bridge converter stores energy in the capacitor bus to supply stiff voltage input to the inverter . The vast majority of drives are VSI type with PWM voltage output . 
 Current @-@ source inverter ( CSI ) drive topologies ( see image ) : In a CSI drive , the DC output of the SCR @-@ bridge converter stores energy in series @-@ reactor connection to supply stiff current input to the inverter . CSI drives can be operated with either PWM or six @-@ step waveform output . 
 Six @-@ step inverter drive topologies ( see image ) : Now largely obsolete , six @-@ step drives can be either VSI or CSI type and are also referred to as variable @-@ voltage inverter drives , pulse @-@ amplitude modulation ( PAM ) drives , square @-@ wave drives or D.C. chopper inverter drives . In a six @-@ step drive , the DC output of the SCR @-@ bridge converter is smoothed via capacitor bus and series @-@ reactor connection to supply via Darlington Pair or IGBT inverter quasi @-@ sinusoidal , six @-@ step voltage or current input to an induction motor . 
 Load <unk> inverter ( LCI ) drive topologies : In an LCI drive ( a special CSI case ) , the DC output of the SCR @-@ bridge converter stores energy via DC link inductor circuit to supply stiff quasi @-@ sinusoidal six @-@ step current output of a second SCR @-@ bridge 's inverter and an over @-@ excited synchronous machine . 
 <unk> or matrix converter ( MC ) topologies ( see image ) : <unk> and MCs are AC @-@ AC converters that have no intermediate DC link for energy storage . A <unk> operates as a three @-@ phase current source via three anti @-@ parallel @-@ connected SCR @-@ bridges in six @-@ pulse configuration , each <unk> phase acting selectively to convert fixed line frequency AC voltage to an alternating voltage at a variable load frequency . MC drives are IGBT @-@ based . 
 <unk> fed slip recovery system topologies : A doubly fed slip recovery system feeds rectified slip power to a smoothing reactor to supply power to the AC supply network via an inverter , the speed of the motor being controlled by adjusting the DC current . 
 = = = Control platforms = = = 
 Most drives use one or more of the following control platforms : 
 PWM V / Hz scalar control 
 PWM field @-@ oriented control ( FOC ) or vector control 
 Direct torque control ( DTC ) . 
 = = = Load torque and power characteristics = = = 
 Variable @-@ frequency drives are also categorized by the following load torque and power characteristics : 
 Variable torque , such as in centrifugal fan , pump , and blower applications 
 Constant torque , such as in conveyor and positive @-@ displacement pump applications 
 Constant power , such as in machine tool and traction applications . 
 = = = Available power ratings = = = 
 VFDs are available with voltage and current ratings covering a wide range of single @-@ phase and multi @-@ phase AC motors . Low @-@ voltage ( LV ) drives are designed to operate at output voltages equal to or less than 690 V. While motor @-@ application LV drives are available in ratings of up to the order of 5 or 6 MW , economic considerations typically favor medium @-@ voltage ( MV ) drives with much lower power ratings . Different MV drive topologies ( see Table 2 ) are configured in accordance with the voltage / current @-@ combination ratings used in different drive controllers ' switching devices such that any given voltage rating is greater than or equal to one to the following standard nominal motor voltage ratings : generally either 2 @.@ 3 / 4 @.@ 16 kV ( 60 Hz ) or 3 @.@ 3 / 6 @.@ 6 kV ( 50 Hz ) , with one thyristor manufacturer rated for up to 12 kV switching . In some applications a step @-@ up transformer is placed between a LV drive and a MV motor load . MV drives are typically rated for motor applications greater than between about 375 kW ( 500 HP ) and 750 kW ( 1000 hp ) . MV drives have historically required considerably more application design effort than required for LV drive applications . The power rating of MV drives can reach 100 MW , a range of different drive topologies being involved for different rating , performance , power quality , and reliability requirements . 
 = = = Drives by machines & detailed topologies = = = 
 It is lastly useful to relate VFDs in terms of the following two classifications : 
 In terms of various AC machines as shown in Table 1 below 
