 The 2015 Philadelphia Cycling Classic , known as The Parx Casino Philly Cycling Classic for sponsorship purposes , was the sixth round of the 2015 UCI Women 's Road World Cup . It was held on 7 June 2015 , in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States . The event had last appeared in the Women 's Road World Cup in 2001 , as the Liberty Classic . 
 On a six @-@ lap course which climbed Manayunk Wall , an 800 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) long climb with an average gradient of 8 percent , at the end of each lap , Jasmin <unk> ( Optum – KBS ) established an early breakaway , leading for two laps before being caught by the peloton . Her breakaway earned her sufficient " Queen of the Mountain " points for her to win that title . Further attacks were made , but none were successful . On the final ascent of Manayunk Wall , Lizzie Armitstead ( Boels – Dolmans ) won in a sprint , beating Elisa Longo Borghini ( Wiggle – Honda ) and Alena <unk> ( Velocio – SRAM ) . 
 = = Entry = = 
 The organisers of the Philadelphia Cycling Classic indicated that they would invite the top twenty ranked UCI teams at the end of 2014 , and then any further allocations would be assigned to highly @-@ ranked national teams and other UCI teams . A list of seventeen participating teams was published in March , just over 10 weeks prior to the race . Of those teams , Astana @-@ Acca Due O , BePink @-@ La Classica and Cycling Canada did not feature in the race , while further teams were added to feature 96 riders across 19 teams . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Philadelphia Cycling Classic follows a six @-@ lap course near the Schuylkill River in northwest Philadelphia . It started and finished at the top of the Manayunk Wall , an 800 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) long climb which peaks at a gradient of 17 percent , though it only averages around 8 percent . The course also included climbs up Lemon Hill and Strawberry Mansion Drive . Each of the six laps is 19 @.@ 71 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 25 mi ) , giving a total race length of 118 @.@ 26 kilometres ( 73 @.@ 48 mi ) . " Queen of the Mountain " points were awarded for the first rider to the top of Manayunk Wall and Lemon Hill each lap , while an intermediate sprint was located roughly halfway along the outward section of the lap , where Kelly Drive intersects with Midvale Avenue . 
 = = Preview = = 
 After five rounds of the 2015 UCI Women 's Road World Cup , there had been five different winners ; Jolien D 'Hoore at the Ronde van Drenthe , Lizzie Armitstead at the Trofeo Alfredo Binda @-@ Comune di <unk> , Elisa Longo Borghini at the Tour of Flanders , Anna van der Breggen at the La Flèche Wallonne Féminine , and Giorgia Bronzini at the Tour of Chongming Island . Anna van der Breggen led the World Cup standings as the racing moved to Philadelphia , with 290 points , but her Rabo @-@ Liv team had opted not to take part in the event . Annemiek van Vleuten and Jolien D 'Hoore , who were second and third in the standings , had not travelled with their teams to the event . Elisa Longo Borghini ( Wiggle – Honda ) and Lizzie Armitstead ( Boels – Dolmans ) , who entered the race placed fourth and fifth , were highlighted as possible favourites for the race , though Armitstead 's team @-@ mate , Evelyn Stevens had won the race in both 2013 and 2014 . 
 = = Race = = 
 There was no significant breakaways during the first lap , but as the riders climbed Lemon Hill on the second of six laps , Jasmin <unk> ( Optum – KBS ) established a gap , and maintained the lead of the race for two laps , earning her the Queen of the Mountain award . She was caught during an attack by Alison Jackson ( <unk> p / b Sho @-@ Air ) , but the pair could not maintain their advantage , and were caught by the peloton on the climb up Manayunk Wall at the end of the third lap . Team Hitec Products attacked each of the intermediate sprints , with Kirsten Wild providing a lead @-@ out each lap for her team @-@ mate Emilie Moberg . They also attempted to make breakaways of their own , and Moberg managed to lead off the front of the peloton for around half a lap before being caught once more by the peloton . The Velocio @-@ SRAM team attacked through the fourth lap , with each of their riders riding off the front in turn , but they failed to establish a breakaway . 
 Entering the final lap , the peloton remained close , although a number of riders had fallen behind or dropped out , particularly through the cobbled bends at the base of the Manayunk Wall . A series of attacks were made on the final lap ; Charlotte Becker ( Team Hitec Products ) gained an advantage , but it was closed again due to work from the Boels @-@ Dolmans team . Once Becker had been caught , Dalia <unk> ( <unk> – Cipollini ) made a move , but the <unk> p / b Sho @-@ Air team worked to eliminate her lead . A sprint to the bottom of the Manayunk Wall was led by Loren <unk> ( Velocio – SRAM ) , but more riders struggled over the cobblestones and dropped back . Alexis Ryan ( UnitedHealthcare ) took over the lead of the peloton at the bottom of the hill , and established a fast pace up the lower slopes , leading Joëlle <unk> ( <unk> Pro Cycling Team ) and her team @-@ mate <unk> Rivera . Optum @-@ KBS also had a number of riders near the front , while Elisa Longo Borghini ( Wiggle – Honda ) and Lizzie Armitstead ( Boels – Dolmans ) were just behind . Longo Borghini attacked first , but Armitstead went with her and passed her just before the line to claim victory . Alena <unk> ( Velocio – SRAM ) and Shelley Olds ( <unk> Pro Cycling Team ) finished in third and fourth ; the top four were all classified with the same time . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = World Cup standings = = 
 = Jim Bell = 
 James Dalton Bell ( born 1958 ) is an American crypto @-@ anarchist who created the idea of arranging for anonymously sponsored assassination payments via the Internet , which he called " assassination politics " . Since the publication of the " Assassination Politics " essay , Bell was targeted by the federal government of the United States . He was imprisoned on felony charges of tax evasion in 1997 . In 2001 , Wired called Bell " [ o ] ne of the Internet 's most famous essayists " and " the world 's most notorious crypto @-@ convict " . 
 In April 1995 , Bell authored the first part of a 10 @-@ part essay called " Assassination Politics " , which described an elaborate assassination market in which anonymous benefactors could securely order the killings of government officials or others who are violating citizens ' rights . Following an investigation by the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) , Bell was arrested and subsequently jailed for 11 months on felony charges of harassment and using false Social Security numbers . 
 After his April 2000 release , Bell publicly announced that he believed that there was extensive Federal Government corruption associated with his 1997 – 2000 criminal case , and that he was going to research the facts and file a lawsuit . Bell filed this lawsuit in 2003 . Bell was put under heavy surveillance and rearrested for harassment and stalking of federal agents . He was charged with intimidation and stalking and was convicted and again imprisoned , this time for a decade @-@ long sentence . Bell protested vociferously against the conduct of the trial , going so far as to file civil lawsuits against two judges , at least two prosecutors , his former probation officers , and his defense attorneys , but ultimately to no avail . He was released in December 2009 , only to be rearrested in July 2010 for violating his parole conditions . Bell 's parole violation hearing resulted in another sentence , and Bell was released on March 12 , 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bell was born in Akron , Ohio and attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he earned a degree in chemistry . After graduation , he worked for Intel as an electrical engineer before founding his own computer storage device company , <unk> Systems in 1982 . When his company closed in 1992 , Bell said he developed a " phobia " of financial and tax @-@ related issues . He had been a Libertarian Party member and described his political beliefs as anarcho @-@ libertarian . Bell attended three meetings of the Multnomah County Common Law Court ( possessing no judicial authority according to Federal government laws ) in Portland , Oregon , which put government officials on trial in absentia and awarded judgements against them . Bell attended these meetings in order to find government ' plants ' in that group . Bell subsequently became involved in a tax dispute with the Internal Revenue Service , which stated that he owed $ 30 @,@ 000 to the federal government . 
 = = " Assassination Politics " essay = = 
 From 1995 through early 1996 , Bell authored an essay entitled " Assassination Politics " in which he described the idea of using digital signatures through email to create an assassination market , " predicting " the deaths of government employees . Bell also speculated that some people could use these net @-@ based markets quite openly without encryption ( Part 10 of the essay ) . So there were two ways theorized to operate the scheme , one complex and secure and the other more open and potentially insecure . In effect , the arrangement would create an incentive for people to assassinate corrupt government officials , offering a reward that could be claimed by someone willing to submit an entry predicting a given person 's death at a particular time . If that person died at about that time , the correct <unk> would win the pool money . Bell published his idea in a 10 @-@ part essay titled " Assassination Politics " on the <unk> USENET newsgroup . Described by Wired as " an unholy mix of encryption , anonymity , and digital cash to bring about the ultimate annihilation of all forms of government " , the essay was nominated for a Chrysler Award for Innovation in Design in 1998 as " an imaginative and sophisticated prospective for improving governmental accountability " . Although the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that advocating violence against government officials is , in the absence of an " incitement to imminent lawless action " , protected by the First Amendment , the publication of " Assassination Politics " put Bell under the scrutiny of federal investigators in 1995 . The <unk> list archives includes many references to , what became known as ' AP ' and ' <unk> ' from 1996 onwards . The name 's ' assassination politics ' and ' Jim Bell ' also cropped up in the US governments pursuit and prosecution of Carl Johnson ( The CJ Files ) . In 2001 , an Australian anarchist claimed to be acting on the ' Part 10 ' part of Assassination politics . This was covered by Declan McCullagh in Wired 's story titled " Online <unk> Cop Threats <unk> " . Later , in 2003 , The Denver Post published a similar story titled " Online threats target Denver investigators - Anarchist says e @-@ mails harmless ; feds disagree " . This story was written by Jim Hughes . The essay attracted interest from theorists long before and after its author 's legal entanglements ; libertarian economist Bob Murphy criticised the assassination politics scheme in a pair of articles titled " The Politics of Destruction " in 2002 . Murphy claimed that assassination politics was both technically infeasible and ideologically undesirable – from an anarcho @-@ capitalist perspective ( crypto @-@ anarchism being a form of anarcho @-@ capitalism ) . Others , such as R. Sukumaran , argue that assassination markets as suggested by Bell are perhaps technically feasible , but because they are so revolutionary , they " threaten elites " and will be made illegal . However , Sukumaran argues that AP was revived within DARPA by Poindexter with <unk> , an attempt to " extrapolate the Iowa Presidential markets system to the prediction of terroristic events " under the " interest of national security . " Mike <unk> has argued that were Assassination Politics ever to be accepted then governments would merely operate secretly ( critiques of libertarianism ) . Almost all commentary so far has focused on the first nine parts of the essay and there is little on part 10 . 
 = = Investigation , prosecution and imprisonment = = 
 According to testimony by a federal agent , the federal government began infiltrating the Multnomah County Common Law Court via Steven Walsh , a government agent who attended the meetings under a false name and who even began to lead the organization . According to court documents , Bell attended three meetings of the group nearly a year after Walsh 's infiltration . 
 In February 1997 , the Internal Revenue Service acted on Bell 's tax debt , docking his wages and seizing his automobile . Inside the car , investigators found bomb @-@ making instructions , political literature and detailed information concerning cyanide and fertilizer . 
 IRS officers raided Bell 's home on April 1 , 1997 . He was arrested in May of that year , and , in July , he pleaded guilty to charges of obstruction of IRS agents and the use of a false Social Security number ( officials alleged that he had used four such numbers since 1984 in order to conceal his assets ; Bell said that he did not believe anyone had a right to know his real Social Security number ) . 
 As part of his plea bargain , Bell pleaded guilty in July 1997 to collecting the names and home addresses of IRS employees , and the home addresses of FBI , Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms agents and police in Clark County , Washington ; Bell also accepted responsibility for conducting a <unk> attack in the Vancouver IRS office . He was convicted of the two low @-@ level felonies and sentenced in December 1997 to eleven months in prison followed by three years of federal probation . As a condition of his sentence , Bell was compelled to pay , upon his release , $ 1 @,@ 359 in restitution for the <unk> attack . He was also subjected to three years of supervised release , during which he was barred from accessing computers and from possessing chemicals . 
 In Bell 's June 2003 lawsuit , Bell accused the federal government of extorting the 1997 plea agreement from him . Bell asserted that when he balked at that agreement in November 1997 , in part due to the government 's violation of the terms , government agents instructed fellow inmate Ryan Thomas Lund to assault Bell . The lawsuit alleged that Lund did this at about 6 : 00 P.M. on November 25 , 1997 , for the purpose of intimidating Bell , and to keep Bell away from his family and the news media . Later , in an ostensibly unrelated event , Lund filed a lawsuit stating that on December 14 , 1997 , two days after Bell 's December 12 , 1997 sentencing , Lund ( who was in solitary confinement at the time due to his assault on Bell ) had a " slip and fall " accident while alone in his cell , ostensibly due to a wet cell floor . Lund had also been promised a 27 @-@ month sentence for his illegal possession of firearms and methamphetamine , when the relevant federal law required a mandatory 10 @-@ year sentence . Bell alleged that the sentence reduction and lawsuit payoff were engineered to reward Lund for extorting Bell . Bell claimed that he was kept under " inhumane conditions for at least ten days " . 
 Bell further alleged in his 2003 lawsuit that a forged appeal case , number 99 @-@ <unk> , was entered into the court record . He stated that " Ninth Circuit Court personnel ... began corruptly falsifying , forging , and improperly adding to and deleting from the Ninth Circuit Court documentary record ... with regard to appeal # 99 @-@ <unk> . " Bell 's October 2004 amendment further alleges that , a handwritten note , " purportedly signed by Bell , but not in Bell 's handwriting style " , was forged to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals . He alleges that this notice of appeal was filed around June 20 , 1999 ( claim 505 ) , and that , " ... Ninth Circuit personnel agreed to and did continually add false records to that docket , and at various times they deleted some of those false records and substituted new false records , for the purposes of concealing the true events and for continuing to obstruct Bell ’ s access to justice and his constitutional rights . " ( Claim 510 ) In his lawsuit , Bell seeks to establish that over a dozen government employees were guilty of numerous felonies . 
 = = Release and conviction = = 
 Bell served his prison sentence at a federal medium @-@ security prison in Phoenix , Arizona , from which he was released in April 2000 . He was rearrested in June of the same year on the charge of violating several of his 36 probation conditions , and was returned in November 2000 to a federal detention center at SeaTac , Washington following a search of his home that Bell called a " disguised burglary " . 
 Bell had conducted sousveillance against Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms agents , using public databases and legally obtained CD @-@ ROMs , " to let them know that surveillance can be done in both directions . " Over a six @-@ month period , Bell also compiled evidence of what he alleged was illegal surveillance of him by a government agency . In the days leading up to his arrest , he claimed that the agency had unlawfully installed a covert listening device in his home and a tracking device in his car , something the ATF admitted doing during the subsequent trial . The ATF stated that it had planted a covert GPS system in Bell 's car and that it had tracked the movements of his Nissan Maxima in real time . 
 Bell alleged in his 2003 lawsuit that the government employees had actually planted an illegal GPS tracking device in his car months before the one ostensibly allowed by the October 2000 warrant , at least as early as Bell 's April 2000 release from prison . The information from that prior device could not be used , however , because there was no warrant allowing it to be planted . Bell also alleged that federal government employees had also illegally planted a GPS tracking transmitter in a vehicle he drove in June 1998 , one which the government never disclosed . Bell further stated that his defense lawyers colluded to keep Bell from being able to demand disclosure of all such secretly planted devices . 
 Bell pleaded not guilty to violating 18 U.S.C. section 2281 , a law prohibiting the intimidation of family members of federal agents and some forms of stalking . The charges specified that Bell had performed Internet background checks on federal agents he asserted were harassing him , and Bell defended his actions by saying he was using public records to defend against what he saw as harassment by government officials . Journalist Declan McCullagh wrote , " [ Bell ] says , and a good number of observers agree , that the Feds are prosecuting him for doing what an investigative reporter does : Compiling information from publicly available databases , documenting what 's happening , and so on . This case could set a precedent that affects the First Amendment privilege of journalists . " 
 Declan McCullagh asserts that during the trial , the judge sealed the entire court file , forbade the defense from issuing subpoenas to witnesses , granted the prosecution significant latitude in making negative suggestions about Bell 's character , and refused requests for a mistrial . McCullagh also asserts that he was subpoenaed by two Treasury Department agents to appear before the court , without being notified ahead of time as required by federal regulations regarding subpoenas involving the media . Following the conviction , Jim Bell renewed his attempts at firing his court @-@ appointed lawyer , appealing his case to the Supreme Court , and filing civil lawsuits against those he alleges were involved in an orchestrated conspiracy to deny him a fair trial and an unbiased , court @-@ appointed defense counsel ; his targets included two judges , at least two prosecutors , and his former probation officers and defense attorneys . 
 = = Bell 's Isotope @-@ Modified Optical Fiber patent application = = 
 In February 2012 , Bell applied for a patent on an invention which would improve fibre optic communication speeds and assist in transmitting long distances . Although yet to produce any fibre , Bell states his mathematical models show the velocity of light within the fiber can be improved to from 68 % to 98 % of the speed of light with lower optical loss and dispersion which would allow light pulses to be transmitted for longer distances without being smeared together over time and distance . 
 = Norwegian Police Service = 
 The Norwegian Police Service ( Norwegian : <unk> og <unk> ) is the Norwegian civilian police agency . It consists of a central National Police Directorate , seven specialty agencies and twenty @-@ seven police districts . The government agency is subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and Public Security and has 13 @,@ 000 employees , of which 8 @,@ 000 are police officers . In addition to police powers , the service is responsible for border control , certain civil duties , coordinating search and rescue operations , counter @-@ terrorism , highway patrolling , writ of execution , criminal investigation and prosecution . 
 The police service dates to the 13th century when the first sheriffs were appointed . As the first city in Norway to do so , Trondheim had a chief of police appointed in 1686 , and Oslo established a uniformed police corps in 1859 . The directorate is led by National Police Commissioner Odd Reidar <unk> . Police districts were introduced in 1894 , with the current structure dating from 2003 . 
 Each police district is led by a chief of police and is subdivided into several police stations in towns and cities , and sheriffs ' offices for rural areas . The Governor of Svalbard acts as chief of police for Svalbard . Norwegian police officers do not carry firearms , but keep their Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine guns and Heckler & Koch P30 pistols locked down in the patrol cars . The Norwegian Prosecuting Authority is partially integrated with the police . 
 Specialist agencies within the services include the National Criminal Investigation Service , the National Authority for Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime ( Økokrim ) , the National Police Immigration Service , the National Mobile Police Service , the Norwegian Border Commissioner , the National Police Computing and Material Service and the Norwegian Police University College . Several other national responsibilities are under the command of Oslo Police District , such as the Emergency Response Unit and the two police helicopters . The Police Security Service is separate from the National Police Directorate . 
 = = History = = 
 The police force in Norway was established during the 13th century . Originally the 60 to 80 sheriffs ( <unk> ) were predominantly used for writ of execution and to a less degree police power . In the cities the duties were originally taken care of by a <unk> . The sheriffs were originally subordinate to the <unk> , but from the 14th century they instead became subordinate to the bailiff ( <unk> ) and the number of sheriffs increased . In the cities the police authority was transferred directly to the bailiff . By the mid @-@ 17th century there were between 300 and 350 sheriffs . With the introduction of the absolute monarchy in 1660 and subsequent strengthening of the civil service , the importance of the police increased . The bailiffs as such became part of the police structure , with their superiors , the county governor , receiving a similar role as that of chief of police . The first titled chief of police was hired in Trondheim in 1686 , thus creating the first police district , although his jurisdiction only covered the city proper . Chiefs of police were hired in Bergen in 1692 , Christiania ( Oslo ) in 1744 and <unk> in 1776 . 
 From the 19th century , deputies were hired in larger areas to assist the sheriffs . Following the democratization in 1814 , the Ministry of Justice was created in 1818 and has since had the primary responsibility for organizing the police force . The 19th century saw a large increase in the number of chiefs of police , reaching sixteen by the middle of the century . Christiania established the country 's first uniformed corps of constables in 1859 , which gave the force a more unified appearance . Similar structures were soon introduced in many other cities . From 1859 the municipalities would finance the wages of the deputies and constables , which made it difficult for the police to use those forces outside the municipal borders . The first organized education of police officers started in Christiania in 1889 . 
 In 1894 the authorities decided to abolish the position of bailiff and it was decided that some of its tasks would be transferred to the sheriffs . This resulted in 26 new chief of police positions , largely corresponding to the old bailiwicks . Some received jurisdiction over both cities and rural areas , other just rural areas . At the same time the existing police districts were expanded to include the surrounding rural areas . However , the individual bailiff were not removed from office until their natural retirement , leaving some bailiwick in place until 1919 . The reform eliminated the difference between the rural and city police forces ; yet the sheriffs were only subordinate to the chief of police in police matters — in civil matters and administration they remained under the county governors . 
 The police school was established in 1920 and the Governor of Svalbard was created in 1925 . To increase the police force 's flexibility , the municipal funding was cut and replaced with state funding in 1937 . That year also saw the first two specialty agencies were created , the Police Surveillance Agency ( later the Police Security Service ) and the Mobile Police Service . After a border agreement was reached between Norway and the Soviet Union in 1949 , the Norwegian Border Commission was established the following year . The Criminal Investigation Service was established in 1959 , and the search and rescue system with two joint coordination centers and sub @-@ centers for each police district was created in 1970 . 
 The number of police districts was nearly constant from 1894 to 2002 , although a few have been creased and closed . However , the organization in the various police districts varied considerably , especially in the cities . In particular , some cities had their civilian responsibilities taken care of by the municipality . This was confusing for the public , resulting in the police services reorganizing to a homogenous organization during the 1980s , whereby the civil tasks being organized as part of the police stations . Økokrim was established in 1988 and in 1994 the administrative responsibilities for the sheriff 's offices was transferred to police districts . Only once has the order to shoot to kill been issued , during the Torp hostage crisis in 1994 . The police school became a university college in 1993 and introduced a three @-@ year education ; in 1998 a second campus opened in Bodø . Police Reform 2000 was a major restructuring of the police force . First the National Police Directorate was created in 2001 , and from 2003 the number of police districts were reduced from 54 to 27 . The Police Computing and Material Service and the Criminal Investigation Service were both established in 2004 . Ten police officers have been killed in service since 1945 . The <unk> Report following the 2011 Norway attacks criticized several aspects of the police force , labeling the work as " unacceptable " . National Commissioner Øystein <unk> withdrew following the criticism , in part because an internal report of the attacks had not found any criticism of the police force . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The National Police Directorate , located in Downtown Oslo , is the central administration for the Norwegian Police Service . It conducts management and supervision of the specialist agencies and police districts , including organizational development and support activities . The directorate is led by the National Police Commissioner , who , since 2012 , has been Odd Reidar <unk> . The National Criminal Investigation Service is a national unit which works with organized and serious crime . It both works as an assistant unit for police districts , with special focus on technical and tactical investigation , in addition to being responsible on its own for organized crime . It acts as the center for international police cooperation , including participation in Interpol and Europol . The National Authority for Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime is responsible for complex cases of economic crime and acts as a public prosecutor for those cases . The National Police Immigration Service registers and identifies asylum seekers and returns those which have their applications rejected . The National Mobile Police Service is based in <unk> and operates throughout the country . Their primary role is as highway patrol and manages the police reserves , although they also assist police districts in extraordinary events where extra manpower is needed or where they are in the vicinity . 
 The Norwegian Border Commissioner is located in Kirkenes and is responsible for managing the Norway – Russia border and upholding the border agreement . Special consideration is needed as it is the only non @-@ Schengen Area land border of Norway . Border controls are the responsibility of the respective police district . The National Police Computing and Material Service is responsible for managing the police 's information and communications technology , procurement , security and real estate . Norway has two joint rescue coordination centers , one for Northern Norway located in Bodø and on one for Southern Norway located in Sola . Their jurisdiction border goes at the 65th parallel north ( Nord @-@ Trøndelag – Nordland border ) . Organizationally they are directly subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and the Police , although their operations are subordinate to the chiefs of police in Salten and Rogaland , respectively . The Police Security Service is Norway 's security agency ; although considered a law enforcement agency , it is not subordinate to the National Police Directorate nor part of the Norwegian Police Service . 
 Metropolitan Norway is divided into 27 police districts . Each district is further subdivided into local police stations and rural police districts , the latter led by a sheriff . Each police district is headquartered at a main police station and is led by a chief of police . Police districts hold a common pool of resources and personnel and have a common administration and budget . Each also has a joint operations center which also acts as an emergency call center for 112 . Many of the larger districts have their own execution and enforcement authority , while this in integrated in the smaller districts . The size of the police districts varies , from Oslo with 2 @,@ 500 employees and covering a population of 570 @,@ 000 to Eastern Finnmark which has 160 employees and 30 @,@ 000 residents . 
 Each districts has specially @-@ trained mobile units for armed and other challenging missions , and dog units for narcotics and search and rescue missions . The police districts also have police boats for coastal waters and selected lakes , with focus on driving under the influence , speeding and environmental monitoring . In Troms and Finnmark , the Reindeer Police are responsible for monitoring and supervising reindeer husbandry and environmental supervision . As of 2009 there were 301 rural police districts , 68 local police stations and 10 execution and enforcement authorities . 
 Oslo Police District has a series of special divisions and task forces which provide aid to all other police districts when necessary . It is responsible for the two police helicopters , which is mostly used for traffic motoring , search and rescue and apprehension . The Emergency Response Unit is a deployment unit for terrorism , sabotage and hostage incidents , which is separate from the crisis and hostage negotiation service . Oslo 's dog patrol service includes the national bomb squad . The departments further has a mobile deployment squad against demonstrations and riots , a Police Negotiation Unit for use against barricades and kidnapping , a mounted police , and the responsibility for protecting high @-@ ranking government and royal officials . 
 Svalbard is not part of the regular police districts — instead it law enforcement it handled by the Governor of Svalbard . He holds the responsibility as both county governor and chief of police , as well as holding other authority granted from the executive branch . Duties include environmental policy , family law , law enforcement , search and rescue , tourism management , information services , contact with foreign settlements , and <unk> in some areas of maritime inquiries and judicial examinations — albeit never in the same cases as acting as police . Jan Mayen is subordinate to Salten Police District . 
 = = Jurisdiction and capabilities = = 
 Norway has a unified police , which means that there is a single police organization and that police power and prosecutor power is not granted to other agencies within Norway . The sole exception is the military police , albeit which only has jurisdiction over military personnel and on military installations , except during martial law . The police are decentralized and generalized to allow a more flexible resource allocation , while remaining under political control . This entails that police officers have no geographical or sector limitations to their powers . The Police Act and several special laws regulate the agencies and the officer 's powers and responsibilities . The police are required to assist other public institutions , including the healthcare authorities , and can be asked by other agencies to assist when it is necessary to enact a decision by force . Conversely , the police can ask for assistance from the Coast Guard when necessary . The police are responsible for all responses against terrorism and sabotage unless Norway is under armed attack . 
 Responsibilities and functions related to security includes patrolling , continual emergency availability , highway patrolling , sea patrolling , coordination of search and rescue activities , embassy security and as a body guard service for members of the government , the royal family and other in need . The crime fighting responsibility is split between preventative measures , such as information , observation and controls , and consequential measures , such as investigation and prosecution . The police further have duties related to civilian court cases , such as writ of execution , evaluation of natural damage , assisting the courts after bankruptcies and functioning as a notary public . 
 The police have a series of functions related to public management , such as the issuing of passports , firearms licenses , police certificates , permissions for lotteries and withdrawal of driving licenses , approval of security guard companies and bouncers , recommendations to municipal councils for issuing alcohol sales licenses , approval of second @-@ hand shops and arrangements which are otherwise unlawful , dealing with unowned dogs and animals in the care of people sentenced unsuitable to hold animals . 
 The police also have the responsibility for prisoner transport during detention , including transport to and from court . The police serve as border guards for the outer border of the Schengen Area . The busiest are Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , which has 130 man @-@ years tied to it , <unk> on the Russian border and Sandefjord Airport , Torp . These are the only borders with designated border employees — all other are manned with regular officers . The police is not responsible for customs , which is the responsibility of the Norwegian Customs and Excise Authorities . Norway participates in a series of international police cooperation , such as Interpol , Europol , the Schengen Information System , Frontex , and the Baltic Sea Task Force on Organized Crime . Norway also has a close cooperation with the other Nordic police forces . The Norwegian Police Service occasionally participates in international operations . 
 In 2011 the police force had 746 @,@ 464 assignments , the most common with 180 @,@ 000 assignments being investigation cases , such as reported deaths , controls and reports of motor vehicle theft . This was followed by traffic assignments , public disturbance of peace , animal cases , theft , private disturbance of peace , and sickness and psychiatry . Seventy @-@ five percent of assignments are solved with a single patrol , while ninety percent are solved with one and two . In armed situations only twenty percent are solved with a single patrol . In 2010 the Norwegian Police Service had 13 billion Norwegian krone in costs , of which seventy percent was used on wages . It employed 13 @,@ 493 man @-@ years , or 1 @.@ 6 man @-@ years per 1000 residents . There were 394 @,@ 137 reported offenses , or 81 @.@ 1 per 1000 people , of which 46 percent were solved . There were 5 @,@ 399 debt settlements , 226 @,@ 491 applications for writ of execution , 195 @,@ 345 immigration cases and 4 @,@ 615 forced returns . 
 = = Investigation and prosecution = = 
 The Norwegian Prosecuting Authority is integrated into the Norwegian Police Service . The authority is divided into a higher and lower authority , with the higher authority ( public prosecutor ) being a separate government agency and the lower authority ( police prosecutor ) being members of the police . The latter includes chief of police , deputy chief of police , police prosecutors and deputy police prosecutors . In questions of prosecution the police districts are subordinate to the Norwegian Prosecuting Authority and in other matters subordinate to the National Police Directorate . 
 The higher authorities will take decisions in serious criminal charges and for appeals . The Norwegian <unk> Authority is led by the Director General of Public Prosecutions , which since 1997 has been Tor @-@ Aksel Busch . The director general makes decisions of indictment in cases with a maximum penalty of twenty @-@ one years and certain other serious crimes . There are twelve subordinate agencies , ten regional and two supporting <unk> and Økokrim , respectively . The regional public prosecution offices take decisions regarding cases not covered by the director general or the police prosecutors . 
 If an offense is filed , the issue may be investigated by police on duty . Permission for search and seizure is issued by the police prosecutor on duty at the police district . <unk> people are permitted a free defense counsel at the public 's expense . If the police wish to keep apprehended people in detention , the issue is brought to the relevant district court , a process which may be repeated several times if the custody needs to be extended . Investigations are led by a police prosecutor . During investigation , the case may be concluded as a non @-@ criminal offense , dismissed , or transferred to another police district . Minor cases with a positive finding may be resolved by police penalty notice , settlement by a conflict resolution board and withdrawal of prosecution . 
 Criminal cases with an assumed perpetrator are sent to the public prosecutor , who will consider issuing an indictment . If positive , the trial will take place at a district court , with a police prosecutor presiding over the case . Cases with more than six years maximum penalty will normally be carried out with public prosecutors prosecuting . Either party can , on specified terms , appeal the outcome of the case to the court of appeal and ultimately the Supreme Court of Norway . 
 = = Education and employment = = 
 Education of police officers is the responsibility of the Norwegian Police University College , which is subordinate to the National Police Directorate . The main campus is located at Majorstuen in Oslo , while the secondary campus is located at <unk> in Bodø . In addition the college has training centers in Kongsvinger and <unk> . Police officer training is a three @-@ year bachelor 's degree , where the first and third year take place at the college and the second year is on @-@ the @-@ ground training in police districts . 
 In 2009 , 1990 people applied for 432 places at the college . From 2010 , admission is administrated through the Norwegian Universities and Colleges Admission Service . The college also has a three @-@ year part @-@ time master 's degree in police science . As the chief of police and deputy chief of police are part of the prosecuting authority , they must be a candidate of law to act in such a position . Although there no longer is a formal requirement for such an education , the role as prosecutor effectively hinders others from holding the position . 
 At the time of graduation all officers are qualified for operational service . However , each employee must undergo 40 hours of yearly training , including firearms practice , to keep their operational certification . Without this , they cannot patrol , use firearms or participate in actions . Forty @-@ four percent of police officers in 2012 lacked such certification . The main reason is that the police districts see it as a waste of resources to train investigation and administrative staff which do not participate in operative duty , and that a higher quality is achieved through specialization of tasks , such as dedicated investigation personnel . 
 Each police district may dictate that operational personnel have a higher amount of training , for instance 80 hours is required in Oslo . Officers are certified at five levels , of which the top four can use firearms . Level three consists of a call @-@ out unit for each police district , consisting of a combined 646 people . This requires 103 hours of special training per year . Higher levels are required for body @-@ guard service ( 55 officers ) and the Emergency Response Union ( 73 officers ) . All certification curriculum is developed by and organized by the university college . 
 The Norwegian Police Federation is the trade union which organizes employees from all levels within the police force . The federation is a member of the Confederation of Unions for Professionals , Norway and the European Confederation of Police . It is illegal for police officers to strike . The federation have nonetheless undertaken several actions , including collective sick leave to close a police station and by members sabotaging courses by not participating . Reports of misconduct and criminal offenses by officers during duty is investigated by the Norwegian Bureau for the Investigation of Police Affairs . Based in Hamar , it is directly subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and the Police and is not part of the Norwegian Police Service . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 As of 2011 the police 's new patrol cars are four @-@ wheel drive Volkswagen Passat with automatic transmission . New transport cars are Mercedes @-@ Benz Vito for light transport and Mercedes @-@ Benz Sprinter for heavy transport . The police force operates two Eurocopter <unk> helicopters , which are based at Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . In addition , the Emergency Response Unit can use the Royal Norwegian Air Force 's Bell 412 helicopters . 
 The police have two main types of uniforms , type I is used for personnel which primarily undertake indoor work , and type II is used for personnel which primarily undertakes outdoor service . Both types have summer and winter versions , and type I also has a dress uniform version . Both types use black as the dominant color with light blue shirts . 
 Police officers are not armed with firearms during patrolling , but have weapons locked down in the patrol cars . Arming of the locked @-@ down weapons requires permission from the chief of police or someone designated by him . The police use Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine guns and Heckler & Koch P30 semi @-@ automatic pistols . The Emergency Response Unit uses <unk> C8 assault rifles . Norwegian police officers do not use electroshock weapons . 
 Previously the police used a decentralized information technology system developed during the mid @-@ 1990s . As late as 2012 servers were still being run with Windows NT 4 @.@ 0 from 1996 and log @-@ on times were typically twenty minutes . The new IT @-@ system D # 2 was introduced in 2011 and will have been taken into use by all divisions by 2012 . D # 2 will be operated by <unk> and will have two redundant server centers . Personnel have access to the system via thin clients . The police have a system to raise a national alarm to close border crossings and call in reserve personnel . The one time it was activated the message was not received by any of the intended recipients . Since 2009 it has been possible to report criminal damage and theft of wallets , bicycles and mobile telephones without a known perpetrator ( s ) online . 
 The Norwegian Public Safety Radio has been installed in Oslo , Østfold , Akershus and southern Buskerud . The system is uses Terrestrial Trunked Radio and allows for a common public safety network for all emergency agencies . Features include authentication , encryption and possibilities to transmit data traffic . As the system is rolled out , central parts will receive transmission speeds of 163 kbit / s . The rest of the country uses an analog radio system specific for each police district . In addition to lack of interoperability with paramedics and fire fighters , none of the systems are encrypted , forcing police officers to rely heavily on GSM @-@ based mobile telephones for dispatch communication when transmitting sensitive information . 
 Police cars lack GPS navigation devices and mobile data terminal . Instead , all communication must be radioed to the dispatcher at the joint operations center , and officers must rely on printed road atlases for navigation . In contrast , GPS navigation and terminal equipment was finished installed in ambulances and fire trucks in 2003 . The Norwegian Public Safety Radio is scheduled for completion in 2015 . 
 = = Ranks = = 
 Source : Norwegian National Police 
 = Cicuta = 
 Cicuta , commonly known as water hemlock , is a small genus of four species of highly poisonous plants in the family Apiaceae . They are perennial herbaceous plants which grow up to 2 @.@ 5 meters ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) tall , having distinctive small green or white flowers arranged in an umbrella shape ( umbel ) . Plants in this genus may also be referred to as <unk> or poison parsnip . Cicuta is native to temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere , mainly North America and Europe , typically growing in wet meadows , along streambanks and other wet and marshy areas . These plants bear a close resemblance to other members in the family Apiaceae and may be confused with a number of other edible and poisonous plants . The common name hemlock may also be confused with poison hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) . 
 Water hemlock is considered one of North America 's most toxic plants , being highly poisonous to humans . Three members of the genus contain a toxin named cicutoxin which causes central nervous system stimulatory effects including seizures following ingestion . Medical treatment of poisoning may include the use of activated charcoal to decrease gastrointestinal absorption of the toxic principle along with supportive care including anticonvulsant drugs such as a benzodiazepine . High doses of anticonvulsant medicine are often required to halt seizure activity and further medical care including intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cicuta spp. are perennial plants that are all similar in morphology , growing up to a maximum of 2 @.@ 5 meters ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in height . The stem of the plant is branching , erect , smooth and hollow ( except for partitions at the junction of the leaves and stem ) , sometimes being purple @-@ striped , or mottled ( typically only C. maculata has the purple stripes or spots ) . Attached to the base of the stem is a tuberous root with thickened rootstocks . The rootstocks are <unk> and contain a yellowish oily liquid which turns reddish brown on exposure to air and emits a characteristic smell of raw parsnip . The alternate leaves are 2 or 3 pinnately compound and may reach 30 centimeters ( 12 in ) to 90 centimeters ( 35 in ) in length . The leaflets are lanceolate , serrate , 5 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) to 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in length , and sharply toothed . The plant flowers in spring or early summer ; the flowers are small with green or white petals clustered in an umbrella shape ( umbel ) characteristic to this family ; the umbel measures 5 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) to 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) across . The plants produce a cylindrical fruit which is 4 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) to 6 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) in length . The plant is spread primarily by seeds which are produced in large numbers and are small in size . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Cicuta genus is one of many genera in the Apiaceae family which is in the order <unk> . The Apiaceae family is also known as Umbelliferae and both of these family names are permitted to be used by the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature . In Europe , Cicuta was not distinguished from the similar genus Conium before the year 1500 . The first mention of the genus in the United States was in the eighteenth century . Carl Linnaeus formally described three species in 1753 . The type species is Cicuta virosa . The genus is now recognized to comprise four species : 
 Other species names such as Cicuta <unk> , Cicuta californica , and Cicuta <unk> are older names now recognized to be varieties of the widespread , morphologically variable Cicuta maculata . Cicuta maculata is now recognized to have four varieties : var. maculata , var. <unk> , var. <unk> , and var. <unk> . Phylogenetic analysis using the sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer ( ITS ) loci was not conclusive but seems to show that C. bulbifera and C. virosa are monophyletic , while C. douglasii may not be . It was also suggested a specimen from California may warrant recognition as a distinct species . Other common names for the genus in general include poison parsnip , beaver poison , wild carrot , wild parsnip , and false parsley . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Members of the family Apiaceae bear close resemblance to each other , and have many characteristics in common . Cicuta spp. are often mistaken for edible plants such as <unk> ( Angelica <unk> ) , wild celery ( <unk> graveolens ) , pignut ( <unk> majus ) , wild carrot ( <unk> <unk> ) , wild parsnip ( Pastinaca sativa ) , and water parsnip ( <unk> spp . ) . One of the more common misidentifications is between water hemlock and water parsnip ; both have clusters of small white flowers shaped like umbrellas , and both have the same habitat near the shore line of lakes and rivers . Differences between water parsnip and water hemlock include the water parsnip having leaves only once compound while the water hemlock has leaves which are two or three times compound . Water hemlock also has a large swelling at the stem base which water parsnip lacks . Additionally , water hemlock has bracts at the base of each small flower cluster , not at the base of the main flower head , while water parsnip has both bracts at the base of flowers and also at the main flower head . 
 Additionally , there can be confusion between the various water hemlock species and poison hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) as the common name hemlock is applied to both Cicuta and Conium maculatum . Both are poisonous and can be differentiated by differences in their root structure . Water hemlock has a branched root systems with tubules , while poison hemlock has a single tap root . Another reliable method to identify water hemlock is to examine the leaf veins . Water Hemlock is unique in the Apiaceae family in that it has leaf veins which terminate in the notches between the leaf tips , rather than extend to the tip of the leaf , as is found in the leaf structure of other members of this family . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Cicuta spp. are found growing across North America and Europe . Typically , they grow in wet habitats usually alongside ponds and streams , in marshes or swamps , or areas that are swampy at least part of the year . Plants can also be found growing in water . Of the four species , Cicuta maculata has the most widespread distribution occurring across the majority of North America . Cicuta bulbifera also has a relatively large distribution , found throughout Northern North America . Cicuta douglasii is found in the northwest corner of North America , while Cicuta virosa is only found in central Europe and in the far north of North America . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 All members of Cicuta except C. bulbifera contain high levels of the poisonous principle cicutoxin , an unsaturated aliphatic alcohol that is structurally closely related to the toxin <unk> found in the plant hemlock water dropwort . Cicutoxin is present at all stages of growth and in all parts of the plant , but is most concentrated in the roots which appear to be the most toxic in the early spring . Its primary toxic effect is to act as a stimulant in the central nervous system . It is a non @-@ competitive gamma @-@ aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) receptor antagonist . Cicutoxin acts on the GABAA receptor causing a block of the chloride channel which results in neuronal depolarization . In the presence of cicutoxin this depolarization continues unabated causing cell overactivity . The hyperactivity in brain cells results in seizures . Cicutoxin is highly poisonous and water hemlock is considered one of North America 's most toxic plants . Ingestion of Cicuta can be fatal in humans and there are reports in the medical literature of severe poisoning and death as early as 1670 . A number of people have also died following ingestion of the plant in the 20th and 21st century . 
 The LD50 in mice administered cicutoxin by intraperitoneal injection is 48 @.@ 3 mg per kg body weight ( mg / kg ) ; this compares with 5 @.@ 9 mg / kg for mice given potassium cyanide by intraperitoneal injection , while the LD50 for arsenic via intraperitoneal injection in mice is 46 @.@ 2 mg / kg . The exact toxic dose of plant material in humans is unknown ; it is thought ingestion of water hemlock in any quantity can result in poisoning and very small amounts may lead to death . Poisoning has been reported following children blowing whistles made from the hollow stem of water hemlock plants . Intoxication has also been reported following skin contact with the plant ; a case was reported where a family of five people rubbed the plant onto the skin and were poisoned , with two children dying . Livestock have long been the worst affected , leading to the common name " <unk> " . Poisoning in livestock is common and typically occurs following ingestion of roots of the plant . In the spring when the ground is soft , grazing animals tend to pull the entire plant out of the ground ingesting both the <unk> and the roots . Roots exposed by ploughing can also be the source of livestock poisonings . Ingestion of plant material may cause death in the animal in as little as 15 minutes . 
 = = = Symptoms = = = 
 Upon consumption , both in humans and other species , the symptoms of poisoning are mainly characterized by generalized seizures . The onset of symptoms following ingestion may be as soon as 15 minutes post ingestion . Initial symptoms reported may include nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , tremors , confusion , weakness , dizziness , and drowsiness ; although the rapid onset of seizure activity may be the first sign presented following poisoning . Seizures are usually described as clonic or tonic – clonic . Complications of ongoing seizure activity include increased body temperature , decreases in the pH of the blood ( metabolic acidosis ) , swelling in the brain , blood coagulation disorders , muscle breakdown ( rhabdomyolysis ) , and kidney failure . Additional neurological symptoms may include hallucinations , delirium , tingling , pricking , or numbness of a person 's skin , dilated pupils , and coma . Cardiovascular symptoms include alternating slow or fast heart rate and alternating low and high blood pressure . Other cardiac effects may include ECG abnormalities such as widening of the PR interval , <unk> tachycardia , and ventricular fibrillation . Symptoms of excess salivation , wheezing , respiratory distress , and absence of breathing have also been reported . 
 Deaths usually occur from respiratory failure or ventricular fibrillation secondary to ongoing seizure activity ; fatalities have occurred within a few hours of ingestion . Poisoned people who recover usually regain consciousness and seizures cease within 24 to 48 hours of poisoning , although seizures may persist for up to 96 hours . There are occasional long @-@ term effects such as retrograde amnesia of the events leading to intoxication and the intoxication itself . Other ongoing mild effects may include restlessness , muscle weakness , twitching , and anxiety . Complete resolution of symptoms may take a number of days or , in some cases , these ongoing symptoms may persist for months after poisoning . 
 = = = Diagnosis and treatment = = = 
 Water hemlock poisoning is usually diagnosed following a history of plant ingestion and symptoms of abrupt onset of seizures . Laboratory tests to determine the presence of cicutoxin in the blood such as <unk> , high pressure liquid chromatography , thin layer chromatography , and mass spectrometry have been used to detect cicutoxin but these tests are not performed routinely in hospital laboratories . If a sample of the plant ingested has been retained , diagnosis can be confirmed by having the plant identified by a botanist . 
 Initial treatment of poisoning may include gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal . Decontamination is typically only performed if a potentially toxic amount of plant matter has been ingested up to one hour previously and the patient has a normal intact airway or has been intubated . There is no specific antidote for water hemlock poisoning and treatment mainly consists of supportive care . Treatment may include control of seizures with the administration of a benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam , or if seizures are refractory to this treatment , a barbiturate such as phenobarbital is administered . The anticonvulsant phenytoin is not recommended as it has not been shown to be effective for seizure control following water hemlock poisoning . Treatment with high doses of benzodiazepines or barbiturates may cause respiratory depression and respiratory support including intubation and mechanical ventilation is required in these patients . Continuous electroencephalography monitoring is recommended in symptomatic patients . 
 Further treatment for complications of metabolic acidosis , rhabdomyolysis , hyperthermia , or low blood pressure may be required . Metabolic acidosis is treated by administering sodium bicarbonate . Low blood pressure is usually treated with intravenous fluid replacement , but the administration of dopamine or norepinephrine may be required to restore blood pressure . The management of rhabdomyolysis includes ensuring adequate hydration and urinary alkalinization ; a complication of rhabdomyolysis is acute renal failure which may require management with hemodialysis . However , hemodialysis , hemoperfusion or other extracorporeal techniques do not remove cicutoxin from the blood and are therefore not useful in enhancing elimination . 
 = Action of 28 January 1945 = 
 The Action of 28 January 1945 was an inconclusive naval battle of the Second World War fought between two British Royal Navy light cruisers and three Kriegsmarine ( German navy ) destroyers near Bergen , Norway . The battle was both the last of many actions between British and German warships off Norway during the war , and the second last surface engagement to fought by the Kriegsmarine . It resulted in heavy damage to one of the German destroyers and light damage to another destroyer and both British cruisers . 
 Shortly after midnight on the night of 27 / 28 January , as the three destroyers of the German 4th Destroyer Flotilla were sailing from northern Norway to the Baltic Sea , they were intercepted by the British cruisers HMS Diadem and Mauritius . In the resulting engagement , the destroyers Z31 and Z34 were damaged by gunfire but the German flotilla outran the slower British ships and escaped . All the German warships eventually reached the Baltic , though Z31 was delayed until repairs were completed in Norway . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Kriegsmarine 's 4th Destroyer Flotilla comprised the Narvik @-@ class destroyers Z31 , Z34 , and Z38 . By January 1945 , these ships had been stationed in northern Norwegian waters for three and a half years , but had only occasionally put to sea during 1944 . Due to Germany 's deteriorating position , the flotilla was directed in January to leave Norwegian waters and return to the Baltic . The three destroyers departed Tromsø on the 25th of the month . 
 The Royal Navy 's Home Fleet conducted a number of attacks on German shipping travelling off the coast of Norway during January 1945 . These included successful attacks by motor torpedo boats on three escorted ships between 6 and 8 January and the interception of a convoy by the heavy cruiser HMS Norfolk and light cruiser HMS Bellona near Egersund on the night of 11 / 12 January . On 27 January , the escort carriers HMS Campania , Nairana and Premier departed the Home Fleet 's main base at Scapa Flow to conduct a raid against shipping near <unk> which was designated Operation <unk> . The carriers were escorted by the heavy cruiser HMS Berwick and six destroyers . 
 The British were alerted to the 4th Destroyer Flotilla 's movement by Ultra signals intelligence . The commander of the Home Fleet , Admiral Henry Moore , was informed that the destroyers had sailed on 27 January , shortly after the three carriers and their escort had put to sea . He believed that the German ships were likely to use a route between the coastal islands and the shore , as was common for the Kriegsmarine . If this route was used , it would be preferable for strike aircraft of No. 18 Group RAF to attack the destroyers as Norway 's inshore waters were protected by naval mines and coastal batteries . Alternatively , the German ships could make a high @-@ speed night passage outside of the coastal islands . In case an offshore route was used , Moore ordered Vice Admiral Frederick Dalrymple @-@ Hamilton , the commander of the 10th Cruiser Squadron , to sail with the cruisers Diadem and Mauritius and patrol off Bergen . The Home Fleet did not have any destroyers available to accompany Dalrymple @-@ Hamilton 's force , though Moore considered but decided against cancelling the carrier operation in order to make some of these ships available . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Contrary to British expectations , the commander of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla , Captain H.F. von <unk> , chose to take the faster route outside of the coastal islands . On the evening of 27 January , the destroyers were spotted and attacked by British aircraft whilst west of Sognefjord , but continued their voyage . Contact was made between the two naval forces at 00 : 48 am on 28 January . At this time , the 4th Destroyer Flotilla was proceeding south and was located about 15 miles ( 13 nmi ; 24 km ) southwest of the <unk> lighthouse and 35 miles ( 30 nmi ; 56 km ) northwest of Bergen . The sea was calm and visibility was excellent due to a full moon . The British and German forces spotted each another simultaneously ; at the time the cruisers were about 11 miles ( 9 @.@ 6 nmi ; 18 km ) west of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla . Upon sighting the destroyers , the British ships fired star shells to illuminate the area and turned to the south on a course parallel to that of the German ships . 
 Z31 suffered extensive damage early in the battle . She was struck by seven 6 in ( 152 mm ) shells , which caused her to catch fire , damaged the hydrophone compartment and torpedo transmitting stations and destroyed her forward gun turret . Z31 's speed was not affected , but casualties were heavy , with 55 sailors killed and another 24 wounded . After Z31 was damaged , Commander Karl Hetz on board Z34 assumed command of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla . Z34 made two torpedo attacks on the British cruisers in an attempt to force them to change course , but this was not successful . Z38 also tried to launch torpedoes , but had to break off this attack when her funnel caught fire and a boiler tube burst . Z34 suffered a hit on her waterline during this period . 
 After Z34 was damaged , Hetz decided to turn to the north and attempt to outrun the British cruisers . Z34 fired a third salvo of torpedoes as the flotilla made this turn , again without result , and the three ships laid smoke screens in an attempt to conceal their position . The two cruisers also turned north to chase the German ships . This led to a running battle in which Mauritius sustained a hit on her mess deck that did not cause any casualties and Diadem was struck on her boat deck by a shell six minutes later that killed one man and wounded three . The German destroyers were capable of making 38 knots ( 70 km / h ; 44 mph ) while Diadem had a maximum speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) and Mauritius 31 knots ( 57 km / h ; 36 mph ) . As a result , the German vessels gradually pulled ahead and came under the protection of shore batteries at about 2 : 00 am . The British ships broke off the pursuit and returned to Scapa Flow after these batteries fired on them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Early in the morning of 28 January , the 4th Destroyer Flotilla resumed its journey south and put into Bergen . Z31 entered one of the town 's docks to be repaired while Z34 and Z38 departed on the evening of 28 January . The two ships were attacked from the air the next day , but did not suffer any damage and sheltered in a fjord south of Stavanger during daylight hours . They put to sea again on the evening of 29 January and eventually reached Kiel in Germany on 1 February . 
 At Bergen , Z31 received initial repairs , which included removing the wreckage of her forward turret . She departed the town on 8 February bound for Horten . After arriving safely in this port she received further repairs and had her anti @-@ aircraft armament upgraded . Her forward turret was not replaced , but a 4 @.@ 1 in ( 100 mm ) gun was mounted instead ; this was intended to be a temporary measure but remained in place for the remainder of her career . After these repairs were completed , Z31 eventually reached Gotenhafen on 15 March . The last German destroyer remaining in northern Norwegian waters , Z33 , sailed for Germany on 5 February 1945 but ran aground while en route and suffered further damage in the Allied " Black Friday " air raid on the ninth of the month . Following repairs , she arrived at Swinemünde on 2 April . 
 Both the British and German navies were dissatisfied with the results of the battle on 28 January . The British were disappointed with the action 's inconclusive result , and Admiral Moore regretted his decision to not cancel the escort carrier operation so that destroyers could be attached to the cruiser force . However , historians have judged that the combination of excellent visibility on the night of 27 / 28 January and the superior speed of the German destroyers meant that the British had no ability to force a result . In a post @-@ war assessment , First Sea Lord Admiral Andrew Cunningham endorsed the tactics Dalrymple @-@ Hamilton used during the engagement , but stated that the size of the British force was " inadequate " . The Kriegsmarine was also unsatisfied with the conduct of the battle , with German naval authorities believing that the destroyers should have taken shelter in coastal waters after they were sighted by Allied aircraft on the evening of 27 January . 
 The action of 28 January was the final battle between British and German warships in Norwegian waters during World War II . It was also the second last surface action fought by the Kriegsmarine , with its final engagement taking place on 18 March 1945 when a force of two torpedo boats and a destroyer was defeated by two British destroyers in the Battle of the Ligurian Sea . By this time , most of the Kriegsmarine 's remaining warships were stationed in the Baltic Sea where they supported German military operations and the evacuation of civilians until the end of the war in May . 
 = Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin = 
 The Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin , also Hungarian conquest or Hungarian land @-@ taking ( Hungarian : <unk> : " conquest of the homeland " ) was a series of historical events ending with the settlement of the Hungarian people in Central Europe at the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries . Before the arrival of the Hungarians , three early medieval powers , the First Bulgarian Empire , East Francia and Moravia had fought each other for control of the Carpathian Basin . They occasionally hired Hungarian horsemen as soldiers . Therefore , the Hungarians who dwelt on the Pontic steppes east of the Carpathians were familiar with their future homeland when their " land @-@ taking " started . 
 The Hungarian conquest started in the context of a " late or ' small ' migration of peoples " . Contemporary sources attest that the Hungarians crossed the Carpathian Mountains following a joint attack in 894 or 895 by the Pechenegs and Bulgarians against them . They first took control over the lowlands east of the river Danube and attacked and occupied Pannonia ( the region to the west of the river ) in 900 . They exploited internal conflicts in Moravia and annihilated this state sometime between 902 and 906 . 
 The Hungarians strengthened their control over the Carpathian Basin by defeating a Bavarian army in a battle fought at Brezalauspurc on July 4 , 907 . They launched a series of plundering raids between 899 and 955 and also targeted the Byzantine Empire between 943 and 971 . However , they gradually settled in the Basin and established a Christian monarchy , the Kingdom of Hungary around 1000 . 
 = = = Written sources = = = 
 Byzantine authors were the first to record these events . The earliest work is Emperor Leo the Wise 's Tactics , finished around 904 , which recounts the Bulgarian @-@ Byzantine war of 894 – 896 , a military conflict directly preceding the Hungarians ' departure from the Pontic steppes . Nearly contemporary narration can be read in the Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk . However , De Administrando Imperio ( " On Governing the Empire " ) provides the most detailed account . It was compiled under the auspices of Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in 951 or 952 . 
 Works written by clergymen in the successor states of the Carolingian Empire narrate events closely connected to the conquest . The Annals of Fulda which ends in 901 is the earliest among them . A letter from Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg to Pope John IX in 900 also refers to the conquering Hungarians , but it is often regarded as a fake . Abbot Regino of Prüm who compiled his World Chronicle around 908 sums up his knowledge on the Hungarians in a sole entry under the year 889 . Another valuable source is Bishop Liutprand of Cremona 's <unk> ( " Retribution " ) from around 960 . Aventinus , a 16th @-@ century historian provides information not known from other works , which suggests that he used now @-@ lost sources . However , his reliability is suspect . 
 An Old Church Slavonic compilation of Lives of saints preserved an eyewitness account on the Bulgarian @-@ Byzantine war of 894 – 896 . The first Life of Saint Naum , written around 924 , contains nearly contemporary information on the fall of Moravia caused by Hungarian invasions , although its earliest extant copy is from the 15th century . Similarly late manuscripts ( the oldest of which was written in the 14th century ) offer the text of the Russian Primary Chronicle , a historical work completed in 1113 . It provides information based on earlier Byzantine and Moravian sources . 
 The Hungarians themselves initially preserved the memory of the major events in " the form of folk songs and ballads " ( C. A. Macartney ) . The earliest local chronicle was compiled in the late 11th century . It exists now in more than one variant , its original version several times extended and rewritten during the Middle Ages . For instance , the 14th @-@ century Illuminated Chronicle contains texts from the 11th @-@ century chronicle . 
 An anonymous author 's Gesta Hungarorum ( " Deeds of the Hungarians " ) , written before 1200 , is the earliest extant local chronicle . However , this " most misleading " example " of all the early Hungarian texts " ( C. A. Macartney ) contains much information that cannot be confirmed based on contemporaneous sources . Around 1283 Simon of Kéza , a priest at the Hungarian royal court wrote the next surviving chronicle . He claims that the Hungarians were closely related to the Huns , earlier conquerors of the Carpathian Basin . Accordingly , in his narration , the Hungarian invasion is in fact a second conquest of the same territory by the same people . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 Graves of the first generations of the conquering Hungarians were identified in the Carpathian Basin , but fewer than ten definitely Hungarian cemeteries have been unearthed in the Pontic steppes . Most Hungarian cemeteries include 25 or 30 inhumation graves , but isolated burials were common . Adult males ( and sometimes women and children ) were buried together with either parts of their horses or with harness and other objects symbolizing a horse . The graves also yielded decorated silver belts , <unk> furnished with metal plates , pear @-@ shaped stirrups and other metal works . Many of these objects had close analogues in the contemporaneous multiethnic " Saltovo @-@ Mayaki culture " of the Pontic steppes . Most cemeteries from the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries are concentrated in the Upper Tisza region and in the plains along the rivers Rába and Vág , for instance , at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> , Slovakia ) and <unk> , but early small cemeteries were also unearthed at Kolozsvár ( Cluj @-@ Napoca ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and other Transylvanian sites . 
 = = Pre @-@ Conquest Hungarians = = 
 The Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk contains the earliest certain reference to the Hungarians . It states that Hungarian warriors intervened in a conflict between the Byzantine Empire and the Bulgarians on the latter 's behalf in the Lower Danube region in 836 or 837 . The first known Hungarian raid in Central Europe was recorded in the Annals of St. Bertin . It writes of " enemies , called Hungarians , hitherto unknown " who ravaged King Louis the German 's realm in 862 . <unk> , Victor Spinei and other historians argue that Rastislav of Moravia , at war with Louis the German , hired Hungarians to invade East Francia . Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg clearly states in his letter of around 900 that the Moravians often allied with the Hungarians against the Germans . 
 For many years [ the Moravians ] have in fact perpetrated the very crime of which they have only once falsely accused us . They themselves have taken in a large number of Hungarians and have shaved their own heads according to their heathen customs and they have sent them against our Christians , overcoming them , leading some away as captives , killing others , while still others , imprisoned , perished of hunger and thirst . 
 Porphyrogenitus mentions that the Hungarians dwelled in a territory that they called " <unk> " until their invasion across the Carpathians . He adds that it was located in the territory where the rivers Barouch , Koubou , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> run . Although the identification of the first two rivers with the Dnieper and the Southern Bug is not unanimously accepted , the last three names without doubt refer to the rivers Dniester , Prut and Siret . In the wider region , at <unk> on the river <unk> , three graves ( one of them belonging to a male buried with the skull and legs of his horse ) are attributed to pre @-@ conquest Hungarians . However , these tombs may date to the 10th century . 
 The Hungarians were organized into seven tribes that formed a confederation . Constantine Porphyrogenitus mentions this number . Anonymous seems to have preserved the Hungarian " Hetumoger " ( " Seven Hungarians " ) denomination of the tribal confederation , although he writes of " seven leading persons " jointly bearing this name instead of a political organization . 
 The Hetumoger confederation was strengthened by the arrival of the Kabars , who ( according to Constantine ) joined the Hungarians following their unsuccessful riot against the Khazar Khaganate . The Hungarians and the Kabars are mentioned in the longer version of the Annals of Salzburg , which relates that the Hungarians fought around Vienna , while the Kabars fought nearby at <unk> in 881 . Madgearu proposes that <unk> groups were already settled in the Tisza plain within the Carpathian Basin around 881 , which may have given rise to the anachronistic reference to Cumans in the Gesta Hungarorum at the time of the Hungarian conquest . 
 The Hetumoger confederation was under a dual leadership , according to Ibn Rusta and Gardizi ( two Muslim scholars from the 10th and 11th centuries , respectively , whose geographical books preserved texts from an earlier work written by al @-@ Jayhani from Bukhara ) . The Hungarians ' nominal or sacred leader was styled kende , while their military commander bore the title gyula . The same authors add that the gyula commanded an army of 20 @,@ 000 horsemen , but the reliability of this number is uncertain . 
 Regino of Prüm and other contemporary authors portray the 9th @-@ century Hungarians as nomadic warriors . Emperor Leo the Wise underlines the importance of horses to their military tactics . Analysis of horse skulls found in Hungarian warriors graves has not revealed any significant difference between these horses and Western breeds . Regino of Prüm states that the Hungarians knew " nothing about fighting hand @-@ to @-@ hand in formation or taking besieged cities " , but he underlines their archery skills . Remains indicate that composite bows were the Hungarians ' most important weapons . In addition , slightly curved sabres were unearthed in many warrior tombs from the period . Regino of Prüm noted the Hungarians ' preference for deceptions such as apparent retreat in battle . Contemporaneous writers also recounted their viciousness , represented by the slaughter of adult males in settlement raids . 
 [ The Hungarians ] are armed with swords , body armor , bows and lances . Thus , in battles most of them bear double arms , carrying the lances high on their shoulders and holding the bows in their hands . They make use of both as need requires , but when pursued they use their bows to great advantage . Not only do they wear armor themselves , but the horses of their illustrious men are covered in front with iron or quilted material . They devote a great deal of attention and training to archery on horse @-@ back . A huge herd of horses , ponies and mares , follows them , to provide both food and milk and , at the same time , to give the impression of a multitude . 
 = = Carpathian Basin on the eve of the Conquest = = 
 = = = Peoples = = = 
 Based on the extant Hungarian chronicles , it is clear that more than one ( occasionally extended ) list existed of the peoples inhabiting the Carpathian Basin at the time of the Hungarian <unk> . Anonymous , for instance , first writes of the " Slavs , Bulgarians , Vlachs and the shepherds of the Romans " as inhabiting the territory , but later he refers to " a people called <unk> " and to the Székelys . Similarly , Simon of Kéza first lists the " Slavs , Greeks , Germans , Moravians and Vlachs " , but later adds that the Székelys also lived in the territory . According to C. A. Macartney , those lists were based on multiple sources and do not document the real ethnic conditions of the Carpathian Basin around 900 . According to Ioan @-@ Aurel Pop , Simon of Kéza listed the peoples who inhabited the lands that the Hungarian conquered and the nearby territories . 
 The Hungarians adopted the ancient ( Celtic , Dacian or Germanic ) names of the longest rivers in the Carpathian Basin from a Slavic @-@ speaking population . For instance , the Hungarian names of the rivers Danube ( <unk> ) , Dráva , Garam , Maros , Olt , <unk> , Tisza and Vág were borrowed from Slavs . The Hungarians also adopted a great number of hydronyms of Slavic origin , including Balaton ( " swamp " ) , Beszterce ( " swift river " ) , <unk> ( " aurochs ' stream " ) and <unk> ( " sooty river " ) . Place names of Slavic origin abound across the Carpathian Basin . For instance , <unk> ( " black fortress " ) , Nógrád ( " new fortress " ) , Visegrád ( " citadel " ) and other early medieval fortresses bore a Slavic name , while the name of <unk> preserved the Latin word for fortress ( castellum ) with Slavic mediation . 
 Besides the Slavs , the presence of a German @-@ speaking population can be demonstrated based on toponyms . For instance , the Hungarians adopted the Germanized form of the name of the river <unk> ( whose name is of Slavic origin ) and the document known as the Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians from around 870 lists Germanic place names in Pannonia , including <unk> ( " bend of the Zala " ) and <unk> ( " fortress in the marshes " ) . Finally , the name of the Barca , <unk> and other rivers could be either Turkic or Slavic . 
 According to Béla Miklós <unk> 's theory , the detailed description of the Magyars by western contemporary sources and the immediate Hungarian intervention in local wars give the presumption that the Hungarians had already lived on the eastern territories of the Carpathian Basin since the middle of the 9th century . Regarding the right location of early Hungarian settlements , the Arabic geographer al @-@ Jayhani ( only snippets of his work survived in other Muslim authors ' papers ) in the 870s placed the Hungarians between Don and Danube rivers . <unk> identifies al @-@ Jayhani 's Danube with the middle Danube region , as opposed to the previously assumed lower Danube region , because following al @-@ Jayhani 's description the Christian Moravians were the western neighbors of the Magyars . 
 = = = Borderland of empires = = = 
 The Carpathian Basin was controlled from the 560s by the Avars , a Turkic @-@ speaking people . Upon their arrival in the region , they imposed their authority over the Gepids who had dominated the territories east of the river Tisza . However , the Gepids survived up until the second half of the 9th century , according to a reference in the Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians to their groups dwelling in Lower Pannonia around 870 . 
 The Avars initially were nomadic horsemen , but both large cemeteries used by three or four generations and a growing number of settlements attest to their adoption of a sedentary ( non @-@ nomadic ) way of life from the 8th century . The Avars ' power was destroyed between 791 and 795 by Charlemagne , who occupied Transdanubia and attached it to his empire . Archaeological investigation of early medieval rural settlements at <unk> , <unk> and other places in Transdanubia demonstrate that their main features did not change with the fall of the Avar Khaganate . New settlements appeared in the former borderlands with cemeteries characterized by objects with clear analogues in contemporary Bavaria , Bulgaria , Croatia , Moravia and other faraway territories . A manor defended by timber walls ( similar to noble courts of other parts of the Carolingian Empire ) was unearthed at <unk> . 
 Avar groups who remained under the rule of their khagan were frequently attacked by Slav warriors . Therefore , the khagan asked Charlemagne to let his people settle in the region between <unk> and Petronell in Pannonia . His petition was accepted in 805 . The Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians lists the Avars among the peoples under the ecclesiastic jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Salzburg around 870 . According to Pohl , it " simply proved impossible to keep up an Avar identity after Avar institutions and the high claims of their tradition had failed . " The growing number of archaeological evidence in Transdanubia also presumes Avar population in the Carpathian Basin at the eve of the 10th century . Archaeological findings suggesting that there is a substantial late Avar presence on the Great Hungarian Plain , however it is difficult to determine their proper chronology . 
 A charter issued in 860 by King Louis the German for the <unk> Abbey may well attest that the Onogurs ( another people of Turkic origin ) were also present in the territory . The charter refers to the " Marches of the <unk> " ( <unk> <unk> ) situated in the westernmost regions of the Carpathian Basin . The <unk> denomination seems to reflect the Slavic form of the Onogurs ' ethnonym . 
 The territories attached to the Frankish Empire were initially governed by royal officers and local chieftains . A Slavic prince named Pribina received large estates along the river Zala around 840 . He promoted the colonization of his lands , and also erected <unk> , a fortress in the marshes . Initially defended by timber walls , this " castle complex " ( András Róna @-@ Tas ) became an administrative center . It was strengthened by drystone walls at the end of the century . Four churches surrounded by cemeteries were unearthed in and around the settlement . At least one of them continued to be used up to the 11th century . 
 Pribina died fighting the Moravians in 861 , and his son , <unk> inherited his estates . The latter was succeeded around 876 by Arnulf , a natural son of Carloman , king of East Francia . Under his rule , Moravian troops <unk> into the conflict known as the " <unk> War " and " laid waste from the Raab eastward " , between 882 and 884 , according to the Annals of Fulda . 
 Moravia emerged in the 820s under its first known ruler , Mojmir I. His successor , Rastislav , developed Moravia 's military strength . He promoted the proselytizing activities of the Byzantine brothers , Constantine and Methodius in an attempt to seek independence from East Francia . Moravia reached its " peak of importance " under Svatopluk I ( 870 – 894 ) who expanded its frontiers in all directions . 
 Moravia 's core territory is located in the regions on the northern Morava river , in the territory of present @-@ day Czech Republic and Slovakia . However , Constantine Porphyrogenitus places " great Moravia , the unbaptized " somewhere in the regions beyond Belgrade and Sirmium ( Sremska Mitrovica , Serbia ) . His report supported further theories on Moravia 's location . For instance , Kristó and Senga propose the existence of two <unk> ( one in the north and other one in the south ) , while Boba , Bowlus and Eggers argue that Moravia 's core territory is in the region of the southern Morava river , in present @-@ day Serbia . The existence of a southern Moravian realm is not supported by artifacts , while strongholds unearthed at <unk> , <unk> and other areas to the north of the Middle Danube point at the existence of a power center in those regions . 
 In addition to East Francia and Moravia , the first Bulgarian Empire was the third power deeply involved in the Carpathian Basin in the 9th century . A late 10th @-@ century Byzantine lexicon known as Suda adds that Krum of Bulgaria attacked the Avars from the southeast around 803 . The Royal Frankish Annals narrates that the Abodrites inhabiting " Dacia on the Danube " ( most probably along the lower courses of the river Tisza ) sought the assistance of the Franks against the Bulgars in 824 . Bulgarian troops also invaded Pannonia , " expelled the Slavic chieftains and appointed Bulgar governors instead " in 827 . An inscription at Provadia refers to a Bulgarian military leader named <unk> drowning in the Tisza around the same time . The emerging power of Moravia brought about a rapprochement between Bulgaria and East Francia in the 860s . For instance , King Arnulf of East Francia sent an embassy to the Bulgarians in 892 in order " to renew the former peace and to ask that they should not sell salt to the Moravians " . The latter request suggests that the route from the salt mines of the Eastern Carpathians to Moravia was controlled around that time by the Bulgarians . 
 The anonymous author of the Gesta Hungarorum , instead of Svatopluk I of Moravia and other rulers known from contemporary sources , writes of personalities and polities that are not mentioned by chroniclers working at the end of the 9th century . For instance , he refers to Menumorut residing in the castle of Bihar ( Biharia , Romania ) , to Zobor " duke of Nitra by the grace of the Duke of the Czechs " , and to Gelou " a certain Vlach " ruling over Transylvania . Although early medieval fortresses were unearthed at Bihar and other places east of the Tisza , none of them definitively date to the 9th century . For instance , in the case of Doboka ( Dăbâca ) , two pairs of bell @-@ shaped pendants with analogues in sites in Austria , Bulgaria and Poland have been unearthed , but Florin Curta dates them to the 9th century , while Alexandru Madgearu to the period between 975 and 1050 . 
 = = The Hungarian conquest = = 
 = = = Prelude ( 892 – c . 895 ) = = = 
 Three main theories attempt to explain the reasons for the " Hungarian land @-@ taking " . One argues that it was an intended military operation , prearranged following previous raids , with the express purpose of occupying a new homeland . This view ( represented , for instance , by <unk> and <unk> ) mainly follows the narration of Anonymous and later Hungarian chronicles . The opposite view maintains that a joint attack by the Pechenegs and the Bulgarians forced the Hungarians ' hand . Kristó , <unk> and the theory 's other followers refer to the unanimous testimony provided by the Annals of Fulda , Regino of Prüm and Porphyrogenitus on the connection between the Hungarians ' conflict with the Bulgar @-@ Pecheneg coalition and their withdrawal from the Pontic steppes . An intermediate theory proposes that the Hungarians had for decades been considering a westward move when the Bulgarian @-@ Pecheneg attack accelerated their decision to leave the Pontic steppes . For instance Róna @-@ Tas argues , " [ the ] fact that , despite a series of unfortunate events , the Magyars managed to keep their heads above water goes to show that they were indeed ready to move on " when the Pechenegs attacked them . 
 In fact , following a break of eleven years , the Hungarians returned to the Carpathian Basin in 892 . They came to assist Arnulf of East Francia against Svatopluk I of Moravia . Widukind of Corvey and Liutprand of Cremona condemned the Frankish monarch for destroying the defense lines built along the empire 's borders , because this also enabled the Hungarians to attack East Francia within a decade . 
 Meanwhile Arnulf ( … ) could not overcome Sviatopolk , duke of the Moravians ( … ) ; and – alas ! – having dismantled those very well fortified barriers which ( … ) are called " closures " by the populace . Arnulf summoned to his aid the nation of the Hungarians , greedy , rash , ignorant of almighty God but well versed in every crime , avid only for murder and plunder ( … ) . 
 A late source , Aventinus adds that Kurszán ( <unk> ) , " king of the Hungarians " stipulated that his people would only fight the Moravians if they received the lands they were to occupy . Accordingly , Aventinus continues , the Hungarians took possession of " both <unk> on this side and beyond " the Tisza east of the rivers Danube and Garam already in 893 . Indeed , the Hungarian chronicles unanimously state that the Székelys had already been present in the Carpathian Basin when the Hungarians moved in . Kristó argues that Aventinus and the Hungarian historical tradition together point at an early occupation of the eastern territories of the Carpathian Basin by auxiliary troops of the Hungarian tribal confederation . 
 The Annals of Fulda narrates under the year 894 that the Hungarians crossed the Danube into Pannonia where they " killed men and old women outright and carried off the young women alone with them like cattle to satisfy their lusts and reduced the whole " province " to desert " . Although the annalist writes of this Hungarian attack after the passage narrating Svatopluk I 's death , Györffy , Kristó , Róna @-@ Tas and other historians suppose that the Hungarians invaded Pannonia in alliance with the Moravian monarch . They argue that the " Legend of the White Horse " in the Hungarian chronicles preserved the memory of a treaty the Hungarians concluded with Svatopluk I according to pagan customs . The legend narrates that the Hungarians purchased their future homeland in the Carpathian Basin from Svatopluk for a white horse harnessed with gilded saddle and reins . 
 Then [ <unk> ] came to the leader of the region who reigned after Attila and whose name was <unk> , and saluted him in the name of his people [ ... ] . On hearing this , <unk> rejoiced greatly , for he thought that they were peasant people who would come and till his land ; and so he dismissed the messenger graciously . [ ... ] Then by a common resolve [ the Hungarians ] despatched the same messenger again to the said leader and sent to him for his land a big horse with a golden saddle adorned with the gold of Arabia and a golden bridle . Seeing it , the leader rejoiced all the more , thinking that they were sending gifts of homage in return for land . When therefore the messenger asked of him land , grass and water , he replied with a smile , " In return for the gift let them have as much as they desire . " [ ... ] Then [ the Hungarians ] sent another messenger to the leader and this was the message which he delivered : " Arpad and his people say to you that you may no longer stay upon the land which they bought of you , for with the horse they bought your earth , with the bridle the grass , and with the saddle the water . And you , in your need and avarice , made to them a grant of land , grass and water . " When this message was delivered to the leader , he said with a smile : " Let them kill the horse with a wooden mallet , and throw the bridle on the field , and throw the golden saddle into the water of the Danube . " To which the messenger replied : " And what loss will that be to them , lord ? If you kill the horse , you will give food for their dogs ; if you throw the bridle on the field , their men will find the gold of the bridle when they mow the hay ; if you throw the saddle into the Danube , their fishermen will lay out the gold of the saddle upon the bank and carry it home . If they have earth , grass and water , they have all . " 
 Ismail Ibn Ahmed , the emir of Khorasan raided " the land of the Turks " ( the Karluks ) in 893 . Later he caused a new movement of peoples who one by one invaded the lands of their western neighbors in the Eurasian steppes . Al @-@ Masudi clearly connected the westward movement of the Pechenegs and the Hungarians to previous fights between the Karluks , Ouzes and <unk> . Porphyrogenitus writes of a joint attack by the Khazars and Ouzes that compelled the Pechenegs to cross the Volga River sometime between 893 and 902 ( most probably around 894 ) . 
 Originally , the Pechenegs had their dwelling on the river [ Volga ] and likewise on the river [ Ural ] ( … ) . But fifty years ago the so @-@ called <unk> made common cause with the Chazars and joined battle with the Pechenegs and prevailed over them and expelled them from their country ( … ) . 
 The relationship between Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire sharpened in 894 , because Emperor Leo the Wise forced the Bulgarian merchants to leave Constantinople and settle in Thessaloniki . Subsequently , Tzar Simeon I of Bulgaria invaded Byzantine territories and defeated a small imperial troop . The Byzantines approached the Hungarians to hire them to fight the Bulgarians . Nicetas Sclerus , the Byzantine envoy , concluded a treaty with their leaders , Árpád and Kurszán ( <unk> ) and Byzantine ships transferred Hungarian warriors across the Lower Danube . The Hungarians invaded Bulgaria , forced Tzar Simeon to flee to the fortress of <unk> ( now Silistra , Bulgaria ) and plundered Preslav . An interpolation in Porphyrogenitus 's work states that the Hungarians had a prince named " <unk> , son of Arpad " at that time , which suggests that he was the commander of the army , but he might have been mentioned in the war context by chance . 
 Simultaneously with the Hungarian attack from the north , the Byzantines invaded Bulgaria from the south . Tzar Simeon sent envoys to the Byzantine Empire to propose a truce . At the same time , he sent an embassy to the Pechenegs to incite them against the Hungarians . He succeeded and the Pechenegs broke into Hungarian territories from the east , forcing the Hungarian warriors to withdraw from Bulgaria . The Bulgarians , according to Constantine Porphyrogenitus , attacked and routed the Hungarians . 
 The Pechenegs destroyed the Hungarians ' dwelling places . Those who survived the double attack left the Pontic steppes and crossed the Carpathians in search of a new homeland . The memory of the destruction brought by the Pechenegs seems to have been preserved by the Hungarians . The Hungarian name of the Pechenegs ( <unk> ) corresponds to the old Hungarian word for eagle ( <unk> ) . Thus the 14th @-@ century Hungarian chronicles ' story of eagles compelling the Hungarians ' ancestors to cross the Carpathians most probably refers to the Pechenegs ' attack . 
 The Hungarians were ( … ) driven from their home ( … ) by a neighboring people called the Petchenegs , because they were superior to them in strength and number and because ( … ) their own country was not sufficient to accommodate their swelling numbers . After they had been forced to flee by the violence of the Petchenegs , they said goodbye to their homeland and set out to look for lands where they could live and establish settlements . 
 [ At ] the invitation of Leo , the Christ @-@ loving and glorious emperor [ the Hungarians ] crossed over and fought Symeon and totally defeated him , ( … ) and they went back to their own county . ( … ) But after Symeon ( … ) sent to the Pechenegs and made an agreement with them to attack and destroy [ the Hungarians ] And when [ the latter ] had gone off on a military expedition , the Pechenegs with Symeon came against [ them ] and completely destroyed their families and miserably expelled thence [ those ] who were guarding their country . When [ the Hungarians ] came back and found their country thus desolate and utterly ruined , they settled in the land where they live today ( … ) . 
 Passing through the kingdom of the Bessi and the <unk> Albi and <unk> and the city named Kyo , they crossed the mountains and came into a region where they saw innumerable eagles ; and because of the eagles they could not stay in that place , for the eagles came down from the trees like flies and devoured both their herds and their horses . For God intended that they should go down more quickly into Hungary . During three months they made their descent from the mountains , and they came to the boundaries of the kingdom of Hungary , that is to Erdelw [ ... ] . 
 = = = First phase ( c . 895 – 899 ) = = = 
 The date of the Hungarian invasion varies according to the source . The earliest date ( 677 ) is preserved in the 14th @-@ century versions of the " Hungarian Chronicle " , while Anonymous supplies the latest date ( 902 ) . Contemporaneous sources suggest that the invasion followed the 894 Bulgarian @-@ Byzantine war . The route taken across the Carpathians is also contested . Anonymous and Simon of Kéza have the invading Hungarians crossing the northeastern passes , while the Illuminated Chronicle writes of their arrival in Transylvania . 
 Regino of Prüm states that the Hungarians " roamed the wildernesses of the Pannonians and the Avars and sought their daily food by hunting and fishing " following their arrival in the Carpathian Basin . Their advance towards the Danube seems to have stimulated Arnulf who was crowned emperor to entrust Braslav ( the ruler of the region between the rivers Drava and Sava ) with the defense of all Pannonia in 896 . In 897 or 898 a civil war broke out between Mojmir II and Svatopluk II ( two sons of the late Moravian ruler , Svatopluk I ) , in which Emperor Arnulf also intervened . There is no mention of the Hungarians ' activities in those years . 
 The next event recorded in connection with the Hungarians is their raid against Italy in 899 and 900 . The letter of Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg and his suffragans suggests that Emperor Arnulf incited them to attack King Berengar I of Italy . They routed the Italian troops on September 2 at the river <unk> and plundered the region of Vercelli and Modena in the winter , but the Doge of Venice , Pietro <unk> defeated them at Venice on June 29 , 900 . They returned from Italy when they learned of the death of Emperor Arnulf at the end of 899 . 
 According to Anonymous , the Hungarians fought with Menumorut before conquering Gelou 's Transylvania . Subsequently the Hungarians turned against Salan , the ruler of the central territories , according to this narrative . In contrast with Anonymous , Simon of Kéza writes of the Hungarians ' fight with Svatopluk following their arrival . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , the Hungarians " remained quietly in Erdelw and rested their herds " there after their crossing because of an attack by eagles . 
 The Hungarian chronicles preserved two separate lists of the Hungarians ' leaders at the time of the Conquest . Anonymous knows of Álmos , Előd , <unk> , <unk> , Tas , Huba and Tétény , while Simon of Kéza and the Illuminated Chronicle list Árpád , Szabolcs , Gyula , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> or nearly <unk> sources make mention of Álmos ( Constantine Porphyrogenitus ) , of Árpád ( Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk and Constantine Porphyrogenitus ) , of <unk> ( Constantine Porphyrogenitus ) and of Kurszán ( Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk ) . 
 According to the Illuminated Chronicle , Álmos , Árpád 's father " could not enter Pannonia , for he was killed in Erdelw " . The episode implies that Álmos was the kende , the sacred ruler of the Hungarians , at the time of their destruction by the Pechenegs , which caused his sacrifice . If his death was in fact the consequence of a ritual murder , his fate was similar to the Khazar khagans who were executed , according to Ibn Fadlan and al @-@ Masudi , in case of disasters affecting their whole people . 
 = = = Second phase ( 900 – 902 ) = = = 
 The emperor 's death released the Hungarians from their alliance with East Francia . On their way back from Italy they expanded their rule over Pannonia . Furthermore , according to Liutprand of Cremona , the Hungarians " claimed for themselves the nation of the Moravians , which King Arnulf had subdued with the aid of their might " at the coronation of Arnulf 's son , Louis the Child in 900 . The Annals of Grado relates that the Hungarians defeated the Moravians after their withdrawal from Italy . Thereafter the Hungarians and the Moravians made an alliance and jointly invaded Bavaria , according to Aventinus . However , the contemporary Annals of Fulda only refers to Hungarians reaching the river Enns . 
 One of the Hungarian contingents crossed the Danube and plundered the territories on the river 's north bank , but Luitpold , Margrave of Bavaria gathered troops and routed them between Passau and Krems an der Donau on November 20 , 900 . He had a strong fortress erected against them on the Enns . Nevertheless , the Hungarians became the masters of the Carpathian Basin by the occupation of Pannonia . The Russian Primary Chronicle may also reflect the memory of this event when relating how the Hungarians expelled the " Volokhi " who had earlier subjugated the Slavs ' homeland in Pannonia . These Volokhi , however , have also been associated either with the Romans or with the Vlachs ( Romanians ) , for instance by Cross and Spinei , respectively . 
 Over a long period the Slavs settled beside the Danube , where the Hungarian and Bulgarian lands now lie . From among these Slavs , parties scattered throughout the country and were known by appropriate names , according to the places where they settled . ( ... ) The [ Hungarians ] passed by Kiev over the hill now called Hungarian and on arriving at the Dnieper , they pitched camp . They were nomads like the <unk> . Coming out of the east , they struggled across the great mountains and began to fight against the neighboring [ Volokhi ] and Slavs . For the Slavs had settled there first , but the [ Volokhi ] had seized the territory of the Slavs . The [ Hungarians ] subsequently expelled the [ Volokhi ] , took their land and settled among the Slavs , whom they reduced to submission . From that time the territory was called Hungarian . 
 King Louis the Child held a meeting at Regensburg in 901 to introduce further measures against the Hungarians . Moravian envoys proposed a peace between Moravia and East Francia , because the Hungarians had in the meantime plundered their country . A Hungarian army invading Carinthia was defeated in April and Aventinus describes a defeat of the Hungarians by Margrave Luitpold at the river Fischa in the same year . 
 = = = Consolidation ( 902 – 907 ) = = = 
 The date when Moravia ceased to exist is uncertain , because there is no clear evidence either on the " existence of Moravia as a state " after 902 ( Spinei ) or on its fall . A short note in the Annales Alamannici refers to a " war with the Hungarians in Moravia " in 902 , during which the " land ( patria ) succumbed " , but this text is ambiguous . Alternatively , the so @-@ called <unk> Customs Regulations mentions the " markets of the Moravians " around 905 . The Life of Saint Naum relates that the Hungarians occupied Moravia , adding that the Moravians who " were not captured by the Hungarians , ran to the Bulgars " . Constantine Porphyrogenitus also connects the fall of Moravia to its occupation by the Hungarians . The destruction of the early medieval urban centers and fortresses at <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Dévény and other places in modern Slovakia is dated to the period around 900 . 
 After the death of ( ... ) [ Svatopluk I , his sons ] remained at peace for a year and then strife and rebellion fell upon them and they made a civil war against one another and the [ Hungarians ] came and utterly ruined them and possessed their country , in which even now [ the Hungarians ] live . And those of the folk who were left were scattered and fled for refuge to the adjacent nations , to the Bulgarians and [ Hungarians ] and Croats and to the rest of the nations . 
 According to Anonymous , who does not write of Moravia , the Hungarians invaded the region of Nyitra ( Nitra , Slovakia ) and defeated and killed Zobor , the local Czech ruler , on Mount Zobor near his seat . Thereafter , as Anonymous continues , the Hungarians first occupied Pannonia from the " Romans " and next battled with Glad and his army composed of Bulgarians , Romanians and Pechenegs from Banat . Glad ceded few towns from his duchy . Finally , Anonymous writes of a treaty between the Hungarians and Menumorut , stipulating that the local ruler 's daughter was to be given in marriage to Árpád 's son , Zolta . Macartney argues that Anonymous 's narration of both <unk> and of Glad is basically a transcription of a much later report of the early 11th @-@ century Achtum , Glad 's alleged descendant . In contrast , for instance , Madgearu maintains that <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and other place names recorded in Banat in the 14th century and 16th century attest to the memory of a local ruler named Glad . 
 [ The Hungarians ] reached the region of Bega and stayed there for two weeks while they conquered all the inhabitants of that land from the <unk> to the Timis River and they received their sons as hostages . Then , moving the army on , they came to the Timis River and encamped beside the ford of <unk> and when they sought to cross the Timis 's flow , there came to oppose them Glad , ( ... ) the prince of that country , with a great army of horsemen and foot soldiers , supported by Cumans , Bulgarians and Vlachs . ( ... ) God with His grace went before the Hungarians , He gave them a great victory and their enemies fell before them as bundles of hay before reapers . In that battle two dukes of the Cumans and three <unk> of the Bulgarians were slain and Glad , their duke escaped in flight but all his army , melting like wax before flame , was destroyed at the point of the sword . ( ... ) Prince Glad , having fled , as we said above , for fear of the Hungarians , entered the castle of Kovin . ( ... ) [ He ] sent to seek peace with [ the Hungarians ] and of his own will delivered up the castle with diverse gifts . 
 An important event following the conquest of the Carpathian Basin , the Bavarians ' murder of Kurszán , was recorded by the longer version of the Annals of Saint Gall , the Annales Alamannici and the Annals of Einsiedeln . The first places the event in 902 , while the others date it to 904 . The three chronicles unanimously state that the Bavarians invited the Hungarian leader to a dinner on the pretext of negotiating a peace treaty and treacherously assassinated him . Kristó and other Hungarian historians argue that the dual leadership over the Hungarians ended with Kurszán 's death . 
 The Hungarians invaded Italy using the so @-@ called " Route of the Hungarians " ( Strada Ungarorum ) leading from Pannonia to Lombardy in 904 . They arrived as King Berengar I 's allies against his rival , King Louis of <unk> . The Hungarians devastated the territories occupied earlier by King Louis along the river Po , which ensured Berengar 's victory . The victorious monarch allowed the Hungarians to pillage all the towns that had earlier accepted his opponent 's rule , and agreed to pay a yearly tribute of about 375 kilograms ( 827 lb ) of silver . 
 The longer version of the Annals of Saint Gall reports that Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg fell , along with Bishops Uto of Freising and Zachary of <unk> , in a " disastrous battle " fought against the Hungarians at Brezalauspurc on July 4 , 907 . Other contemporary sources add that Margrave Luitpold of Bavaria and 19 Bavarian counts also died in the battle . Most historians ( including Engel , Makkai , and Spinei ) identify Brezalauspurc with Pressburg ( Bratislava , Slovakia ) , but some researchers ( for instance Boba and Bowlus ) argue that it can refer to <unk> , Braslav 's fortress on the Zala in Pannonia . The Hungarians ' victory hindered any attempts of eastward expansion by East Francia for the following decades and opened the way for the Hungarians to freely plunder vast territories of that kingdom . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The Hungarians settled in the lowlands of the Carpathian Basin along the rivers Danube , Tisza and their tributaries , where they could continue their semi @-@ nomadic lifestyle . As an immediate consequence , their arrival " drove a non @-@ Slavic wedge between the West Slavs and South Slavs " ( Fine ) . Fine argues that the Hungarians ' departure from the western regions of the Pontic steppes weakened their former allies , the Khazars , which contributed to the collapse of the Khazar Empire . 
 Some decades after the Hungarian conquest , a new synthesis of earlier cultures , the " Bijelo Brdo culture " spread in all over the Carpathian Basin , with its characteristic jewellery , including S @-@ shaped earrings . The lack of archaeological finds connected to horses in " Bijelo Brdo " graves is another feature of these cemeteries . The earliest " Bijelo Brdo " assemblages are dated via unearthed coins to the rule of Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in the middle of the 10th century . Early cemeteries of the culture were unearthed , for instance , at <unk> and <unk> in Hungary , at Dévény ( Devín ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) in Slovakia , at <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) in Romania and at <unk> ( Vukovar ) and <unk> ( Kloštar Podravski ) in Croatia . 
 Hungarian society experienced fundamental changes in many fields ( including animal husbandry , agriculture and religion ) in the centuries following the " Land @-@ taking " . These changes are reflected in the significant number of terms borrowed from local Slavs . About 20 % of the Hungarian vocabulary is of Slavic origin , including the Hungarian words for sheep @-@ pen ( <unk> ) , yoke ( <unk> ) and horseshoe ( <unk> ) . Similarly , the Hungarian name of vegetables , fruits and other cultivated plants , as well as many Hungarian terms connected to agriculture are Slavic loanwords , including <unk> ( " cabbage " ) , <unk> ( " plum " ) , <unk> ( " oats " ) , <unk> ( " hay " ) and <unk> ( " scythe " ) . 
 The Hungarians left wide marches ( the so @-@ called <unk> ) in the borderlands of their new homeland uninhabited for defensive purposes . In this easternmost territory of the Carpathian Basin , the earliest graves attributed to Hungarian warriors — for instance , at <unk> ( Sic ) , Torda ( Turda ) and <unk> ( Ocna <unk> ) — are concentrated around the Transylvanian salt mines in the valley of the rivers Kis @-@ Szamos ( Someșul Mic ) and Maros ( Mureş ) . All the same , warriors were also stationed in outposts east of the Carpathians , as suggested by 10th @-@ century graves unearthed at <unk> , Przemyśl , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and at Tei . The Hungarians ' fear of their eastern neighbors , the Pechenegs , is demonstrated by Porphyrogenitus 's report on the failure of a Byzantine envoy to persuade them to attack the Pechenegs . The Hungarians clearly stated that they could not fight against the Pechenegs , because " their people are numerous and they are the devil 's brats " . 
 Instead of attacking the Pechenegs and the Bulgarians in the east , the Hungarians made several raids in Western Europe . For instance , they plundered Thuringia and Saxony in 908 , Bavaria and Swabia in 909 and 910 and Swabia , Lorraine and West Francia in 912 . Although a Byzantine hagiography of Saint George refers to a joint attack of Pechenegs , " <unk> " and Hungarians against the Byzantine Empire in 917 , its reliability is not established . The Hungarians seem to have raided the Byzantine Empire for the first time in 943 . However , their defeat in the battle of Lechfeld in 955 " put an end to the raids in the West " ( Kontler ) , while they stopped plundering the Byzantines following their defeat in the battle of <unk> in 970 . 
 The Hungarian leaders decided that their traditional lifestyle , partly based on plundering raids against sedentary peoples , could not be continued . The defeats at the Lechfeld and <unk> accelerated the Hungarians ' adoption of a sedentary way of life . This process culminated in the coronation of the head of the Hungarians , Stephen the first king of Hungary in 1000 and 1001 . 
 = = Artistic representation = = 
 The most famous perpetuation of the events is the Arrival of the Hungarians or <unk> Panorama which is a large cyclorama ( a circular panoramic painting ) by Hungarian painter Árpád <unk> and his assistants . It was completed in 1894 for the 1000th anniversary of the event . Since the <unk> anniversary of the event in 1995 , the painting has been displayed in the <unk> National Heritage Park , Hungary . Mihály Munkácsy also depicted the event under the name of Conquest for the Hungarian Parliament Building in 1893 . 
 = Frank Bladin = 
 Air Vice Marshal Francis Masson ( Frank ) Bladin , CB , CBE ( 26 August 1898 – 2 February 1978 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in rural Victoria , he graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1920 . Bladin transferred from the Army to the Air Force in 1923 , and learned to fly at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . He held training appointments before taking command of No. 1 Squadron in 1934 . Quiet but authoritative , he was nicknamed " Dad " in tribute to the concern he displayed for the welfare of his personnel . 
 Ranked wing commander at the outbreak of World War II , by September 1941 Bladin had been raised to temporary air commodore . He became Air Officer Commanding North @-@ Western Area in March 1942 , following the first Japanese air raids on Darwin , Northern Territory . Personally leading sorties against enemy territory , he earned the United States Silver Star for gallantry . In July 1943 , Bladin was posted to No. 38 Group RAF in Europe , where he was mentioned in despatches . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire the same year . 
 Promoted acting air vice marshal in 1946 , Bladin was among the coterie of senior officers who helped reshape the post @-@ war RAAF . His roles in the late 1940s and early 1950s included Chief of Staff of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan , Air Officer Commanding Eastern Area ( later RAAF Air Command ) , and Air Member for Personnel . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1950 , he retired to his country property in 1953 . He was active for many years in veterans ' affairs before his death in 1978 at the age of seventy @-@ nine . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Frank Bladin was born on 26 August 1898 in Korumburra , Victoria , the youngest son of engineer Frederick Bladin and his wife Ellen . Educated to junior public level at Melbourne High School , he sought to join the Australian Imperial Force during World War I. His parents refused their permission , and he instead entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1917 . Graduating in 1920 , Bladin served for the next two years in the Australian Army , including sixteen months seconded to the Royal Field Artillery in Britain . He transferred to the recently established Royal Australian Air Force as a flying officer in January 1923 . Undergoing pilot training at Point Cook , Victoria , he was one of five former Army lieutenants on the inaugural RAAF flying course — all of whom had left their original service at least partly because of poor career prospects in the post @-@ war military . One of Bladin 's other classmates on the course was a 1919 graduate of the Royal Australian Naval College , Sub @-@ Lieutenant Joe Hewitt . During 1925 – 26 , Bladin was in charge of running Citizens Air Force ( reserve ) pilots ' courses at No. 1 Flying Training School , Point Cook . Having been promoted to flight lieutenant , he married Patricia Magennis at Yass , New South Wales , on 20 December 1927 ; the couple had a son and two daughters . 
 Bladin was posted to Britain in 1929 to attend RAF Staff College , Andover , and wrote an article on Empire air defence in 1931 for Royal Air Force Quarterly , one of the few published pieces of work on air power produced by RAAF officers in the pre @-@ war years . Promoted to squadron leader , he took over as Commanding Officer of No. 1 Squadron from Squadron Leader Frank Lukis in April 1934 . Bladin found that the unit , flying Westland Wapitis and Hawker Demons out of RAAF Station Laverton in Victoria , " had not operated under field conditions away from its brick hangars and concrete tarmac since its inception some eight years previous " . He proceeded to change this , deploying the squadron 300 miles away to Cootamundra in rural New South Wales , where he " borrowed a portion of a sheep station from a friend so that the pilots could carry out their bombing practice " over a two @-@ week period commencing in late November 1935 . After completing his tenure with No. 1 Squadron in December , Bladin was appointed Officer Commanding Cadet Squadron at No. 1 Flying Training School . He modelled the training course on that of Duntroon , foreshadowing instruction at the Air Force 's own cadet institute , RAAF College , which would be established in 1947 . On 12 March 1937 , he was promoted to wing commander . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Bladin 's first posting following the outbreak of World War II was as Director of Operations and Intelligence at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , in March 1940 . Promoted to group captain in June , he became Air Officer Commanding Southern Area in August 1941 and was raised to acting air commodore the following month . By 1 January 1942 , Bladin was serving as Assistant Chief of the Air Staff ( Operations ) , charged with readying air bases and putting into effect plans for the Empire Air Training Scheme . He took over as Air Officer Commanding North @-@ Western Area ( AOC NWA ) on 25 March that year . Based in Darwin , his role was to conduct the air defence of Torres Strait , the Northern Territory , and north Western Australia . He also had to restore morale following the bombing of Darwin on 19 February and deal with the threat of imminent invasion , tasks complicated by the poor state of local communications , transport and early warning systems . Initiating combat training for all RAAF ground crew , Bladin proceeded to construct secondary airfields so that he could disperse his forces . He became , in the words of Air Force historian Dr Alan Stephens , " the RAAF 's outstanding area commander of the war " , and earned distinction as the first Australian decorated by the United States in the Pacific theatre of operations when he was awarded the Silver Star for gallantry . The cited action took place in June when Bladin personally led a raid by USAAF B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses on Celebes in the Dutch East Indies . As well as destroying enemy machines on the ground and damaging infrastructure , the Allied bombers managed to evade an attack by nine Japanese fighters during their return to base . Bladin 's award was recommended in September , and promulgated in the Australian Gazette on 23 November 1944 . 
 By December 1942 , Bladin 's strength in NWA consisted of seven RAAF squadrons operating mainly Bristol Beaufighter and P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters , Lockheed Hudson light bombers , and A @-@ 31 Vengeance dive bombers . These were soon augmented by one squadron each of Dutch East Indies B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers and USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers . As Japanese air raids continued into 1943 , Bladin placed his bombers inland , and his fighters close to the coast where they could intercept the raiders . Appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 1 January 1943 , he stepped up offensive strikes against island bases and shipping in the Timor and Arafura Seas as the Allies took the fight to the Japanese . He often employed his own judgement in the selection of targets , as detailed directives from superior headquarters were not always forthcoming . On 27 February , acting on intercepted radio transmissions , he launched a pre @-@ emptive raid on Penfui airfield near Koepang , which destroyed or damaged twenty @-@ two enemy bombers that had been destined to make a major raid on Darwin . To help protect northern Australia from ongoing air attack , three squadrons of Spitfire fighters were transferred from the United Kingdom in late 1942 , becoming operational in March 1943 as No. 1 Fighter Wing . A major engagement over Darwin on 2 May resulted in eight Spitfires crashing and several others making forced landings , for the destruction of one Japanese bomber and five fighters . An adverse communiqué concerning the action was issued from General Douglas MacArthur 's headquarters and was picked up by Australian newspapers , which reported the Spitfires ' " heavy losses " and caused resentment in NWA . Bladin complained to his superior , Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , that the " alarmist tendency of the press and radio references was having a bad effect on the combat pilots " . He also ordered an immediate Beaufighter strike led by Wing Commander Charles Read against Penfui airfield , on the assumption that this was where the Japanese raiders were based ; four enemy aircraft were destroyed on the ground . 
 On 17 June , under the command of Group Captain Clive Caldwell , No. 1 Fighter Wing recorded NWA 's most successful interception to date , claiming fourteen Japanese raiders destroyed and ten damaged , for the loss of two Spitfires . The 380th Bombardment Group USAAF , consisting of four squadrons of Liberators , came under Bladin 's control the same month , enhancing NWA 's strategic strike capability . When Bladin handed over North @-@ Western Area to Air Vice Marshal Adrian Cole in July 1943 , the latter reported that his new command was " well organised , keen and in good shape " . Posted to England as Senior Air Staff Officer ( SASO ) of No. 38 Group RAF , Bladin was closely involved in training aircrew and planning airborne operations for Operation Overlord , the Allied invasion of France . He flew a mission on D @-@ Day , 6 June 1944 , to deliver glider @-@ borne troops to Normandy , and was mentioned in despatches two days later . Completing his RAF service on the staff of the Second Tactical Air Force in France , Bladin returned to Australia to become Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in October 1944 . On two occasions in June 1945 , he was considered for the position of AOC RAAF Command , the Air Force 's main operational formation in the South West Pacific . Bladin would have replaced Air Vice Marshal Bostock , who was facing disciplinary action for refusing to comply with directives from the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body , but in the end the Australian government made no change to command arrangements . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 The RAF had planned to deploy an airborne formation , No. 238 ( Airborne Assault ) Group , to the Pacific theatre and requested Bladin be released from his duties as Deputy Chief of the Air Staff to assume its command , but this was cancelled with the end of hostilities in August 1945 . His next posting was to Kure , Japan , in January 1946 , as Chief of Staff to Lieutenant General John Northcott , commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) . Northcott reportedly chose Bladin not only for his operational command and staff experience in the RAAF and the RAF during World War II , but for his pedigree as a Duntroon graduate rather than having a background that was confined to the Air Force alone . Promoted acting air vice marshal on 1 March 1946 , he handed over to another Duntroon graduate , Air Vice Marshal John McCauley , in June 1947 . After returning to Australia , Bladin was to figure prominently , along with such figures as McCauley , Air Vice Marshal Joe Hewitt and Air Commodore ( later Air Chief Marshal Sir ) Frederick Scherger , in reshaping the post @-@ war Air Force . His next command was Eastern Area , which would evolve over the years into Home Command , Operational Command and , finally , Air Command . Bladin 's acting rank of air vice marshal was made substantive on 1 October 1948 . As AOC Eastern Area , he was instrumental in organising acquisition of a new site for his then @-@ headquarters at Bradfield Park on Sydney 's North Shore , namely the former <unk> Hotel at Glenbrook in the Blue Mountains . Subsequently known as Headquarters Operational Command , later Headquarters Air Command , the site was purchased in mid @-@ 1949 , and became operational at the end of the year . As well as commanding a view of the surrounding countryside , the property was within five kilometres of the City of Penrith and thirty kilometres of RAAF Base Richmond , and incorporated a disused railway tunnel that offered " complete protection from Atom Bomb attack " . 
 Bladin became Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) on 24 November 1948 ; this position gave him a seat on the Air Board , which consisted of the RAAF 's most senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . He succeeded Joe Hewitt , and worked to consolidate the innovations in Air Force education and training that the latter had initiated . RAAF Staff College was opened in June 1949 at Point Cook , providing an advanced defence course aimed at squadron leaders and wing commanders ; various international facilities were also utilised to further officers ' education . In October , Bladin became involved in the push for a Junior Equipment and Administrative Training Scheme to offer apprenticeships to clerical and supply staff , which was established two years later . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the King 's Birthday Honours announced in June 1950 . In 1951 , inspired by a similar initiative in state education , he sponsored a move to have RAAF education officers augment their degree qualifications with formal teaching credentials . Over the following year , in response to increased demands for aircrew to meet Australia 's commitments to the Malayan Emergency and the Korean War , pilot training was broken out from a single all @-@ encompassing course at No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) in Point Cook , Victoria , into separate courses at the newly formed No. 1 Initial Flying Training School at Archerfield , Queensland , No. 1 Basic Flying Training School at Uranquinty , New South Wales , and No. 1 Applied Flying Training School ( re @-@ formed from No. 1 FTS ) at Point Cook . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Bladin retired from the Air Force on 15 October 1953 , and was succeeded as AMP by Air Vice Marshal Val Hancock . Shortly after leaving the Air Force , Bladin donated an eponymous trophy for the service 's best @-@ performing Avro Lincoln unit in bombing and aerial gunnery competition . He ran a grazing property , which he named <unk> , at Yass , just north of the Australian Capital Territory . Between 1951 and 1954 , and again from 1956 to 1969 , he also served as treasurer of the Returned Sailors ' , Soldiers ' and Airmen 's Imperial League of Australia , which became the Returned Services League in 1965 . In the early 1960s he helped raise funds for building the Anzac Memorial Chapel of St Paul at his old college , Duntroon . Bladin died in Melbourne on 2 February 1978 , survived by his three children . His wife , who was involved in the support of veterans ' families and other community work , had died earlier . <unk> an Air Force funeral at the Church of Our Lady of Good Counsel in <unk> , Frank Bladin was buried at Springvale , Victoria . 
 = Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment = 
 Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment Ltd . ( MLSE ) is a professional sports and commercial real estate company based in Toronto , Ontario , Canada . With assets that include franchises in three of the six major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada , it is the largest sports and entertainment company in Canada , and one of the largest in North America . 
 The primary holdings of the company are its major sports franchises , the Toronto Maple Leafs of the National Hockey League , Toronto Raptors of the National Basketball Association and Toronto FC of Major League Soccer , as well as their minor league farm teams , the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , Raptors 905 of the NBA D @-@ League and Toronto FC II of the United Soccer League , respectively . In addition , it owns the Air Canada Centre , the home arena of the Maple Leafs and Raptors . MLSE also manages or has invested in several other sports facilities including BMO Field , home of Toronto FC and beginning in 2016 the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) , Ricoh Coliseum , home of the Marlies , MasterCard Centre , the practice facility of the Maple Leafs and Marlies , BioSteel Centre , the practice facility for the Raptors scheduled to open in 2016 , KIA Training Ground , practice facility for Toronto FC and Toronto FC II and home of the TFC Academy , and Lamport Stadium . 
 MLSE was founded by Conn Smythe in 1931 as Maple Leaf Gardens Limited ( MLGL ) to act as a holding company for the Maple Leafs and their planned new arena Maple Leaf Gardens , from which the company got its name . Smythe transferred his ownership of the Leafs to the company in exchange for shares in MLGL , and sold shares in the holding company to the public to help fund construction of the arena . While initially primarily a hockey company , with ownership stakes in a number of minor and junior hockey clubs including the Toronto Marlboros of the Ontario Hockey Association , the company later branched out to own the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the CFL from the late 1970s to late 1980s , before merging with the Raptors , who were constructing the Air Canada Centre at the time , and adopting their current name in 1998 . Most recently the company launched Toronto FC in 2007 . 
 Over most of its 80 plus years of existence MLSE was a public company . Following the death of majority owner Harold Ballard in 1990 , Steve Stavro led a controversial bid to buy the company and take it private . Most recently , the Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan sold their 79 @.@ 53 % share of the company for $ 1 @.@ 32 billion to a joint venture between Rogers Communications and Bell Canada , two of Canada 's largest media companies , giving the company an equity value of $ 1 @.@ 66 billion and an enterprise value of $ 2 billion . ( All figures are in Canadian dollars ( CAD ) unless otherwise specified . ) Although the company has proven to be very profitable , they have had much less success at producing winning teams . Of the three major franchises they currently own ( Maple Leafs , Raptors and Toronto FC ) , only the Maple Leafs have ever won a championship , but not since their 1967 Stanley Cup . 
 = = Corporate history = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The corporation 's roots can be traced back to 1927 , when Conn Smythe organized a group of investors to purchase Toronto 's premier hockey franchise , the Toronto St. Patricks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , which had won Stanley Cup championships in 1918 ( as the Toronto Arenas ) and 1922 , from a group headed by Charles Querrie . The club was playing poorly and minority partner Jack Bickell contacted Smythe about becoming coach of the team . However , Smythe told Bickell that he was more interested in buying a stake in the team . Not long after , with the team in trouble financially due to majority owner Querrie having lost a lawsuit to former Toronto Blueshirts owner Eddie Livingstone , Querrie put the St. Pats up for sale and agreed in principle to sell them for $ 200 @,@ 000 to a group that would move the team to Philadelphia . After Bickell contacted Smythe to inform him of the sale , Smythe persuaded Querrie that civic pride was more important than money and put together a syndicate that bought the St. Pats . Smythe himself invested $ 10 @,@ 000 of his own money and his group contributed $ 75 @,@ 000 up front and a further $ 75 @,@ 000 due 30 days later , with Bickell retaining his $ 40 @,@ 000 share in the team . The deal was finalized on Valentine 's Day , and the new owners quickly renamed the team the Toronto Maple Leafs . Later that year , Smythe bought the junior hockey Toronto Marlboros of the Ontario Hockey Association to serve as a developmental team for Maple Leafs . 
 In 1929 , Smythe decided , in the midst of the Great Depression , that the Maple Leafs needed a new arena . Their then home , the Arena Gardens , which they shared with the Marlboros , had been built in 1912 and seated just 8 @,@ 000 , which the Maple Leafs were regularly filling . After considering various locations , the site at the corner of Carlton and Church was purchased from The T. Eaton Co . Ltd. for $ 350 @,@ 000 , a price said to be $ 150 @,@ 000 below market value . A new 12 @,@ 473 seat ( 14 @,@ 550 including standing room ) arena was designed by the architectural firm of Ross and Macdonald . To finance construction , Smythe got backing from Sun Life for half of the expected $ 1 million cost and launched Maple Leaf Gardens Limited ( MLGL ) , a management company that would own both the Maple Leafs and the new arena , which was named Maple Leaf Gardens ( MLG ) . A public offering of shares in MLGL was made at $ 10 each ( $ 155 @.@ 00 in 2016 dollars ) , with a free common share for each five preferred shares purchased . Ownership of the hockey team was transferred to MLGL in return for shares . To fund construction of the building , workers were paid 20 % of their salary in MLG stock . Construction started on June 1 , 1931 , and MLG was opened five months and two weeks later , on November 12 , 1931 , at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( $ 23 @.@ 2 million in 2016 dollars ) . The Marlboros also moved to the new arena . 
 To help fill dates at the new arena , Smythe acquired an expansion franchise in the professional International Lacrosse League on behalf of MLGL for the 1932 season , which was also given the name the Toronto Maple Leafs . A team named the Toronto Maple Leafs had competed in the first season of the ILL at the Arena Gardens , but was renamed the Tecumsehs with the arrival of Smythe 's team . Both teams played at MLG . Smythe pulled out following the season due to financial losses , and the league did not play the following year . 
 = = = Minor hockey expansion = = = 
 The company has owned numerous minor league hockey teams over the years , which have served as developmental farm teams for the Maple Leafs . A group backed by Smythe and Frank Selke of the Montreal Canadiens was awarded an American Hockey League ( AHL ) franchise for Rochester , New York in July 1956 , after a local group could not come up with the $ 150 @,@ 000 USD in capital required by the league . The Leafs and Canadiens would each own 27 @.@ 5 % of the team , with the balance sold to Rochester interests . The team was named the Rochester Americans . The <unk> were a joint affiliate of both the Canadiens and the Maple Leafs , though the club was operated by the Canadiens . In the summer of 1959 the Maple Leafs bought out the Canadiens ' ownership share of the club , giving them a 55 % controlling interest , due to concerns that with Montreal operating the club they were giving their prospects priority over those of the Leafs . They purchased most of the remaining 45 % in 1963 , boosting their ownership share to 98 % by November 1964 . In July 1966 the Maple Leafs sold the team to a group which included their then General Manager Punch Imlach for a reported $ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 In June 1963 the Spokane Comets Western Hockey League franchise was purchased by a group led by the Maple Leafs , who relocated them to become the Denver Invaders and act as the Leaf 's farm team . Though the league did not acknowledge that the Maple Leafs had an ownership stake in the team , they held a majority position with the Denver partners only owning roughly 36 % . Following reported losses of $ 150 @,@ 000 in their first season , Smythe announced that the team would be relocated after the team failed to reach a 2 @,@ 000 season ticket target by a league @-@ imposed deadline . The team became the Victoria Maple Leafs for the following season . In June 1967 MLGL sold the team for $ 500 @,@ 000 to a group from Phoenix , which relocated it to become the Phoenix Roadrunners . 
 In 1964 MLGL the Tulsa Oilers of the Central Professional Hockey League were launched . The team was owned and operated by MLGL as a developmental club for the Maple Leafs . In the spring of 1973 it was announced that the Oilers would relocate to become the Oklahoma City Blazers . Prior to the 1976 – 77 season the Maple Leafs decided to share an affiliate with the Chicago Black Hawks in an attempt to reduce costs , and pulled out of the Blazers . In 1978 the New Brunswick Hawks of the AHL were established , and were jointly operated by the Chicago Black Hawks and the Toronto Maple Leafs as their farm team . MLGL and the Black Hawks each owned half of the franchise . However , by 1980 MLGL had decided that the Leafs needed a team of their own , with a spokesperson citing the limited number of roster spots as the rationale for the move . In 1981 the Cincinnati Tigers of the old Central Hockey League were established under the ownership of MLGL , but the team averaged only 1 @,@ 500 fans and lost $ 750 @,@ 000 in their first season and folded the following spring . Shortly thereafter , with Chicago having pulled out of New Brunswick in favour of affiliating with the Springfield Indians on their own , the Leafs relocated the New Brunswick Hawks to St. Catharines , Ontario to establish the St. Catharines Saints as their farm team . The team played in St. Catharines until 1986 , and after stops in Newmarket , Ontario as the Newmarket Saints ( 1986 – 1991 ) and St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador as the St. John 's Maple Leafs ( 1991 – 2005 ) , the team moved to Toronto as the Toronto Marlies ( named after the company 's former junior team ) where they have been playing ever since . 
 The Toronto Marlboros served as a junior farm team for the Maple Leafs for 40 years until direct NHL sponsorship of junior clubs ended in 1967 when the NHL made the Entry Draft universal . In October 1988 , with the team losing hundreds of thousands of dollars a year , MLGL reached an agreement to sell the Marlboros for a reported $ 500 @,@ 000 , severing their ties with the Maple Leafs . However , the Leafs retained the rights to the Marlies name . The OHL team moved to Hamilton for the 1989 – 90 season , becoming the Dukes of Hamilton . 
 = = = Growth beyond hockey = = = 
 In 1967 MLGL entered into negotiations to purchase the financially struggling Toronto Maple Leafs baseball team of the minor AAA International League . The asking price was $ 60 @,@ 000 . The deal ultimately fell apart due to concerns about the team 's stadium , Maple Leaf Stadium , which needed up to $ 250 @,@ 000 in repairs and whose owner wanted $ 4 million to purchase it , and the team was sold and relocated to become the Louisville Colonels for the following season . MLGL owner Harold Ballard said that the company 's interest was due in part to help position itself to go after a Major League Baseball ( MLB ) franchise for Toronto . In early 1974 MLGL announced plans to build a new baseball stadium in Toronto , but the city ultimately decided to renovate Exhibition Stadium to make it suitable for baseball . At the time , the MLGL group , led by Lorne Duguid , vice @-@ president of Hiram Walker Distillers and MLGL executive , was one of at least four bidding for a Toronto MLB team , including competing groups led by Labatt Brewing Company , Robert Hunter , the former President of the International League Maple Leafs , and Canadian Baseball Co , led by Sydney Cooper . After negotiating with the owners of the Baltimore Orioles , Chicago White Sox , Cleveland Indians and Oakland Athletics in their attempt to acquire a team for Toronto , MLGL offered $ 15 million for the San Francisco Giants but the team 's owner decided in early 1976 to sell the club to the Labatt group for $ 13 @.@ 25 million USD . While the Giant 's relocation was ultimately rejected by a U.S. court , Labatt was awarded an expansion team in the American League that became the Toronto Blue Jays for $ 7 million USD later that year . 
 A team named the Toronto Maple Leafs competed in the inaugural season of the National Lacrosse Association , a professional box lacrosse league , in 1968 at MLG . MLGL owners Ballard and Stafford Smythe were two of the five founding partners of the club , but financial difficulties forced MLGL to take over ownership midway though the season . The NLA suspended operations prior to the following season . 
 In the early 1970s MLGL announced plans to apply for a second Toronto @-@ based Canadian Football League team , in addition to the Toronto Argonauts , which would play at Varsity Stadium , but the proposal never went anywhere . In 1974 , when his former partner John Bassett put the Argonauts up for sale for $ 3 @.@ 3 million , Ballard expressed interest in buying the team , but it was ultimately sold to William R. Hodgson . Shortly thereafter Ballard tried to buy the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the CFL from owner Michael DeGroote , but this offer was also rejected . Three money @-@ losing seasons later , in February 1978 , DeGroote sold the team to MLGL for $ 1 @.@ 3 million . During his tenure as owner of the Tiger @-@ Cats , Ballard repeatedly threatened to move the franchise to Toronto 's Varsity Stadium , which was vetoed by the Argos , and claimed to have lost roughly $ 20 million over 11 seasons . MLGL sold the team in March 1989 to David Braley for $ 2 . 
 Ruby Richman , the former coach of Canada men 's national basketball team , working with Ballard pursued a number of existing National Basketball Association ( NBA ) and American Basketball Association ( ABA ) teams to relocate to Toronto to play at MLG in the 1970s . Richman had a tentative agreement to purchase both the Miami Floridians and Pittsburgh Condors of the ABA with a plan to merge them into a single Toronto @-@ based team , but the deal fell through . Later , Richman held negotiations with the Detroit Pistons , which were seeking $ 5 million for the franchise , but pulled out when the price was raised to $ 8 @.@ 25 million . MLGL attempted to purchase and relocate the Buffalo Braves , which had played a number of regular season games at MLG over the years , to Toronto in 1974 for $ 8 @.@ 5 million , and again several times later , but the owners eventually chose to move the team to San Diego . When Toronto was awarded an expansion NBA franchise in 1974 for the 1975 – 76 season MLGL was one of three groups to bid for the rights to the team , but the club never materialized as no group was able to secure funding for the expansion fee of $ 6 @.@ 8 million . MLGL attempted to purchase and relocate the Houston Rockets in 1975 , which were seeking $ 8 million for the team , but the team 's lease ultimately prevented a relocation . In 1976 MLGL attempted to buy the Atlanta Hawks . In 1979 a Toronto group which included Ballard again pushed for an expansion franchise , but lost out to the Dallas Mavericks . A Toronto group , which included Bill Ballard , son of Harold , and Basketball Hall of Famer Wilt Chamberlain submitted an application and $ 100 @,@ 000 USD deposit for an NBA expansion franchise for MLG in 1986 , but of the six cities to apply Toronto was not one of the four which were successful . It was not until the NBA awarded an expansion franchise to John Bitove , over a group led by future MLSE minority partner Larry Tanenbaum which had partnered with the Maple Leafs , and the Toronto Raptors joined the NBA for the 1995 – 96 season that the city would get an NBA team . 
 = = = Merger with the Raptors and rebranding = = = 
 In 1997 it was reported that the Maple Leafs were in negotiations to purchase the Toronto Shooting Stars of the National Professional Soccer League . The team had been suspended following their inaugural season playing at MLG during which the club lost nearly $ 1 million and the league was forced to take over operations after only three games when ownership pulled out . However , the team never returned to play . Following the inaugural season of the Hamilton , Ontario based Ontario Raiders of the National Lacrosse League in 1998 , in which they lost $ 250 @,@ 000 playing at Copps Coliseum , owner Chris Fritz was forced to look for partners . MLSE engaged in negotiations to purchase the team and have it play at MLG . However , a group which included Bill Watters , the then Assistant General Manager of the Toronto Maple Leafs , ultimately bought the team for $ 250 @,@ 000 and promptly moved it to MLG where they rebranded the team the Toronto Rock . MLSE held negotiations with the Arena Football League in 1998 on acquiring a $ 4 – 7 million USD expansion franchise for the following season to coincide with the opening of the ACC . The company also submitted an application for a Women 's National Basketball Association franchise , but was rejected by the league due to concerns about their readiness . 
 With MLG aging , MLGL began planning for a new home arena for the Maple Leafs in the 1990s . At the time , the Raptors were constructing a new arena , later to be called the Air Canada Centre ( ACC ) , which they invited the Maples Leafs to be a joint tenant at . However , MLGL reject the offer , arguing that " the footprint is too small " . When Allan Slaight took over controlling ownership of the Toronto Raptors in late 1996 , talks began again between the two groups . MLGL put forward a proposal to the city to construct a new $ 300 million shared arena just to the north , on top of the rail tracks Union Station , with the already under construction Raptors arena being converted to a bus terminal . However , the proposal died when an agreement could not reached with the City of Toronto on rent for the land . In November 1997 MLSE submitted a new proposal for a $ 250 million arena at Exhibition Place . However , after years of acrimonious negotiations MLGL purchased 100 % of the Raptors basketball club and the ACC , from Allan Slaight and the Bank of Nova Scotia on February 12 , 1998 . MLGL paid a reported $ 467 million , made up of $ 179 million for the team and $ 288 million for the arena . Richard Peddie , who had been President of the Toronto Raptors , was retained in the merger and became MLSE 's President and CEO . That July the company adopted a new name , Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment ( MLSE ) , to reflect its broader holdings . MLSE subsequently ordered major modifications to the original design of the ACC , which was basketball @-@ specific , to make it more suitable for hockey . Originally planned to cost $ 217 million , the budget was increased to $ 265 million after MLSE took control . MLG was subsequently sold to Loblaw Companies , Canada 's largest food retailer , in 2004 for $ 12 million under the condition that it not be used as a sports and entertainment facility , though MLSE eventually consented to allowing a small arena to be restored in the building to house Ryerson University 's Rams . 
 The Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission ( CRTC ) granted MLSE two category 2 digital specialty channel licenses in 2000 for Leafs TV and Raptors NBA TV , which launched on September 7 , 2001 . The channels were used by MLSE to broadcast live games involving their teams in an attempt to increase competition for their rights and drive up the fees paid by other broadcasters . 
 In August 2004 MLSE announced that they would relocate their AHL farm team from St. John 's , Newfoundland to Toronto to play in the Ricoh Coliseum for the 2005 – 06 season , after the arena was left without a hockey tenant following the termination of their lease with the Toronto Roadrunners , the AHL affiliate of the Edmonton Oilers , for defaulting on their rent . MLSE agreed to a 20 @-@ year lease for the Coliseum , which had undergone a $ 38 million renovation in 2003 , that called for rent to cover debt financing charges , property taxes and generate a return to the arena investors , which exceeds $ 4 million annually . 
 MLSE announced in April 2005 that they would be working with Cadillac Fairview ( a wholly owned subsidiary of Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan ) and <unk> Developments to build Maple Leaf Square , a major entertainment complex situated next to the ACC . The $ 500 million 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 square feet ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) complex , which was completed in 2010 , is a mixed use facility which features the Hotel St. Germain , <unk> restaurant , Real Sports Apparel , Real Sports Bar and Grill , Longo 's grocery store , office space and condominium residences . In conjunction with the construction of Maple Leaf Square was a two @-@ year , $ 48 million renovation of the ACC to connect it with the square , which added a new atrium that includes a high @-@ definition broadcast studio for Leafs TV , NBA TV Canada and GolTV Canada . The external wall of the atrium features a 30 by 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) video screen which often broadcasts games to spectators gathered in the plaza in front of the arena . 
 = = = Launch of Toronto FC = = = 
 MLSE was awarded a Major League Soccer expansion team for Toronto , which would become known as Toronto FC , in 2005 for $ 10 million USD . The company also agreed to contribute $ 8 million towards the construction of Toronto FC 's future home BMO Field , which was to cost $ 62 @.@ 9 million total , and purchased the naming rights to the stadium for $ 10 million for 20 years , which they subsequently resold to the Bank of Montreal for $ 27 million over the first 10 years . MLSE also agreed to cover any construction cost overruns . The governments of Canada , Ontario and Toronto contributed $ 27 million , $ 8 million and $ 9 @.@ 8 million respectively , with the City of Toronto also providing the land . In return , MLSE got the management rights for the stadium for 20 years . Prior to the 2010 MLS season , MLSE spent $ 3 @.@ 5 million to convert the stadium from FieldTurf to natural grass , and a further $ 2 million to expand the north end by 1 @,@ 400 seats . As part of the deal to convert the field to natural grass , MLSE spent $ 1 @.@ 2 million adding a winter bubble to Lamport Stadium and $ 800 @,@ 000 building a new artificial turf field to replace the community use hours lost at BMO Field . 
 MLSE partnered with Rogers Communications in 2005 to bid to host a regular season National Football League game in Toronto . On January 30 , 2008 it was announced that Rogers and Larry Tanenbaum , chairman of MLSE , had reached an agreement with the Buffalo Bills to host an annual regular @-@ season and three exhibition NFL games over five seasons at Toronto 's Rogers Centre beginning in 2008 , with the games branded the Bills Toronto Series . At the time MLSE was considering bringing a NFL team to Toronto permanently and building them a new stadium , but abandoned the idea when they concluded that the project would not generate sufficient financial return to justify the significant cost of the project . Subsequently , MLSE president Tim Leiweke said on a NFL team in Toronto : " We can 't own a team ( per NFL rules ) , but we do have more expertise on how to build ( stadiums ) than anyone ... MLSE can play a role . " It has been reported that MLSE is interested in building and managing the proposed NFL stadium , which it has already begun designing . In 2013 MLSE minority owner Tanenbaum and board member Edward Rogers III partnered with musician Bon Jovi to purchase an NFL team . Following the death of Bills ' owner Ralph Wilson in 2014 the group submitted an offer to purchase the franchise , with speculation that they would move the team to Toronto when their lease permitted it , but were outbid by the <unk> . 
 The company contemplated purchasing the Argonauts of the CFL at least twice , with minority partner Tanenbaum keen to add the team to his list of franchises , but concluded that the cost and effort that would be required to make the team profitable was not worth the minimal financial upside . In 2013 it was reported that the company was again considering purchasing the team and having them play at a renovated BMO Field , with the asking price reportedly $ 20 million , but later coming down to $ 10 million . A vote by MLSE 's board on purchasing the team was called in December 2013 , but they were unable to come to an agreement on the issue . On May 20 , 2015 it was announced that two of the three ownership partners of MLSE , Bell Canada and Tanenbaum 's Kilmer Group , had acquired ownership of the Argos , with the deal to close at the end of the year , and would move the team to BMO Field for the 2016 season . It has been speculated that Rogers was not interested in investing in the team since Bell has exclusive rights to broadcast all CFL games . It is thought that control of the Argos by MLSE will enhance Toronto 's chances of acquiring an NFL franchise , with Peddie saying " the NFL is telling them that if you want an NFL team , you better make sure the Argos are okay . " Leiweke has said that moving into a renovated BMO field " will help turn [ the Argos ] around " and that " there 's no way the NFL comes here without the CFL being unbelievably successful first . " 
 When the nearby city of Oshawa built a new arena , known as General Motors Centre , MLSE was chosen to manage the building . However , disappointing results in the first year and a half of operations following the arena 's opening in November 2006 led MLSE to request that its contract be terminated in March 2008 . The company had been attempting to get into the business of managing facilities beyond those where their teams play but decided to withdraw , with Bob Hunter , MLSE 's Vice President of venues and entertainment , saying that managing the arena was " no longer a strategic focus for us " . 
 = = = Recent projects = = = 
 In 2008 MLSE launched the TFC Academy youth system to develop soccer players for Toronto FC by taking advantage of MLS 's new homegrown player rule which allows clubs to retain the rights to players they develop without them being subject to the MLS SuperDraft . The senior academy team originally competed in the Canadian Soccer League until pulling out in early 2013 due to the CSL losing its sanctioning from the Canadian Soccer Association . The team played that year in the Ontario Soccer League before joining League1 Ontario for the 2014 season . In November 2014 MLSE announced the establishment of Toronto FC II , their own minor league professional soccer team to play in the United Soccer League which will serve as a reserve team for TFC and a bridge between the Academy . The team began play in 2015 at a newly renovated 2 @,@ 000 seat stadium , with plans to expand it to 5 @,@ 000 by 2017 , constructed at the Ontario Soccer Centre in Vaughan , just north of Toronto . In March 2011 Downsview Park was selected as the site of Toronto FC 's new state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art academy and training facility . Construction began on the KIA Training Ground in May 2011 , and the facility opened in June 2012 . It includes three grass fields , one domed turf field and a field house . MLSE spent more than $ 21 million building the facility and pays rent for the land , In July 2014 it was announced that MLSE would expand the training grounds to house a practice facility for the Argos , which would rent the facility from MLSE and practice on a nearby city owned field . The team moved in that September . 
 Then Raptors President and General Manager Bryan Colangelo said in 2008 that MLSE was considering launching an NBA Development League franchise in the Toronto area within a couple of years to serve as a developmental team for the Raptors . Hamilton 's Copps Coliseum and Oshawa were reportedly under consideration to host the franchise . However , a Canadian @-@ based franchise posed difficulties due to tax and visa complications , and Rochester , New York , which is just across the United States border , was considered as an alternative . In May 2015 it was announced that MLSE had purchased a D @-@ League franchise , which would be named Raptors 905 and would begin play that fall at the Hershey Centre in Mississauga , a suburb of Toronto . The franchise reportedly cost $ 6 million . 
 It was announced on January 23 , 2009 that MLSE would acquire the 80 @.@ 1 % interest in GolTV Canada , a digital cable soccer channel , held by MLSE owner Tanenbaum through Insight Sports . The channel operated as a localized version of <unk> TV USA , which owned the remaining 19 @.@ 9 % , with focus on Toronto FC . MLSE informed the CRTC in 2015 that it had acquired full ownership of the channel , however later that year they announced that it would cease operations and the license be abandoned , effective August 31 , 2015 . In November 2009 MLSE applied to the CRTC for a Category 2 digital TV license for a general interest sports service provisionally named Mainstream Sports , which was granted in June 2010 . MLSE planned to broadcast its teams ' games on the channel , along the lines of team @-@ owned regional sports networks in the United States such as YES Network and the New England Sports Network , with the tentative name " Real Sports " ( in keeping with the branding of MLSE 's sports bar and apparel store ) . It was never revealed whether the channel would have replaced , or supplemented , MLSE 's existing digital channels . Peddie credited the threat of a Real Sports channel as a motivator for Rogers and Bell , owners of sports channels Sportsnet and TSN respectively , to purchase the company due to concerns about losing the rights to broadcast MLSE teams to the channel or having to pay huge fees for them . The acquisition of MLSE by Rogers and Bell in 2012 , and associated agreements to divide the company 's regional broadcast rights between the two , eliminated the need for the channel and its license expired after the three @-@ year deadline for launch passed in 2013 . 
 In September 2009 the Maple Leafs and Marlies opened their new hockey practice facility , the MasterCard Centre . The arena was a joint venture between MLSE , the City of Toronto and the Lakeshore Lions Club to replace the nearby Lakeshore Lions Arena , and was built at a cost of $ 44 million , after cost overruns drove up the cost from $ 33 @.@ 65 million . The Lions Club contributed $ 40 million to the project , with the city providing a $ 35 @.@ 5 million loan guarantee . The Toronto District School Board leased the land for the arena to the Lakeshore Lions for a 50 @-@ year term . MLSE spent a further $ 5 million on training and medical facilities , and pays $ 600 @,@ 000 annually to rent the building . The arena was originally operated by the Lakeshore Lions Club , but in June 2011 , with the arena on the verge of defaulting on its rising debt , the City of Toronto took control and assumed its $ 43 @.@ 4 million debt with the intention to return it to private management within 2 – 3 years . A city councillor has suggested that MLSE , which operates BMO Field and Ricoh Coliseum on behalf of the city , would be " the logical party " to take over the arena , and a spokesperson for the company said " while we don 't have any interest in purchasing the facility , we are open to discussing the possibility of managing the facility on behalf of the City " . MLSE 's executive vice president of venues and entertainment Bob Hunter confirmed that they would bid for the right to run the building . 
 At one point MLSE contemplated purchasing the Toronto Blue Jays of MLB and Sportsnet from Rogers Communications , but concerns about the viability of SkyDome as a baseball venue and the profitability of the team resulted in the company not pursuing either . The company also considered investing in an English soccer club , and in May 2012 , after the Leeds United Supporters Trust put out a request for a takeover from majority shareholder Ken Bates , it was reported that MLSE were in talks to buy the Football League Championship team . However , the company later denied that it planned to purchase the club . In 2015 reports emerged that MLSE was investigating taking over the bankrupt Parma F.C. of Italy 's Serie A. 
 Peddie retired as President and CEO of MLSE at the end of 2011 after 14 years on the job , having tripled the value of the company . However , he was often criticized for his inability to end the company 's long championship drought . Of the three major franchises the company currently owns ( Maple Leafs , Raptors and Toronto FC ) , only the Maple Leafs have ever won a championship , and not since their 1967 Stanley Cup . The only other major championship MLSE has won was the 74th Grey Cup in 1986 by the Tiger @-@ Cats . Though Tom Anselmi briefly took over as President , he was replaced in June 2013 by high profile executive Tim Leiweke who had previously run Anschutz Entertainment Group . On August 21 , 2014 Leiweke announced that he was stepping down , but would remain in his position until a successor was appointed . MLSE announced on October 29 , 2015 that Michael <unk> had been hired as Leiweke 's successor as President and CEO , and would officially assume his duties in December 2015 . 
 The financial success of Toronto FC led MLSE to undertake a major renovation of BMO Field . Under a two phase process , the stadium 's capacity was increased from 21 @,@ 566 to 30 @,@ 000 by May 2015 , and a canopy roof covering most permanent seating areas was added and the pitch lengthened to accommodate a Canadian football field by May 2016 . The renovations were originally budgeted to cost $ 120 million , but ended up at $ 150 million in total . In exchange for a $ 10 million contribution to the project by the City of Toronto , which owns the stadium , they receive rent from MLSE , while MLSE 's management and naming rights agreements for the stadium , which were set to expire in 2027 , were extended by 10 years . The province of Ontario also contributed $ 10 million to the financing . The City insisted that the renovations allow the Argonauts , who had to vacate their current home the Rogers Centre , to move in . The sale of the Argos in May 2015 to a new ownership group consisting of MLSE owners Bell and Tanenbaum was accompanied by an announcement that they had reached an agreement with MLSE to relocate to the stadium for the 2016 season . The Argos contributed $ 10 million to the conversion of the field to make it CFL compatible , which was matched by MLSE . MLSE financed the rest of the project , and was responsible for cost overruns . The renovated stadium can be temporarily expanded to a capacity of roughly 40 @,@ 000 for big events . The Argos purchase agreement called for two Grey Cups to played at BMO Field , the first being the 104th Grey Cup in 2016 , and the stadium was chosen to host rugby sevens at the 2015 Pan @-@ Am games and the 2017 NHL Centennial Classic . 
 In August 2014 , MLSE reached an agreement with the City of Toronto to build a practice facility for the Raptors , to be known as BioSteel Centre , at Exhibition Place . MLSE will pay the entire $ 30 million construction cost , and will lease the property from the city for $ 205 @,@ 000 annually , subject to reassessments for inflation , for a 20 @-@ year term , with two options to extend it by a further 10 years , following which the city would take ownership of the building . Construction is scheduled to completed in time for the team 's hosting of the NBA All @-@ Star Game in February 2016 . 
 In February 2015 MLSE confirmed that they were planning on launching a professional boxing series , featuring 3 @-@ 4 major fights a year co @-@ promoted with Groupe Yvon Michel . Originally planned to start with a World Boxing Council light heavyweight title fight in April at Ricoh Coliseum , this was delayed due to regulatory restrictions on the amount of gauze that can be used for wrist wraps in Ontario . MLSE and Michel joined with Lennox Lewis to promote a WBC light @-@ heavyweight title fight in September 2015 at Ricoh Coliseum . 
 = = = Timeline of sports franchise ownership = = = 
 = = Ownership = = 
 = = = Conn Smythe = = = 
 Although Conn Smythe was the face of MLGL from its founding in 1931 , he did not acquire majority ownership of the company until 1947 , following a power struggle between directors who supported him as president and those who wanted him replaced with Frank J. Selke . With the help of a $ 300 @,@ 000 loan from Toronto stockbroker and MLGL shareholder Percy Gardiner , and the support of minority partner Jack Bickell , Smythe was able to buy 30 @,@ 000 shares in MLGL from Gardiner and installed himself as president on November 19 , 1947 , replacing Edward Bickle . The loan was paid off in 1960 . In November 1961 Smythe sold 45 @,@ 000 of his 50 @,@ 000 shares to a three @-@ person partnership formed by Stafford Smythe ( Conn Smythe 's son ) , Harold Ballard and John Bassett , who at the time owned part of the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League and Toronto Telegram , for $ 2 @.@ 3 million . When combined with their own holdings , this gave them 87 @,@ 000 shares representing 60 % of the company . Ballard fronted Stafford most of the money for the purchase though a loan he obtained . According to several sources , Conn thought the sale was only to his son , and was furious when he learned that Ballard and Bassett were his partners . He had hoped that Stafford would keep MLGL for his son , Tommy . However , it is unlikely that Stafford could have raised the millions needed for the deal on his own . Stafford became president of MLGL and governor of the Maple Leafs , with Ballard executive vice president and Bassett chairman of the board . 
 = = = Harold Ballard , John Bassett and Stafford Smythe = = = 
 In March 1966 Conn sold his remaining shares and resigned from the board of directors after a Muhammad Ali boxing match was scheduled for MLG . He found Ali 's refusal to serve in the U.S. Army in the Vietnam War to be offensive , and said that by accepting the fight , MLGL owners had " put cash ahead of class . " Within three years under the new owners , profits at MLGL had tripled to just under $ 1 million . Ballard negotiated lucrative deals to place advertising throughout the building , and greatly increased the number of seats in the arena . 
 Following a Royal Canadian Mounted Police raid at MLG in 1968 , Stafford was charged with income tax evasion , and he and Ballard were accused of illegally taking money from MLGL to pay for renovations of their houses and other personal expenses . Just before the charges were laid , Bassett argued to the board that Stafford and Ballard should be removed from their posts . Following an 8 – 7 vote of the board of directors on June 26 , 1969 , Stafford and Ballard were both fired , and Bassett was appointed president of MLGL . However , Bassett did not force Stafford and Ballard to sell their shares , and both men remained on the board . This proved to be a serious strategic blunder ; Stafford was the largest single shareholder in MLGL , and he and Ballard controlled almost half the company 's stock between them . They were thus able to regain control of the board in 1970 and Stafford was once again appointed president . Facing an untenable situation , Bassett sold the 196 @,@ 200 shares he controlled in MLGL to Stafford and Ballard in September 1971 for $ 5 @.@ 4 million , which he used to buy out his partners in the Argos . Combined with their 306 @,@ 295 jointly controlled shares , the transaction gave the Stafford Smythe @-@ Ballard partnership 78 % of the stock . Ballard would be convicted of 47 charges and sentenced to three years in a federal penitentiary , but Stafford died in October 1971 of a bleeding ulcer at the age of only 50 just before his trial was scheduled to begin . Under the terms of Stafford 's will , of which Ballard was an executor , each partner was allowed to buy the other 's shares upon their death . Stafford 's brother and son tried to keep the shares within the family , but in February 1972 Ballard bought all 251 @,@ 545 of Stafford 's shares for $ 7 @.@ 5 million , valuing the company at $ 22 million . Stafford 's brother Hugh also sold his shares to Ballard , ending the Smythe family 's 45 @-@ year involvement in the company . Combined with Ballard 's 262 @,@ 162 shares , this gave him majority ownership of about 70 % . 
 = = = Harold Ballard = = = 
 In 1966 Ballard set up a family holding company , named Harold E. Ballard Ltd . ( HEBL ) , for his assets including his shares in MLGL as part of an estate freeze . Ballard distributed 103 common shares in HEBL , with his three children , Bill , Harold Jr . , and Mary Elizabeth , each receiving 34 which were held in trust , and his wife Dorothy receiving 1 , which Harold would inherit upon her death three years later . Harold retained 308 @,@ 000 preferred shares in HEBL . While the equity of the company was vested in the common stock , both common and preferred shares each received a single vote , ensuring that Harold retained control of the company . 
 After getting into financial difficulty , Harold reached an agreement with Molson Brewery in November 1980 , which at the time owned the Montreal Canadiens , for the company to cover his debt financing charges on a loan of $ 8 @.@ 8 million for 10 years in exchange for an option to purchase a 19 @.@ 9 % block of shares in MLGL from HEBL and a right of first refusal on the rest of HEBL 's shares . The NHL did not learn of the deal until the late 1980s . In 1982 he offered to sell the company for $ 50 million , with the arena alone reportedly valued at $ 11 million , though a stockholders ' report the following year placed the value of MLGL at $ 23 @.@ 5 million . When Harold transferred ownership of his personal real estate holdings , which were valued at $ 2 @.@ 52 million , to HEBL in January 1989 , he acquired 4 newly issued common shares in the company plus a promise of a further $ 896 @,@ 472 rather than cash . Mary Elizabeth sold her stake in HEBL to her father for $ 15 @.@ 5 million in January 1989 , after originally having a deal to sell the stake to Don Giffin , while Harold Jr. sold his back to HEBL for $ 21 million in June of the same year . Harold secured a loan from Molson for the full amount of his buyout of Mary Elizabeth , using the 34 acquired shares in HEBL as security . Harold Jr . ' s shares were subsequently retired . Bill sued his father for $ 170 million over HEBL 's acquisition of Harold Jr . ' s stake , claiming that he and partner Michael Cohl had acquired a right of first refusal to purchase the shares for $ 20 million that February . Shortly thereafter , HEBL issued Harold 32 common shares and $ 125 @,@ 216 in exchange for ownership of his 350 @,@ 200 personally held MLGL shares and $ 125 @,@ 000 . Two more new common shares would be granted to Harold to repay the $ 911 @,@ 000 debt HEBL owed him from his two transactions with the company . This gave Harold , who feared that Bill was positioning himself to take over the holding company , control of HEBL . Harold did not want his bickering children to inherit MLGL because he feared they would destroy it . 
 Though Harold ran up significant amounts of personal debt during his ownership of MLGL , he made the company very profitable , so much so that MLG became known as the " Cashbox on Carlton Street " , referring to the address of the arena . Upon Harold 's death in April 1990 , most of his estate , which was worth less than $ 50 million , was left to charitable organizations . The executors of Harold 's will were supermarket tycoon Steve Stavro , Giffin and Donald Crump . In November 1990 Molson exercised their option on 19 @.@ 9 % of the company , paying $ 10 @,@ 000 for 735 @,@ 575 of HEBL 's MLGL shares , which at the time were valued at $ 20 million . Due to restrictions against cross @-@ ownership in the NHL , the company set up a trust to hold their stake , and the league instructed them to sell the shares within an " adequate amount of time " . Shortly after the estate , which had limited income due to HEBL still owing TD Bank $ 15 @.@ 8 million on its loan to acquire Harold Jr 's HEBL stock , missed a January 1991 deadline to repay its $ 20 million loan ( including interest ) from Molson , Stavro personally loaned the estate the funds to pay off the debt . In exchange he received an option to purchase the estate 's HEBL shares before January 1996 . Bill challenged the transaction , but it was approved by the court . In early 1991 Molson offered to buy the estate 's shares for $ 40 each . In September 1991 Bill sold his HEBL stock to his father 's estate for $ 21 million , giving it ownership of the entire company . Shortly thereafter it was announced that Stavro had reached a deal with Molson on an option to purchase their MLGL shares until April 1994 and for Molson to waive their option on the estate 's shares . 
 = = = Steve Stavro = = = 
 Stavro founded MLG Ventures ( MLGV ) in March 1994 with partners Toronto @-@ Dominion Bank and Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan . MLG Holdings Ltd . ( MLGH ) , of which Stavro owned 80 % and TD Bank controlled the remaining 20 % , held a 51 % ownership stake in MLGV , with the remaining 49 % owned by Teachers ' . The following month MLGV announced that they had reached an agreement to purchase the 60 @.@ 3 % of MLGL held by Harold 's estate for $ 34 a share or $ 75 million total , valuing the company at $ 125 million . The estate still owned Stavro $ 23 million at the time . Molson also sold its 19 @.@ 9 % of MLGL to MLGV in April 1994 for $ 25 million . Larry Tanenbaum 's company Kilmer Sports purchased a 25 % share of MLGH from Stavro in 1996 for a reported $ 21 million . 
 MLGV subsequently purchased all the remaining shares and took MLGL private in 1998 , after acquiring more than the 90 % of stock necessary to force objecting shareholders out , and MLGL and MLGV amalgamated . The purchase was the subject of a Ontario Securities Commission ( OSC ) review , due to allegations that MLGV had engaged in insider trading by failing to disclose that broadcast revenue was expected to substantially increase , and a $ 50 million lawsuit from Bill who claimed that Stavro and others devalued MLGL and withheld information relevant to the value of the company prior to the sale of his stock . Ontario 's Office of the Public Trustee , which was charged with representing the charities named by Harold 's will as beneficiaries , argued that Stavro had a conflict of interest as both executor of the will and buyer and had not paid market value because there was no public bidding process for the shares . Several minority owners , including Harry Ornest , who held 3 @.@ 5 % of the company , and Jim <unk> also objected to MLGV 's attempts to take the company private without an auction . Stavro and his partners in MLGV reached a settlement in 1996 to pay an additional $ 23 @.@ 5 million plus interest to the charities as well as $ 2 @.@ 5 million to the minority shareholders who had sued , clearing the way for them to become the majority owner of MLGL . They also settled with the OSC in 1999 for $ 1 @.@ 6 million , which included a fine and costs . Teachers ' invested $ 44 @.@ 3 million and TD $ 9 @.@ 75 million in the deal . 
 Following the merger , the ownership structure of the now defunct MLGV was retained by MLGL . MLGH was the majority owner of MLGL , holding 51 % of the company . It in turn was controlled by Stavro ( 55 % ) , with minority shareholders Tanenbaum ( 25 % ) and TD Capital Group ( 20 % ) . The remaining 49 % of MLGL was owned by Teachers ' . This tiered ownership structure gave Stavro effective control of MLGL with only a net 29 % stake of the company . Teachers ' invested a further $ 50 million in the company in the form of a convertible bond in 1998 to finance the purchase of the Raptors and ACC and complete construction of the arena . 
 = = = Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan = = = 
 In 2003 an agreement was reached to restructure the company with Stavro selling his stake to Bell Globemedia for a reported $ 120 – 150 @-@ million after debt repayments , the other partners converting their debts into equity , and each partner getting a direct ownership stake in the newly named MLSE , with MLGH being dissolved . This left Teachers ' as the controlling majority owners of MLSE with 58 @.@ 4 % , and minority partners Bell Globemedia ( 15 @.@ 4 % ) , TD Capital with ( 13 @.@ 5 % ) and Tanenbaum , who took over as non @-@ executive chairman , with 13 % . Each owner of MLSE had a right of first refusal on any shares sold , in proportion to their ownership share . The same year MLSE was internally valued at over $ 1 billion by Teachers ' in its annual report . In 2008 the Toronto Star reported that a valuation commissioned by the company concluded that the company was worth $ 1 @.@ 5 billion USD . On December 5 , 2008 CTVglobemedia ( the renamed Bell Globemedia ) sold half of its 15 @.@ 4 % stake to Tanenbaum for $ 100 million , making Tanenbaum the second @-@ largest stakeholder with 20 @.@ 7 % . The transaction valued the company at $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . On August 20 , 2009 Teachers ' announced that it had agreed to purchase the remaining 7 @.@ 7 % stake in MLSE owned by CTVglobemedia , bumping their stake to 66 % . 
 = = = Bell and Rogers = = = 
 In December 2010 it was reported that Rogers Communications , owner of the Toronto Blue Jays , was in negotiations to purchase the Teachers ' 66 % stake in MLSE , with the asking price set at $ 1 @.@ 3 billion , and in March 2011 Teachers ' confirmed that their share in the company was for up for sale . Tanenbaum 's right of first refusal on the shares gave him control over any sale by Teachers ' . In May 2011 Teachers ' announced that they had reached an agreement to purchase TD Capital 's 13 @.@ 5 % ownership share , giving them 79 @.@ 5 % of the company and leaving Tanenbaum as the only minority partner with 20 @.@ 5 % , simplifying a sale of their shares . In November 2011 Teachers ' announced that they were taking the company off the market . However , only a couple of weeks later , on December 9 , 2011 , Teachers ' announced the sale of its entire stake in MLSE to a partnership between Bell Canada and Rogers Communications , in a deal valued at $ 1 @.@ 32 billion , giving the company an equity value of $ 1 @.@ 66 billion and an enterprise value of $ 2 billion due to the assumption of their share of MLSE 's $ 372 million in debt and $ 66 million in leases . As part of the deal , Tanenbaum increased his stake in the company by 5 % , valued at $ 109 million , to 25 % to secure his approval . The deal required the approval of Canada 's Competition Bureau , the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission ( with regards to MLSE 's TV channels ) , as well as the NHL , the AHL , the NBA , and MLS ( with regards to each of MLSE 's main sports franchises ) . 
 The Competition Bureau announced in May 2012 that it would not challenge the transaction , but that it will " actively review " the situation in light of " serious concerns " expressed by various parties , reserving the right to take action at a later date . The NHL Board of Governors approved the sale at a meeting in Las Vegas on June 19 , 2012 . The final approval , that of the CRTC , was granted on August 16 , with the commission noting that it only had jurisdiction over the TV channels owned by MLSE ( the transfer of ownership from MLSE to Bell , Rogers and Kilmer directly , it decided , posed no major concerns ) , and not the broadcast rights associated with MLSE 's teams . The transaction closed on August 22 , 2012 . 
 As part of the sale , two numbered companies were created to jointly hold stock . Following the restructuring , the ownership hierarchy of MLSE was : 
 <unk> Canada Inc . ( Rogers / Bell joint holding company ) – 75 % 
 Rogers Communications – 50 % ( net ownership 37 @.@ 5 % ) 
 <unk> Canada Inc . ( Bell holding company ) – 50 % 
 Bell Canada Enterprises – 74 @.@ 67 % ( net ownership 28 % ) 
 BCE Master Trust Fund ( investment fund of Bell 's pension plan ) – 25 @.@ 33 % ( net ownership 9 @.@ 5 % ) 
 Kilmer Sports ( holding company of Larry Tanenbaum ) – 25 % 
 This ownership structure ensures that , at the shareholder level , Rogers and Bell vote their overall 75 % interest in the company together and thus decisions on the management of the company must be made by consensus of the two . ( If Rogers and Bell owned their interests directly , either Rogers or Bell could be overruled by its competitor in combination with Tanenbaum . ) As such , Rogers and Bell have agreed that their previously four of six ( now six of eight ) directors on the MLSE board will always vote together , and thus that any disagreements between the two companies will be settled privately without the involvement of Tanenbaum . Bell has indicated that the involvement of Bell 's pension fund is , at least in part , intended to ensure Bell can retain its existing 18 % interest in the Montreal Canadiens , as NHL rules prevent any shareholder that owns more than 30 % of a team from holding an ownership position in any other team . As a result of Bell and Rogers having co @-@ ownership in MLSE , the regional broadcasts of Maple Leafs , Raptors and Toronto FC games are split between Bell 's TSN and Rogers ' Sportsnet . 
 In 2015 MLSE initiated a corporate restructuring , with the plan to transfer most of its assets to another holding company , named " Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment Partnership " ( <unk> ) , which would be wholly owned , directly and indirectly , by MLSE . 
 = = Assets = = 
 = = = Sports teams = = = 
 Toronto Maple Leafs ( National Hockey League ) – Valued at $ 1 @.@ 15 billion USD in 2015 , 3rd in the NHL 
 Toronto Raptors ( National Basketball Association ) – Valued at $ 920 million USD in 2015 , 14th in the NBA 
 Toronto FC ( Major League Soccer ) – Valued at $ 175 million USD in 2015 , 5th in MLS 
 Toronto Marlies ( American Hockey League ) 
 Toronto FC II ( United Soccer League ) 
 TFC Academy ( League1 Ontario ) 
 Raptors 905 ( NBA D @-@ League ) 
 Note that the valuations done by Forbes are estimates and are not based on numbers provided by MLSE . 
 = = = Facilities and properties = = = 
 = = = = Owns = = = = 
 Air Canada Centre – a multi @-@ purpose indoor arena in downtown Toronto home to the Maple Leafs and Raptors which was constructed at a cost of $ 265 million 
 Maple Leaf Square ( 37 @.@ 5 % ) – a real estate development adjacent to the Air Canada Centre , developed in partnership with fellow <unk> subsidiary Cadillac Fairview , which includes , among other tenants , the following businesses operated by MLSE : 
 Real Sports Bar & Grill – a sports @-@ themed restaurant 
 Real Sports Apparel – a sports clothing store 
 <unk> – an upscale restaurant on the corner of Bremner and York streets 
 = = = = Invested in and operates ( owned by the City of Toronto ) = = = = 
 BMO Field – home of Toronto FC and the Canadian men 's national soccer team ( CONCACAF ) 
 Ricoh Coliseum – home of the Marlies 
 BioSteel Centre – practice facility for the Raptors 
 = = = = Invested in = = = = 
 MasterCard Centre – practice facility for the Maple Leafs and Marlies 
 KIA Training Ground – practice facility for Toronto FC and Toronto FC II , and home of the TFC Academy 
 Lamport Stadium – former home of the TFC Academy 
 = = = Television channels = = = 
 Leafs TV – a specialty channel devoted to the Maple Leafs and Marlies ( valued at $ 19 million on behalf of the CRTC in 2012 ) 
 NBA TV Canada – a localized version of NBA TV , a US basketball channel , which also devotes part of its schedule to specific coverage of the Raptors ( valued at $ 21 million on behalf of the CRTC in 2012 ) 
 = = Staff = = 
 = = = Board of Directors = = = 
 Larry Tanenbaum – Kilmer Sports ( Non @-@ Executive Chairman of the Board ) 
 George A. Cope – BCE and Bell Canada 
 Dale Lastman – Goodmans LLP 
 Guy Laurence – Rogers Communications 
 Edward Rogers III – Rogers Communications 
 Anthony <unk> – Rogers Communications 
 Bernard Le Duc – Bell Canada 
 <unk> <unk> – Bell Canada 
 = = = Executive team = = = 
 Michael <unk> – President and CEO 
 Brendan Shanahan – President and Alternate Governor , Toronto Maple Leafs 
 Masai Ujiri – President and General Manager , Basketball Operations 
 Bill Manning – President , Toronto FC 
 = José Sarria = 
 José Julio Sarria also known as The Grand Mere , Absolute Empress I de San Francisco , and the Widow Norton ( December 13 , 1922 – August 19 , 2013 ) was an American political activist from San Francisco , California who , in 1961 , became the first openly gay candidate for public office in the United States . He is also remembered for performing as a drag queen at the Black Cat Bar and as the founder of the Imperial Court System . 
 Sarria was born to Julio Sarria and Maria Dolores Maldonado . His parents did not marry and his father showed no interest in his son 's life . Maria initially raised José on her own , but when this became too difficult she placed him with another couple . Both they and his mother indulged his early interest in wearing girl 's clothing . Sarria showed an affinity for languages , which led to his first serious romance with another man . Sarria tutored Paul Kolish , an Austrian baron who had fled from the Nazis . Sarria and Kolish fell in love , and their relationship endured until Kolish and his son were killed in a car accident in 1947 . 
 Sarria served in the United States Army during World War II . Following his discharge , he studied to become a teacher and frequented the Black Cat . He met waiter Jimmy Moore , whom Sarria described as " the love of [ his ] life " . Sarria was hired as a cocktail waiter . Following a conviction on a morals charge , Sarria , realizing he could not now become a certified teacher , began performing in drag . He appeared regularly at the Black Cat . An early LGBT activist , Sarria co @-@ founded several homophile organizations , including the League for Civil Education , the Tavern Guild and the Society for Individual Rights . Sarria became the first openly gay candidate for public office in the United States when he ran for the San Francisco Board of Supervisors in 1961 . In 1964 Sarria declared himself " Empress José I , The Widow Norton " and founded the Imperial Court System , which grew to become an international association of charitable organizations . 
 Following the closure of the Black Cat in 1964 , Sarria went to work with restaurateur Pierre Parker . The pair operated French restaurants at World 's Fairs . While at the 1964 New York World 's Fair , Sarria learned that Jimmy Moore had committed suicide . Sarria worked at several more Fairs before retiring in 1974 . After living with Parker in Phoenix , Arizona for several years , Sarria returned to San Francisco . He continued to reign over the Courts for 43 years , before abdicating in 2007 . For his lifetime of activism , the city of San Francisco renamed a section of 16th Street in Sarria 's honor . 
 = = Family history = = 
 Sarria was born in San Francisco , California to Maria Dolores Maldonado and Julio Sarria . His family was of Spanish and Colombian origin . His mother Maria was born in Bogotá to an upper class and politically active family . During the events of the Thousand Days War and following her mother 's death , Maria sought out the protection of her mother 's friend , General Rafael Uribe Uribe , to escape Colombia . The general located Maria 's surviving uncle , who took her to the American consulate . There she was made a ward of the United States and relocated to Panama . " My mother got to Panama with directions to the home of a family called Kopp . He was the chairman of the big German beer company there " , said Sarria . " She went to work for the <unk> . ... My mother was the upstairs maid and took care of the children . " In 1919 she relocated to Guatemala City but remained there for just six months and , in 1920 , sailed to San Francisco . As Sarria reported it , " Now on the boat is where my mother met my father , Julio Sarria . He came from a large and very wealthy family , very well known . ... His grandparents came from Spain . " 
 Maria initially worked for the woman who sponsored her passage to the United States and then took a job as a maid with a family named Jost . Julio was the <unk> d ' at the Palace Hotel . Julio courted Maria until she realized she was pregnant . Their son José was born on December 12 . His birth certificate reads 1923 but Sarria believed he was born in 1922 . Julio and Maria never married . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sarria 's mother continued to work for the Jost family but it became increasingly difficult for her to fulfil her job responsibilities and care for an infant . Maria made arrangements for him to be raised by another couple , <unk> and Charles Millen . <unk> had recently lost her youngest child to diphtheria and suffered severe depression . Her doctor suggested she take in another child to raise and after meeting with her Maria agreed to let her raise José . José came to consider the <unk> and their children to be his second family . Maria bought a house and moved the <unk> and José into it . 
 Sarria did not have a relationship with his birth father , a man who showed zero interest in him and failed to provide his family with financial support . Julio Sarria was eventually arrested for failure to pay child support . A judge ordered that he pay $ 5 to be released ; this money was then turned over for Jose 's care . Julio was arrested each month until he returned to Nicaragua in around 1926 or 1927 ; each time he paid the $ 5 and was released . Julio died in Nicaragua in 1945 . Years later , José learned that his father had acknowledged him as his first @-@ born . 
 Sarria attended the Emerson School for kindergarten and then , because he spoke only Spanish , was sent to private schools until learning English . Sarria began dressing in female clothes at an early age and his family indulged him , allowing him occasionally to go on family outings dressed as a girl . In his youth he studied ballet , tap dancing and singing . 
 When Sarria was around ten years old , he asked his mother how much money they had in the bank . Maria , who gave her money to her employer Mr. Jost to invest , asked to see the books . She discovered that Jost had been embezzling from her and from the other women whom she had referred to him . Jost was arrested , convicted and deported . Maria sued Jost 's corporate partners and received a settlement but never recovered the bulk of the money . Unable to afford her house payments , Maria moved José and the Millen family to Redwood City in 1932 . 
 As a teenager Sarria enrolled in Commerce High School , where he took advanced classes in French and German . With his Spanish and English these brought his total languages to four . His facility with languages led to his first serious relationship with another man . Sarria tutored Paul Kolish , an Austrian baron who fled to Switzerland when the Nazis invaded Austria . He brought with him his wife and son Jonathan , each of whom suffered from asthma and tuberculosis . When his wife died , he brought Jonathan to America . Kolish found himself falling in love with his tutor and Sarria 's family welcomed him and his son . Sarria graduated from high school and enrolled in college to study home economics . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Following the attack on Pearl Harbor , Sarria became determined to join the military , despite being , at just under five feet tall , too short to meet the Army 's height requirement . He seduced a major who was attached to the San Francisco recruiting station on the condition that the major approve Sarria 's enlistment . Sarria was approved and entered the Army Reserve , continuing his studies as he waited to be called up to active duty . Shortly before he was scheduled for induction in the regular Army , his beloved second father , Charles Millen , died of a heart attack . Sarria 's induction was delayed a month , then he was sworn in and ordered to Sacramento , California , for basic training with the Signal Corps . 
 Because of his fluency in several languages , Sarria was assigned to Intelligence School . However , following a routine background check for security clearance , he was advised that he would no longer be in the program . Sarria assumed that it was because investigators discovered his homosexuality . " I mean I had no lisp , but I wasn 't the most masculine guy in town ... So I think that they figured that I was a little bit gay . " Sarria officially remained attached to the Signal Corps but was ordered to Cooks and Bakers School and trained as a cook . After graduating from cooking school , he was assigned to train as a scout , but deliberately failed the training because of the dangerous nature of the assignment . He was then assigned to the motor pool . 
 Through his work at the motor pool , Sarria met a young officer named Major <unk> . He became the major 's orderly , eventually running an officers ' mess in occupied Germany where he cooked for <unk> and about ten other officers . He was discharged from the Army in 1947 , at the rank of Staff Sergeant . 
 Upon Sarria 's return from overseas , Kolish began to worry about their future . The United States had no legal recognition for same @-@ sex relationships and Kolish looked for a way to provide for Sarria after Kolish 's death . He proposed marriage to Sarria 's mother Maria . Maria was willing , but José refused to allow it . Given no other choice , Kolish contacted his only remaining adult relative , a brother who lived in Hollywood , and left instructions for the care of Sarria and his family . 
 On Christmas Day 1947 , Kolish and his son were struck by a drunk driver while driving to spend the holiday with Sarria and his family . Both were killed . The coroner determined that Jonathan died first , meaning that Paul 's brother inherited everything . The brother ignored Paul 's wishes regarding Sarria . " I would have gotten one of the houses " , Sarria claimed , " but he only gave me a little money and one ring . He claimed that was all Paul wanted me to have . He was so evil . He said afterwards , ' If you expect anything else , you 're not going to get it . ' " 
 = = The Nightingale of Montgomery Street = = 
 Following his military service , Sarria returned to San Francisco . He enrolled in college with plans of becoming a teacher . He and his sister Teresa began frequenting the Black Cat Bar , a center of the city 's Beat and bohemian scene . Sarria and Teresa both became smitten with a waiter named Jimmy Moore and bet as to which of them could get him into bed first . José won the bet and soon Moore and he were lovers . Sarria began covering for Moore when he was unable to work and soon Black Cat owner Sol Stoumen hired him as a cocktail waiter . 
 At around this time , Sarria was arrested for solicitation in a sting operation at the St. Francis Hotel . Sarria maintained his innocence , stating that the arresting officer knew him personally . " But they had to make an example of somebody ... I was in the wrong place at the wrong time . " Nonetheless , he was convicted and subjected to a large fine . Sarria , understanding that his conviction meant he could never become certified as a teacher , dropped out of college . Unsure of how to find work , he took the advice of a drag performer named Michelle and entered a drag contest at an Oakland bar called Pearl 's . Sarria took second place , winning a two @-@ week performance contract at the bar at $ 50 a week . " I decided then to be the most notorious impersonator or homosexual or fairy or whatever you wanted to call me – and you would pay me for it . " Returning to San Francisco , he picked up some small singing jobs while still cocktail waiting at the Black Cat . 
 One night at the Black Cat , Sarria recognized the piano player 's rendition of Bizet 's opera Carmen and began singing arias from the opera while he delivered drinks . This quickly led to a schedule of three to four shows a night , along with a regular Sunday afternoon show . Sarria was billed as " The Nightingale of Montgomery Street " . Initially he focused on singing parodies of popular torch songs . Soon , however , Sarria was performing full @-@ blown parodic operas in his natural high tenor . His specialty was a re @-@ working of Carmen set in modern @-@ day San Francisco . Sarria as Carmen would prowl through the popular cruising area Union Square . The audience cheered " Carmen " on as she dodged the vice squad and made her escape . 
 Sarria encouraged patrons to be as open and honest as possible . " People were living double lives and I didn 't understand it . It was persecution . Why be ashamed of who you are ? " He exhorted the clientele , " There 's nothing wrong with being gay – the crime is getting caught " , and " United we stand , divided they catch us one by one " . At closing time he would call upon patrons to join hands and sing " God Save Us Nelly Queens " to the tune of " God Save the Queen " . Sometimes he would bring the crowd outside to sing the final verse to the men across the street in jail , who had been arrested in raids earlier in the night . Speaking of this ritual in the film Word is Out , gay journalist George Mendenhall said : 
 It sounds silly , but if you lived at that time and had the oppression coming down from the police department and from society , there was nowhere to turn ... and to be able to put your arms around other gay men and to be able to stand up and sing ' God Save Us Nelly Queens ' ... we were really not saying ' God Save Us Nelly Queens . ' We were saying ' We have our rights , <unk> 
 Sarria fought against police harassment , both of gays and of gay bars . Raids on gay bars were routine , with everyone inside the raided bar taken into custody and charged with such crimes as being " inmates in a disorderly house " . Although the charges were routinely dropped , the arrested patrons ' names , addresses and workplaces were printed in the newspapers . When charges were not dropped , the arrested men usually quietly pleaded guilty . Sarria encouraged men to plead not guilty and demand a jury trial . Following Sarria 's advice , more and more gay men began demanding jury trials , so many that court <unk> were overloaded and judges began expecting that prosecutors have actual evidence against the accused before going to trial . One favored harassment technique , employed especially on Halloween after midnight , was to arrest drag queens under an old city ordinance that made it illegal for a man to dress in women 's clothing with an " intent to deceive " . In consultation with attorney Melvin Belli , Sarria countered this tactic by distributing labels to his fellow drag queens ( hand @-@ made , in the shape of a black cat 's head ) that read " I am a boy " . If confronted , the queen would simply display the tag to prove that there was no intent to deceive . Sarria 's actions helped bring an end to Halloween police raids . Along with Guy Strait , Sarria formed the League for Civil Education ( LCE ) in 1960 or 1961 . The LCE ran educational programs on the topic of homosexuality and provided support for men being ostracized for being gay and for those caught in police raids . 
 = = Political candidacy = = 
 During an intensive period of police pressure after the 1959 San Francisco mayoral election , in which the supposed leniency of city government toward homosexuals became an issue , Sarria ran for the San Francisco Board of Supervisors in 1961 , becoming the first openly gay candidate for public office in the United States . Although Sarria never expected to win he almost did win by default . On the last day for candidates to file petitions , city officials realized that there were fewer than five candidates running for the five open seats , which would have guaranteed Sarria a seat . By the end of the day , a total of 34 candidates had filed . LCE co @-@ founder Strait began printing the LCE News in part to support Sarria 's candidacy . Sarria garnered some 6 @,@ 000 votes in the city @-@ wide race , finishing ninth . This was not enough to win a seat but was enough to shock political pundits and set in motion the idea that a gay voting bloc could wield real power in city politics . " [ He ] put the gay vote on the map " , said Terence Kissack , former executive director of the GLBT Historical Society . " He made it visible and showed there was a constituency . " As Sarria put it , " From that day on , nobody ran for anything in San Francisco without knocking on the door of the gay community . " 
 In 1962 , Sarria along with bar owners and employees formed the Tavern Guild , the country 's first gay business association . The Guild raised money for legal fees and bail for people arrested at gay bars and helped bar owners coordinate their response to the harassment by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the police . 
 Sarria continued to perform and agitate at the Black Cat until , after some 15 years of unrelenting police pressure , the bar lost its liquor license in 1963 . The Black Cat stayed open as a luncheonette for a few more months before finally closing for good in February 1964 . 
 = = José I , The Widow Norton = = 
 With the demise of the Black Cat , Sarria helped found the Society for Individual Rights ( SIR ) in 1963 . SIR grew out of a split between Sarria and Strait over the direction that LCE was heading . Strait and his supporters wanted to focus more on publishing the group 's newsletter , while Sarria and his backers wanted to maintain focus on street @-@ level organizing . SIR sponsored both social and political functions , including bowling leagues , bridge clubs , voter registration drives and " Candidates ' Nights " and published its own magazine , Vector . In association with the Tavern Guild , SIR printed and distributed " Pocket Lawyers " . These pocket @-@ sized guides offered advice on what to do if arrested or harassed by police . SIR lasted for 17 years . 
 Crowned Queen of the Beaux Arts Ball in 1964 by the Tavern Guild , Sarria , stating that he was " already a queen " , proclaimed himself " Her Royal Majesty , Empress of San Francisco , José I , The Widow Norton " . Sarria devised the name " Widow Norton " as a reference to the much @-@ celebrated citizen of 19th century San Francisco , Joshua Norton , who had declared himself Emperor of the United States and Protector of Mexico in 1859 . Sarria organized elaborate annual pilgrimages to lay flowers on Norton 's grave in the Woodlawn Cemetery in Colma , California . He purchased a plot adjacent to Norton 's where he is now interred . 
 Sarria 's assumption of the title of Empress led to the establishment of the Imperial Court System , a network of non @-@ profit charitable organizations throughout the United States , Canada and Mexico that raises money for various beneficiaries . Sarria is much revered within the hierarchy of the Imperial Court System and is affectionately and informally known as " Mama " or " Mama José " among Imperial Court members . The " José Honors Awards " are presented to Imperial Court dignitaries and others in a bi @-@ annual banquet held in Sarria 's honor . 
 = = Restaurateur = = 
 In 1964 , Sarria went into business with restaurateur Pierre Parker , who owned restaurants called " Lucky Pierre " in Carmel , California and New York City . They met when Parker wandered into the Black Cat one night and they struck up a friendship . In addition to his restaurants , Parker held the French food concession for the World 's Fair . He invited Sarria to join him at the 1964 New York World 's Fair . 
 While working at the Fair , Sarria learned that his longtime companion , Jimmy Moore , had died . Moore had been a frequent drinker throughout their relationship and had been arrested a number of times for public drunkenness . A judge finally told Moore that the next time he was arrested he would be given the maximum sentence . Moore was arrested again and , scared of a long prison term , hanged himself in jail . Although devastated , Sarria could not come home from the exposition . At the end of the season he returned and he and Moore 's father consoled each other . " And so , that ended my big romance . The great love of my life . It carried on for nine years . " 
 Sarria and Parker worked together through both seasons of the New York fair , Expo 67 in Montreal , <unk> ' 68 in San Antonio , Texas and Expo ' 74 in Spokane , Washington , after which Sarria retired . He and Parker moved to Phoenix , Arizona , where Sarria lived until returning to San Francisco in 1977 . He remained politically active , endorsing the candidacies of Harvey Milk for the Board of Supervisors . In 1977 , Milk would win the board seat that Sarria had sought in 1961 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Sarria and members of the Imperial Court appeared along with other notable drag queens in the 1995 film To Wong Foo , Thanks for Everything ! Julie Newmar . They played the judges of the " Drag Queen of the Year Contest " that opened the film . 
 In 2005 , Sarria found himself at the center of a legal controversy over his role on the jury in the 1991 murder trial of Clifford Bolden . Bolden had been sentenced to death in 1991 for the 1986 murder of Henry Michael Pederson , whom Bolden allegedly picked up in a bar in San Francisco 's Castro district . Bolden 's attorneys claimed that Sarria , who was not on the jury that convicted Bolden but was seated as an alternate for the penalty phase , had known Bolden 's lover , Pederson and another of the jurors . They alleged that he had concealed this knowledge in order to remain on the jury and push for a death sentence . Sarria acknowledged having spoken occasionally with the other juror but denied the rest of the allegations . Sarria was cleared of wrongdoing in February 2008 . 
 Sarria was honored in 2005 with the San Francisco LGBT Pride Celebration Committee 's Lifetime Achievement Grand Marshal Award . On May 25 , 2006 , Sarria 's lifetime of activism was commemorated when the city of San Francisco renamed a section of 16th Street in the Castro to José Sarria Court . A plaque outlining Sarria 's accomplishments is embedded in the sidewalk in front of the Harvey Milk Memorial Branch of the San Francisco Public Library , which is located at 1 José Sarria Court . In 2009 , the California State Assembly honored Sarria during an official celebration of LGBT Pride Month on June 21 . 
 Sarria reigned over the Imperial Court System until February 17 , 2007 , abdicating the throne in favor of his first heir apparent , Nicole Murray @-@ Ramirez , who assumed the title Empress Nicole the Great , Queen Mother of the Americas . 
 Sarria left San Francisco in 1996 , settling in the Palm Springs , California , area for more than a decade before moving to Los Ranchos de Albuquerque , New Mexico , a suburb of Albuquerque . On granting Sarria its Lifetime Achievement Award in March 2012 , Albuquerque Pride noted that he was living in Los Ranchos in " a cute little <unk> and is enjoying his time raising chickens . " The " <unk> " was the guest house adjacent to the home of Tony Ross and his husband PJ Sedillo ( also known as Fontana DeVine , Imperial Dowager Empress VI of the United Court of the <unk> ) ; Ross and Sedillo served as Sarria 's caregivers in the last three years of his life . 
 = = Death = = 
 Sarria died of adrenal cancer at the age of 89 or 90 on August 19 , 2013 , at his home in Los Ranchos de Albuquerque . Obituaries and tributes appeared around the United States in media including The Advocate , <unk> Public Radio ( San Francisco ) , The New York Times and the San Francisco Chronicle . Media outside the United States that reported the death include Gay Star News , an online newspaper based in London ; <unk> , a monthly LGBT magazine in Warsaw , Poland ; Roze Golf , a regional LGBT radio program and online magazine based in Enschede , Netherlands ; the website of RTVE , the Spanish national public television network ; and Svenska Dagbladet , a daily newspaper in Stockholm , Sweden . 
 Sarria 's imperial @-@ drag @-@ themed funeral was held on September 6 , 2013 at Grace Cathedral of San Francisco , with the Right Rev. Marc Handley Andrus , bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of California , presiding ; some 1 @,@ 000 mourners attended the service . Various local and state elected officials participated , including California State Sen. Mark Leno , former San Francisco mayor Art Agnos , San Francisco Treasurer Jose Cisneros , and members of the San Francisco Board of Supervisors . Leaders of the Imperial Court System and the Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence attended in full regalia , with the formal mourning dress for the court dictated by Sarria in advance . Other dignitaries at the funeral included Stuart Milk , nephew of politician Harvey Milk and head of the Harvey Milk Foundation . 
 Immediately following the funeral , a cortege of approximately 500 mourners accompanied Sarria 's body to Woodlawn Memorial Park in Colma , where he was buried with full military honors in a plot he had previously purchased at the foot of the grave of Joshua Norton . 
 = = Archives & memorabilia = = 
 Sarria documented his public and private activities throughout his life , amassing an extensive collection of archival materials and artifacts . He donated the majority of his papers and memorabilia , along with a sampling of his costumes , to the GLBT Historical Society , an archive and research center in San Francisco . An initial donation came in 1996 followed by another substantial body of material in 2012 . 
 In addition , Sarria gave a small selection of costumes , accessories and documents to the Oakland Museum of California — including a cape and headdress that he wore in performances of his comic version of Aida at The Black Cat . Sarria continued to own a smaller collection of art , artifacts and documentation ; he had said that he expected to eventually donate those materials to the GLBT Historical Society . An article published in The Atlantic in 2011 asserted that Sarria had also donated materials to the Smithsonian Institution . This claim appears to be erroneous , as Sarria stated in 2012 that he declined the Smithsonian 's request . 
 = Robert Garran = 
 Sir Robert Randolph Garran GCMG KC ( 10 February 1867 – 11 January 1957 ) was an Australian lawyer and the first Australian public servant , an early leading expert in Australian constitutional law , the first employee of the Government of Australia and the first Solicitor @-@ General of Australia . Garran spent thirty @-@ one years as permanent head of the Attorney @-@ General 's Department , providing advice to ten different Prime Ministers ( from Barton to Lyons ) . He played a significant behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role in the Australian federation movement , as adviser to Edmund Barton and chair of the Drafting Committee at the 1897 – 1898 Constitutional Convention . 
 In addition to his professional work , Garran was also an important figure in the development of the city of Canberra during its early years . He founded several important cultural associations , organised the creation of the Canberra University College , and later contributed to the establishment of the Australian National University . Garran published at least eight books and many journal articles throughout his lifetime , covering such topics as constitutional law , the history of federalism in Australia , and German language poetry . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Garran was born in Sydney , New South Wales , the only son ( among seven children ) of journalist and politician Andrew Garran and his wife Mary Isham . His parents were committed to social justice , Mary campaigning for issues such as the promotion of education for women , and Andrew advocating Federation and covering reformist movements as editor of The Sydney Morning Herald and later promoting them as a member of the New South Wales Legislative Council . 
 The family lived in Phillip Street in central Sydney . Garran 's mother " had a deep distrust , well justified in those days , of milkman 's milk " and so she kept a cow in the backyard , which would walk on its own to The Domain each day to graze and return twice a day to be milked . The <unk> later lived in the suburb of Darlinghurst , just to the east of the centre of the city . 
 Garran attended Sydney Grammar School from the age of ten , starting in 1877 . He was a successful student , and became School Captain in 1884 . He then studied arts and law at the University of Sydney , where he was awarded scholarships for classics , mathematics and general academic ability . Garran graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree with first @-@ class honours in 1888 , winning the University 's Medal in Philosophy , and a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1889 . 
 After graduating , Garran began to study for the Bar examination . He was employed for a year with a firm of Sydney solicitors , and the next year served as associate to Justice William Charles Windeyer of the Supreme Court of New South Wales . Windeyer had a reputation for being a harsh and inflexible judge , particularly in criminal cases , where he was said to have " a rigorous and unrelenting sense of the retribution that he believed criminal justice demanded , [ and ] a sympathy verging on the emotional for the victims of crime . " Garran however offered a different view , saying that " those who knew him well knew that under a brusque exterior he was the kindest of men " , and his reputation had to some degree been created by misrepresentation . In 1891 , Garran was admitted to the New South Wales Bar , where he commenced practice as a barrister , primarily working in equity . 
 = = Federation movement = = 
 Garran , like his father , was strongly involved in the Australian Federation movement , the movement which sought to unite the British colonies in Australia ( and , in early proposals , New Zealand ) into one federated country . The first Constitutional Convention was held in 1891 in the chamber of the Legislative Council of New South Wales in Macquarie Street , Sydney , around the corner from Garran 's chambers in Phillip Street ; Garran regularly attended and sat in the public gallery to see " history ... in the making under my very eyes . " Garran would later recall with approval that the 1891 convention was the first with the courage to face the " lion in the path " , the issue of customs duties and tariffs , which had previously divided states such as Victoria , who were in favour of protectionism , and states such as New South Wales , who were in favour of free trade . In Garran 's view a clause proposed at the convention , which allowed for tariffs against international trade while ensuring free trade domestically ( the predecessor to the final section 92 of the Constitution of Australia ) , " expressed the terms on which New South Wales was prepared to face the lion . " 
 Garran became involved with the work of Edmund Barton , who would later be the first Prime Minister of Australia but at the time was the de facto leader of the federation movement in New South Wales as Sir Henry Parkes declined into poor health . Garran , along with others such as Atlee Hunt , worked essentially as secretaries to Barton 's federation campaign , drafting correspondence and planning meetings . At one late night meeting , planning a speech Barton was to give in the Sydney suburb of Ashfield , Barton coined the phrase " For the first time , we have a nation for a continent , and a continent for a nation " ; Garran recalled that the now famous phrase " would have been unrecorded if I had not happened to jot it down . " 
 In June 1893 , when the Australasian Federal League was formed at a meeting in the Sydney Town Hall , Garran joined immediately and was made a member of the executive committee . He was one of the League 's four delegates to the 1893 Corowa Conference and a League delegate to the 1896 Bathurst Conference , informal conferences held between members of the League ( primarily based in Sydney ) , the Australian Natives ' Association ( mainly Victorian ) and other pro @-@ federation groups . At Corowa he was part of an impromptu group organised by John Quick which drafted a resolution , passed at the Conference , calling on the colonial parliaments to hold a directly elected Constitutional Convention to be charged with drafting the Bill for the Constitution of Australia . The proposal , which came to be known as the Corowa Plan , was later accepted at the 1895 Premiers ' Conference and formed the basis for the federation process over the following five years . 
 In 1897 , Garran published The Coming Commonwealth , an influential book on the history of the Federation movement and the debate over the 1891 draft of the Constitution of Australia . The book was based on material he prepared for a course on federalism and federal systems of government , which he had planned to give at the University of Sydney , but which failed to attract a sufficient number of students . Nevertheless , the book was both unique and popular , as one of the few books on the topic at the time , with the first edition quickly selling out . Soon after its publication the Premier of New South Wales George Reid , who had been elected as a New South Wales delegate to the 1897 – 1898 Constitutional Convention , invited Garran to be his secretary . At the Convention , Reid appointed him secretary of the Drafting Committee , at Barton 's request ; he was also a member of the Press Committee . 
 Garran recorded in a letter to his family during the convention 's Melbourne sitting that : 
 The committee professes to find me very useful in unravelling the conundrums sent down by the finance committee ... The last two nights I have found the drafting committee <unk> [ tired ] and despairing , and now they have pitched the conundrums at me and gone out for a smoke ; and then I worked out algebraic formulas to clear the thing up , drafted clauses accordingly , and when the committee returned we had plain sailing . 
 Garran joked that the long work of the drafting committee breached the Factory Acts , the group ( primarily Barton , Richard O 'Connor , John Downer and Garran ) often working late into the night preparing drafts for the convention to consider and debate the next morning . On the evening before the convention 's last day , Barton had gone to bed exhausted in the small hours , Garran and Charles Gavan Duffy finishing the final schedule of amendments at breakfast time . The convention concluded successfully , approving a final draft which would ultimately , aside from a small amendment arranged at the last minute in London , become the Constitution of Australia . 
 Throughout 1898 , following the completion of the proposed Constitution , Garran participated in the campaign promoting Federation leading up to the referendums at which the people of the colonies voted whether or not to approve the Constitution . He contributed a daily column to the Evening News , and had humorous poems critiquing opponents of federation published in The Bulletin . The following year , he began working with Quick on the Annotated Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth , a reference work on the Constitution including a history , and detailed discussion of each section analysing its meaning and its development at the Conventions . Published in 1901 , the Annotated Constitution , commonly referred to simply as " Quick & Garran " , soon became the standard work on the Constitution and is still regarded as one of the most important works on the subject . 
 = = Public service = = 
 On the day that Federation was completed and Australia created , 1 January 1901 , Garran was made a Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George ( CMG ) " in recognition of services in connection with the Federation of Australian Colonies and the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia " , and was appointed secretary and Permanent Head of the Attorney @-@ General 's Department by the first Attorney @-@ General of Australia , Alfred Deakin . Garran was the first , and for a time the only , public servant employed by the Government of Australia . Garran later said of this time that : 
 I was not only the head [ of the department ] , but the tail . I was my own clerk and messenger . My first duty was to write out with my own hand Commonwealth Gazette No. 1 proclaiming the establishment of the Commonwealth and the appointment of ministers of state , and to send myself down with it to the government printer . 
 In this role , Garran was responsible for organising the first federal election in March 1901 , and for organising the transfer of various government departments from the states to the federal government , including the Department of Defence , the postal and telegraphic services ( now part of the Department of Communications , Information Technology and the Arts ) and the Department of Trade and Customs ( now part of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade ) . As parliamentary drafter , Garran also developed legislation to administer those new departments and other important legislation . 
 Garran and his fellow staff aimed for a simple style of legislative drafting , a goal enabled by the fact that there was no pre @-@ existing federal legislation on which their work would have to be based . In Garran 's opinion the approach , which was put into practice many years before the similarly principled plain English movement became popular in government in the 1970s , was intended " to set an example of clear , straightforward language , free from technical jargon . " Subsequent parliamentary drafters have noted that Garran was unusual in this respect for deliberately setting out to achieve and improve a particular drafting style , and that it was not until the early 1980s that such discipline among drafters re @-@ emerged . 
 However , Garran himself admitted that his drafting could be overly simplistic , citing the first customs and excise legislation ( the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901 ) , developed with the Minister for Trade and Customs Charles Kingston , as an example of the style taken to excess . The style was also once parodied by foundation High Court Justice Richard O 'Connor as follows : 
 Every man shall wear – 
 ( a ) Coat 
 ( b ) Vest 
 ( c ) Trousers 
 Penalty : £ 100 . 
 In 1902 , Garran married Hilda Robson . Together they would have four sons , Richard ( born 1903 ) , John ( 1905 ) , Andrew ( 1906 ) and Isham Peter ( 1910 ) . At this time the family lived in Melbourne , and the boys all attended Melbourne Grammar School and later studied at the University of Melbourne , attending Trinity College there . 
 The Attorney @-@ General 's Department also managed litigation on behalf of the government . Initially the department contracted private law firms to actually conduct the litigation , but in 1903 the office of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor was established , with Charles Powers the first to hold the job . The other Crown Solicitors that Garran worked with included Gordon Castle ( with whom he had also worked as a drafter ) and William <unk> . 
 Garran worked with several Attorneys @-@ General as Permanent Head of the Department . Garran regarded the first Attorney @-@ General , Alfred Deakin , as an excellent thinker and a natural lawyer , and on occasion " [ spoke ] of Deakin as the Balfour of Australian politics . " He was also very much impressed with the fifth Attorney @-@ General , Isaac Isaacs , who was an extremely diligent worker , and two time Attorney @-@ General Littleton Groom , who was " probably one of the most useful Ministers the Commonwealth has had . " 
 In 1912 , Garran was considered as a possible appointee to the High Court , following the expansion of the bench from five seats to seven and the death of Richard O 'Connor . Billy Hughes , Attorney @-@ General in the Fisher government at the time , later said Garran would have been appointed " but for the fact that he is too valuable a man for us to lose . We cannot spare him . " 
 = = = Solicitor @-@ General = = = 
 In 1916 , Garran was made the first Solicitor @-@ General of Australia ( the office was then known as Commonwealth Solicitor @-@ General ) by Billy Hughes , who had since become Prime Minister . The creation of the office and Garran 's appointment to it was to some degree recognition of his existing role as Permanent Head of the Attorney @-@ General 's Department , in which Garran gave legal advice to several successive governments , but it also represented a formal delegation of many of the powers and functions formerly exercised by the Attorney @-@ General . 
 Garran developed a strong relationship with Hughes , giving him legal advice on the World War I conscription plebiscites and on the range of regulations which were made under the War Precautions Act 1914 . The War Precautions Regulations had a broad scope , and were generally supported by the High Court , which adopted a much more flexible approach to the reach of the Commonwealth 's defence power during wartime . A substantial amount of Garran 's work during the war involved preparing and carrying out the regulations . Many of them were directed at maximising the economic aspect of the war effort and ensuring supplies of goods to Australian troops ; others were directed at controlling citizens or former citizens of the enemy Central Powers living in Australia . On one occasion , when Hughes had been informed that at a party hosted by a German man , the band had played " Das Lied der Deutschen " , Hughes asked Garran " By the way , what is this tune ? " to which Garran replied that it was Haydn 's melody to " Gott <unk> Franz den Kaiser " , and as it was used as the tune to several hymns " it was probably sung in half a dozen churches in Sydney last Sunday . " Hughes then said " Good Heavens ! I have played that thing with one finger hundreds of times . " 
 The partnership between Garran and Hughes is regarded by some as unusual , given that Garran was " tall , gentlemanly , wise and scholarly " , and patient with his staff , whereas Hughes was " short of stature [ and ] renowned for bursts of temper . " Nevertheless , the partnership was a successful one , with Hughes recognising the importance of Garran 's constitutional expertise , remarking once about the World War I period that " the best way to govern Australia was to have Sir Robert Garran at [ my ] elbow , with a fountain pen and a blank sheet of paper , and the War Precautions Act . " Likewise , Garran respected Hughes ' strong leadership style , which had been important in guiding the country through the war , although in describing the Nationalist Party 's loss in the 1922 federal election , Garran later said that " Hughes also overestimated his own hold on Parliament [ although ] his hold on the people was probably undiminished . " 
 Garran accompanied Hughes and Joseph Cook ( then the Minister for the Navy ) to the 1917 and 1918 meetings of the Imperial War Cabinet in London , United Kingdom , and was also part of the British Empire delegation to the 1919 Paris Peace Conference in Paris , France . There he was on several of the treaty drafting committees , and contributed to many provisions , notably the portions of the League of Nations Covenant relating to League of Nations mandates . Though focusing mainly on League of Nations matters , Garran and John Latham ( the head of Australian Naval Intelligence ) had the status of technical advisers to Hughes and Cook , and so could attend the main conference and any of the associated councils . Observing the proceedings , Garran admired the " moral and physical courage " of French premier Georges Clemenceau , whom he regarded as determined to protect France from Germany but in a measured and temperate way ; in Garran 's words , Clemenceau " always withstood the excessive demands of the French chauvinists , of the French army , and of Foch himself . " Garran viewed some similarities between British Prime Minister David Lloyd George and United States President Woodrow Wilson where others saw only differences , since Lloyd George " also had a strong vein of idealism in his character " , and Wilson could be pragmatic when the situation called for it , such as in discussions relating to American interests . Garran also met other political and military leaders at the conference , including T. E. Lawrence , " an Oxford youth of 29 – he looks 18 " , who was modest and " without any affectation ... in a company of two or three [ he ] could talk very interestingly , but at a larger gathering he was apt to be dumb . " 
 Following the war , Garran worked with Professor Harrison Moore of the University of Melbourne and South Australian judge Professor Jethro Brown on a report about proposed constitutional amendments which ultimately became the referendum questions put forward in the 1919 referendum . Garran had been made a Knight Bachelor in 1917 and was appointed as a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George ( KCMG ) in 1920 . Garran attended two Imperial Conferences , accompanying Prime Minister Stanley Bruce in 1923 and in 1930 joining Prime Minister James Scullin and Attorney @-@ General Frank Brennan , chair of the Drafting Committee which prepared drafts of agreements on various topics , such as merchant shipping . He also attended the eleventh League of Nations conference that year with them in Geneva , Switzerland . At the Royal Commission on the Constitution in 1927 , Garran was invited to give evidence by Prime Minister Bruce , where he discussed the history and origins of the Constitution and the evolution of the institutions established under it . 
 Through the 1920s and early 1930s , Garran prepared annual summaries of legislative developments in Australia , highlighting important individual pieces of legislation for the Journal of Comparative Legislation and International Law ( now known as the International and Comparative Law Quarterly ) published by Oxford University Press . 
 Towards the end of his time as Solicitor @-@ General , Garran 's work included the preparation of the Debt Conversion Agreement between the Government of Australia and the governments of the states , which involved the federal government taking over and managing the debts of the individual states , following the 1928 referendum . 
 In 1927 , Garran had moved from his home in Melbourne , Victoria to the newly established capital Canberra , one of the first public officials to do so ( many government departments and their public servants did not move to Canberra until after World War II ) . He also worked within the Government to facilitate housing in Canberra for officials moving from other cities , and was involved in establishing cultural organisations in the city . In 1928 he was the inaugural President of the Canberra Rotary Club . In 1929 , he formed the Canberra University Association in order to promote the formation of a university in Canberra , and in 1930 organised the establishment of Canberra University College ( essentially a campus of the University of Melbourne ) which taught undergraduate courses , chairing its council for its first twenty @-@ three years . Throughout the 1920s and 1930s , Garran " consistently advocated the establishment of what he prophetically called ' a National University at Canberra ' " , which would be primarily for specialist research and postgraduate study , in areas particularly relating to Australia , such as foreign relations with Asia and the Pacific region . This vision was evidently influential on the establishment of the Australian National University ( ANU ) in 1946 , the only research @-@ only university in the country ( although in 1960 it amalgamated with Canberra University College to offer undergraduate courses ) . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Garran retired from his governmental positions on 9 February 1932 , a fixed retirement date on the day before his sixty @-@ fifth birthday . He soon returned to practise as a barrister , and within a month he was made a King 's Counsel ( KC ) . However , he occasionally carried out more prominent work . In 1932 , he was selected on the advice of now Attorney @-@ General John Latham to chair the Indian Defence Expenditure Tribunal , to advise on the dispute between India and the United Kingdom regarding the costs of the military defence of India . In 1934 , along with John Keating , William Somerville and David John Gilbert , he formed a committee which prepared The Case for Union , the Government of Australia 's official reply to the secessionist movement in the state of Western Australia . 
 Garran was also involved with the arts ; he was the vice @-@ president of the Canberra Musical Society , where he sang and played the clarinet , and in 1946 won a national song competition run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Garran also published translations of Heinrich Heine 's 1827 work Buch der Lieder ( " Book of Songs " ) in 1924 , and of the works of Franz Schubert and Robert Schumann in 1946 . 
 In 1937 , Garran was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George ( GCMG ) , the third time he had been knighted . Shortly after the establishment of the ANU in 1946 , Garran became its first graduate when he was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws . He had already been awarded such an honorary doctorate from the University of Melbourne in 1937 and later receiving one from his alma mater , the University of Sydney in 1952 . Garran served on ANU 's council from 1946 until 1951 . Garran 's influence on Canberra is remembered by the naming of the suburb of Garran , Australian Capital Territory , and his link with ANU is remembered by the naming of a chair in the university 's School of Law , by the naming of the hall of residence Burton & Garran Hall and by the naming of Garran house at Canberra Grammar School for his work with that school . 
 Garran died in 1957 in Canberra . He was granted a state funeral , the first given to a public servant of the Government of Australia . He was survived by his four sons ; his wife Hilda had died in 1936 . His memoirs , Prosper the Commonwealth , were published posthumously in 1958 , having been completed shortly before his death . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Garran 's " personality , like his prose , was devoid of pedantry and pomposity and , though dignified , was laced with a quizzical turn of humour . " His death " marked the end of a generation of public men for whom the cultural and the political were natural extensions of each other and who had the skills and talents to make such connections effortlessly . " At his death , Garran was one of the last remaining of the people involved with the creation of the Constitution of Australia . 
 Former Prime Minister John Howard , in describing Garran , said : 
 " I wonder though if we sometimes underestimate the changes , excitements , disruptions and adjustments previous generations have experienced . Sir Robert Garran knew the promise and reality of federation . He was part of the establishment of a public service which , in many ways , is clearly recognisable today . " 
 Garran 's friend Charles Daley , a long time civic administrator of the Australian Capital Territory , emphasised Garran 's contribution to the early development of the city of Canberra , particularly its cultural life , remarking at a celebratory dinner for Garran in 1954 that : 
 " There has hardly been a cultural movement in this city with which Sir Robert has not been identified in loyal and inspiring support , as his constant aim has been that Canberra should be not only a great political centre but also a shrine to foster those things that stimulate and enrich our national life ... his name will ever be inscribed in the annals , not only of Canberra , but of the Commonwealth as <unk> et <unk> nomen <unk> . 
 However Garran is perhaps best remembered as an expert on constitutional law , more so than for his other contributions to public service . On his experience of Federation and the Constitution , Garran was always enthusiastic : 
 " I 'm often asked ' has federation turned out as you expected ? ' Well yes and no . By and large the sort of thing we expected has happened but with differences . We knew the constitution was not perfect ; it had to be a compromise with all the faults of a compromise ... But , in spite of the unforeseen [ sic ] strains and stresses , the constitution has worked , on the whole , much as we thought it would . I think it now needs revision , to meet the needs of a changed world . But no @-@ one could wish the work undone , who tries to imagine , what , in these stormy days , would have been the plight of six disunited Australian colonies . " 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 The Canberra suburb of Garran , established in 1966 , was named after him . 
 In 1983 , the former Patent Office building - now occupied by the Federal Attorney General 's Department - was renamed Robert Garran Offices . The art deco building is within the Parliamentary Triangle of Canberra , and was constructed in 1932 at the corner of Kings Avenue and National Circuit , in Parkes , Australian Capital Territory . 
 = Tropical Storm Cyprien = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Cyprien ( JTWC designation : 08S ) was a short @-@ lived tropical cyclone that caused minor damage in Madagascar . Forming on December 30 , 2001 , Cyprien quickly strengthened in a slightly favorable environment . By January 2 , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) according to Météo @-@ France and 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . Later that day the storm made landfall in Morombe , at a weaker intensity , and dissipated early on January 3 . Throughout the affected areas , Cyprien destroyed 957 structures , leaving 1 @.@ 16 billion Malagasy franc ( 2002 MGF ; US $ 181 @,@ 000 ) in damages . No fatalities were reported ; however two people were listed as missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On December 26 , a cold front exited Mozambique in southeastern Africa into the Mozambique channel . Upon reaching open waters , the front developed an area of convection and later a circulation just inland from the coast on December 27 . The front dissipated but the circulation remained as a distinct low pressure area . Although there was high wind shear in the area , good divergence allowed for convection to continue developing . On December 30 , Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , designated the system as a tropical disturbance . Over the next two days , convection became increasingly organized , with banding features developing by December 31 . That day , MFR upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression , and around 0900 UTC , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Decreasing wind shear and moderate outflow would allow the system to intensify into a tropical storm . 
 On January 1 , 2002 , the JTWC classified the depression as a tropical storm , designating it as Tropical Cyclone 08S . The system rapidly organized shortly after and was further upgraded to a moderate tropical storm by Météo @-@ France at 0600 UTC , at which time the Meteorological Service of Madagascar gave it the name Cyprien . In response to a mid to upper @-@ level subtropical high pressure area , the storm tracked in a general eastward direction at 16 km / h ( 10 mph ) . Several hours after being named , the JTWC assessed Cyprien to have reached its peak winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . <unk> satellite passes indicated areas of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) winds early on January 2 , prompting Météo @-@ France to upgrade Cyprien to a severe tropical storm , with winds peaking at 100 km / h ( 65 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) . By this time , the central barometric pressure fell to 980 hPa ( mbar ) . 
 Later on January 2 , the combination of the subtropical ridge to the north , an approaching mid @-@ latitude trough and moderate to strong westerlies caused Severe Tropical Storm Cyprien to turn towards the southwest . Slight weakening took place shortly before the storm made landfall in Morombe ; maximum winds decreased to 50 mph ( 85 km / h 10 @-@ minute winds ) . Increased wind shear and interaction with land caused the deep convection to become substantially displaced to the east from the center of circulation . Early on January 3 , Cyprien was downgraded to a tropical depression by both agencies ; however , some areas were still reporting gale @-@ force winds . It turned to the northeast over land , dissipating late on January 3 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 The precursor to Cyprien dropped heavy rainfall in Mozambique , including 92 mm ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) in Beira . 
 Due to the low @-@ intensity of the storm , damages in southwestern Madagascar were moderate . Cyprien produced wind gusts as strong as 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Heavy rains also fell throughout the region , peaking at 232 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) . The hardest hit area was the city of Morombe ; a total of 900 people in the city were affected by the storm and two people were reportedly missing . Following an assessment of the storm 's impact , 180 homes and 16 administrative buildings were found to have been destroyed by Cyprien . Damages in the area amounted to 1 @.@ 1 billion Malagasy franc ( 2002 MGF ; US $ 172 @,@ 507 ) . North of Morombe , the city of Morondava also sustained significant damage ; roughly 1 @,@ 000 people were affected and 661 homes were destroyed . Numerous homes were inundated by floodwaters . Officials reported that floodwaters persisted until January 9 . Damages in the city amounted to 60 million MGF ( 2002 MGF ; US $ 9 @,@ 287 ) . In all , damages from the storm amounted to 1 @.@ 16 billion MGF ( 2002 MGF ; ~ US $ 181 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Following Cyprien , the Government of Madagascar did not request international assistance in post @-@ storm recovery . By January 10 , a cargo plane carrying 65 million MGF ( 2002 MGF ; US $ 10 @,@ 062 ) worth of relief supplies was deployed to the affected regions . The supplies , consisting of medical supplies , tents , and one tonne of rice , were given to local authorities to be distributed to the affected population . Sanitary items were also distributed by the government to avoid an outbreak of water @-@ borne diseases such as diarrhea and cholera . 
 = HMS Warrior ( 1905 ) = 
 HMS Warrior was a Warrior @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She was stationed in the Mediterranean when the First World War began and participated in the pursuit of the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau . Warrior was transferred to the Grand Fleet in December 1914 and remained there for the rest of her career . She was heavily damaged during the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , after which she withdrew and was later abandoned and sank in a rising sea . 
 = = Description = = 
 Warrior displaced 13 @,@ 550 long tons ( 13 @,@ 770 t ) as built and 14 @,@ 500 long tons ( 14 @,@ 700 t ) fully loaded . The ship had an overall length of 505 feet 4 inches ( 154 @.@ 0 m ) , a beam of 73 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 4 m ) and a draught of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . She was powered by four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 23 @,@ 650 indicated horsepower ( 17 @,@ 640 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 @.@ 3 knots ( 43 @.@ 2 km / h ; 26 @.@ 8 mph ) . The engines were powered by 19 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers and six cylindrical boilers . The ship carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 050 long tons ( 2 @,@ 080 t ) of coal and an additional 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 7 @,@ 960 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 740 km ; 9 @,@ 160 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Her main armament consisted of six BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mk X guns in single Mk V turrets distributed in two centerline turrets ( one each fore and one aft ) and four turrets disposed in the corners about the funnels . Her secondary armament of four BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk II or Mk V guns in single Mk II turrets was carried amidships , between the wing 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns . Twenty @-@ six Vickers QF 3 @-@ pounders were fitted , ten on turret roofs and eight each on the forward and aft superstructures . The last four ships of the Duke of Edinburgh @-@ class cruisers had a secondary armament of turreted 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns rather than the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns in casemates of the first two ships ; these latter four were sometimes referred to as the Warrior class . Because of the extra topweight of the turrets in comparison to their half @-@ sisters their stability was reduced which made them very good seaboats and steady gun platforms . The ship also mounted three submerged 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes , one of which was mounted in the stern . 
 = = Service = = 
 Warrior was ordered as part of the 1903 – 04 naval construction programme as the first of four armoured cruisers . She was laid down on 5 November 1903 at Pembroke Dockyard , launched on 25 November 1905 and completed on 12 December 1906 . On completion , Warrior was assigned to the 5th Cruiser Squadron in the Channel Fleet until 1909 , when she was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron . In 1913 the ship was transferred to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet . She was involved in the pursuit of the German battlecruiser Goeben and light cruiser Breslau at the outbreak of World War I , but was ordered not to engage them . Warrior participated in the Allied sweep which led to the sinking of the Austro @-@ Hungarian light cruiser SMS Zenta during the Battle of Antivari in August 1914 . A few days later she was ordered to Suez to defend the Suez Canal against any Turkish attack and remained there until 6 November when she was ordered to Gibraltar to join a squadron of French and British ship to search for German warships still at sea off the African coast . This was cancelled on 19 November after the location of the German East Asia Squadron was revealed by survivors of the Battle of Coronel . 
 Warrior joined the Grand Fleet in December 1914 and was assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Robert Keith Arbuthnot . At the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 , the 1st Cruiser Squadron was in front of the Grand Fleet , on the right side . At 5 : 47 p.m. , the squadron flagship , HMS Defence , and Warrior spotted the German II Scouting Group and opened fire . Their shells felt short and the two ships turned to port in pursuit , cutting in front of the battlecruiser HMS Lion , which was forced to turn away to avoid a collision . Shortly afterwards they spotted the disabled German light cruiser SMS Wiesbaden and closed to engage . When the two ships reached a range of 5 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 000 m ) from Wiesbaden they were spotted in turn at 6 : 05 by the German battlecruiser SMS Derfflinger and four battleships who were less than 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) away . The fire from the German ships was heavy and Defence blew up at 6 : 20 . Warrior was hit by at least fifteen 28 @-@ centimetre ( 11 in ) and six 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) shells , but was saved when the German ships switched their fire to the battleship HMS Warspite when its steering jammed and caused Warspite to make two complete circles within sight of much of the High Seas Fleet . 
 Warrior was heavily damaged by the German shells , which caused large fires and heavy flooding , although her engines continued running for long enough to allow her to withdraw to the west . She was taken in tow by the seaplane tender HMS Engadine who took off her surviving crew of 743 . She was abandoned in a rising sea at 8 : 25 a.m. on 1 June when her upper deck was only 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above the water , and subsequently foundered . 
 = HMS Black Prince ( 1861 ) = 
 HMS Black Prince was the third ship of that name to serve with the Royal Navy . She was the world 's second ocean @-@ going , iron @-@ hulled , armoured warship , following her sister ship , HMS Warrior . For a brief period the two Warrior @-@ class ironclads were the most powerful warships in the world , being virtually impregnable to the naval guns of the time . Rapid advances in naval technology left Black Prince and her sister obsolete within a short time , however , and she spent more time in reserve and training roles than in first @-@ line service . 
 Black Prince spent her active career with the Channel Fleet and was hulked in 1896 , becoming a harbour training ship in Queenstown , Ireland . She was renamed Emerald in 1903 and then Impregnable III in 1910 when she was assigned to the training establishment in Plymouth . The ship was sold for scrap in 1923 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Black Prince was 380 feet 2 inches ( 115 @.@ 9 m ) long between perpendiculars and 420 feet ( 128 @.@ 0 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 58 feet 4 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 26 feet 10 inches ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . The ship displaced 9 @,@ 137 long tons ( 9 @,@ 284 t ) . The hull was subdivided by watertight transverse bulkheads into 92 compartments and had a double bottom underneath the engine and boiler rooms . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Warrior @-@ class ships had one 2 @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine made by John Penn and Sons driving a single 24 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) propeller . Ten rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 20 psi ( 138 kPa ; 1 kgf / cm2 ) . The engine produced a total of 5 @,@ 772 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 304 kW ) during Black Prince 's sea trials in September 1862 and the ship had a maximum speed of 13 @.@ 6 knots ( 25 @.@ 2 km / h ; 15 @.@ 7 mph ) under steam alone . The ship carried 800 long tons ( 810 t ) of coal , enough to steam 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . 
 The ironclads were ship rigged and had a sail area of 48 @,@ 400 square feet ( 4 @,@ 497 m2 ) . Black Prince could only do 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) under sail , 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) slower than her sister Warrior . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The armament of the Warrior @-@ class ships was intended to be 40 smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 68 @-@ pounder guns , 19 on each side on the main deck and one each fore and aft as chase guns on the upper deck . This was modified during construction to ten rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns , twenty @-@ six 68 @-@ pounders , and four rifled breech @-@ loading 40 @-@ pounder guns . 
 The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) and had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110 @-@ pounder Armstrong breech @-@ loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of 11 @.@ 25 ° , a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . The shell of the 40 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading gun was 4 @.@ 75 inches ( 121 mm ) in diameter and weighed 40 pounds ( 18 @.@ 1 kg ) . The gun had a maximum range of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) . In 1863 – 64 the 40 @-@ pounder guns were replaced by a heavier version with the same ballistics . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 Black Prince was rearmed during her 1867 – 68 refit with twenty @-@ four 7 @-@ inch and four 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship also received four 20 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns for use as saluting guns . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre 8 @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 9 long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The sides of Black Prince were protected by an armour belt of wrought iron , 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick , that covered the middle 213 feet ( 64 @.@ 9 m ) of the ship . The ends of the ship were left entirely unprotected which meant that the steering gear was very vulnerable . The armour extended 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) above the waterline and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below it . 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads protected the guns on the main deck . The armour was backed by 16 inches ( 406 mm ) of teak . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Black Prince was ordered on 6 October 1859 from Robert Napier & Sons in Govan , Glasgow for the price of £ 377 @,@ 954 . The ship was laid down on 12 October 1859 and launched 27 February 1861 . Her completion was delayed by a drydock accident at Greenock while fitting out , which damaged her masts . She steamed to Spithead in November 1861 with only jury @-@ rigged fore and mizzenmasts . The ship was commissioned in June 1862 , but was not completed until 12 September 1862 . Black Prince was assigned to the Channel Fleet until 1866 , then spent a year as flagship on the Irish coast . Overhauled and rearmed in 1867 – 68 , she became guardship on the River Clyde . The routine of that duty was interrupted in 1869 when she and Warrior towed a large floating drydock from Madeira to Bermuda . 
 Black Prince was again refitted in 1874 – 75 , gaining a poop deck , and rejoined the Channel Fleet as flagship of Rear Admiral Sir John Dalrymple @-@ Hay , second @-@ in @-@ command of the fleet . In 1878 Captain H.R.H. Duke of Edinburgh took command and the ship crossed the Atlantic to participate in the installation of a new Governor General of Canada . Upon her return Black Prince was placed in reserve at Devonport , and , reclassified as an armoured cruiser , she was reactivated periodically to take part in annual fleet exercises . Black Prince was hulked in 1896 as a harbour training ship , stationed at Queenstown , and was renamed Emerald in 1903 . In 1910 the ship was moved to Plymouth and renamed Impregnable III when she was assigned to the training school HMS Impregnable before she was sold for scrap on 21 February 1923 . 
 = Phil H. Bucklew = 
 Phil Hinkle Bucklew ( December 18 , 1914 – December 30 , 1992 ) was a professional American football player who went on to become a United States Navy officer . He served in one of the Navy 's first special warfare units during World War II . While serving in the European Theater , he was twice awarded the Navy Cross , the second highest decoration in the United States Military . 
 After World War II , Bucklew completed his PhD at Columbia University and went on to command SEAL Team One . In the early stages of the Vietnam War he authored a report in which he predicted the Vietcong would make use of the intercoastal waterways and rivers as routes for supplies and personnel . Although it was initially dismissed , this report was later used as a source to increase the use of Navy SEALs in direct action missions . In 1969 Bucklew retired as a Captain and worked as a consultant for a shipbuilding company in the private sector . 
 Bucklew died in 1992 after a series of strokes . He is known as the " Father of Naval Special Warfare " and the Phil Bucklew Naval Special Warfare Center in Coronado , California bears his name . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bucklew was born and raised in Columbus , Ohio where he attended Columbus North High School . He went on to attend Xavier University in Cincinnati , where he earned fame as a football player ( fullback , punter , and tight end ) . After college , Bucklew played for the Cleveland Rams in 1937 and 1938 . In 1939 , Bucklew left the Rams and founded the Columbus Bullies ; he was their coach for two years , until the United States entered World War II in 1941 . 
 = = Naval career = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Bucklew volunteered for military service in the Naval Reserve on December 8 , 1941 , the day after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . He reported to Norfolk , Virginia for his training and commission as an Ensign . He soon joined the Navy Scouts and Raiders , an elite force of combat swimmers who scouted beaches for amphibious landings . As an Ensign , he served with the Scouts and Raiders in Operation Torch ( the invasion of North Africa ) in November 1942 . In July 1943 , he commanded a " Scout Boat " during the landings on Sicily ( Operation Husky ) and was awarded his first Navy Cross . Bucklew participated in the landings at Salerno , Italy ( Operation Avalanche ) , where he was awarded the Silver Star . 
 Bucklew and his unit were transferred to England to support the imminent invasion of Normandy . In January 1944 , Bucklew and another S & R officer , Grant Andreasen , swam ashore at night to collect sand samples from the target beach , which would be later referred to as Omaha Beach . The mission planners needed to know whether the sand would support heavy vehicles . On another occasion , Bucklew and Andreasen were brought within 300 yards of the beach by a kayak paddled by a British Commando . They swam the rest of the way and hid in the water to watch and time sentry patrols , before going ashore to collect more sand samples and other useful intelligence . 
 On D @-@ Day , June 6 , 1944 , Bucklew commanded a scout boat , assigned to lead the first wave of tank @-@ carrying landing craft to Omaha Beach . The landing craft were accompanied by DD tanks . While he was still out at sea , Bucklew saw that the sea conditions were too dangerous for launching the DD tanks . Unfortunately , his radio report was ignored and most of the DD tanks foundered . Bucklew was awarded a second Navy Cross while leading the first wave of tank @-@ carrying landing craft to the beach in his scout boat . On that occasion he had to combat both heavy surf and enemy fire . He remained on station as a guide boat all day , directing assault waves and giving supporting fire against German positions . He rescued many soldiers , whose landing craft were destroyed , from drowning . Bucklew laid down in the bow of his boat and pulled the drowning men from the water using the strength of his arms . 
 Bucklew 's final assignment during World War II took him to China , where he scouted the Chinese coast and later moved inland to help train and equip Chinese guerrillas to fight the Japanese . Bucklew moved from one partisan group to another , gathering intelligence on the Japanese along the way . Due to his large size and inability to speak Chinese , the partisans disguised him as a deaf mute . The Japanese learned of this " American Spy " and labeled him " Big Stoop " . When his mission was complete he was debriefed in Calcutta , India . 
 Three of his closest friends in the Scouts also had athletic backgrounds : John <unk> , formerly a Detroit Lions all @-@ pro tackle , Robert Halperin , who had played quarterback for Knute Rockne 's Notre Dame football team and in the NFL , and Jerry Donnell , a football player who was killed in action at the Battle of Anzio . 
 = = = Post World War II = = = 
 In 1946 , Bucklew married his fiancée , Helen Nagel , and left active duty for two years to complete his Ph.D. in Education at Columbia University . At Columbia , Bucklew worked as a Navy ROTC instructor and coached the football team . He returned to active duty in 1948 before completing his Ph.D , serving at various bases in the United States , Korea , and Vietnam . In June 1951 , LCDR Bucklew was assigned as commanding officer of Beach Jumper Unit 2 , at the Naval Amphibious Base , Little Creek , Virginia and served in that capacity until late 1955 . In 1952 the U.S. Navy turned its PT boats over to the South Korean Navy . These boats flew under the Korean flag but were manned by American sailors under the command of Bucklew . In 1955 , then @-@ Lieutenant Commander Bucklew was assigned to a Naval Advisory Group in Korea , operating from a base off Inchon . This group , with the help of the CIA , conducted infiltration , harassment , and psychological operations against North Korea . 
 In 1962 , after 20 years of service , Bucklew was facing mandatory retirement due to staff reductions within the Navy . However , with the creation of the SEAL Teams under President John F. Kennedy , Bucklew was selected to command Naval Special Warfare Group One , which consisted of SEAL Team 1 , Underwater Demolition Teams 11 and 12 , and BSU @-@ 1 ( Boat Support Unit ) . Ironically , Bucklew never qualified at BUD / S himself . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 In early 1964 , before American forces became actively engaged in South Vietnam , Captain Bucklew , at the behest of CINCPAC Admiral Harry D. Felt , took part in an exploratory mission to determine what could be done to counter waterborne infiltration of South Vietnam . Bucklew and his staff traveled the Mekong Delta , interviewing dozens of Vietnamese military personnel and their American advisors . At the Cambodian border , Bucklew witnessed the Vietcong openly moving supplies by sampan inside Cambodia , despite its neutrality . In his report to CINCPAC , Bucklew described the totality of the Communist infiltration effort , criticized the South Vietnamese response as inefficient and inadequate , and suggested that halting the Vietcong would require a coastal blockade augmented by extensive patrolling of the internal rivers along the Cambodian frontier , in addition to the Mekong and Bassac . The " Bucklew Report " further recommended that the Navy establish " a viable means of controlling the rivers by implementing barricades , curfews , checkpoints , and patrols . " 
 The Navy initially disregarded Bucklew 's conclusion , placing emphasis on seaborne infiltration of South Vietnam by the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong . After the Navy launched Operation Market Time , it refused to consider the implications of the Bucklew report . Ironically the effectiveness of Market Time caused the North Vietnamese and Vietcong to do what Bucklew predicted in greater force : make use of the rivers along the Cambodian frontier to move logistics into a region where countermeasures were nonexistent . Hence , the Vietcong was able to conclude the build @-@ up necessary to launch the attacks of early 1968 . Bucklew 's report was , however , used as the impetus to deploy SEAL Teams for direct action missions in 1966 . 
 After relinquishing command of SEAL Team One in 1967 , Bucklew was assigned to the Department of the Navy at the Pentagon , where he served until his retirement in 1969 . 
 = = Post @-@ military life and legacy = = 
 After retirement , Bucklew remained in the D.C. area . From 1974 to 1984 , he served as the D.C. representative for <unk> , a Louisiana boat @-@ building company . 
 Bucklew is often called " The Father of Naval Special Warfare " by members of the Naval Special Warfare community and military authors . His written memoirs were published in 1982 . In 1987 , wheelchair @-@ bound from a stroke , Bucklew attended the ceremony in which the Naval Special Warfare Center in Coronado , California was named for him . In October 1989 , he was inducted as the 34th member of the Columbus Hall of Fame , and his photograph hangs in City Hall . Bucklew died at Fairfax Hospital in Fairfax , Virginia , in 1992 after suffering more strokes . He is buried at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Navy Cross citations = = 
 = = = First Navy Cross citation = = = 
 Citation : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Cross to Lieutenant , Junior Grade [ then Ensign ] Phil Hinkle Bucklew , United States Naval ( Reserve ) , for extraordinary heroism and distinguished service in the line of his profession as a Scout Boat Officer in action against enemy forces during the amphibious assault on the Island of Sicily on July 10 , 1943 . Achieving a high degree of success in his capable and resourceful training of scout boat crews for the entire attack force , Lieutenant , Junior Grade , Bucklew participated in the actual invasion with outstanding courage . Undeterred by glaring searchlight illumination and withering blasts of hostile weapons , he proceeded through hazardous waters , located the designated beach and directed the assault boat wave . Utterly disregarding shore battery and machine @-@ gun fire which repeatedly struck his vessel , Lieutenant , Junior Grade , Bucklew persevered in guiding subsequent waves to the proper beach . The conduct of Lieutenant , Junior Grade , Bucklew throughout this action reflects great credit upon himself , and was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 = = = Second Navy Cross citation = = = 
 Citation : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting a Gold Star in lieu of a Second Award of the Navy Cross to Lieutenant , Junior Grade Phil Hinkle Bucklew , United States Naval ( Reserve ) , for extraordinary heroism and distinguished service in the line of his profession as Officer in Charge of an LCT Scout Boat during the amphibious assault on the Normandy Coast of France on June 6 , 1944 . Embarked in one of the first craft to approach the strongly defended cost , Lieutenant , Junior Grade , Bucklew successfully accomplished his highly important mission of locating the designated beaches and , despite rough surf and continuous harassing enemy fire , skillfully led the first wave of DD tanks , going in close to the beach and taking his station as guide . Firing his boat 's rockets over the tanks at target objectives in support of the landings , he moved in closer to direct his guns at suspected hostile machine @-@ gun nests in houses along the beach and subsequently , in the face of heavy enemy opposition , rescued wounded personnel from burning landing craft and regulated the flow of traffic throughout the morning and afternoon of D @-@ Day . The conduct of Lieutenant , Junior Grade , Bucklew throughout this action reflects great credit upon himself , and was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 = = Military awards and decorations = = 
 Navy Cross with one Gold Star 
 Silver Star 
 Bronze Star 
 Meritorious Service Medal 
 Navy Achievement Medal 
 Presidential Unit Citation 
 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation 
 Navy Good Conduct Medal 
 China Service Medal 
 American Defense Medal 
 American Campaign Medal 
 Asiatic Pacific Campaign Medal 
 World War II Victory Medal 
 Navy Occupation Service Medal 
 National Defense Service Medal with one Bronze Star 
 Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal 
 Vietnam Campaign Medal 
 Croix de guerre with palm 
 Korean Presidential Unit Citation 
 United Nations Korean Medal 
 Vietnam Campaign Medal 
 = = Quote = = 
 = Vic Aldridge = 
 Victor " Vic " Aldridge ( October 25 , 1893 – April 17 , 1973 ) , nicknamed the " Hoosier Schoolmaster " , was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played for the Chicago Cubs , Pittsburgh Pirates and New York Giants , and was known to be an excellent curveball pitcher . Before his playing career he was a schoolmaster , hence his nickname . His most significant actions as a player occurred during the 1925 World Series , where Aldridge completed and won games two and five , only to have the most disastrous first inning in the seventh game of the World Series ever . After his retirement from baseball , he served as a state senator in the Indiana General Assembly . Aldridge is a member of the Indiana Baseball Hall of Fame , inducted in 2007 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in the small country town of Cale , Indiana , Vic Aldridge attended the <unk> primary school in Cale , Indiana which was a short walk from his home . He attended high school in Trinity Springs , Indiana where he played baseball on the Trinity Springs team . He graduated from Trinity Springs , Indiana . He then attended Central Normal College in Danville , Indiana . In 1914 – 1915 he taught school at the Pea Ridge School in Trinity Springs , Indiana . He also taught school in Miami County Indiana . He was married to <unk> B. Wadsworth of Indian Springs , Indiana . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Aldridge was a dependable second or third starter throughout most of his career . He was known for his curveball and pinpoint accuracy . Aldridge batted and threw right @-@ handed . He began his pro career by signing a contract with Indianapolis of the American Association in 1915 , but first played for Denver of the Western League and then Erie of the Central League . He played for Indianapolis in 1916 where he was scouted for the Chicago Cubs . He was sold to the Cubs on August 28 , 1916 . 
 Aldridge spent 1917 and 1918 with the Chicago Cubs , serving in the bullpen . In 1917 Aldridge played in thirty games , winning six games and losing six , with a 3 @.@ 12 earned run average and two saves . In 1918 he played only three games , pitching only twelve innings , before joining the United States Navy during the final year of World War I. After returning from the war , he played for the Los Angeles Angels , an affiliate of the Cubs , in the Pacific Coast League . Aldridge returned to the Cubs for the 1922 season . He played the next three years for Chicago , with consistent performances . In 1922 , 1923 and 1924 he played 36 , 30 and 32 games respectively , with 16 , 16 and 15 wins in the three seasons , with respective earned run averages of 3 @.@ 52 , 3 @.@ 48 and 3 @.@ 50 . During this time his son Vic Aldridge , Jr. served unofficially as the Cubs batboy and even had a uniform donated by Mordecai Brown so he would look the part . In 1923 he was ejected from a game . 
 = = 1925 = = 
 Vic Aldridge was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates after the 1924 season on October 27 , 1924 , along with George Grantham and Al Niehaus , for Wilbur Cooper , Charlie Grimm and Rabbit Maranville . The change in stadiums prompted him to rely more on his fastball than his curveball , as he felt he needed to protect himself from home runs in Wrigley Field and its smaller field , thus using the curveball to reduce the risk of being homered against , but the larger field in Pittsburgh made fastballs safer to use , and thus a better pitch to rely upon . The next year , Aldridge won fifteen games ( ninth highest total in the National League in 1925 ) and lost seven , for a <unk> winning percentage that was the fourth highest for any NL pitcher that year . His finest moments were in the postseason that year when he pitched two complete game victories against the Washington Senators as the Pirates won the World Series . He won Game 2 of the series 3 – 2 on October 8 , and Game 5 by a score of 6 – 3 , the first two Pirates wins of the Series . Aldridge used the money from the World Series to buy a home in Terre Haute , Indiana . 
 Aldridge also started the seventh game on October 15 . It had been raining for a week in Pittsburgh , and the sixth game had been rainy . The weather for the seventh was even worse , and the game was played in thick pea soup fog and drizzle , with a very wet pitching mound . It was hoped that Aldridge would continue his success in the first two games to the seventh , but it was not to be . Although noted for his consistency , in this game Aldridge was very wild ; he had had only two days rest and he kept slipping on the slick pitcher 's plate . Sam Rice was the first batter , and he hit a single . Then Bucky Harris came out , whose fly out was the only success Aldridge had during the game . Goose Goslin was walked after a wild pitch . Joe Harris was walked after a wild pitch advanced the baserunners . After a full count , Joe Judge was walked , scoring in one run . Then Ossie Bluege hit a single . Pirates manager Bill McKechnie had seen enough and relieved Aldridge . In total , Aldridge gave up three walks , two hits and two wild pitches , resulting in the Senators having a 4 – 0 lead in the first inning . The Pirates would rally to win the game and the World Series by a score of 9 – 7 , the first time a team won the World Series after a 3 – 1 deficit . It was the worst start of the seventh game for a pitcher in Series history . 
 = = Late career = = 
 The 1925 proved to be the pinnacle of Aldridge 's career . In 1926 he suffered a record of 10 wins and 13 losses , with a 4 @.@ 07 earned run average . The year 1927 was better for Aldridge . He won fifteen games , losing only ten , with a 4 @.@ 25 earned run average . Aldridge also played in the 1927 World Series , losing the second game of the series 6 – 2 as Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig led the New York Yankees to a sweep of the Pirates in four games . He gave up all six runs in the 7 ⅓ innings he pitched . After several other players had ghostwritten newspaper articles for the Christy Walsh Syndicate , he wrote an article for a Pittsburgh newspaper , who bragged that it was Aldridge himself who wrote it . 
 After winning 15 games again in 1927 , Aldridge expected a raise , but instead Pittsburgh owner Barney Dreyfuss traded him to the New York Giants on February 11 , 1928 , for Burleigh Grimes , citing Aldridge 's 4 @.@ 25 ERA in 1927 as a reason not to give him a raise . He held out for much of the year ; by the time he returned , he was out of shape and pitched poorly . During the time Aldridge refused to report , Giants manager John McGraw threatened Aldridge with less pay , and at one point tried to trade him to the Cincinnati Reds . After the season , in which Aldridge 's record was four wins and seven losses with a 4 @.@ 83 earned run average after 119 innings pitched , he was sent to the Brooklyn Dodgers . However , Aldridge refused to report and retired from baseball instead . His final game was on August 29 , 1928 . 
 In total , Aldridge pitched 1 @,@ 601 innings , won 97 games and lost 80 , had 102 complete games and a combined earned run average of 3 @.@ 76 . Rogers Hornsby said that Aldridge had one of the three best curveballs he had ever seen , a curveball described by the Baseball Magazine as a " hard , sharp @-@ breaking curve " that was one of the best curveballs in all of baseball . He also threw a screwball . His batting average was .229 , a respectable average for a pitcher . Aldridge twice attempted to steal a base , once each in 1922 and 1926 , and succeeded both times . 
 = = Post career = = 
 After his playing career ended , Aldridge attended law school at the Voorhees School of Law and served in the Indiana State Senate from 1937 to 1948 . He was first elected on November 4 , 1936 , as a Democrat . He served as a schoolmaster full @-@ time before his baseball career , hence his nickname " The Hoosier Schoolmaster " . 
 Aldridge died in Terre Haute at age 79 , and is buried in the New Trinity Springs Cemetery of Trinity Springs , Indiana . He was inducted into the Indiana Baseball Hall of Fame on January 19 , 2007 , as its 131st member ; his granddaughter , Mary Turner , and grandson , Vic Aldridge III , accepted the award on his behalf . 
 = Grandma Moses = 
 Anna Mary Robertson Moses ( September 7 , 1860 – December 13 , 1961 ) , known by her nickname Grandma Moses , was a renowned American folk artist . Having begun painting in earnest at the age of 78 , she is often cited as an example of an individual successfully beginning a career in the arts at an advanced age . Her works have been shown and sold in the United States and abroad and have been marketed on greeting cards and other merchandise . Moses ' paintings are among the collections of many museums . The <unk> Off was sold for US $ 1 @.@ 2 million in 2006 . 
 Moses has appeared on magazine covers , television , and in a documentary of her life . She wrote her autobiography , won numerous awards and was awarded two honorary doctoral degrees . 
 The New York Times said of her : " The simple realism , nostalgic atmosphere and luminous color with which Grandma Moses portrayed simple farm life and rural countryside won her a wide following . She was able to capture the excitement of winter 's first snow , Thanksgiving preparations and the new , young green of oncoming spring ... In person , Grandma Moses charmed wherever she went . A tiny , lively woman with mischievous gray eyes and a quick wit , she could be sharp @-@ tongued with a sycophant and stern with an errant grandchild . " 
 Starting at 12 years of age and for a total of 15 years , she was a live @-@ in housekeeper . One of the families that she worked for , who noticed her appreciation for their prints made by Currier and Ives , supplied her with art materials to create drawings . Moses and her husband began their married life in Virginia , where they worked on farms . In 1905 they returned to the Northeastern United States and settled in Eagle Bridge , New York . The couple had five children who survived infancy . Her interest in art was expressed throughout her life , including embroidery of pictures with yarn , until arthritis made this pursuit too painful . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Greenwich on September 7 , 1860 , Anna Mary Robertson was the third of Margaret Shanahan Robertson and Russell King Robertson 's ten children . She was raised with four sisters and five brothers . Her father ran a flax mill and was a farmer . Moses attended a one @-@ room school for a short period of time as a child . That school is now the Bennington Museum in Vermont which has the largest collection of her works in the United <unk> got inspired to paint from taking art lessons at school . Moses first painted as a child , using lemon and grape juice to make colors for her " landscapes " . Other natural materials that she used to create works of art included ground ochre , grass , flour paste , slack lime and sawdust . 
 She left home and began to work for a wealthy neighboring family at 12 years of age , performing chores on their farm . She continued to keep house , cook and sew for wealthy families for 15 years . One of the families that she worked for , the <unk> , noticed her interest in their Currier and Ives prints and purchased chalk and wax crayons so that she could create her own artwork . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 She was 27 when she worked on the same farm as Thomas Salmon Moses , a " hired man . " They were married and established themselves near Staunton , Virginia where they spent nearly two decades , living and working in turn on four separate local farms . To supplement the family income , Moses made potato chips and churned butter from the milk of a cow that she purchased with her savings . Later , the couple bought a farm . 
 Five of the ten children born to them survived infancy . Although she loved living in the Shenandoah Valley , in 1905 Anna and Robert moved to a farm in Eagle Bridge , New York at her husband 's urging . Thomas Moses died in 1927 of a heart attack , after which her son Forrest helped her operate the farm . She retired and moved to a daughter 's home in 1936 . Anna Mary was known as either " Mother Moses " or " Grandma Moses , " and although she first exhibited as " Mrs. Moses , " the press dubbed her " Grandma Moses , " and the nickname stuck . 
 = = Decorative arts = = 
 As a young wife and mother , Moses had been creative in her home by , for example , using <unk> to decorate a <unk> in 1918 . Moses made embroidered pictures of yarn for friends and family beginning in 1932 . She also created beautiful quilted objects , a form of " hobby art " as defined by Lucy R. Lippard . 
 Moses had developed arthritis by the age of 76 , which made embroidery painful . It was suggested to her by Celestia , her sister , that painting would be easier for her , which spurred Moses 's painting career in her late <unk> her right hand hurt she switch to her left hand . 
 = = Art career = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Moses painted scenes of rural life from earlier days , which she called " old @-@ timey " New England landscapes . Moses said that she would " get an inspiration and start painting ; then I 'll forget everything , everything except how things used to be and how to paint it so people will know how we used to live . " She omitted features of modern life , like tractors and telephone poles , from her works of art . 
 Her early style is less individual and more realistic or primitive , despite her lack of knowledge of , or perhaps rejection of , basic perspective . Initially she created simple compositions or copied existing images . As her career advanced she created complicated , panoramic compositions of rural life . 
 She was a prolific painter , generating over 1 @,@ 500 canvasses in three decades . Initially Moses charged $ 3 to $ 5 for a painting , depending upon its size , and as her fame increased her works were sold for $ 8 @,@ 000 to $ 10 @,@ 000 . Her winter paintings are reminiscent of some such of the known winter paintings of Pieter Bruegel the Elder , although she had never seen his work . A German fan of her work said , " There emanates from her paintings a light @-@ hearted optimism ; the world she shows us is beautiful and it is good . You feel at home in all these pictures , and you know their meaning . The unrest and the neurotic insecurity of the present day make us inclined to enjoy the simple and affirmative outlook of Grandma Moses . " 
 = = = Initial exhibitions = = = 
 During a visit to Hoosick Falls in 1938 , Louis J. <unk> , who collected art and worked as an engineer in the state of New York , discovered paintings made by Moses in the window of a drug store . He bought their supply and ten more from her Eagle Bridge house for $ 3 or $ 5 each . The next year , three Grandma Moses paintings were included in New York 's Museum of Modern Art exhibition entitled " Contemporary Unknown American Painters " . Her first solo exhibition , " What a Farm Wife Painted , " opened in the same city in October 1940 at Otto <unk> 's Galerie St. Etienne . A meet @-@ and @-@ greet with the artist and an exhibition of 50 paintings at Gimbel 's Department Store was held next on November 15 . Her art displays included samples of her baked goods and preserves that won Moses prizes at the county fair . Her third solo show in as many months , was held at the Whyte Gallery , Washington , D.C. In 1944 she began to be represented by the American British Art Center and the Galerie St. Etienne , which increased her sales . Her paintings were exhibited throughout Europe and the United States over the next 20 years . Otto <unk> established the Grandma Moses Properties , Inc. for her . 
 Grandma Moses 's paintings were used to publicize American holidays , including Thanksgiving , Christmas and Mother 's Day . During the 1950s , Grandma Moses 's exhibitions broke attendance records around the world . Art historian Judith Stein noted : " A cultural icon , the spry , productive <unk> was continually cited as an inspiration for housewives , widows and retirees . " Her paintings were reproduced on Hallmark greeting cards , tiles , fabrics , and ceramics . They were also used to market products , like coffee , lipstick , cigarettes , and cameras . 
 = = = Acclaim = = = 
 In 1950 , the National Press Club cited her as one of the five most newsworthy women and the National Association of House Dress Manufacturers honored her as their 1951 Woman of the Year . At age 88 , Mademoiselle magazine named Grandma Moses a “ Young Woman of the Year . ” She was awarded two honorary doctoral degrees . The first was bestowed in 1949 from Russell Sage College and the second two years later from the Moore College of Art and Design . 
 President Harry S. Truman presented her with the Women 's National Press Club trophy Award for outstanding accomplishment in art in 1949 . Jerome Hill directed the 1950 documentary of her life , which was nominated for an Academy Award . In 1952 , she published My Life 's History , her autobiography . In it she said " I look back on my life like a good day 's work , it was done and I feel satisfied with it . I was happy and contented , I knew nothing better and made the best out of what life offered . And life is what we make it , always has been , always will be . " In 1955 , she appeared as a guest on See It Now , a television program hosted by Edward R. Murrow . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 She was a member of the Society of Mayflower Descendants and Daughters of the American Revolution . Her 100th birthday was named by New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller as " Grandma Moses Day " . LIFE magazine celebrated her birthday by featuring her on its September 19 , 1960 , cover . The children 's book " Grandma Moses Story Book " was published in 1961 . 
 Grandma Moses died on December 13 , 1961 at 101 years of age in Hoosick Falls , New York at the Health Center . She is buried there at the Maple Grove Cemetery . President John F. Kennedy memorialized her : " The death of Grandma Moses removed a beloved figure from American life . The directness and vividness of her paintings restored a primitive freshness to our perception of the American scene . Both her work and her life helped our nation renew its pioneer heritage and recall its roots in the countryside and on the frontier . All Americans mourn her loss . " After her death , her work was exhibited in several large traveling exhibitions in the United States and abroad . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A 1942 piece , The Old Checkered House , 1862 was appraised at the Memphis 2004 Antiques Roadshow . It was not as common as her winter landscapes . Originally purchased in the 1940s for under $ 10 , the piece was assigned an insurance value of $ 60 @,@ 000 by the appraiser , Alan <unk> . 
 In November 2006 , her 1943 work <unk> off became her highest @-@ selling work at US $ 1 @.@ 2 million . 
 The White House owns and displays her painting , Fourth of July . It also appears on a U.S. commemorative stamp that was issued in her honor in 1969 . 
 The character Granny on the popular 1960s rural comedy television series The Beverly Hillbillies was named Daisy Moses as an homage to Grandma Moses , who died shortly before the series began . 
 Norman Rockwell and Grandma Moses were friends who lived over the Vermont @-@ New York state border from each other . Moses lived in Eagle Bridge , New York and after 1938 the <unk> had a house in nearby Arlington , Vermont . Grandma Moses appears on the far left edge in the Norman Rockwell painting Christmas Homecoming , which was printed on The Saturday Evening Post 's December 25 , 1948 cover . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Some of the public collections of her work are : 
 Bennington Museum in Bennington , Vermont , holds the largest public collection of Moses 's paintings 
 Brooklyn Museum , New York City 
 Figge Art Museum , Davenport , Iowa 
 Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden , Washington D.C. 
 Lauren Rogers Museum of Art , Laurel , Mississippi 
 Maier Museum of Art at Randolph @-@ Macon Woman 's College , Virginia 
 Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester , New York 
 Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City 
 National Museum of Women in the Arts , Washington D.C. 
 The Phillips Collection , Washington D.C. 
 Phoenix Art Museum , Arizona 
 University of Iowa Museum of Art , Iowa City 
 = = Works = = 
 Some of her works are : 
 Autumn in the Berkshires 
 Black Horses , 1942 
 <unk> Fair , 1945 
 Catching the Thanksgiving Turkey , San Diego Museum of Art 
 Dividing of the Ways , 1947 , oil and tempera on masonite , Collection American Folk Art Museum , New York 
 English Cottage Flower Garden , embroidery 
 Get Out the Sleigh , 1960 , oil on pressed wood 
 <unk> Time , 1945 
 Home of the Hezekiah King , 1776 , 1943 , Phoenix Art Museum 
 Home for Thanksgiving , 1952 
 Hoosick Falls , 1944 , Southern Vermont Arts Center 
 Jack ' n Jill 
 July Fourth , 1951 
 My Hills of Home , Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester , New York 
 Out for Christmas Trees 
 <unk> , 1957 , Grandma Moses with her grandchildren 
 The Childhood Home of Anna Mary Robertson Moses , 1942 
 Thanksgiving Turkey 
 The Daughter 's Homecoming , oil on pressed wood 
 The Old Checkered House 
 The Old Covered Bridge , The Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art , Hartford , Connecticut 
 The Old Oaken Bucket 
 The Red Checkered House 
 Turkey in the Straw , c . 1940 , private collection 
 White Christmas 
 Winter is Here , 1945 
 = 50 euro note = 
 The fifty euro note ( € 50 ) is one of the middle value euro banknotes and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 . The note is used daily by some 332 million Europeans and in the 23 countries which have the euro as their sole currency ( with 22 legally adopting it ) . 
 It is the fourth smallest note , measuring 140 mm × 77 mm , and has an orange colour scheme . The note depicts bridges and arches / doorways in the Renaissance era ( 15th and 16th centuries ) . 
 The € 50 note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity . In January 2016 , there were about 8 @,@ 170 @,@ 123 @,@ 315 fifty euro banknotes in circulation in the eurozone . It is by far the most widely circulated denomination , compromising over 44 % of the total banknotes . 
 The full design of the Europa series € 50 banknote was revealed on 5 July 2016 ; it is due to be launched in April 2017 . 
 = = History = = 
 The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe . For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accounting . Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the 12 countries in the eurozone , such as the Dutch guilder and the Portuguese escudo . Today , the € 50 note is used daily by some 332 million Europeans and in the 22 countries which have it as their sole currency ( with 20 legally adopting it ) . 
 Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 , Latvia in 2014 , and Lithuania in 2015 . 
 = = = The changeover period = = = 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continue to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg . He was succeeded on 1 November 2003 by Jean @-@ Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012 . Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi . 
 Until now there has been only one series of euro notes ; however a new series , similar to the current one , is planned to be released . The European Central Bank will announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status . 
 As of June 2012 , current issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union , as Cyprus is not depicted on current notes as the map does not extend far enough east , and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series ' minimum size for depiction . Since the European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years after each issue , a second series of banknotes is already in preparation . New production and anti @-@ counterfeiting techniques will be employed on the new notes , but the design will be on the same theme ( bridges and arches ) and will use colours identical to the previous series . However , they would still be recognisable as a new series . 
 = = Design = = 
 The fifty euro note is the fourth smallest note , measuring 140 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) × 77 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) , with an orange colour scheme . Each euro banknote depicts bridges and arches / doorways in a different historical European style ; the € 50 note shows the Renaissance era ( 15th and 16th centuries ) . Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and the window are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era . 
 Like all euro notes , the € 50 note shows the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB , the initials of the ECB in the different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and various security features . 
 = = = Security features ( First series ) = = = 
 The fifty euro note contains the following security features : 
 Colour changing ink used on the numeral located on the back of the note , that appears to change colour from purple to brown , when the note is tilted . 
 A see through number printed in the top corner of the note , on both sides , appear combine perfectly to form the value numeral when held against the light . 
 A hologram , used on the note which appears to see the hologram image change between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , it appears to be rainbow @-@ coloured concentric circles of micro @-@ letters moving from the centre to the edges of the patch . 
 A EURion constellation ; the EURion constellation is a pattern of symbols found on a number of banknote designs worldwide since about 1996 . It is added to help software detect the presence of a banknote in a digital image . 
 Watermarks , which appear when held up to the light . 
 Raised printing in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes will be raised . 
 Ultraviolet ink ; the paper itself does not glow , fibres embedded in the paper do appear , and be coloured red , blue and green , the EU flag is green and has orange stars , the ECB President 's , currently Mario Draghi 's , signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow . 
 Microprinting , on various areas of the banknotes there is microprinting , for example , inside the " <unk> " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front . The micro @-@ text is sharp , but not blurred . 
 A security thread , embedded in the banknote paper . The thread will appear as a dark stripe when held up to the light . The word " EURO " and the value is embedded in tiny letters on the thread . 
 Perforations in the hologram which will form the euro symbol . There are also small numbers showing the value . 
 A matted surface ; the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , but not limp or waxy . 
 Barcodes , 
 A serial number . 
 = = = Security features ( Europa series ) = = = 
 Watermark : When the note is held under a normal light source , a portrait of Europa and an electrotype denomination appear on either side . 
 Portrait Window : When the note is held against the light , the window in the hologram becomes transparent and reveals a portrait of Europa which is visible on both sides of the note . 
 Portrait Hologram : When the note is tilted , the hologram – the silver @-@ colored stripe on the right of the note – reveals a portrait of Europa as well as the " € " symbol , the main image and the value of the banknote . 
 Emerald Number : When the note is tilted , the number " 50 " on the bottom left corner of the note displays an effect of the light that moves up and down . The number " 50 " also changes color from emerald green to deep blue . 
 Security Thread : When the note is held to the light , the security thread appears as a dark line . The " € " symbol and the value of the note can be seen in tiny white lettering in the stripe . 
 Microprinting : Some areas of the banknote feature a series of tiny letters . The microprinting can be read with a magnifying glass . The letters are sharp , not blurred . 
 = = Circulation = = 
 As of May 2013 , there are approximately 6 @,@ 383 @,@ 487 @,@ 700 € 50 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone . The 50 euro note is the most commonly used banknote . The total value of the notes in circulation is approximately € 319 @,@ 173 @,@ 835 @,@ 100 ( as of May 2013 ) . The European Central Bank monitors the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes . The Eurosystem has been tasked with ensuring an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes . 
 = = Legal information = = 
 Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes . In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes . The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations . 
 = = Tracking = = 
 There are several communities of people at European level , most of which is EuroBillTracker , that , as a hobby , it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , to keep track and know where they travel or have traveled . The aim is to record as many notes as possible in order to know details about its spread , like from where and to where they travel in general , follow it up , like where a ticket has been seen in particular , and generate statistics and rankings , for example , in which countries there are more tickets . EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2 @.@ 897 billion . 
 = Allan Walters = 
 Air Vice Marshal Allan Leslie Walters , CB , CBE , AFC ( 2 November 1905 – 19 October 1968 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in Victoria and raised in Western Australia , he graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , before transferring to the RAAF in 1928 . He was considered one of the service 's leading flying instructors and aerobatic pilots between the wars , and was appointed to his first squadron command in 1937 . Over the course of World War II , Walters led No. 1 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron in Singapore , No. 1 ( Fighter ) Wing in Darwin , Northern Territory , No. 72 Wing in Dutch New Guinea , and Northern Command in Papua New Guinea . He was decorated with the Air Force Cross in 1941 for his work with No. 1 Squadron , and mentioned in despatches in 1944 for his service with No. 72 Wing . 
 Walters was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1946 for his service with Northern Command . Already marked out for senior roles in the post @-@ war RAAF , his positions during the 1950s included Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Southern Area Command , AOC RAAF Overseas Headquarters in London , Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in Washington , D.C. , AOC Home Command , Air Member for Personnel , and AOC Support Command . He was promoted acting air vice marshal in 1952 ( substantive in 1954 ) , and appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1956 . Popularly known as " Wally " , he was twice a candidate for Chief of the Air Staff , and twice passed over . He retired from the RAAF in 1962 and made his home in Melbourne , where he died in 1968 at the age of sixty @-@ two . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Allan Leslie Walters was born on 2 November 1905 in Ascot Vale , Victoria , to schoolteacher Ferdinand Walters and his wife Edith . The family soon moved to Perth , Western Australia , and Allan completed his education at Perth Modern School , where he joined the cadets . After leaving school and spending eight months in the militia , he entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in February 1924 . At Duntroon he specialised in field artillery , and excelled at athletics . Graduating as a lieutenant in December 1927 , he transferred to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) on 1 February 1928 . Walters ' preferred career path in the military was engineering , and it was only when he failed to gain selection for this field after his graduation that he applied to transfer to the Air Force , which , having no cadet college of its own , had arranged with Duntroon to take one of its artillery specialists each year for secondment as a pilot . He commenced his course at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , in mid @-@ 1928 , and graduated as a flying officer in March 1929 . Walters showed an aptitude for instruction , and after further training was graded an ' A1 ' flight instructor , a rare distinction . Posted to No. 3 Squadron at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , operating Westland Wapitis , he also made a name for himself performing aerobatics at air shows throughout the country . Walters put this particular talent to use in pursuit of his wife @-@ to @-@ be , Jean Manning , stunt flying above All Saints Church , North Parramatta , where her father was rector . Reverend Manning married the couple there on 30 June 1930 ; their daughter Robin was born in Richmond . 
 Walters was granted a permanent commission in the Air Force in 1930 . On 5 January 1931 , by now promoted flight lieutenant , he won a trophy in an air obstacle race at the Cootamundra Air Pageant . In May the following year , he took out the NSW Air Derby and Evening News Cup . He temporarily commanded No. 3 Squadron during October 1933 , in the absence of Squadron Leader Bill Bostock . At the time , the commanding officer of No. 3 Squadron also held command of RAAF Station Richmond . Walters was posted to Britain in 1936 to attend the Royal Air Force Staff College , Andover , and was promoted to squadron leader in March 1937 , while still overseas . He also undertook a naval reconnaissance course at RAF Manston . Returning to Australia in May , he took command of No. 22 Squadron in June , flying Hawker Demons and Avro Ansons out of Richmond until February 1938 . 
 Between 6 and 23 February 1938 , Walters piloted the first overseas flight in an aeroplane designed and built in Australia when he flew the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Richard Williams , to Singapore in a Tugan Gannet . He returned to Richmond in May 1938 to lead No. 3 Squadron , operating Demons , and again took part in aerobatic displays . On 25 October 1938 , his Demon crashed in scrub at <unk> <unk> , New South Wales , when the engine failed shortly after taking off for Richmond , but he was not injured . Completing his Richmond appointment in May 1939 , Walters transferred to Melbourne as Director of Staff Duties at RAAF Headquarters . Later that month , he joined Group Captain Henry Wrigley as an expert assessor on the panel of an inquiry into a recent series of three Anson accidents ; the full report handed down in October found human error the likely explanation for at least one crash and that training on the type followed the syllabus laid down , but that pilots needed more practical experience in dealing with potential in @-@ flight incidents . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Walters ' first operational appointment following the outbreak of World War II was as commanding officer of No. 1 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron , which he led to Sembawang , Singapore , in July 1940 . His promotion to temporary wing commander was announced the same month . He had earlier travelled incognito to Singapore on a Qantas Empire flying boat , which had been specifically requested to deviate from its normal flight path so that he could reconnoiter airfields in the Dutch East Indies . Deployed in response to fears of Japanese expansion in Malaya , No. 1 Squadron was the first Australian unit equipped with Lockheed Hudson light bombers , which were employed primarily for maritime patrol work . Walters was awarded the Air Force Cross for his " very active part in all operations " and for training his unit to " a particularly high standard " ; the honour was gazetted in the 1941 King 's Birthday Honours . He succeeded Frank Lukis as commanding officer of RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , in May the same year , and was promoted acting group captain . In May 1942 , he joined Allied Air Forces Headquarters , South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , in Melbourne as Assistant Director of Operations . He was made a temporary group captain in September , and transferred to Headquarters RAAF Command as senior air staff officer . 
 On 7 October 1942 , Walters took command of a new formation , No. 1 ( Fighter ) Wing , at RAAF Station Richmond . Established to boost the air defence capability of Australia 's North @-@ Western Area , the wing comprised three Supermarine Spitfire squadrons that had been transferred from Europe : No. 54 Squadron RAF , No. 452 Squadron RAAF and No. 457 Squadron RAAF . With Wing Commander Clive Caldwell , Australia 's top @-@ scoring flying ace of the war , as his wing leader , Walters began deploying aircraft and men to Darwin , Northern Territory , in December , providing a filip for morale in the region . Proudly declaring himself Australia 's oldest fighter pilot , Walters was reported as taking every opportunity to join his men in the air . He flew as Caldwell 's wingman in No. 1 Wing 's first major action against the Japanese over Darwin on 2 May 1943 . Eight Spitfires crashed and several others made forced landings , for the destruction of one Japanese bomber and five fighters . Walters himself narrowly avoiding being shot down when he warned Caldwell of an attacking enemy fighter , to the detriment of his own safety . After they landed , Caldwell chided his commander , " You silly old so @-@ and @-@ so . You want to look after your own skin instead of worrying about someone else 's ! " On 20 June , Walters participated in the wing 's most successful combat against the Japanese to that time , personally accounting for one of fourteen raiders claimed by the Spitfires , for the loss of two of their own number . He posted out of Darwin a few days later , having earned the admiration of Caldwell and the rest of the wing 's personnel . 
