 = = = Article II – Franchise and Officers = = = 
 The second Article of the Constitution sets out the procedures and mechanisms for voting , elections and holding office . Pursuant to Section 1 , any Virginia resident over age 18 may vote in state elections ; the voting age was reduced from 21 by a 1972 amendment to the federal constitution . However , § 1 denies the vote to people who have been determined to be mentally incompetent or anyone convicted of a felony . <unk> convicted felons has been found to be consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution . The General Assembly , pursuant to § 4 , is given wide power to regulate the time place and manner of all elections . 
 Section Five establishes that the only qualifications to hold office in Virginia are that a person must have been a Virginia resident for at least one year and eligible to vote . Any statute or rule requiring other qualifications is constitutionally invalid under this section . But , the General Assembly can impose local residency requirements for election to local governmental bodies or for election to the Assembly in representation of particular districts . 
 = = = Article III – Division of Powers = = = 
 Article III has one section , confirming the principle of separation of powers between the legislative , executive and judicial branches of government . Unlike the U.S. federal Constitution , the Virginia Constitution explicitly provides that no branch may exercise powers that properly belong to the others . Separation between the branches of government is also listed as a right of the people in § 5 of Article I. 
 = = = Article IV – Legislature = = = 
 Article IV establishes the basic structure and authority of the Virginia legislature . The legislative power of the state is vested in the Virginia General Assembly , which consists of the Virginia Senate and the Virginia House of Delegates . § 17 of Article IV gives the legislature the power to impeach members of the executive and judicial branches . 
 The original § 14 of Article IV forbade the incorporation of churches , though the Virginia Commission on Constitutional Revision , in its 1969 report , had recognized that the prohibition was probably invalid . The federal district court for the Western District of Virginia ruled in April 2002 that this provision of the Virginia Constitution was in fact unconstitutional , because it violates the federal constitutional right to the free exercise of religion . The court found that it is unconstitutional to deny a church the option to incorporate under state law when other groups can incorporate . An amendment striking the ban on church incorporation was approved by Virginia voters in November 2006 . 
 = = = Article V – Executive = = = 
 The fifth Article similarly defines the structure and powers of the executive branch . The Governor of Virginia is invested as the chief executive , though § 1 of Article V , provides that the governor may not run for successive terms . The offices of lieutenant governor and attorney general are established as supporting elected constitutional positions . 
 The constitutional powers of the governor include the ability to sign legislation , veto bills ( which veto may then be overridden by a two @-@ thirds majority of both houses of the assembly ) , and issue pardons . 
 = = = Article VI – Judiciary = = = 
 Article VI vests judicial power in the Supreme Court of Virginia , along with the subordinate courts created by the General Assembly . Judges are appointed by a majority vote in the General Assembly to terms of 12 years for Supreme Court Justices and 8 years for other judges . The Supreme Court , pursuant to § 5 , has the authority to make rules governing the practice of law and procedures in the courts of the commonwealth ( see rules ) , and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is established as the administrative head of the Virginia judicial system . 
 = = = Article VII – Local Government = = = 
 Article VII of the Constitution sets up the basic framework for the structure and function of local government in Virginia . Local government may be established at the town ( population over 1000 ) , city ( population over 5000 ) , county or regional government level . Article VII gives the General Assembly the power to create general laws for the organization and governing of these political subdivisions , except that regional governments cannot be created without the consent of the majority of the voters in the region . 
 Section 4 establishes the constitutional offices of treasurer , sheriff , Commonwealth 's Attorney , clerk of court and Commissioner of the Revenue to be elected within each city and county in Virginia . 
 = = = Article VIII – Education = = = 
 A compulsory and free primary and secondary public education for every Virginia child is the focus of Article VIII . The General Assembly is empowered to determine the funding for the educational system and apportion the cost between state and local government . A state Board of Education is established to create school divisions and effectuate the overall educational policies . Supervision of the individual schools is delegated to local school boards , provided for in § 7 . 
 = = = Article IX – Corporations = = = 
 The primary purpose of Article IX is to create the Virginia State Corporation Commission , which is charged with administering the laws that regulate corporations . The State Corporation Commission also issues charters for Virginia corporations and licenses to do business for “ foreign ” ( non @-@ Virginia ) corporations . Section 5 of Article IX prohibits such foreign corporations from doing anything in Virginia that a Virginia corporation could not do . 
 = = = Article X – Taxation and Finance = = = 
 Article X establishes the basic structure for taxation of personal property in Virginia . Pursuant to this Article , all non @-@ exempt real and personal property is subject to taxation at its fair market value . Section 6 sets out a lengthy list of exempt property , which includes church property , cemeteries , and non @-@ profit school property . 
 Significant additions to Article X include § 7 , a budget amendment , which became effective in 1986 , and § 7 @-@ A , which establishes the " Lottery Proceeds Fund " , requiring that all proceeds from the lottery be set aside for educational purposes . 
 = = = Article XI – Conservation = = = 
 Article XI states that it is the general policy of the Commonwealth to preserve , protect and conserve the state ’ s natural and historic resources . The General Assembly is permitted to further these policies by entering into public @-@ private partnerships or partnerships with federal agencies . 
 A 2001 amendment added § 4 , which establishes hunting and fishing as constitutional rights of Virginians , though the legislature may enact appropriate regulations and restrictions on these rights . 
 = = = Article XII – Future changes = = = 
 The last Article creates the mechanism for future changes to the Constitution . Any amendment to the Constitution must first be passed by a majority in each of the two legislative houses . The proposed amendment must then be held over for consideration by the succeeding elected legislature , where it must again be passed by a majority in each house . The amendment then goes on the general ballot and becomes enacted into the Constitution if approved by a majority of the voters . 
 Alternatively , a two @-@ thirds majority of both Virginia houses may call for the creation of a constitutional convention . Any revisions or amendments proposed by the constitutional convention are presented to the citizens of Virginia and become law upon approval by a majority of voters . 
 = = Subsequent amendments = = 
 Since 1971 , additional amendments have been passed by the General Assembly and approved by the voter to conform to provisions in the U.S. Constitution , rulings from the U.S. Supreme Court and Congressional statute . The voting age is reduced to eighteen , voting residency requirements are removed , and voter registration conforms to the Motor Voter Act . Additionally , the Virginia Constitution now provides for a General Assembly session following a governor ’ s veto , and the right of the people to hunt , fish and harvest game is guaranteed . 
 In 2006 , Virginians passed an amendment limiting marriage to “ unions between one man and one woman ” . That has since been overturned by Obergefell v. Hodges ( 2015 ) . 
 There is a perennial discussion over Virginia ’ s unique Constitutional status restricting its governor to one consecutive term , and its distinctive method of selecting both trial and appellate judges by state legislature , shared only with South Carolina . 
 = The Red Sea Sharks = 
 The Red Sea Sharks ( French : Coke en stock ) is the nineteenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was initially serialised weekly in Belgium 's Tintin magazine from October 1956 to January 1958 before being published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1958 . The narrative follows the young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy , and his friend Captain Haddock as they travel to the ( fictional ) Middle Eastern kingdom of Khemed with the intention of aiding the Emir Ben <unk> Ezab in regaining control after a coup d 'état by his enemies , who are financed by slave traders . 
 Following on from the previous volume in the series , The Calculus Affair , The Red Sea Sharks was created with the aid of Hergé 's team of artists at Studios Hergé . Influenced by Honoré de Balzac 's The Human Comedy , Hergé used the story as a vehicle in which to reintroduce a wide range of characters who had first appeared in earlier installments of the series . The story dealt with the ongoing trade in enslaved Africans across the Arab world , however in the 1960s the story would generate controversy as Hergé was repeatedly accused of having portrayed the Africans in a racist manner . He was upset by these claims , and made alterations to the depiction of the Africans in later reprints . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Tintin in Tibet , and the series as a whole became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . The Red Sea Sharks was critically well @-@ received , with various commentators describing it as one of the best Tintin adventures . The story was adapted for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In Brussels , Tintin and Captain Haddock bump into an old acquaintance , General Alcazar . Returning to Marlinspike Hall , they find that another acquaintance , the Emir of Khemed , Mohammed Ben Kalish Ezab , has been overthrown by his nemesis Sheikh Bab El Ehr , and that the Emir has accordingly sent his son , the disobedient Abdullah , to stay at Marlinspike for his own protection . The police detectives Thomson and Thompson visit , informing Tintin that Alcazar is seeking to purchase military aircraft from J. M. Dawson . 
 Investigating further , Tintin discovers that Dawson has also sold military aircraft to Bab El Ehr . Realising that the only way to be rid of Abdullah is to restore the Emir 's control of Khemed , Tintin , Haddock , and their dog Snowy travel to the Middle Eastern country . However the trio narrowly survive a bomb planted aboard the plane to kill them , and are able to slip into the city of <unk> unobserved . There they meet an old friend , the Portuguese merchant Oliveira da Figueira , who helps them to escape the city and ride on horseback to the Emir 's hideout . During the journey armoured cars and fighter planes are ordered to intercept them by " Mull Pasha " , who is actually Tintin 's old antagonist , Dr. Müller . The pursuit ends when a mix @-@ up in Muller 's order causes the fighter planes to destroy the armoured cars . 
 The Emir welcomes Tintin and Haddock , revealing that there is an ongoing slave trade through Khemed that is operated by the international businessman the Marquis di Gorgonzola , who falsely offers transport to African Muslims on the pilgrimage to Mecca and then sells them into slavery . Tintin , Haddock and Snowy leave for the Red Sea coast and board a <unk> for Mecca ; they are attacked by fighter planes before Tintin shoots one down and rescues its mercenary Estonian pilot , Piotr Skut . The four are picked up by di Gorgonzola 's yacht , the Scheherazade , but are soon offloaded onto the SS Ramona , a tramp steamer . Di Gorgonzola turns out to be another of Tintin 's old adversaries , Roberto Rastapopoulos . The Ramona is one of Rastapopoulos ' slave trading ships , and when a fire breaks out aboard it during the night , the ship 's commander Allan and his crew flee , leaving Tintin , Haddock , Snowy and Skut aboard along with a consignment of African slaves . 
 With Haddock taking on the ship 's captaincy , they are successfully able to put out the fire . However , Rastapopoulos sends a U @-@ Boat to destroy the Ramona , with the ship taking evasive manoeuvres to survive , ultimately being rescued by the cruiser USS Los Angeles . The Los Angeles chases down the Scheherazade and attempts to capture di Gorgonzola , but he fakes his own death and escapes via a mini @-@ submarine . Tintin , Haddock and Snowy return to Belgium and learn that the Emir has recaptured Khemed and that Abdullah can return home . Their relaxation is cut short by Jolyon Wagg , who has arranged to use Marlinspike for an auto rally . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and publication = = = 
 Hergé was inspired to develop the plot for The Red Sea Sharks after reading a magazine article detailing the continued existence of the slave trade within the Arab world , in which it was claimed that African pilgrims headed to Mecca were being enslaved during the journey . Hergé included a reference to this slave trade in the story 's original French title , Coke en Stock ( " Coke on Board " ) , which referred to the slave smuggler 's use of " coke " as a codeword for the enslaved people . 
 Prior to writing the story , Hergé had read Balzac et son monde ( " Balzac and His World " ) , a 1955 book written by his friend Félicien Marceau . Intrigued by the work of Honoré de Balzac , Hergé was inspired by the way in which Balzac had introduced an array of characters from his earlier work into The Human Comedy , and he subsequently adopted this trait for The Red Sea Sharks , in which a wide range of characters from The Adventures of Tintin make a reappearance . Hergé also introduced a new character , the Estonian pilot Piotr Skut , who would later reappear in Flight 714 . 
 To produce accurate illustrations for the Ramona , Hergé and his assistant Bob de Moor traveled aboard a Swedish cargo vessel , the MS Reine Astrid , from Antwerp to Gothenburg and back , during which they took photographs and drew sketches . Hergé had also collected press clippings depicting the Christina , a motor <unk> owned by the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis , and used them as the basis for his depiction of Rastapopoulos ' ship , the <unk> . The aircraft , cars , and machinery that appear in the story were drawn by Roger Leloup , one of the members of the Studios Hergé . In one scene in the latter part of the story , Hergé included a frogman , whose depiction was drawn from a press clipping of Lionel Crabb . His depiction of the Emir 's hideaway palace cut from the rock was based on the Al <unk> in Petra , Jordan , which he had seen in an issue of National Geographic . 
 Hergé 's growing interest in art was reflected in the story , as he included a copy of Alfred Sisley 's Le Canal du Loing at Marlinspike Hall . He also included paintings by Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró aboard <unk> ' Scheherazade . Muller 's pseudonym in the story , Mull Pasha , was based upon the British soldier Glubb Pasha . In the final scene , Hergé included cameos of both himself and his friend and colleague Edgar P. Jacobs . 
 The story began serialisation in Belgium 's Tintin magazine in October 1956 , before being serialised in the French edition of the magazine from December 1956 . It was then published in book form by Casterman in 1958 . Upon the story 's British publication in 1960 , Coke en Stock was renamed The Red Sea Sharks . 
 = = = Racism and alterations = = = 
 Hergé had been accused of exhibiting a racist attitude toward Africans in an earlier story , Tintin in the Congo , and potentially hoped to exonerate himself from such criticism by depicting Tintin and Haddock freeing African slaves in The Red Sea Sharks . In preparing the latter story he had consulted a colleague who worked for an African @-@ themed magazine , L 'Afrique et le Monde ( " Africa and the World " ) ; they translated some of the passages that Hergé wished to include in the story into Yoruba . However , in January 1962 an article in the magazine Jeune Afrique criticised Hergé for a racist depiction of Africans in the story , an accusation that would be echoed in other publications . These claims focused on the African characters ' simplistic use of pidgin language , which was similar to the speech patterns used in Tintin in the Congo . 
 African : " You speak well , Effendi . Wicked Arab , very wicked . Poor black men not want to be slaves . Poor black men want to go to Mecca . " 
 Haddock : " Naturally , I realise that . But I repeat if you go there , you 'll be sold as slaves . Is that what you want ? " 
 African : " We not slaves , Effendi . We good Muslims . We want to go to Mecca . " 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters expressed the view that " for the most part these attacks were extremely unfair " . Hergé was emotionally affected by the accusations , and made changes to the book for its 1967 reprint accordingly ; here he changed the Africans ' speech patterns , giving them improved grammar . However , he left Haddock speaking pidgin in response to the Africans . 
 For this version he also made changes to the Emir 's letter to Tintin ; the former version had been formal in its prose , stating " Most esteemed and well @-@ beloved friend , I entrust to you my son Abdullah , to improve his English . Here the situation is serious . Should any misfortune befall me I count on you , my friend , to care for Abdullah " . In Hergé 's revised edition , he adopts a more florid prose style : " This is to tell you , oh highly esteemed friend , that I entrust to you Abdullah , my adored son . Because here the situation is serious . Should misfortune descend on me like the hawk on an innocent gazelle ( for the world is made of life and death ) I am sure that Abdullah will find you with warmth and affection , refuge and peace . And in doing this you will be performing a fragrant act before Allah . " 
 He also expressed regret that he depicted the death of a shark in the story , later stating that " I still believed that sharks were big evil beasts " when writing The Red Sea Sharks . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Commenting on the inclusion of a wide range of characters from The Adventures of Tintin , Harry Thompson referred to the story as " a Tintin family reunion " , commenting that it was " a story unusually full of the type of people Captain Haddock liked to avoid " . Michael Farr believed that in reviving so many older characters , Hergé had given The Red Sea Sharks " a marked retrospective quality " . Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier thought that the story was too crowded , leaving little room for series regulars Professor Calculus or Thomson and Thompson , and leaving the introduced figure of Skut as " a nice supporting character , but nothing more " . The Lofficiers stated that " Hergé was doing some house @-@ cleaning of his past works and characters before embarking on something more serious and with more personal resonance " , Tintin in Tibet . 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters described The Red Sea Sharks as a " complex , ambiguous , even labyrinthine " story which was " undoubtedly the book in which Hergé ventured furthest into the creation of his own universe . " He thought that " Hergé enters a new phase " with The Red Sea Sharks , as its author " seems to know his family of characters better and better , and he enjoys playing with them and his readers . " Peeters noted that the book was " in some respects a continuation " of Land of Black Gold , an assessment shared by Thompson , the Lofficiers , and Farr , all of whom described it as a partial sequel to the earlier book . Thompson added that The Red Sea Sharks " atoned for the relative failure " of Land of Black Gold , believing that although it had a " rather hasty finish " , it was " a first @-@ rate thriller " . The Lofficiers awarded it four out of five , stating that it was " very effective as a modern political thriller and far more believable than The Calculus Affair " . They also opined that it provided an effective political commentary on the West 's relationship with the Arab world . In their analysis , Tintin and Haddock seek to aid the Emir not because he is a good leader , but for their own selfish purposes ( to get Abdullah out of Marlinspike ) , just as Western governments and corporations build alliances with Arab leaders guilty of human rights abuses in order to benefit their own interests . 
 Thompson felt that the inclusion of slavery as a key theme led to this book being " one of Hergé 's more adult @-@ oriented adventures " . Nevertheless , Farr noted that the story contained " a good measure of humour " to balance out these darker elements . Farr drew comparisons with Anthony Powell 's A Dance to the Music of Time , a series of novels that was contemporary to The Red Sea Sharks and which was similarly inspired by Balzac 's The Human Comedy . Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline believed that The Red Sea Sharks represented " the culmination of his golden age " , which had begun with The Blue Lotus . He also commented that " it almost seemed as if Hergé had regained the pace and rhythm of his most creative period " with this story . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of The Adventures of Tintin , the literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès expressed the view that The Red Sea Sharks reflected a world in which traditional values have been degraded and everything – including human life – has become a commodity . He added that Rastapopoulos becomes " the embodiment of the global market " in this story , tying together all of the other characters and therefore replacing Tintin as the figure " at the centre of the universe " . Apostolidès opined that The Red Sea Sharks amplifies " the theme of the general equivalence of everything " that is present in the series , serving as " a kind of retrospective " by introducing old characters and establishing new relationships between them . He believed that the theme of the mirage pervaded the story , appearing repeatedly in such forms as Abdullah 's cuckoo clock which concealed a water <unk> and the pseudonyms employed by the various characters throughout the narrative . The literary critic Tom McCarthy stated that The Red Sea Sharks exhibited a number of themes that recurred throughout The Adventures of Tintin . He believed that a scene in which one of Bab El Ehr 's men spies on the Emir in his mountain hideaway reflected a wider theme of eavesdropping that features throughout the series . McCarthy also highlighted Tintin 's actions in returning Abdullah to Khemed , expressing the view that it is part of a wider running theme throughout the series in which the hero takes an abandoned children to their home ; other instances included Tintin 's discovery of an adoptive family for the orphan Chang Chong @-@ Chen in The Blue Lotus and the delivery of the lost gypsy child Miarka to her family in The Castafiore Emerald . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1991 , a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana adapted 21 of the stories – among them The Red Sea Sharks – into a series of episodes , each 42 minutes long . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " , with compositions having been actually directly taken from the panels in the original comic book . 
 = Mollusca = 
 The molluscs or mollusks / <unk> / compose the large phylum of invertebrate animals known as the Mollusca . Around 85 @,@ 000 extant species of molluscs are recognized . Molluscs are the largest marine phylum , comprising about 23 % of all the named marine organisms . Numerous molluscs also live in freshwater and terrestrial habitats . They are highly diverse , not just in size and in anatomical structure , but also in behaviour and in habitat . The phylum is typically divided into 9 or 10 taxonomic classes , of which two are entirely extinct . <unk> molluscs , such as squid , cuttlefish and octopus , are among the most neurologically advanced of all invertebrates — and either the giant squid or the colossal squid is the largest known invertebrate species . The gastropods ( snails and slugs ) are by far the most numerous molluscs in terms of classified species , and account for 80 % of the total . The scientific study of molluscs is called <unk> . 
 The three most universal features defining modern molluscs are a mantle with a significant cavity used for breathing and excretion , the presence of a radula ( except for bivalves ) , and the structure of the nervous system . Other than these things , molluscs express great morphological diversity , so many textbooks base their descriptions on a " hypothetical ancestral mollusc " ( see image below ) . This has a single , " limpet @-@ like " shell on top , which is made of proteins and chitin reinforced with calcium carbonate , and is secreted by a mantle covering the whole upper surface . The underside of the animal consists of a single muscular " foot " . Although molluscs are coelomates , the coelom tends to be small . The main body cavity is a hemocoel through which blood circulates ; their circulatory systems are mainly open . The " generalized " mollusc 's feeding system consists of a rasping " tongue " , the radula , and a complex digestive system in which exuded mucus and microscopic , muscle @-@ powered " hairs " called cilia play various important roles . The generalized mollusc has two paired nerve cords , or three in bivalves . The brain , in species that have one , encircles the esophagus . Most molluscs have eyes , and all have sensors to detect chemicals , vibrations , and touch . The simplest type of molluscan reproductive system relies on external fertilization , but more complex variations occur . All produce eggs , from which may emerge trochophore larvae , more complex veliger larvae , or miniature adults . 
 Good evidence exists for the appearance of gastropods , cephalopods and bivalves in the Cambrian period 541 to 485 @.@ 4 million years ago . However , the evolutionary history both of molluscs ' emergence from the ancestral Lophotrochozoa and of their diversification into the well @-@ known living and fossil forms are still subjects of vigorous debate among scientists . 
 Molluscs have been and still are an important food source for anatomically modern humans , but with a risk of food poisoning from toxins that accumulate in molluscs under certain conditions , and many countries have regulations to reduce this risk . Molluscs have , for centuries , also been the source of important luxury goods , notably pearls , mother of pearl , Tyrian purple dye , and sea silk . Their shells have also been used as money in some preindustrial societies . <unk> species can also represent hazards or pests for human activities . The bite of the blue @-@ ringed octopus is often fatal , and that of Octopus <unk> causes inflammation that can last for over a month . Stings from a few species of large tropical cone shells can also kill , but their sophisticated , though easily produced , venoms have become important tools in neurological research . Schistosomiasis ( also known as bilharzia , <unk> or snail fever ) is transmitted to humans via water snail hosts , and affects about 200 million people . Snails and slugs can also be serious agricultural pests , and accidental or deliberate introduction of some snail species into new environments has seriously damaged some ecosystems . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The words mollusc and mollusk are both derived from the French <unk> , which originated from the Latin <unk> , from mollis , soft . <unk> was itself an adaptation of Aristotle 's τα <unk> ta <unk> , " the soft things " , which he applied to cuttlefish . 
 The name <unk> was formerly used to denote a division of the animal kingdom containing the brachiopods , bryozoans , and tunicates , the members of the three groups having been supposed to somewhat resemble the molluscs . As it is now known these groups have no relation to molluscs , and very little to one another , the name <unk> has been abandoned . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The most universal features of the body structure of molluscs are a mantle with a significant cavity used for breathing and excretion , and the organization of the nervous system . The most abundant metallic element in molluscs is calcium . 
 Molluscs have developed such a varied range of body structures , it is difficult to find synapomorphies ( defining characteristics ) to apply to all modern groups . The most general characteristic of molluscs is they are unsegmented and bilaterally symmetrical . The following are present in all modern molluscs : 
 The dorsal part of the body wall is a mantle ( or pallium ) which secretes calcareous spicules , plates or shells . It overlaps the body with enough spare room to form a mantle cavity . 
 The anus and genitals open into the mantle cavity . 
 There are two pairs of main nerve cords . 
 Other characteristics that commonly appear in textbooks have significant exceptions : 
 = = Diversity = = 
 Estimates of accepted described living species of molluscs vary from 50 @,@ 000 to a maximum of 120 @,@ 000 species . In 1969 David Nicol estimated the probable total number of living molluscs at 107 @,@ 000 of which were about 12 @,@ 000 fresh @-@ water gastropods and 35 @,@ 000 terrestrial . The Bivalvia would comprise about 14 % of the total and the other five classes less than 2 % of the living molluscs . In 2009 , Chapman estimated the number of described living species at 85 @,@ 000 . <unk> in 2001 estimated about 93 @,@ 000 named species , which include 23 % of all named marine organisms . Molluscs are second only to arthropods in numbers of living animal species — far behind the arthropods ' 1 @,@ 113 @,@ 000 but well ahead of chordates ' 52 @,@ 000 . About 200 @,@ 000 living species in total are estimated , and 70 @,@ 000 fossil species , although the total number of mollusc species ever to have existed , whether or not preserved , must be many times greater than the number alive today . 
 Molluscs have more varied forms than any other animal phylum . They include snails , slugs and other gastropods ; clams and other bivalves ; squids and other cephalopods ; and other lesser @-@ known but similarly distinctive subgroups . The majority of species still live in the oceans , from the seashores to the abyssal zone , but some form a significant part of the freshwater fauna and the terrestrial ecosystems . Molluscs are extremely diverse in tropical and temperate regions , but can be found at all latitudes . About 80 % of all known mollusc species are gastropods . Cephalopoda such as squid , cuttlefish , and octopuses are among the neurologically most advanced of all invertebrates . The giant squid , which until recently had not been observed alive in its adult form , is one of the largest invertebrates , but a recently caught specimen of the colossal squid , 10 m ( 33 ft ) long and weighing 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) , may have overtaken it . 
 Freshwater and terrestrial molluscs appear exceptionally vulnerable to extinction . Estimates of the numbers of nonmarine molluscs vary widely , partly because many regions have not been thoroughly surveyed . There is also a shortage of specialists who can identify all the animals in any one area to species . However , in 2004 the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species included nearly 2 @,@ 000 endangered nonmarine molluscs . For comparison , the great majority of mollusc species are marine , but only 41 of these appeared on the 2004 Red List . About 42 % of recorded extinctions since the year 1500 are of molluscs , consisting almost entirely of nonmarine species . 
 = = A " generalized mollusc " = = 
 Because of the great range of anatomical diversity among molluscs , many textbooks start the subject of molluscan anatomy by describing what is called an <unk> @-@ mollusc , hypothetical generalized mollusc , or hypothetical ancestral mollusc ( HAM ) to illustrate the most common features found within the phylum . These species reproduce through binary fission , much like a sea star . The depiction is rather similar to modern monoplacophorans , and some suggest it may resemble very early molluscs . 
 The generalized mollusc is bilaterally symmetrical and has a single , " limpet @-@ like " shell on top . The shell is secreted by a mantle covering the upper surface . The underside consists of a single muscular " foot " . The visceral mass , or <unk> , is the soft , <unk> metabolic region of the mollusc . It contains the body organs . 
 = = = Mantle and mantle cavity = = = 
 The mantle cavity , a fold in the mantle , encloses a significant amount of space . It is lined with epidermis , and is exposed , according to habitat , to sea , fresh water or air . The cavity was at the rear in the earliest molluscs , but its position now varies from group to group . The anus , a pair of <unk> ( chemical sensors ) in the incoming " lane " , the hindmost pair of gills and the exit openings of the nephridia ( " kidneys " ) and gonads ( reproductive organs ) are in the mantle cavity . The whole soft body of bivalves lies within an enlarged mantle cavity . 
 = = = Shell = = = 
 The mantle edge secretes a shell ( secondarily absent in a number of taxonomic groups , such as the nudibranchs ) that consists of mainly chitin and conchiolin ( a protein hardened with calcium carbonate ) , except the outermost layer in almost all cases is all conchiolin ( see periostracum ) . Molluscs never use phosphate to construct their hard parts , with the questionable exception of <unk> . While most mollusc shells are composed mainly of aragonite , those gastropods that lay eggs with a hard shell use calcite ( sometimes with traces of aragonite ) to construct the eggshells . 
 The shell consists of three layers : the outer layer ( the periostracum ) made of organic matter , a middle layer made of columnar calcite , and an inner layer consisting of laminated calcite , often nacreous . 
 = = = Foot = = = 
 The underside consists of a muscular foot , which has adapted to different purposes in different classes . The foot carries a pair of statocysts , which act as balance sensors . In gastropods , it secretes mucus as a lubricant to aid movement . In forms having only a top shell , such as limpets , the foot acts as a sucker attaching the animal to a hard surface , and the vertical muscles clamp the shell down over it ; in other molluscs , the vertical muscles pull the foot and other exposed soft parts into the shell . In bivalves , the foot is adapted for burrowing into the sediment ; in cephalopods it is used for jet propulsion , and the tentacles and arms are derived from the foot . 
 = = = Circulatory system = = = 
 Molluscs ' circulatory systems are mainly open . Although molluscs are coelomates , their coeloms are reduced to fairly small spaces enclosing the heart and gonads . The main body cavity is a hemocoel through which blood and coelomic fluid circulate and which encloses most of the other internal organs . These <unk> spaces act as an efficient hydrostatic skeleton . The blood contains the respiratory pigment hemocyanin as an oxygen @-@ carrier . The heart consists of one or more pairs of atria ( auricles ) , which receive oxygenated blood from the gills and pump it to the ventricle , which pumps it into the aorta ( main artery ) , which is fairly short and opens into the hemocoel . 
 The atria of the heart also function as part of the excretory system by filtering waste products out of the blood and dumping it into the coelom as urine . A pair of nephridia ( " little kidneys " ) to the rear of and connected to the coelom extracts any re @-@ usable materials from the urine and dumps additional waste products into it , and then ejects it via tubes that discharge into the mantle cavity . 
 = = = Respiration = = = 
 Most molluscs have only one pair of gills , or even only one gill . Generally , the gills are rather like feathers in shape , although some species have gills with filaments on only one side . They divide the mantle cavity so water enters near the bottom and exits near the top . Their filaments have three kinds of cilia , one of which drives the water current through the mantle cavity , while the other two help to keep the gills clean . If the <unk> detect noxious chemicals or possibly sediment entering the mantle cavity , the gills ' cilia may stop beating until the unwelcome intrusions have ceased . Each gill has an incoming blood vessel connected to the hemocoel and an outgoing one to the heart . 
 = = = Eating , digestion , and excretion = = = 
 Members of the mollusk family use intracellular digestion to function . Most molluscs have muscular mouths with radulae , " tongues " , bearing many rows of chitinous teeth , which are replaced from the rear as they wear out . The radula primarily functions to scrape bacteria and algae off rocks , and is associated with the <unk> , a cartilaginous supporting organ . The radula is unique to the molluscs and has no equivalent in any other animal . 
 Molluscs ' mouths also contain glands that secrete slimy mucus , to which the food sticks . Beating cilia ( tiny " hairs " ) drive the mucus towards the stomach , so the mucus forms a long string called a " food string " . 
 At the tapered rear end of the stomach and projecting slightly into the hindgut is the prostyle , a backward @-@ pointing cone of feces and mucus , which is rotated by further cilia so it acts as a bobbin , winding the mucus string onto itself . Before the mucus string reaches the prostyle , the acidity of the stomach makes the mucus less sticky and frees particles from it . 
 The particles are sorted by yet another group of cilia , which send the smaller particles , mainly minerals , to the prostyle so eventually they are excreted , while the larger ones , mainly food , are sent to the stomach 's cecum ( a pouch with no other exit ) to be digested . The sorting process is by no means perfect . 
 Periodically , circular muscles at the hindgut 's entrance pinch off and excrete a piece of the prostyle , preventing the prostyle from growing too large . The anus , in the part of the mantle cavity , is swept by the outgoing " lane " of the current created by the gills . Carnivorous molluscs usually have simpler digestive systems . 
 As the head has largely disappeared in bivalves , the mouth has been equipped with labial palps ( two on each side of the mouth ) to collect the detritus from its mucus . 
 = = = Nervous system = = = 
 The cephalic molluscs have two pairs of main nerve cords organized around a number of paired ganglia , the visceral cords serving the internal organs and the pedal ones serving the foot . Most pairs of corresponding ganglia on both sides of the body are linked by commissures ( relatively large bundles of nerves ) . The ganglia above the gut are the cerebral , the pleural , and the visceral , which are located above the esophagus ( gullet ) . The pedal ganglia , which control the foot , are below the esophagus and their commissure and connectives to the cerebral and pleural ganglia surround the esophagus in a <unk> nerve ring or nerve collar . 
 The <unk> molluscs ( bivalves ) also have this ring but it is less obvious and less important . The bivalves have only three pairs of ganglia — cerebral , pedal , and visceral — with the visceral as the largest and most important of the three functioning as the principal center of " thinking " . Some such as the scallops have eyes around the edges of their shells which connect to a pair of looped nerves and which provide the ability to distinguish between light and shadow . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The simplest molluscan reproductive system relies on external fertilization , but with more complex variations . All produce eggs , from which may emerge trochophore larvae , more complex veliger larvae , or miniature adults . Two gonads sit next to the coelom , a small cavity that surrounds the heart , into which they shed ova or sperm . The nephridia extract the gametes from the coelom and emit them into the mantle cavity . Molluscs that use such a system remain of one sex all their lives and rely on external fertilization . Some molluscs use internal fertilization and / or are hermaphrodites , functioning as both sexes ; both of these methods require more complex reproductive systems . 
 The most basic molluscan larva is a trochophore , which is planktonic and feeds on floating food particles by using the two bands of cilia around its " equator " to sweep food into the mouth , which uses more cilia to drive them into the stomach , which uses further cilia to expel undigested remains through the anus . New tissue grows in the bands of mesoderm in the interior , so the apical tuft and anus are pushed further apart as the animal grows . The trochophore stage is often succeeded by a veliger stage in which the prototroch , the " equatorial " band of cilia nearest the apical tuft , develops into the velum ( " veil " ) , a pair of cilia @-@ bearing lobes with which the larva swims . Eventually , the larva sinks to the seafloor and metamorphoses into the adult form . While metamorphosis is the usual state in molluscs , the cephalopods differ in exhibiting direct development : the hatchling is a ' miniaturized ' form of the adult . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Most molluscs are herbivorous , grazing on algae or filter feeders . For those grazing , two feeding strategies are predominant . Some feed on microscopic , filamentous algae , often using their radula as a ' rake ' to comb up filaments from the sea floor . Others feed on macroscopic ' plants ' such as kelp , rasping the plant surface with its radula . To employ this strategy , the plant has to be large enough for the mollusc to ' sit ' on , so smaller macroscopic plants are not as often eaten as their larger counterparts . Filter feeders are molluscs that feed by straining suspended matter and food particle from water , typically by passing the water over their gills . Most bivalves are filter feeders . 
 Cephalopods are primarily predatory , and the radula takes a secondary role to the jaws and tentacles in food acquisition . The <unk> <unk> uses its radula in the usual fashion , but its diet includes protists such as the <unk> <unk> . <unk> sea @-@ slugs suck the sap from algae , using their one @-@ row radula to pierce the cell walls , whereas <unk> nudibranchs and some <unk> feed on sponges and others feed on hydroids . ( An extensive list of molluscs with unusual feeding habits is available in the appendix of <unk> , A. ( 1955 ) . " <unk> diets " . Journal of <unk> Studies 31 ( 3 – 4 ) : 144 . . ) 
 = = Classification = = 
 Opinions vary about the number of classes of molluscs ; for example , the table below shows eight living classes , and two extinct ones . Although they are unlikely to form a clade , some older works combine the Caudofoveata and <unk> into one class , the <unk> . Two of the commonly recognized " classes " are known only from fossils . 
 Classification into higher taxa for these groups has been and remains problematic . A phylogenetic study suggests the Polyplacophora form a clade with a monophyletic <unk> . Additionally , it suggests a sister taxon relationship exists between the Bivalvia and the <unk> . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Good evidence exists for the appearance of gastropods , cephalopods and bivalves in the Cambrian period 541 to 485 @.@ 4 million years ago . However , the evolutionary history both of the emergence of molluscs from the ancestral group Lophotrochozoa , and of their diversification into the well @-@ known living and fossil forms , is still vigorously debated . 
 Debate occurs about whether some Ediacaran and Early Cambrian fossils really are molluscs . Kimberella , from about 555 million years ago , has been described by some paleontologists as " mollusc @-@ like " , but others are unwilling to go further than " probable bilaterian " . There is an even sharper debate about whether Wiwaxia , from about 505 million years ago , was a mollusc , and much of this centers on whether its feeding apparatus was a type of radula or more similar to that of some polychaete worms . Nicholas Butterfield , who opposes the idea that Wiwaxia was a mollusc , has written that earlier microfossils from 515 to 510 million years ago are fragments of a genuinely mollusc @-@ like radula . This appears to contradict the concept that the ancestral molluscan radula was mineralized . 
 However , the Helcionellids , which first appear over 540 million years ago in Early Cambrian rocks from Siberia and China , are thought to be early molluscs with rather snail @-@ like shells . <unk> molluscs therefore predate the earliest trilobites . Although most <unk> fossils are only a few millimeters long , specimens a few centimeters long have also been found , most with more limpet @-@ like shapes . The tiny specimens have been suggested to be juveniles and the larger ones adults . 
 Some analyses of <unk> concluded these were the earliest gastropods . However , other scientists are not convinced these Early Cambrian fossils show clear signs of the torsion that identifies modern gastropods twists the internal organs so the anus lies above the head . 
 <unk> , some fossils of which predate 530 million years ago , was long thought to be a cephalopod , but discoveries of more detailed fossils showed its shell was not secreted , but built from grains of the mineral silicon dioxide ( silica ) , and it was not divided into a series of compartments by septa as those of fossil shelled cephalopods and the living Nautilus are . <unk> 's classification is uncertain . The Late Cambrian fossil <unk> is now thought to be the earliest clearly cephalopod fossil , as its shell had septa and a <unk> , a strand of tissue that Nautilus uses to remove water from compartments it has vacated as it grows , and which is also visible in fossil ammonite shells . However , <unk> and other early cephalopods crept along the seafloor instead of swimming , as their shells contained a " ballast " of stony deposits on what is thought to be the underside , and had stripes and blotches on what is thought to be the upper surface . All cephalopods with external shells except the nautiloids became extinct by the end of the Cretaceous period 65 million years ago . However , the shell @-@ less <unk> ( squid , octopus , cuttlefish ) are abundant today . 
 The Early Cambrian fossils <unk> and Pojetaia are regarded as bivalves . " Modern @-@ looking " bivalves appeared in the Ordovician period , 488 to 443 million years ago . One bivalve group , the rudists , became major reef @-@ builders in the Cretaceous , but became extinct in the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . Even so , bivalves remain abundant and diverse . 
 The <unk> are a class of extinct animals with a shell and operculum that may be molluscs . Authors who suggest they deserve their own phylum do not comment on the position of this phylum in the tree of life 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 The phylogeny ( evolutionary " family tree " ) of molluscs is a controversial subject . In addition to the debates about whether Kimberella and any of the " halwaxiids " were molluscs or closely related to molluscs , debates arise about the relationships between the classes of living molluscs . In fact , some groups traditionally classified as molluscs may have to be redefined as distinct but related . 
 Molluscs are generally regarded members of the Lophotrochozoa , a group defined by having trochophore larvae and , in the case of living Lophophorata , a feeding structure called a lophophore . The other members of the Lophotrochozoa are the annelid worms and seven marine phyla . The diagram on the right summarizes a phylogeny presented in 2007 . 
 Because the relationships between the members of the family tree are uncertain , it is difficult to identify the features inherited from the last common ancestor of all molluscs . For example , it is uncertain whether the ancestral mollusc was <unk> ( composed of repeating units ) — if it was , that would suggest an origin from an annelid @-@ like worm . Scientists disagree about this : <unk> and colleagues concluded , in 2006 , the repetition of gills and of the foot 's retractor muscles were later developments , while in 2007 , <unk> concluded the ancestral mollusc was <unk> , and it had a foot used for creeping and a " shell " that was mineralized . In one particular branch of the family tree , the shell of <unk> is thought to have evolved from the spicules ( small spines ) of aplacophorans ; but this is difficult to reconcile with the embryological origins of spicules . 
 The molluscan shell appears to have originated from a mucus coating , which eventually stiffened into a cuticle . This would have been impermeable and thus forced the development of more sophisticated respiratory apparatus in the form of gills . Eventually , the cuticle would have become mineralized , using the same genetic machinery ( engrailed ) as most other bilaterian skeletons . The first mollusc shell almost certainly was reinforced with the mineral aragonite . 
 The evolutionary relationships ' within ' the molluscs are also debated , and the diagrams below show two widely supported reconstructions : 
 Morphological analyses tend to recover a conchiferan clade that receives less support from molecular analyses , although these results also lead to unexpected <unk> , for instance scattering the bivalves throughout all other mollusc groups . 
 However , an analysis in 2009 using both morphological and molecular phylogenetics comparisons concluded the molluscs are not monophyletic ; in particular , <unk> and Bivalvia are both separate , monophyletic lineages unrelated to the remaining molluscan classes ; the traditional phylum Mollusca is polyphyletic , and it can only be made monophyletic if <unk> and bivalves are excluded . A 2010 analysis recovered the traditional conchiferan and <unk> groups , and showed molluscs were monophyletic , demonstrating that available data for solenogastres was contaminated . Current molecular data are insufficient to constrain the molluscan phylogeny , and since the methods used to determine the confidence in clades are prone to overestimation , it is risky to place too much emphasis even on the areas of which different studies agree . Rather than eliminating unlikely relationships , the latest studies add new permutations of internal molluscan relationships , even bringing the conchiferan hypothesis into question . 
 = = Human interaction = = 
 For millennia , molluscs have been a source of food for humans , as well as important luxury goods , notably pearls , mother of pearl , Tyrian purple dye , sea silk , and chemical compounds . Their shells have also been used as a form of currency in some preindustrial societies . A number of species of molluscs can bite or sting humans , and some have become agricultural pests . 
 = = = Uses by humans = = = 
 Molluscs , especially bivalves such as clams and mussels , have been an important food source since at least the advent of anatomically modern humans , and this has often resulted in overfishing . Other commonly eaten molluscs include octopuses and squids , whelks , oysters , and scallops . In 2005 , China accounted for 80 % of the global mollusc catch , netting almost 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 long tons ; 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Within Europe , France remained the industry leader . Some countries regulate importation and handling of molluscs and other seafood , mainly to minimize the poison risk from toxins that can sometimes accumulate in the animals . 
 Most molluscs with shells can produce pearls , but only the pearls of bivalves and some gastropods , whose shells are lined with nacre , are valuable . The best natural pearls are produced by marine pearl oysters , Pinctada <unk> and Pinctada mertensi , which live in the tropical and subtropical waters of the Pacific Ocean . Natural pearls form when a small foreign object gets stuck between the mantle and shell . 
 The two methods of culturing pearls insert either " seeds " or beads into oysters . The " seed " method uses grains of ground shell from freshwater mussels , and overharvesting for this purpose has endangered several freshwater mussel species in the southeastern USA . The pearl industry is so important in some areas , significant sums of money are spent on monitoring the health of farmed molluscs . 
 Other luxury and high @-@ status products were made from molluscs . Tyrian purple , made from the ink glands of murex shells , " ... fetched its weight in silver " in the fourth century BC , according to Theopompus . The discovery of large numbers of Murex shells on Crete suggests the Minoans may have pioneered the extraction of " imperial purple " during the Middle Minoan period in the 20th – 18th centuries BC , centuries before the <unk> . Sea silk is a fine , rare , and valuable fabric produced from the long silky threads ( byssus ) secreted by several bivalve molluscs , particularly Pinna nobilis , to attach themselves to the sea bed . Procopius , writing on the Persian wars circa 550 CE , " stated that the five hereditary satraps ( governors ) of Armenia who received their insignia from the Roman Emperor were given chlamys ( or cloaks ) made from <unk> pinna . Apparently , only the ruling classes were allowed to wear these chlamys . " 
 <unk> shells , including those of <unk> , were used as a kind of money ( shell money ) in several preindustrial societies . However , these " currencies " generally differed in important ways from the standardized government @-@ backed and -controlled money familiar to industrial societies . Some shell " currencies " were not used for commercial transactions , but mainly as social status displays at important occasions , such as weddings . When used for commercial transactions , they functioned as commodity money , as a tradable commodity whose value differed from place to place , often as a result of difficulties in transport , and which was vulnerable to incurable inflation if more efficient transport or " goldrush " behavior appeared . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Bivalve molluscs are used as bioindicators to monitor the health of aquatic environments in both fresh water and the marine environments . Their population status or structure , physiology , behaviour or the level of contamination with elements or compounds can indicate the state of contamination status of the ecosystem . They are particularly useful since they are sessile so that they are representative of the environment where they are sampled or placed . A typical project is the Mussel Watch Programme but today they are used worldwide . 
 = = = = Stings and bites = = = = 
 A risk of food poisoning from toxins that accumulate in molluscs occurs under certain conditions , and many countries have regulations that aim to minimize this risk . Blue @-@ ringed octopus bites are often fatal , and the bite of other octopuses can cause unpleasant symptoms . Stings from a few species of large tropical cone shells can also kill . However , the sophisticated venoms of these cone snails have become important tools in neurological research and show promise as sources of new medications . 
 When handled alive , a few species of molluscs can sting or bite and , with some species , this can present a serious risk to the human handling the animal . To put this into perspective , though , deaths from mollusc venoms are less than 10 % of the number of deaths from jellyfish stings . 
 All octopuses are venomous , but only a few species pose a significant threat to humans . Blue @-@ ringed octopuses in the genus <unk> , which live around Australia and New Guinea , bite humans only if severely provoked , but their venom kills 25 % of human victims . Another tropical species , Octopus <unk> , causes severe inflammation that can last for over a month even if treated correctly , and the bite of Octopus rubescens can cause necrosis that lasts longer than one month if untreated , and headaches and weakness persisting for up to a week even if treated . 
 All species of cone snails are venomous and can sting when handled , although many species are too small to pose much of a risk to humans . These carnivorous gastropods feed on marine invertebrates ( and in the case of larger species , on fish ) . Their venom is based on a huge array of toxins , some fast @-@ acting and others slower but deadlier ; they can afford to do this because their toxins require less time and energy to be produced compared with those of snakes or spiders . Many painful stings have been reported , and a few fatalities , although some of the reported fatalities may be exaggerations . Only a few larger species of cone snails which can capture and kill fish are likely to be seriously dangerous to humans . The effects of individual cone @-@ shell toxins on victims ' nervous systems are so precise as to be useful tools for research in neurology , and the small size of their molecules makes it easy to synthesize them . 
 The traditional belief that a giant clam can trap the leg of a person between its valves , thus causing drowning , is a myth . 
 = = = = Parasites = = = = 
 Schistosomiasis ( also known as bilharzia , <unk> or snail fever ) is transmitted to humans via water snail hosts , and affects about 200 million people . A few species of snails and slugs are serious agricultural pests ; in addition , accidental or deliberate introduction of various snail species into new territory has resulted in serious damage to some natural ecosystems . 
 Schistosomiasis , a disease caused by the fluke worm Schistosoma , is " second only to malaria as the most devastating parasitic disease in tropical countries . An estimated 200 million people in 74 countries are infected with the disease – 100 million in Africa alone . " The parasite has 13 known species , two of which infect humans . The parasite itself is not a mollusc , but all the species have freshwater snails as intermediate hosts . 
 = = = = Pests = = = = 
 Some species of molluscs , particularly certain snails and slugs , can be serious crop pests , and when introduced into new environments , can unbalance local ecosystems . One such pest , the giant African snail Achatina fulica , has been introduced to many parts of Asia , as well as to many islands in the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean . In the 1990s , this species reached the West Indies . Attempts to control it by introducing the predatory snail <unk> rosea proved disastrous , as the predator ignored Achatina fulica and went on to extirpate several native snail species , instead . 
 Despite its name , <unk> <unk> is a viral disease , and is unrelated to molluscs . 
 = Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn = 
 Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn is a role @-@ playing video game developed by BioWare and published by Black Isle Studios . It is the sequel to Baldur 's Gate ( 1998 ) , and was released for Microsoft Windows in September 2000 . Like Baldur 's Gate , the game is set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting , based on the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition rule set . 
 Baldur 's Gate II opens shortly after the events of Baldur 's Gate and continues the story of the protagonist , Gorion 's Ward , whose unique heritage has now gained them the attention of Jon Irenicus . The game 's plot revolves around the protagonist 's encounters with Irenicus , and is set south of the events in Baldur 's Gate in the country of Amn , mainly in and around the city of Athkatla . 
 The game received critical acclaim upon its release ; GameSpy , GameSpot , and IGN awarded Baldur 's Gate II their " Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year " awards for 2000 , and the game has sold more than two million units . An expansion pack , entitled Baldur 's Gate II : Throne of Bhaal , was released on June 21 , 2001 . Besides adding a large dungeon and enhancements to the game , it concluded the Child of Bhaal saga . Baldur 's Gate II : Enhanced Edition , an enhanced version of Baldur 's Gate II , was released on November 15 , 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn is an Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition computer role @-@ playing game . The central quest of the game consists of about sixty hours of play , while the full game , including all side quests , totals around 300 hours . The player controls a party of up to six characters , one of whom is the protagonist ; if the protagonist dies , a saved @-@ game must be loaded , or a new game begun . The game begins with character creation , where , through a series of configuration screens , the player creates a player character protagonist , choosing such things as class , ability scores , appearance and alignment . Alternatively , an existing character from Baldur 's Gate or Tales of the Sword Coast can be imported . Once in the game world , the player may recruit certain non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) to travel with him or her , though only five may do so at a time ; depending on who is present in the group , bickering , romance , and side quests can result . NPCs in the party often converse with the player or with one another , and at times interject into the player 's conversations with others . 
 The game is played from an isometric perspective , and the screen , which does not need to remain centered on the protagonist , can be scrolled with the mouse or the keyboard . Areas are revealed as they are explored by the player 's characters . A fog of war effect hides explored areas when the player 's characters move away from them . The player can also change the formation in which the party moves . Clicking an area exit , such as a doorway or staircase , causes another area to be loaded . Clicking on the edge of an outside area causes the party to travel there ; the game then presents the player with the World Map , from which the player may select a destination . 
 The player interacts with characters and objects by clicking on them . Clicking on the ground causes the player 's selected characters to move . The gameplay , though in real @-@ time , can be paused , whereupon commands may be issued to controllable characters , who will attempt to execute them when the game is <unk> . The game can also be set to pause automatically at certain times . Dialogue is started by NPCs at certain scripted times , or by the player 's clicking on NPCs who are not immediately hostile . When speaking to an NPC , the player must often choose what to say from a list of responses . Dialogue may lead to quests or important information . When the player clicks on a hostile being , the currently selected characters will advance to attack it . Information about characters , creatures , items , and buildings in the game environment is shown on a tool tip , which appears when the mouse pointer is held over game elements . 
 When a character in the group gains the necessary experience points , he or she gains a level . Experience points are awarded for certain player actions , such as killing enemies or completing quests . The party also has a reputation , which is affected by the player 's moral actions , and which , along with the party leader 's charisma attribute , influences how NPCs in the game world react to the player . The characters in the party will also complain if the party 's reputation conflicts with their alignment . Resting heals the characters in the party and refreshes those who are fatigued ; also , resting allows a character to memorize spells . The game contains over 300 spells available for memorization . With the exception of sorcerers , magic @-@ users must memorize spells before they can be cast . Spell @-@ casting takes time and may be disrupted by attacks or other spells . 
 The player can access sub @-@ screens through the interface : area and world maps ; the journal , which tracks important information , such as quests and the game 's plot ; the inventory page , which is used to manage and equip items ; the record screen , which is used to view information about , as well as level up , characters in the party ; the mage book and priest scroll screens , where spells can be inspected and memorized ; and the options screen , where settings may be altered , saved @-@ games loaded , or the game saved or quit . 
 = = = Classes and kits = = = 
 During character creation , the player chooses a class : fighter , ranger , paladin , thief , bard , mage , cleric , druid , barbarian , monk , or sorcerer ; the last three are new for the sequel . Different classes have different special abilities and restrictions ; a thief character , for instance , can find and remove traps , but thieves have limitations on which weapons and armor they may use , and cannot be of lawful good alignment . Most classes also have a subset of kits , or specializations within a class , from which to choose . Kits have special advantages and usually , disadvantages ; one of the kits of the paladin class , the cavalier , for example , specializes in fighting monsters such as dragons and demons , but cannot use missile weapons . At some point in the game , the player may join or take over a stronghold . The type of stronghold is determined by the protagonist 's class . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 The game also has a multiplayer mode , in which up to six human players can adventure through the game , controlling player @-@ made characters as well as recruited NPCs . The content of the game is otherwise the same , and one of the players controls the protagonist . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Forgotten Realms , the high fantasy campaign setting in which Baldur 's Gate II is set , is a fictional world similar to a medieval Earth , but with its own peoples , geography , and history . In the Realms , as its inhabitants call it , fantastic creatures and magic are common . 
 Baldur 's Gate II takes place mainly in Amn , a country on the subcontinent of Faerûn . This country , known commonly as the Merchant Kingdom , lies south of Baldur 's Gate ; wealth and trade are the chief concerns of the region . The capital city of Athkatla , around which a fair portion of the game revolves , is the most important in Amn , and is ruled by the anonymous Council of Six . The local thieves ' guild , the Shadow Thieves , also has considerable power . The group , which operates all along the Sword Coast , is based in Athkatla . Another powerful organization in Amn are the Cowled Wizards , who regulate the use of magic in the region . The Shadow Thieves , the Cowled Wizards , and the Harpers , a semi @-@ secret conglomeration of good organizations , all factor prominently into the story and provide side quests . 
 Besides Athkatla , other places the player will pass through include : an island , on which stands both the port town of <unk> and the asylum Spellhold ; the Underdark ; the city of Suldanessellar ; and the Astral Plane . There are also other places , which may be explored : the Umar Hills , where people have been disappearing ; a temple ruins , fallen under the shadow of the Shade Lord ; the de <unk> Keep , home of the de <unk> but recently overrun by trolls ; the town of <unk> , under attack by animals ; a druid grove connected to <unk> 's woes ; the <unk> Hills , where the player becomes entangled in the intrigues of <unk> , a dragon ; the underwater <unk> city ; and the Planar Prison . 
 Baldur 's Gate II is set in the year 1369 DR ( Dale Reckoning ) , and thus takes place not long after the Time of Troubles ( 1358 DR ) , when the Tablets of Fate , powerful magic items which maintain a balance between good and evil , were stolen . Lord Ao , the <unk> , forced the gods to become mortal until the Tablets were found ; some gods died while in this mortal state . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Bhaal , the God of Murder , was one such god , slain by an adventurer named <unk> , who himself became a god . But Bhaal foresaw his destruction , and walked the land before the other gods . He left behind him " a score of mortal progeny , " whose later deaths , when they were slain by heroes , would fuel his rebirth . The game 's protagonist is one of these offspring ; but , through the choices of the player , may be either good or evil . The character grew up in the library fortress of Candlekeep , watched over by the mage Gorion . Imoen , who grew up there as well , became a close friend . The story of the first Baldur 's Gate follows their adventure along the Sword Coast , where the hero learns of their heritage , and defeats their half @-@ brother <unk> , a fellow child of Bhaal . 
 Some notable characters in Shadows of Amn include : Gaelan Bayle , who offers the party the help of the Shadow Thieves ; Aran <unk> , the leader of the Shadow Thieves ; Saemon <unk> , who sails the party to an island ; <unk> , a silver dragon whose eggs have been stolen and given to drow ; <unk> ; and Queen <unk> , the ruler of Suldanessellar . Jon Irenicus and his sister Bodhi are the chief antagonists , with Irenicus the game 's main villain . Drizzt Do 'Urden also makes an appearance ; and if the player solicits his aid , he and his companions will later help the player . 
 In Baldur 's Gate II , several characters from the first game reappear , of which the following can join the player 's party : Imoen , who grew up with the protagonist in Candlekeep ; <unk> , who , with her husband Khalid , was a friend of Gorion 's ; Minsc , a warrior who carries with him a hamster named Boo ; Edwin , a Red Wizard of Thay ; and <unk> , a dark elf cleric . There are also many new NPCs who may join the party : <unk> , a winged elf who has lost her wings and was sold to the circus by slavers at a young age ; <unk> , an older paladin and a powerful and respected member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart ; Mazzy , an honorable halfling fighter and " the nearest thing to a paladin that a halfling can aspire to " ; <unk> , who is of the upper class , but , though conscious of class distinction , tries to help those less fortunate than herself ; <unk> , who is of a family noted for its talented magic @-@ users , but hates the art ; <unk> , a member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart , and whose wish is to become a full knight ; <unk> , a druid ; <unk> <unk> , a tiefling bard and one of the actors of an acting troupe ; Jan , a gnome , of the Jansen family ; <unk> , a thief from the land of Kara @-@ Tur ; and <unk> , an evil dwarven fighter . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Shortly after the events of Baldur 's Gate , the hero and companions are overcome and taken captive . When the game opens , the hero awakens in a cage , and is shortly thereafter experimented upon by a wizard named Jon Irenicus . Irenicus is distracted as his complex is attacked by thieves , and disappears to fight them . The hero uses this opportunity to escape from the complex with a few other companions , including Imoen , and emerges into the city of Athkatla . As soon as the hero and his party have entered the city proper , they see Irenicus fighting off some of his attackers . After he has destroyed his attackers , he notices the hero and his companions . An argument ensues , during which Imoen angrily attacks Irenicus using magic . Immediately Cowled Wizards appear , after a fight arrest both Irenicus and Imoen for the unsanctioned use of magic , and teleport both of them away . 
 In the slums of Athkatla , a man named Gaelan Bayle offers the party the help of a powerful organization , who can find Imoen or Irenicus for the large sum of 20 @,@ 000 gold pieces . The party is approached by and offered the help of another rival guild headed by Bodhi ; it is the player 's choice whom to side with . 
 Imoen and Irenicus are removed to an asylum called Spellhold situated on an island . Irenicus soon breaks his bonds and prepares to experiment on Imoen . In Athkatla , the party raises the money necessary and receives assistance from whichever organization it has decided to work with , and gains passage to the island on a ship sailed by Saemon <unk> . The heroes enter Spellhold , but are captured by Irenicus , who has taken control of the prison and had planned all along to bring the protagonist there . Irenicus subjects the protagonist to a ritual which takes the protagonist 's soul . Imoen , who is revealed to also be a Child of Bhaal , has already been subjected to Irenicus 's ritual , and her soul has gone to Irenicus 's sister Bodhi . Bodhi then abandons the party to the maze beneath Spellhold so she may hunt them . When they face her , the now soulless protagonist loses self @-@ control and transforms into a creature called the Slayer , one of the avatar forms of Bhaal , which scares off Bodhi . The hero returns to their normal self , and the party battles Irenicus , forcing him to retreat . The party follows , and reaches the surface via the Underdark . 
 Upon reaching the surface , the party encounters the army of the elven city of Suldanessellar . The elves cannot return to the city , for Irenicus has magically hidden it . To gain access to it , the party secures the <unk> Lanthorn from Bodhi , who has stolen the artifact ; upon Bodhi 's death , Imoen 's soul is restored . The <unk> Lanthorn lights the way to Suldanessellar , which has been invaded by Irenicus and his minions . The party proceeds through the city and , at the Tree of Life , learns Irenicus is draining the power of the Tree , which will doom Suldanessellar . The heroes defeat him , but because Irenicus still has the protagonist 's soul , they and the rest of the party , are dragged into Hell with the wizard . When they defeat Irenicus , they return to life , and are honored by the elves of Suldanessellar . 
 = = Development = = 
 Baldur 's Gate II was developed by BioWare and published by Black Isle Studios and released for Windows in September 2000 . The game uses the same Infinity Engine as Baldur 's Gate . BioWare dedicated the game to Daniel Walker , the company 's second employee , who died in 1999 . 
 Baldur 's Gate was the first role @-@ playing game designed by BioWare , and they applied what they learned in the process to Baldur 's Gate II . They also felt they did not have enough time to reach their design goals with the first game , due to developing both the content of the game and the Infinity Engine at the same time . In Baldur 's Gate II , it was determined that the designers should be allowed " adequate time to allow the game to reach its full potential . " Throughout its development , they focused " on ensuring that Baldur 's Gate II is significantly better than Baldur 's Gate in every way possible , and to make it appeal not only to fans of the original game but also to make it accessible to new fans who never played the original game . " 
 Development of Baldur 's Gate II began in January 1999 . From the suggestions of fans on message boards and newsgroups , reviews of Baldur 's Gate , and internal suggestions , a list of constructive criticism was compiled ; from this list , a slightly shorter one of features to be added to the game was made . Some of the items on this list were : support for higher resolutions , such as 800 by 600 pixels and above ; 3D support ; non @-@ pausing dialogue in multiplayer ; drop off panels in the interface ; character kits ; dual @-@ wielding of weapons ; a streamlined journal and <unk> map ; deathmatch ; and inclusion of famous AD & D monsters such as the dragon . Not many features had to be cut , and they kept as many as they could . Because of the engine 's mature state of development , most features were fairly easy to add . Ben <unk> , the producer of the game , said , " The engine was up and running since day one , which is a huge morale booster . When a monster is complete , we put it into the ' override ' directory and it appears in the game ! This is a huge change from working on the original . " Late in the project , deathmatch was removed , while non @-@ pausing dialogue , which proved " the most problematic feature " , was removed early on before being reintroduced in early 2000 . 
 To avoid some of the design mistakes made in Baldur 's Gate , guidelines were drawn up for each department ; the level designers had the longest set of guidelines . These lists continually changed and evolved as the development progressed . The main design guidelines for the entire project were that the players should feel like their actions have an effect on the game world , and good versus evil options should be available depending on which path the player takes . Guidelines for the story were to keep the focus on the player 's character , keep the player updated on the activities on the game 's villain , add a significant plot twist , and make the ending of the game open enough so that there would be room for more sequels . Environment guidelines were to break the game into chapters , make some locations key to the central plot , keep areas interesting and easy to quickly navigate , and showcase areas before they were available to explore to capture player interest . For the game systems , guidelines focused on character customization and a well @-@ crafted reward system . The writing guidelines were concerned mainly with dialogue : limiting the number of sentences NPCs spoke at a time , keeping the number of player response choices at three as often as possible , avoiding profanity and accents , and having a small set of random dialogue for unimportant NPCs . Many early design decisions did not follow the guidelines , and programming constraints were not always followed by other departments , such as design and art , leading to slowdowns in some parts of the game that were difficult or impossible to fix . 
 The process for creating levels was long and complicated . It began with the creation of a general layout of the area to be built by designers . They would pass this concept map to the artists , who added models to it , beginning with the largest objects and ending with small items such as individual pieces of furniture . After everything was put in place by the art team , designers took over again , inserting graphical enhancements , effects , and collision detection code . With a functional level , creatures , items , traps , and triggers were added last , then scripts were written for everything to control behavior . The team found it quite difficult to keep track of changes made to levels , and there were sometimes communication problems between different parts of the team , such as the artists and designers , resulting in inconsistencies between their work . Ray Muzyka , the co @-@ executive producer , wrote , " We learned to make sure all elements of the team are talking to each other and working as a group , rather than as a bunch of individuals ! " They did feel they had done a good job automating the level creation process , as levels were rapidly designed . " A designer , " wrote Muzyka , " might submit a level description and receive it , art complete , a month later ready for scripting , but missing some key features ( almost always a door ) . We would then have to determine whether the omission was important enough to have the art piece redone , or whether we could simply tweak the design of the level to fit the finished art . " 
 During the game 's development , a quality assurance department was added to BioWare , and the game 's publishers lent their assistance in testing . Muzyka said , " because of its immense size , Baldur 's Gate II was a tester 's nightmare , " and " this was compounded by the fact that we didn 't do enough testing as areas were being developed . " The game contained about 290 quests , each of which had to be tested in both single player and multiplayer modes . BioWare used a method , introduced to them by Feargus Urquhart , Douglas Avery , and Chris Parker of Black Isle Studios , in which the game 's quests were listed on white @-@ boards , with a cross placed beside each quest . Pairs consisting of a developer and a tester were allotted each a quest , and upon their believing the quest to be stable , its cross was deleted . 
 Muzyka wrote : 
 In the final days of working on <unk> there was a strangely serene feeling in the office . We didn 't experience the headlong panic that is sometimes prevalent while finishing a game , but we certainly did experience considerable stress as we built 21 final candidates in 3 days . After a few long nights with the whole team playing the game over and over again , we reached a point where we built a good final candidate . Then it was sent to the <unk> ! 
 The game 's music was composed by Michael Hoenig , a German composer who played with Tangerine Dream . He also composed the music for the first Baldur 's Gate . 
 = = Release = = 
 Baldur 's Gate II went gold on September 14 , 2000 ; and was released in North America on September 24 , 2000 , and in Europe on September 29 , 2000 . A Collector 's Edition was also released . It included the game , an additional CD , which contained unique armor and weapons and music from the soundtrack , a cloth map , eight character trading cards , and a Black Isle Studios writing tablet . According to BioWare , the game had sold over two million units by February 2008 . 
 = = = Expansion pack = = = 
 An expansion pack for Shadows of Amn , entitled Baldur 's Gate II : Throne of Bhaal , also developed by BioWare and published by Black Isle , was released on June 21 , 2001 . Throne of Bhaal added a variety of features to the base game : a new dungeon called Watcher 's Keep ; new features and enhancements , such as the Wild Mage character class ; a higher experience point cap and high @-@ level class abilities ; and new spells , such as Wish , <unk> 's Crushing Hand , and Dragon 's Breath . Throne of Bhaal also takes the protagonist 's history further , and , being the final chapter , concludes the Baldur 's Gate saga . Throne of Bhaal was well received ; it won the " PC Role @-@ Playing " award at the 2002 Interactive Achievement Awards and has a Metacritic score of 88 . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 Shadows of Amn was re @-@ released , along with its expansion , Throne of Bhaal , as Baldur 's Gate II : The Collection in 2003 . In 2004 , they were bundled with the original Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale as Black Isle Compilation Part Two . In 2006 , they were re @-@ released with Baldur 's Gate and Tales of the Sword Coast as Baldur 's Gate : 4 in 1 <unk> . They were also included in The Forgotten Realms Deluxe Edition , and Ultimate Dungeons & Dragons . In November 2010 , Baldur 's Gate II Complete was released in digital format on GOG.com. This version includes both Shadows of Amn and the Throne of Bhaal expansion pack . Bundled with it are the game manuals in PDF format , high definition wallpapers , artwork , avatars , and the soundtracks of Shadows of Amn and Throne of Bhaal . 
 = = = Enhanced Edition = = = 
 On March 15 , 2012 , Baldur 's Gate II : Enhanced Edition was announced . Developed by Overhaul Games , it is an enhanced version of Baldur 's Gate II , and uses an updated version of the Infinity Engine . The game was released on November 15 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Baldur 's Gate II met with worldwide critical acclaim upon its release , and Metacritic lists it as the sixth highest @-@ scoring PC game on the site as of June 27 , 2015 . GameSpot said that , while it is a very long game , its fine points are what make it so great , and said the game was in a class by itself . IGN also called the game incomparable and peerless . GameSpot later called the game " a towering achievement in the history of role @-@ playing games . " Computer Gaming World 's reviewer felt though the game was worthy being called the best game of the year , and as good as games such as Fallout , Planescape : Torment , and Betrayal at Krondor , " I won 't trap myself with the ' best RPG ever ' phrase . " He also felt the game 's story was somewhere between Planescape : Torment and Icewind Dale in terms of depth . In a 2007 Gamasutra article on the " Platinum and Modern Ages " of computer role @-@ playing games ( CRPGs ) , Matt Barton noted contemporary reviewers ' universal praise for the game , and said , " I consider it the finest CRPG ever designed . " According to GameSpy , " this is easily one of the finest CRPGs ever made and an experience that no RPG fan should miss " . 
 Baldur 's Gate II 's gameplay was called " addicting " by GamePro . RPGamer said that while the game was generally the same as the original Baldur 's Gate , the combat was much improved , with less frustration and more strategic options . Computer Gaming World agreed , saying players would put more consideration into designing and implementing combat plans . Some reviewers , however , felt the non @-@ player characters in the game were not as powerful as player @-@ made characters . GameSpy said the game is much more difficult than Baldur 's Gate , and requires more strategy and planning than the original does . GameSpot felt the opening level of the game " falls flat , " but that it gets much better once the player reaches Athkatla . IGN also noted that the introductory section of the game , while good , was nowhere near as fun as the adventures in Athkatla . 
 The game 's plot was met positively by most reviewers , with GameSpy calling it " epic " . IGN praised the clarity of the quests and ease of moving from one goal to the next . RPGamer 's reviewer , on the other hand , felt the plot was lackluster , but approved of the side quests , which he said could turn into " minor epics " of their own . 
 The game 's graphics were well received . GamePro praised them , saying , " the backdrops are stunning and the spell effects are impressive " . IGN echoed this statement , calling the difference between Baldur 's Gate and Shadows of Amn " like looking at a still oil painting , and then turning to see the scene in living motion on a big screen TV . " GameSpot thought both the pre @-@ rendered backgrounds and the animations for characters and monsters were well done . FiringSquad said the game 's artwork surpassed that of Planescape : Torment , and called the background artwork " fantastic . " FiringSquad also praised the voice acting of Baldur 's Gate II , saying , " Characters sound alive and vivacious ( or depressed , crazy — whatever suits them ) " and adding that the quality of the voices drew the player more deeply into the game . IGN called the voice acting " outstanding " and said the variety of personalities would cause players to become " attached " to the characters , only noting with disapproval the dearth of new voices for the player 's protagonist . Reviewers generally found the game 's music to be well @-@ done ; though RPGamer felt it was " inoffensive but unimpressive . " 
 Gameplanet criticized the game 's poor support for online multiplayer , saying it was " unstable and quite frustrating . " Jakub Wojnarowicz of FiringSquad felt the lack of communication between players in combat during online games was problematic , but that Local Area Network play would be more satisfying . PC Zone said multiplayer was as unimpressive as it had been in the first game in the series , and said the game needed multiplayer maps . IGN , however , felt multiplayer play was solidly implemented and fun . Criticism was also directed at bugs in the game , such as frequent crashes when trying to access certain locations . According to Tim <unk> from GameSpy , Baldur 's Gate II is " not 100 % stable . " GameSpot noted that the game 's loading times were somewhat long and that the game crashed on occasion , but said these problems are not significant . IGN , though noting that the game slowed down during combat when a lot of animations were happening simultaneously due to spells or " dazzling backgrounds " , said there were almost no other technical problems . GameSpot also felt the small number of character portraits to choose from was a disappointment , and was displeased that the game reused special effects , audio , and graphics from the first game . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Baldur 's Gate II was inducted into GameSpot 's " Greatest Games of All Time " list and won their Readers ' Choice Game of the Year award for 2000 . It received three " Gaming Globe " awards from Eurogamer in 2001 : Best Game , Best Art Direction , and Best Male Supporting Character ( for Minsc ) . GameSpy , GameSpot , and IGN all awarded Baldur 's Gate II their " Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year " awards in 2000 . The game won the " Character or Story Development " award at the 2001 Interactive Achievement Awards , and was also nominated for " Game of the Year , " " Game Play Engineering , " " PC Game of the Year , " and " PC Role @-@ Playing . " IGN placed it at No. 25 on their 2005 " Top 100 Games of All Time " list . In 2006 , though not ranking in the top five games , it earned an " honorable mention " in Gamasutra 's Quantum Leap Awards . In 2009 , Game Informer put Baldur 's Gate II at No. 88 on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time , " calling it " the best Dungeons & Dragons game ever made . " This is up one place from their top 100 list in 2001 . At the end of 2009 , Baldur 's Gate II , though not quite making the Top 12 list , received an honorable mention in Gamasutra 's Game of the Decade , where readers voted for their best game of the 2000s . In 2010 , on IGN 's Top 25 Modern PC Games , Baldur 's Gate II was ranked No. 2 . 
 = = Novel = = 
 There is a novelization of the game by Philip <unk> . Published in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast , it focuses solely on Abdel , the last of the <unk> . The novel is the second in the series ; the first , also by <unk> , is a novelization of Baldur 's Gate , and the third , by Drew <unk> , of the Throne of Bhaal expansion . 
 = Impressive Instant = 
 " Impressive Instant " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna from her 2000 studio album Music . Originally intended to be the fourth single of the album , the release was cancelled due to a disagreement between Madonna and her recording company . Finally Warner Bros. released it in the United States as a promotional single on September 18 , 2001 . Written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï , the track is bright and uplifting in its content and composition . It was the first song that Madonna and Ahmadzaï worked on and recorded . The producer had to work separately on his laptop to generate the sound elements which Madonna wanted in the song , since it was difficult to generate the music in the recording studio . " Impressive Instant " has been described as a club @-@ savvy stomper containing futuristic keyboard lines , with Madonna 's vocals being distorted and robotic . Backed by laser noises and synths , the song 's lyrics deal with love at first sight , and contains nonsense lyrics . 
 " Impressive Instant " was met with positive critical reception . Many reviewers called it a highlight of the album and praised Ahmadzaï 's production of the track . Released only in the US , it was a popular dance hit , reaching the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart , and staying atop for two consecutive weeks . The track became Madonna 's 27th number @-@ one song on this chart , the most for any artist . It was her 36th top @-@ ten song on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play tally and her seventh consecutive chart topper . During the promotional tours for Music , Madonna performed the song in a neo @-@ Western setting at New York and London . It was further performed at the 2001 Drowned World Tour as part of the punk section , with Madonna accompanied by dancers wearing gas masks . The performance was generally received as a highlight of the concert . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 By the year 2000 , Madonna was dating director Guy Ritchie , and was pregnant with their child . Wanting to distract herself from the media frenzy surrounding this news , Madonna concentrated on the development of her eighth studio album , Music . Buoyed up by the commercial success of 1998 's Ray of Light album , she was keen on getting back to the studio and start recording . Madonna was well disposed towards William Orbit , producer of Ray of Light , but by 2000 , his production and sound had become ubiquitous . Also , the music scene was being dominated by younger generation of singers like Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera , prompting Madonna to look for a distinctive sound in this market . It was then that she was introduced to French DJ and producer Mirwais Ahmadzaï , through some common friends . Madonna instantly liked his pitch @-@ shifting , pulverizing rhythms and his utilization of acid bass in his songs . Ahmadzaï always preferred taking musical risks and hence he wanted the collaborations with Madonna to get out the best from the artist . " The challenge was to make something current appear , something hidden in her personality . Everybody knows [ Madonna ] as a chameleon , as a businesswoman . I wanted to show her potential as a musician , " Ahmadzaï noted . 
 One of their collaborations was the song " Impressive Instant " and like most songs on Music , it is bright and uplifting in its composition , and was described by Madonna as " downright silly " . She explained that they " were working on that song and I thought , ' Oh , fuck it , let 's just have fun ' , Life would be such a drag if we were deep and probing all the time . " The song was intended to be released as the fourth single off Music but Warner Bros. , Madonna 's recording company , wanted " Amazing " to be the next single . Madonna felt that " Amazing " was too similar to her previous single " Beautiful Stranger " ( 1999 ) , and wanted the more eclectic and futuristic " Impressive Instant " so they were deadlocked . In an interview with Russian channel Radio Monte Carlo 102 @.@ 1 FM , remixer Peter Rauhofer explained that Warner Bros. did plan to move forward with the release of " Amazing " without Madonna 's help since she was too busy preparing for her next tour . They planned to promote the single with a music video cut from the live version of " Amazing " from Madonna 's Drowned World Tour , but Madonna scrapped the song from the set list to be sure that Warner Bros. could not promote it , and the fourth single idea was over . 
 = = Recording and mixing = = 
 The recording sessions for Music began in January 2000 at Sarm West Studios , Notting Hill , London . The first song that Madonna and Ahmadzaï worked on was " Impressive Instant " , since it was the most complete among all the demos that he had sent to the singer . The song was an instrumental and was not supposed to be included in Ahmadzaï 's own album , Production . But Madonna had different ideas for the track and its lyrics , which she explained to the producer . Feeling that Madonna 's vision about the song 's composition would be difficult to create in Sarm West , Ahmadzaï wanted to return to Paris and work there on his own computer . " There are a lot of chopped vocal tracks on ' Impressive Instant ' ... That was impossible to do in the studio . It doesn 't make sense to rent a place like Sarm just to have me work on ten seconds of music all day , using only the one computer , " he added . Within the first ten days , they had recorded the backing vocals , acoustic guitars etc. on a Sony 48 @-@ track and transferred it to Logic Audio workstation , using the converters of the TC Electronic <unk> ; Ahmadzaï then went back to Paris with the recordings . 
 In Paris , Ahmadzaï worked obsessively to complete the recording of " Impressive Instant " , applying his characteristic sound mangling . He used the Antares Auto @-@ Tune plug @-@ in set for the pitch correction . Explaining that the audio processor kept the characteristic of the voice , he recalled that Madonna was not afraid to use it , unlike other artists ; she just had to sing a little out of tune and vibrato . The song had LFO sweeps at its beginning , panning from its left and right , which created the backdrop of the track . To achieve this , Ahmadzaï used a Nord Lead synthesizer , passed through an audio filter . The bass used in the song was subdued , and did not contain any music in high or mid @-@ range . Instead of using a Minimoog synthesizer , Ahmadzaï used a Korg Prophecy analog output which added a different synth to the song . Audio filters were used for the first appearance of a melody and Madonna 's voice was processed through an Eventide 3000 harmonizer , finally adding effects from filters and <unk> emulator . Also , Ahmadzaï added his characteristic stuttering sounds to the song , explaining : 
 " I did all that stuttering in Logic . It 's very , very complicated , slice by slice . You have to experiment a lot to make it work . I put Auto @-@ Tune on individual syllables . Sometimes I use 40 tracks of audio just on one vocal track . Each has a different level and treatment , and then I do a composite . I couldn 't do this with a normal analog studio setup . The starting and stopping thing , it 's an idea I 've had for awhile [ sic ] . Normally , it takes about six months to a year for people I 'm working with to understand my ideas . With Madonna , the first time she heard it , she loved it . She had a chemical reaction to it . She listened to it and she said , ' Okay , let 's do it . ' It 's because of this that I love to work with her . You don 't have to spend six months explaining things . " 
 The final thing that he did was to create a breakdown using Auto @-@ Tune and the Nord Lead synthesizer , applying its echo function . In total Ahmadzaï worked for 15 days on the track , finally handing it to mixing engineer Mark " Spike " Stent . He explained in an interview with Keyboard magazine that the version that he created was almost same to the final track present in Music . On most of the other tracks , Stent tried to add a lot of mixing effects to Ahmadzaï 's production . But for " Impressive Instant " , they tried to mix it first from the Sony digital tracks and failed get the original sound of the demo , since the compression present in the track was the actual sound to be produced . So Stent took the sound from Ahmadzaï 's Yamaha 02R mixer , including the bass , loops , and the kick . Along with mixing the track at Olympic Studios , London , the mastering was done by Tim Young at Metropolis Studio . Other engineers working on the track included Mark Endert , Sean <unk> , Tom Hannen and Tim Lambert . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Larry Flick from Billboard called it a club @-@ savvy stomper containing futuristic keyboard lines . Madonna 's vocals in the number change from distorted , robotic lines to playful , child like chants . Author Lucy O 'Brien wrote in her book , Madonna : Like an Icon , that the song is a mixture of acid techno and pop trance . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , " Impressive Instant " is set in the time signature of common time with a moderately fast tempo of 123 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Madonna 's vocals ranging from A3 to A4 . The song follows a basic sequence of Am – G – Am – G – Am as its chord progression . 
 Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , explained that " Impressive Instant " began with the equalizer on higher frequencies turned down , so that the amount of treble is very less initially . Madonna 's vocals are heavily processed and is accompanied by a crackling sound , which has a " tactile roughness " therefore making the mix sound " like a musical sandpaper " , Rooksby wrote . The vocals are often isolated and are backed by laser noises and an octave bass . A " burbling " synth arrives at the 2 : 30 mark , and then the chorus of " I 'm in a trance " is repeated , ending the song with the cliché solo vocal phrase . 
 The buoyant song has lyrics like " I like to singy , singy , singy , Like a bird on a wingy , wingy , wingy " , as electronic keyboard riffs and dance beats swirl the whole composition . Lyrically , " Impressive Instant " deals with love at first sight ( " You 're the one that I 've been waiting for / I don 't even know your name " ) and according to O 'Brien , is " an abstract world of nonsense lyrics , disco balls and glitz " . It also talks about being in a trance and comparison with various cosmic phenomena in lines like " Cosmic systems in a twine , astral bodies drip like wine " , but ultimately returns to the subject of dance . Remixes were commissioned by Warner Bros. Records in April 2001 , featuring mixes by DJ Peter Rauhofer , who transformed the track from techno to progressive house . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reaction has been positive towards the song . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic named it a " track pick " from the album . In a review of the album , Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani hailed it as " a joyous composition " . Michael Hubbard of musicOMH called it " pure pop genius , " saying the track " steals the show " . Gary Crossing from Dotmusic described the song as a " Sexy , bass @-@ heavy monster of a floor @-@ filler with cheesy synths , robotic voices and whispers aplenty " while complimenting the " I like to singy singy singy " . This view was shared by Victoria Segal from NME who complimented Ahmadzaï 's production technique and blending disco sounds with vocoder effects . She added that the song is " so heavily distorted , the macho disco bassline is so quick to get its shirt off and the baby oil on , it somehow sounds cool . " Barry Walters from Rolling Stone called the song " improvisional " , and described it as " [ roaring ] like a rock rocket ship , then [ purring ] while a digitally tweaked [ Madonna ] squeaks " . David Browne from Entertainment Weekly called the verses of " Impressive Instant " as Madonna 's " <unk> lyrics in ages " , and also complimented Ahmadzaï 's fusion of hard disco beats and contorting Madonna 's vocals . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune credited Madonna for paying homage to dance music with " Impressive Instant " and explaining that : 
 Though Madonna is often overshadowed by her producers , she has her moments , and she is never more inspired than on the so @-@ silly @-@ it 's @-@ great ' Impressive Instant ' , yet another homage to the music that leaves her and legions of followers ' spinning , baby , out of control ' . She deserves credit for allowing her latest interpretation of that music to be bent , folded and so lovingly mutilated by her collaborators , and when she chirps , ' I like to singy singy singy / Like a bird on a wingy wingy wingy ' , I can envision discos from Stockholm to Sacramento going bonkers with her . 
 Gary <unk> from The Guardian felt that Madonna 's indomitable persona was mostly hidden beneath the layers of electronic and vocoder effects , except in songs like " Impressive Instant " with the lines like " " I like to singy singy singy " , making the first half of Music interesting . BBC 's John Hand noticed Ahmadzaï 's " quirky " influence in the production of the track ; he also called it a club and dancey song . Michael Paoletta from Billboard called it " vibrant and uplifting in tone " calling it a trippy / trance disco romp . Alex Pappademas from Spin noted the difference of Madonna 's endeavors with Ray of Light and its introspective mood and the fun @-@ filled , joyous nature of songs like " Impressive Instant " in <unk> Village Voice 's Ben <unk> complimented the alliteration and the elastic bassline of the song , saying that it would have been a better album opener than the title song . Ben Greenbank from Sputnikmusic gave a mixed review , saying that although " Impressive Instant " and " Runaway Lover " from Music were decent songs , they did not have anything special about them to make the reviewer feel that they would be dancefloor staples , or were listenable a second time round . In 2011 , MSN Music Canada listed the song at number three on their countdown of " 10 famous lyrics that make absolutely no sense " . Tom Townshend from the website said that the lyrics were " word abuse . We can 't read it . It burns the skin from our eyes ! " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Impressive Instant " was not released commercially and was not promoted to radio as well , hence did not appear on any sales or airplay charts of Billboard . It was released to dance clubs as a promo @-@ only single with remixes by Peter Rauhofer on September 18 , 2001 . The song debuted on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart at number 25 on the issue dated October 27 , 2001 , becoming the " hot shot debut " of the week . The next week , it moved 13 places to number 12 on the chart . The following week , the number moved further up and entered the top @-@ ten at number four . On the Billboard issue dated November 17 , 2001 , " Impressive Instant " reached the top of the chart , becoming Madonna 's 27th number @-@ one song on this chart , the most for any artist . It was the artist 's 36th top @-@ ten song on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play tally and her seventh consecutive chart topper , dating from " Nothing Really Matters " in 1999 , followed by " Beautiful Stranger " ( 1999 ) , " American Pie " and " Music " in 2000 , and " Don 't Tell Me " and " What It Feels Like for a Girl " in 2001 . It remained on the top for another week , before being replaced by Ben Shaw 's single " So Strong " . The last week for " Impressive Instant " on the Dance chart was on January 12 , 2002 , where it climbed down to number 48 , before dropping off the chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna first performed " Impressive Instant " during the promotional tours for Music . The first of these , was on November 5 , 2000 , at Roseland Ballroom in New York City , and the other on November 29 , 2000 , at Brixton Academy in London . Accompanying musicians performing with Madonna were ; Mirwais Ahmadzaï on guitar and longtime backing singers Niki Haris and Donna DeLory . During the performance of New York , she wore a black tank top with " Britney Spears " written on it , along with cowboy hats and boots . The costumes for the show and the set was designed by Dolce & Gabbana . Roseland 's secondary stage was used for the performance and was decked as a neo @-@ Western wonderland , with bales of hay , yellow @-@ lit horseshoes and silver cacti throughout the lobby and entrance . Dancers dressed as cowboys <unk> during the pre @-@ show in provocative poses , lassoing each other and skating around the passersby . The stage was draped in an American flag . As the music started , the flag lifted to reveal a white Ford pickup truck from which Madonna emerged , singing " Impressive Instant " . Bare @-@ chested male dancers encircled her , as she posed on the hood of the truck and danced through the song . The vocoder effects on Madonna 's voice was removed for the live performance , which Jennifer Vineyard from Rolling Stone felt made the singer 's vocals sound " less ridiculous " . By the end of the performance , she as transported onto the main stage of Roseland , with the help of the audience member 's hands . A similar performance was done at Brixton Academy ; Madonna wore a different T @-@ shirt , with her son Rocco and daughter Lourdes ' names printed on it . Around 3 @,@ 000 fans attended the concert in London , which was streamed over the internet . More than nine million people watched the concert according to Nicky Price , a representative for Microsoft 's MSN , the webcast 's producer . It became the most @-@ viewed webcast of all time , beating Paul McCartney 's performance of " 50s rock and roll classics " at Liverpool 's The Cavern Club in December 1999 , which was viewed by an audience of about three million . 
 When Madonna embarked on her Drowned World Tour in 2001 , " Impressive Instant " was added as the second song in the setlist . The costumes were designed by Jean @-@ Paul Gaultier , and had varied accessories like spiked dog collars , Swarovski crystal @-@ encrusted bracelets and tattered tops . Michael <unk> was responsible for the <unk> ; he was sought out by Madonna and her stylist Arianne Phillips , to help with finishing touches for many of the outfits . Madonna opened the show with the punk section , wearing tattered black garments and a tartan kilt and belting out the first song , " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " . As the song ended , Madonna started with " Impressive Instant " , accompanied by her dancers wearing gas masks and encased in rolls of black mesh , chasing the singer around the stage . In the middle of the song , she was carried around by her dancers . According to Stuart <unk> , author of the book The Twisted Tale of Glam Rock , Madonna merged choreography with narrative in the performance , as she and her dancers crossed the stage . The 1984 @-@ style robotic movements denoted fascism with the dancers stalking and then trying to grope Madonna ; in the end one dancer dressed as a robot grabbed a big hosepipe and thrust it between Madonna 's legs , as it emitted fog towards the audience . <unk> deduced that this could denote both an act of achieving orgasm or urination towards the crowd . Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández , one of the authors of the book , Madonna 's Drowned Worlds , found similarities with Madonna 's exploration of lesbian cultural references from her earlier works , with the performance of " Impressive Instant " . The placement of the fogging machine between Madonna 's legs were seen as symbols for the phallus and ejaculation , and was deduced as an example of the singer 's insistence on masculinity as " performance " . The dancers ultimately get subdued by Madonna , who finish off singing the song and takes up a Gibson Les Paul electric guitar to perform the next track , " Candy Perfume Girl " . 
 Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , gave a positive review of the performance saying that " defiance being a rock attitude , and one embraced by Madonna , she didn 't hesitate in wanting her public to know that she hasn 't mellowed over the years " , evident by her unsmiling facial expressions . Casper Llewellyn Smith from The Daily Telegraph felt that with the performance of the song , the Drowned World show " picked up pace . " In a review in Los Angeles Times , critic Greg Kot said that the " ballistic " response of the audience to the performance of " Impressive Instant " and another song " Candy Perfume Girl " confirmed the crowd 's satisfaction regarding the show . A similar review was given by Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani , who described the performance as a " virulent and possessive dance routine " , and felt it set the tone for the whole show . Alex Needham from NME compared the performance with those by The Royal Ballet , suggesting that if the group performed in rubber @-@ fetish , they would be similar to Madonna 's theatrics . Todd Ramlow from PopMatters criticized Madonna 's vocals during the performance , saying that she sounded flat during the lower notes of the song . The electronic effects used in the song was received negatively by Ramlow , who felt that Madonna should have opted for the addition of backing vocalists . The performance of the song on August 26 , 2001 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills , outside of Madonna 's hometown of Detroit was recorded and released in the live video album , Drowned World Tour 2001 on November 13 , 2001 . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 US promo vinyl single 
 " Impressive Instant " ( Peter Rauhofer 's Universal Club Mix ) – 9 : 39 
 " Impressive Instant " ( Peter Rauhofer 's Drowned World Dub ) – 8 : 25 
 US promo 12 " vinyl single 
 " Impressive Instant " ( Peter Rauhofer 's Universal Dub ) – 6 : 41 
 " Impressive Instant " ( Peter Rauhofer 's Universal Radio Mixshow Mix ) – 5 : 32 
 " Impressive Instant " ( Peter Rauhofer 's Drowned World Dub Part 2 ) – 7 : 25 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Sarm West Studios , Notting Hill , London 
 Mixed at Olympic Studios , London 
 Mastered at Metropolis Studios , London 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . , Warner Bros. Music Corp ( ASCAP ) , 1000 Lights Music Ltd , Warner @-@ Tamerlane Publishing Corp. ( BMI ) 
 Personnel 
 Madonna – songwriter , vocalist , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – songwriter , producer , programming , keyboards 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – recording , mixing 
 Tim Young – mastering 
 Jake Davis – Pro Tools 
 Mark Endert – engineer 
 Sean <unk> – engineer 
 Tom Hannen – assistant engineer 
 Tim Lambert – assistant engineer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Music album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Icelandic horse = 
 The Icelandic horse is a breed of horse developed in Iceland . Although the horses are small , at times pony @-@ sized , most registries for the Icelandic refer to it as a horse . Icelandic horses are long @-@ lived and hardy . In their native country they have few diseases ; Icelandic law prevents horses from being imported into the country and exported animals are not allowed to return . The Icelandic displays two gaits in addition to the typical walk , trot , and canter / gallop commonly displayed by other breeds . The only breed of horse in Iceland , they are also popular internationally , and sizable populations exist in Europe and North America . The breed is still used for traditional <unk> work in its native country , as well as for leisure , showing , and racing . 
 Developed from ponies taken to Iceland by Norse settlers in the 9th and 10th centuries , the breed is mentioned in literature and historical records throughout Icelandic history ; the first reference to a named horse appears in the 12th century . Horses were venerated in Norse mythology , a custom brought to Iceland by the country 's earliest settlers . Selective breeding over the centuries has developed the breed into its current form . Natural selection has also played a role , as the harsh Icelandic climate eliminated many horses through cold and starvation . In the 1780s , much of the breed was wiped out in the aftermath of a volcanic eruption at Laki . The first breed society for the Icelandic horse was created in Iceland in 1904 , and today the breed is represented by organizations in 19 different nations , organized under a parent association , the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 Icelandic horses weigh between 330 and 380 kilograms ( 730 and 840 lb ) and stand an average of 13 and 14 hands ( 52 and 56 inches , 132 and 142 cm ) high , which is often considered pony size , but breeders and breed registries always refer to Icelandics as horses . Several theories have been put forward as to why Icelandics are always called horses , among them the breed 's spirited temperament and large personality . Another theory suggests that the breed 's weight , bone structure and weight @-@ carrying abilities mean it can be classified as a horse , rather than a pony . The breed comes in many coat colors , including chestnut , dun , bay , black , gray , palomino , pinto and roan . There are over 100 names for various colors and color patterns in the Icelandic language . They have well @-@ proportioned heads , with straight profiles and wide foreheads . The neck is short , muscular , and broad at the base ; the withers broad and low ; the chest deep ; the shoulders muscular and slightly sloping ; the back long ; the croup broad , muscular , short and slightly sloping . The legs are strong and short , with relatively long cannon bones and short pasterns . The mane and tail are full , with coarse hair , and the tail is set low . The breed is known to be hardy and an easy keeper . The breed has a double coat developed for extra insulation in cold temperatures . 
 Characteristics differ between various groups of Icelandic horses , depending on the focus of individual breeders . Some focus on animals for pack and draft work , which are conformationally distinct from those bred for work under saddle , which are carefully selected for their ability to perform the traditional Icelandic gaits . Others are bred solely for horsemeat . Some breeders focus on favored coat colors . 
 Members of the breed are not usually ridden until they are four years old , and structural development is not complete until age seven . Their most productive years are between eight and eighteen , although they retain their strength and stamina into their twenties . An Icelandic mare that lived in Denmark reached a record age of 56 , while another horse , living in Great Britain , reached the age of 42 . The horses are highly fertile , and both sexes are fit for breeding up to age 25 ; mares have been recorded giving birth at age 27 . The horses tend to not be easily spooked , probably the result of not having any natural predators in their native Iceland . Icelandics tend to be friendly , docile and easy to handle , although also enthusiastic and self @-@ assured . As a result of their isolation from other horses , disease in the breed within Iceland is mostly unknown , except for some kinds of internal parasites . The low prevalence of disease in Iceland is maintained by laws preventing horses exported from the country being returned , and by requiring that all equine equipment taken into the country be either new and unused or fully disinfected . As a result , native horses have no acquired immunity to disease ; an outbreak on the island would be likely to be devastating to the breed . This presents problems with showing native Icelandic horses against others of the breed from outside the country , as no livestock of any species can be imported into Iceland , and once horses leave the country they are not allowed to return . 
 = = = Gaits = = = 
 The Icelandic is a " five @-@ gaited " breed , known for its sure @-@ footedness and ability to cross rough terrain . As well as the typical gaits of walk , trot , and canter / gallop , the breed is noted for its ability to perform two additional gaits . Although most horse experts consider the canter and gallop to be separate gaits , on the basis of a small variation in the footfall pattern , Icelandic breed registries consider the canter and gallop one gait , hence the term " five @-@ gaited " . 
 The first additional gait is a four @-@ beat lateral ambling gait known as the tölt . This is known for its explosive acceleration and speed ; it is also comfortable and ground @-@ covering . There is considerable variation in style within the gait , and thus the tölt is variously compared to similar lateral gaits such as the rack of the Saddlebred , the largo of the Paso Fino , or the running walk of the Tennessee Walking Horse . Like all lateral ambling gaits , the footfall pattern is the same as the walk ( left hind , left front , right hind , right front ) , but differs from the walk in that it can be performed at a range of speeds , from the speed of a typical fast walk up to the speed of a normal canter . Some Icelandic horses prefer to tölt , while others prefer to trot ; correct training can improve weak gaits , but the tölt is a natural gait present from birth . There are two varieties of the tölt that are considered incorrect by breeders . The first is an uneven gait called a " Pig 's Pace " or " Piggy @-@ pace " that is closer to a two @-@ beat pace than a four @-@ beat amble . The second is called a <unk> and is a tölt and canter combination most often seen in untrained young horses or horses that mix their gaits . Both varieties are normally uncomfortable to ride . 
 The breed also performs a pace called a <unk> , <unk> or " flying pace " . It is used in pacing races , and is fast and smooth , with some horses able to reach up to 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) . Not all Icelandic horses can perform this gait ; animals that perform both the tölt and the flying pace in addition to the traditional gaits are considered the best of the breed . The flying pace is a two @-@ beat lateral gait with a moment of suspension between footfalls ; each side has both feet land almost simultaneously ( left hind and left front , suspension , right hind and right front ) . It is meant to be performed by well @-@ trained and balanced horses with skilled riders . It is not a gait used for long @-@ distance travel . A slow pace is uncomfortable for the rider and is not encouraged when training the horse to perform the gait . Although most pacing horses are raced in harness using <unk> , in Iceland horses are raced while ridden . 
 = = History = = 
 The ancestors of the Icelandic horse were probably taken to Iceland by Viking Age Scandinavians between 860 and 935 AD . The Norse settlers were followed by immigrants from Norse colonies in Ireland , the Isle of Man and the Western Isles of Scotland . These later settlers arrived with the ancestors of what would elsewhere become Shetland , Highland , and Connemara ponies , which were crossed with the previously imported animals . There may also have been a connection with the Yakut pony , and the breed has physical similarities to the Nordlandshest of Norway . Other breeds with similar characteristics include the Faroe pony of the Faeroe Islands and the Norwegian Fjord horse . Genetic analyses have revealed links between the Mongolian horse and the Icelandic horse . Mongolian horses are believed to have been originally imported from Russia by Swedish traders ; this imported Mongol stock subsequently contributed to the Fjord , Exmoor , Scottish Highland , Shetland and Connemara breeds , all of which have been found to be genetically linked to the Icelandic horse . 
 About 900 years ago , attempts were made to introduce eastern blood into the Icelandic , resulting in a degeneration of the stock . In 982 AD the Icelandic Althing ( parliament ) passed laws prohibiting the importation of horses into Iceland , thus ending crossbreeding . The breed has now been bred pure in Iceland for more than 1 @,@ 000 years . 
 The earliest Norse people venerated the horse as a symbol of fertility , and white horses were slaughtered at sacrificial feasts and ceremonies . When these settlers arrived in Iceland , they brought their beliefs , and their horses , with them . Horses played a significant part in Norse mythology , and several horses played major roles in the Norse myths , among them the eight @-@ footed pacer named Sleipnir , owned by Odin , chief of the Norse gods . <unk> , a mare who is the first Icelandic horse known by name , appeared in the Book of Settlements from the 12th century . According to the book , a chieftain named Seal @-@ Thorir founded a settlement at the place where <unk> stopped and lay down with her pack . Horses also play key roles in the Icelandic sagas <unk> 's Saga , Njal 's Saga and Grettir 's Saga . Although written in the 13th century , these three sagas are set as far back as the 9th century . This early literature has an influence today , with many riding clubs and horse herds in modern Iceland still bearing the names of horses from Norse mythology . 
 Horses were often considered the most prized possession of a medieval Icelander . Indispensable to warriors , war horses were sometimes buried alongside their fallen riders , and stories were told of their deeds . Icelanders also arranged for bloody fights between stallions ; these were used for entertainment and to pick the best animals for breeding , and they were described in both literature and official records from the Commonwealth period of 930 to 1262 AD . Stallion fights were an important part of Icelandic culture , and brawls , both physical and verbal , among the spectators were common . The conflicts at the horse fights gave rivals a chance to improve their political and social standing at the expense of their enemies and had wide social and political repercussions , sometimes leading to the restructuring of political alliances . However , not all human fights were serious , and the events provided a stage for friends and even enemies to battle without the possibility of major consequences . Courting between young men and women was also common at horse fights . 
 Natural selection played a major role in the development of the breed , as large numbers of horses died from lack of food and exposure to the elements . Between 874 and 1300 AD , during the more favorable climatic conditions of the medieval warm period , Icelandic breeders selectively bred horses according to special rules of color and conformation . From 1300 to 1900 , selective breeding became less of a priority ; the climate was often severe and many horses and people died . Between 1783 and 1784 , around 70 % of the horses in Iceland were killed by volcanic ash poisoning and starvation after the 1783 eruption of <unk> . The eruption lasted eight months , covered hundreds of square miles of land with lava , and rerouted or dried up several rivers . The population slowly recovered during the next hundred years , and from the beginning of the 20th century selective breeding again became important . The first Icelandic breed societies were established in 1904 , and the first breed registry in Iceland was established in 1923 . 
 Icelandics were exported to Great Britain before the 20th century to work as pit ponies in the coal mines , because of their strength and small size . However , those horses were never registered and little evidence of their existence remains . The first formal exports of Icelandic horses were to Germany in the 1940s . Great Britain 's first official imports were in 1956 , when a Scottish farmer , Stuart <unk> , began a breeding program . Other breeders in Great Britain followed <unk> 's lead , and the Icelandic Horse Society of Great Britain was formed in 1986 . The number of Icelandic horses exported to other nations has steadily increased since the first exports of the mid @-@ 19th century . Since 1969 , multiple societies have worked together to preserve , improve and market these horses under the auspices of the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations . Today , the Icelandic remains a breed known for its purity of bloodline , and is the only horse breed present in Iceland . 
 The Icelandic is especially popular in western Europe , Scandinavia , and North America . There are about 80 @,@ 000 Icelandic horses in Iceland ( compared to a human population of 317 @,@ 000 ) , and around 100 @,@ 000 abroad . Almost 50 @,@ 000 are in Germany , which has many active riding clubs and breed societies . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Icelandic horses still play a large part in Icelandic life , despite increasing mechanization and road improvements that diminish the necessity for the breed 's use . The first official Icelandic horse race was held at Akureyri in 1874 , and many races are still held throughout the country from April through June . Both gallop and pace races are held , as well as performance classes showcasing the breed 's unique gaits . Winter events are often held , including races on frozen bodies of water . In 2009 such an event resulted in both horses and riders falling into the water and needing to be rescued . The first shows , focused on the quality of animals as breeding stock , were held in 1906 . The Agricultural Society of Iceland , along with the National Association of Riding Clubs , now organizes regular shows with a wide variety of classes . Some horses are still bred for slaughter , and much of the meat is exported to Japan . Farmers still use the breed to round up sheep in the Icelandic highlands , but most horses are used for competition and leisure riding . 
 = = Registration = = 
 Today , the Icelandic horse is represented by associations in 19 countries , with the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations ( FEIF ) serving as a governing international parent organization . The FEIF was founded on May 25 , 1969 , with six countries as original members : Austria , Denmark , Germany , Iceland , the Netherlands , and Switzerland . France and Norway joined in 1971 , and Belgium and Sweden in 1975 . Later , Finland , Canada , Great Britain , USA , Faroe Islands , Luxembourg , Italy , Slovenia and Ireland became members , but Ireland subsequently left because of a lack of members . New Zealand has been given the status of " associate member " as its membership base is small . In 2000 , <unk> was established as the official FEIF registry for Icelandic horses . The registry is a web database program that is used as a studbook to track the history and bloodlines of the Icelandic breed . The registry contains information on the pedigree , breeder , owner , offspring , photo , breeding evaluations and assessments , and unique identification of each horse registered . The database was established by the Icelandic government in cooperation with the FEIF . Since its inception , around 300 @,@ 000 Icelandic horses , living and dead , have been registered worldwide . The <unk> @-@ <unk> und <unk> is an organization of German riders and breeders of Icelandic horses and the association of all Icelandic horse clubs in Germany . 
 = George Wilkes = 
 George Wilkes ( 1817 – September 23 , 1885 ) was an American journalist and newspaper editor . A native of New York , Wilkes became a journalist and after losing a libel case was imprisoned in New York City 's jail ; his imprisonment led him to write a pamphlet on the jail 's conditions in 1844 . The next year , Wilkes and a friend started publishing National Police Gazette , a newspaper dealing with crime reporting and other sensationalistic topics . In 1856 Wilkes bought a sporting newspaper called The Spirit of the Times , which he had previously worked for . After selling the Gazette , Wilkes continued to publish and edit the Spirit until his death in 1885 . Wilkes also wrote a couple of books on non @-@ sporting topics as well as introducing parimutuel betting into the United States . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wilkes was born in 1817 in the state of New York in the United States . It is not sure who his parents were , although they may have been George Wilkes , a cabinet maker , and Helen . Little is known of his upbringing before he became a law clerk for Enoch E. Camp . But Wilkes left the legal profession for journalism , first working for a series of short @-@ lived newspapers in New York City , the Flash , the Whip , and the Subterranean . He lost a libel case and was sentenced to a term in the city jail , The Tombs . From his experiences there , Wilkes wrote a pamphlet entitled The Mysteries of the Tombs : A Journal of Thirty Days Imprisonment in the N. Y. City Prison , which came out in 1844 . 
 = = Early writings = = 
 In 1845 Wilkes joined forces with Camp and began the National Police Gazette . The Gazette quickly became popular and within a few weeks of its founding had a circulation of 15 @,@ 000 . Collier 's Magazine once called the Gazette a most interesting record of " horrid murders , outrageous robberies , bold forgeries , astounding burglaries , hideous rapes , vulgar seductions , and recent exploits of pickpockets and hotel thieves . " Because of Wilkes ' and Camp 's efforts to combat crime in New York through the Gazette , the offices of the newspaper were the subject of attacks by mobs stirred up by criminals . 
 Also in 1845 , Wilkes wrote a History of Oregon , Geographical and Political , which was inaccurate . Notwithstanding this , an extract from the work was published as Project for a National Railroad from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean , also in 1845 . It was popular , and was in its fourth edition by 1847 . Around 1849 Wilkes went to California , either with or shortly after his friend David <unk> Broderick . Wilkes was a political advisor of Broderick 's , but they quarreled over water issues in 1853 and Wilkes left California . Wilkes then traveled to Europe , turning the experience into another book , this one entitled Europe in a Hurry . Returning to California after Europe , he reunited with Broderick in late 1853 but another quarrel in 1854 over Wilkes ' appointment to a judicial post led to Wilkes ' leaving California permanently . The two men reconciled in 1859 during a visit by Broderick to New York shortly before Broderick 's death . Wilkes was the recipient of Broderick 's estate , and Wilkes wrote a long eulogy to his friend that appeared in the Spirit in October 1859 . 
 In 1866 , Wilkes and Camp sold the Gazette to George W. <unk> , who had previously been Chief of Police for New York City . 
 = = Spirit of the Times = = 
 When Wilkes returned from California to New York City , he began to work for William T. Porter at Porter 's newspaper The Spirit of the Times . Porter sold the paper in 1856 to Wilkes , who retained Porter on the newspaper 's staff until Porter 's death in 1858 . Wilkes , however , renamed the paper to Porter 's Spirit of the Times , a title it retained until 1859 . In September 1859 , Abraham C. Dayton , who had previously worked for the Spirit , left the paper and because he had purchased a share of the paper at one point from Porter , began publishing a paper he called Porter 's Spirit of the Times . Dayton got a court order preventing Wilkes from using Porter 's name , so Wilkes changed the name of his paper to Wilkes ' Spirit of the Times , while Dayton continued to publish Porter 's Spirit of the Times . Dayton was only able to publish until August 1861 , however , as Wilkes drove the other paper out of business . Wilkes owned the surviving paper until his death in 1885 . 
 Under Wilkes ' ownership , the Spirit , which previously had covered mainly sporting events , expanded its coverage to include political matters . When the American Civil War began in 1861 , Wilkes covered the battles also . He was present at the First Battle of Bull Run and wrote an account of it . He continued to serve as a correspondent throughout the war and contracted the kidney disease which he later died from during his war journalism . Wilkes also used literary feuds with other newspapers , both in and out of the sporting press , to help his subscription rates . After the Civil War , Wilkes ' Spirit was one of the three leading newspapers in New York City . Two , including the Spirit , of the three were mainly devoted to horse racing — the other being The Turf , Field and Farm by Sanders D. Bruce . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Wilkes was active in Republican Party political affairs and ran for the United States Congress against James Brooks , losing the race in 1870 , with Brooks receiving 12 @,@ 845 votes and Wilkes <unk> votes . Wilkes , along with John Chamberlain and Marcus Cicero Stanley , introduced parimutuel betting in the United States . Wilkes also was active in promoting boxing , acting as the promoter for some prizefights . Wilkes also became involved in an effort to colonize Baja California , becoming trustee of a colonizing company in 1867 . In 1877 he published his last work , Shakespeare from an American Point of View , which reflected his lifelong interest in William Shakespeare . This work was revised twice , with the third edition appearing in 1882 . 
 Married twice , Wilkes had two adopted children , George and Alicia . He also had a sister , Catherine , and a brother , Henry . He died on September 23 , 1885 in New York City , and was buried on September 26 , 1885 . It is claimed that Tsar Alexander II of Russia in 1870 inducted him into the Order of St Stanislas for Wilkes ' promotion of a railroad route from Russia through India to China . The writer of his Dictionary of American Biography entry described him as a " master of a vigorous style that exactly suited his hard truculent disposition " . 
 = Anderson Street ( NJT station ) = 
 Anderson Street is a New Jersey Transit rail station on the Pascack Valley Line . The station is one of two rail stations in Hackensack ( the other being Essex Street ) and located at Anderson Street near Linden Street . All normal scheduled trains service this station seven days a week except for the Metro @-@ North Railroad Express trains to Spring Valley , New York . 
 The station house was built in 1869 ( and opened on September 9 , 1869 ) by the Hackensack and New York Railroad on a track extension from Passaic Street in Hackensack . The station was turned over to the Erie Railroad in 1896 and New Jersey Transit in 1983 . The next year , the station was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The station building , which was 139 years old , was destroyed in a three @-@ alarm fire and explosion at 5 : 55 a.m. on January 10 , 2009 . At the time the station house was the second @-@ oldest ( active service ) in New Jersey ( second to Ramsey 's Main Street station ) . The station building was also the site for the Green Caboose Thrift Shop , a charity gift shop maintained by a branch of the Hackensack University Medical Center from 1962 until the station depot burned in 2009 . 
 = = Layout and service = = 
 The Anderson Street station is located at the intersection with Anderson Street and Linden Avenue in Hackensack . The station has one track running through it , with one lone asphalt side platform appearing on the northbound side . The station has a nearby parking lot at the same intersection , with fifty parking spaces maintained by Park America ( under lease from New Jersey Transit ) . Two of these fifty parking spaces are handicap accessible , although the station itself is not . These parking spots are permit @-@ only , but are free to use on evenings and weekends . The station is located in New Jersey Transit 's fifth fare zone , tickets may be purchased at the station . Except for the Metro @-@ North Railroad Express routes to Spring Valley , all trains serve the Anderson Street station , and there is nearby access to the 175 and 770 New Jersey Transit bus lines . The station is 18 minutes from Secaucus Junction , 21 minutes from Hoboken Terminal , and 39 minutes from Spring Valley . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Hackensack and New York Railroad = = = 
 The original alignment of the Anderson Street station dates back to the chartering of the Hackensack and New York Railroad in 1856 by David P. Patterson and other investors . Their intent in creating the rail line was to help maintain a steam @-@ powered train line in the Pascack Valley and have future ambitions to build the system northward . Construction on the new 21 @-@ mile ( 34 km ) long line began in 1866 , with trains heading from New York City to the Passaic Street station in Hackensack . Although Hackensack was not a large hub , there were several rail lines serving the city , including the New Jersey Midland Line ( now the New York , Susquehanna and Western Railroad ) with stops at Main Street ( at the Mercer Street intersection ) and at Prospect Avenue . During the 1860s , service was extended to north , terminating at Essex Street . Residents from the Anderson Street area donated $ 2 @,@ 600 ( 1869 USD ) to have a new station depot constructed along new tracks heading northward . Although most Hackensack and New York trains ended at Passaic Street , service was extended northward on September 5 , 1869 , when that stop was abandoned in replacement for Anderson Street . Just next year , service was extended northward on the Hackensack and New York Railroad Extension Railroad to Cherry Hill ( now North Hackensack / New Bridge Landing ) and onto Hillsdale . 
 The Anderson Street Station had a wood siding with a shingled roof , two brick chimneys off the roof and two asphalt platforms in both directions . The station also had a garage door on the southern side of the building . No official style of architecture was mentioned for Anderson Street in the 1920 Final Engineering Report due to lack of design . Nearby , a wooden watchman 's shanty was constructed near the team track . The station had two tracks run through it ( one main track and a team track ) and had a rail crossing between tracks . By 1870 , the tracks had been extended northward to Hillsdale , and public service began on the line on March 4 of that year . Trains terminated at Hillsdale with fare of only $ 0 @.@ 75 ( 1870 USD ) , but just one year later , the extension northward . The service was extended northward to the community of Haverstraw , New York , and in 1896 , the rail line was leased by the private company to the Erie Railroad . 
 = = = Erie Railroad station and restoration = = = 
 After the leasing of the New Jersey and New York Railroad to the Erie Railroad , the history of Anderson Street station remained rather quiet , with minor changes to the station building and site occurring over the next sixty years . The Erie had repainted the station to a common green and white Erie Railroad paint scheme . By 1964 , there were new asphalt pavement platforms on both the northbound main track and the southbound team track , crossing gates had been installed and the paint scheme was fading to a darker green . By September 1966 , the Erie Lackawanna ( a merge of the Erie Railroad and Delaware , Lackawanna and Western ) sold off the station building to become the site of the Green Caboose Thrift Shop , and repainted a teal green color . The nearby watchman 's shanty , closed on Sundays , were repainted to tan and green with a red roof . The team track was also being dismantled by this point . Later , in 1972 , the station experienced minor changes , with the Green Caboose Thrift Shop remaining in service the station building being repainted by the Erie Lackawanna a dark green ( with the Erie Lackawanna 's red doors ) . The nearby watchman 's shanty was not repainted , remaining the railroad 's common red color and the team track had been long removed , with no remains were noticeable . 
 In 1976 , the Erie Lackawanna was combined with several other railroads to create the Consolidated Rail Corporation , who continued maintenance of the New Jersey and New York Line for the next seven years , until the newly formed New Jersey Transit took over the station in 1983 . On March 17 , 1984 , the station building , now 114 years old , was added to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and by that June , the station was added to the National Register of Historic Places . The station building was restored in 2001 by contractors from Jablonski Building Conservation Incorporated in Midtown Manhattan , who had experience restoring train stations . The building conservation repainted the old station 's wooden siding yellow and the bay windows to a brand new brown on the station 's ground @-@ level platform . 
 = = = Station building fire and explosion = = = 
 At approximately 5 : 55 a.m. on January 10 , 2009 , the station building for Anderson Street caught fire and ruptured two propane tanks , which caused the building to explode . Two nearby cars were damaged as well . The three @-@ alarm fire destroyed the building , and causing damage to nearby apartment complex . Twelve fire companies were called to battle the blaze , including fire stations from Teaneck , Ridgefield Park , Bogota and South Hackensack . Service on the Pascack Valley Line had to be stopped indefinitely until they could demolish the unsafe site of the former station building and inspect the area to allow train usage . Hackensack city manager Stephen Lo <unk> was notified of the fire and deemed it a " devastating loss for the community . " At 11 a.m. , city officials were digging up the area around the station to stop the gas line near the new station . The Green Caboose Thrift Shop , a charity gift shop run by a ladies auxiliary of the Hackensack University Medical Center which was housed in the station , received a major blow after the explosion , which destroyed all their merchandise . The Green Caboose has since moved to Orchard Street in Hackensack . On February 7 , 2011 an application was filed to remove the destroyed structure from both the New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places , to prevent a person from constructing a new station that would not be considered " historic " . On May 18 , 2011 , the station was removed from the National Register and its listing with the 51 other stations in the original 1984 package . 
 = = = New train station = = = 
 In March 2013 , construction began on a new station . The cost of the new station is $ 571 @,@ 061 . The new building will have a waiting room with three walls and ticket machines . 
 = Casper Shafer = 
 Casper Shafer ( c . 1712 – 17 December 1784 ) was among the first settlers of the village of Stillwater along the Paulins Kill in Sussex County , New Jersey in the United States . A successful miller and early tavern owner , Shafer later served in the first sessions of the New Jersey Legislature during the American Revolution . During these sessions , New Jersey had become a newly independent state , established the first state constitution , ordered the state 's last Royal Governor deposed and arrested , and actively supported and financed the Continental Army . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and emigration = = = 
 Shafer was born in 1712 in the Rheinland @-@ Pfalz in present @-@ day Germany . He was among tens of thousands of German <unk> who escaped conditions of war and poverty in southwestern Germany throughout the eighteenth century and journeyed up the Rhine River to Rotterdam seeking passage to the New World . From Rotterdam , Shafer emigrated to the American colonies aboard the ship Queen Elizabeth commanded by Alexander Hope , and entered Philadelphia on 16 September 1738 . At some time after 1741 , Shafer married Maria Catrina Bernhardt ( 1722 – 1794 ) , the daughter of Johan Peter Bernhardt ( d . 1748 ) . Shafer , his father @-@ in @-@ law , Johan Peter Bernhardt , his brother @-@ in @-@ law John George Wintermute ( 1711 @-@ 1782 ) , and their families settled along the Paulins Kill in northwestern New Jersey circa 1742 . Over the next few decades , more German Palatine families settled here , and this settlement became the village of Stillwater . 
 = = = In New Jersey = = = 
 During the first year the conditions were spartan , and the settlers shared a log cabin located over a large stump which served as the family 's table . Shafer 's four children were all born in Stillwater — Peter ( 1744 – 1799 ) , Margaretta ( 1745 – 1815 ) , Abraham ( 1754 – 1820 ) and Isaac ( 1760 – 1800 ) . 
 A few years after settling , Shafer erected a rudimentary grist mill along the Paulins Kill approximately 900 yards north of the site of the surviving larger mill he built in 1764 . This first mill ground out three @-@ to @-@ five bushels of flour per day . " In later years , Shafer built a saw mill , oil @-@ mill and tannery at the site . To assist in the agricultural and industrial work , he acquired several African @-@ American slaves , many of whom remained property of his descendants well into the 19th century . Shafer also established large orchards on his property in Stillwater , mostly of apple trees that were later described as growing to " a majestic size , some of them attaining to over three feet in diameter at the butt . " When Sussex County was established in 1753 , the first session of the Court of General Sessions granted licenses to Shafer and a few other early residents to operate taverns . 
 Each year , Shafer would navigate down the Paulins Kill and Delaware River by flatboat " carrying flour and other produce down to the Philadelphia market " and returning with " such goods as the wants of the country in its primitive state seemed to demand . " , The pattern of trade in the region was focused toward Philadelphia , and for several years Shafer did not have any knowledge of English coastal cities in Newark Bay . The local Munsee ( a Lenape phratry ) informed him of a town they called <unk> — that is , Elizabethtown ( present @-@ day Elizabeth , New Jersey ) — which he had not heard of . According to Schaeffer , " he journeyed in that direction some fifty miles over the mountains and through the almost trackless wilderness , until he finally arrived at the veritable town ... where he commenced trading in his small way . And thus he was the pioneer in opening a profitable and important commercial intercourse between the south eastern sea @-@ board , and that part of New Jersey . " It was not until 1756 @-@ 1757 that a military supply road built by Jonathan Hampton during the French & Indian War opened up a connection for trade between Elizabeth and Morristown with the northwestern frontier . 
 In 1775 , Shafer was a member of the Committee of Safety for Sussex County , and was charged with raising £ 10 @,@ 000 to " purchase arms and ammunition and for other exigencies of the Province . " The following year , Shafer , Thomas Peterson and <unk> Brown represented the County in the Provincial Congress whose session began at Burlington on 10 June 1776 establishing the government as the former colony became an independent state , deposed and imprisoned the Royal Governor , William Franklin , and established the state 's first constitution . In August , the Provincial Congress met in Princeton and transformed into the state 's first Legislature . According to Snell , on several occasions Shafer would rise to his feet exclaiming his dissent in German , saying " Das ist nicht recht ! Das ist nicht recht ! " ( trans . " That is not right ! That is not right ! " ) and positing his argument in his adopted English . He represented the county for the next three years , and was described as " faithful in his attendance at the various meetings at Princeton , Trenton , Burlington and Haddonfield . His vote is recorded on almost every question , and always in favor of the most vigorous and aggressive measures for carrying on the war . " 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Casper Shafer died on 7 February 1784 in Stillwater . Shafer disagreed on matters of doctrine with the German Reformed and Lutheran clergy who supplied the local church , the " Dutch Meeting House " ( now a presbyterian congregation ) , and in his last years became cordially acquainted with Presbyterian clergyman Rev. Ira Condict ( 1764 – 1811 ) . Condict , who would later become President of Queen 's College ( now Rutgers University ) had been called to serve the nearby Presbyterian congregations at Upper Hardwick ( now Yellow Frame Presbyterian Church ) and at Sussex Court House ( now Newton ) . Shafer requested that Condict perform his burial service , but because the German clergy objected to Condict using the church building , Condict eulogized Shafer from the church 's front steps . Casper Shafer was buried in the churchyard at Stillwater . His tombstone reads : 
 On 10 December 2009 , the grist mill built by Casper Shafer , and operated after his death by his son Abraham , was listed as the Casper and Abraham Shafer Grist Mill Complex on the state and National Register of Historic Places . The site is currently maintained by the Ridge and Valley Conservancy , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to local environmental protection and historic preservation . It is frequently open for public visitation and educational events . 
 = Chad = 
 Chad ( / <unk> / ; Arabic : <unk> <unk> ; French : Tchad ) , officially the Republic of Chad ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; French : République du Tchad ) , is a landlocked country in northern Central Africa . It is bordered by Libya to the north , Sudan to the east , the Central African Republic to the south , Cameroon and Nigeria to the southwest and Niger to the west . It is the fifth largest country in Africa in terms of area . 
 Due to its harsh arid desert climate , it is often known as " the Dead Heart of Africa . " 
 Chad has several regions : a desert zone in the north , an arid Sahelian belt in the centre and a more fertile <unk> Savanna zone in the south . Lake Chad , after which the country is named , is the largest wetland in Chad and the second @-@ largest in Africa . N 'Djamena , the capital , is the largest city . Chad is home to over 200 different ethnic and linguistic groups . Arabic and French are the official languages . Islam and Christianity are the most widely practiced religions . 
 Beginning in the 7th millennium BC , human populations moved into the Chadian basin in great numbers . By the end of the 1st millennium BC , a series of states and empires had risen and fallen in Chad 's Sahelian strip , each focused on controlling the trans @-@ Saharan trade routes that passed through the region . France conquered the territory by 1920 and incorporated it as part of French Equatorial Africa . In 1960 , Chad obtained independence under the leadership of François Tombalbaye . Resentment towards his policies in the Muslim north culminated in the eruption of a long @-@ lasting civil war in 1965 . In 1979 the rebels conquered the capital and put an end to the south 's hegemony . However , the rebel commanders fought amongst themselves until Hissène Habré defeated his rivals . He was overthrown in 1990 by his general Idriss Déby . Since 2003 the Darfur crisis in Sudan has spilt over the border and destabilised the nation , with hundreds of thousands of Sudanese refugees living in and around camps in eastern Chad . 
 While many political parties are active , power lies firmly in the hands of President Déby and his political party , the Patriotic Salvation Movement . Chad remains plagued by political violence and recurrent attempted coups d 'état . Chad is one of the poorest and most corrupt countries in the world ; most inhabitants live in poverty as subsistence herders and farmers . Since 2003 crude oil has become the country 's primary source of export earnings , superseding the traditional cotton industry . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 7th millennium BC , ecological conditions in the northern half of Chadian territory favored human settlement , and the region experienced a strong population increase . Some of the most important African archaeological sites are found in Chad , mainly in the Borkou @-@ Ennedi @-@ Tibesti Region ; some date to earlier than 2000 BC . 
 For more than 2 @,@ 000 years , the Chadian Basin has been inhabited by agricultural and sedentary people . The region became a crossroads of civilizations . The earliest of these were the legendary Sao , known from artifacts and oral histories . The Sao fell to the Kanem Empire , the first and longest @-@ lasting of the empires that developed in Chad 's Sahelian strip by the end of the 1st millennium AD . Two other states in the region , <unk> and <unk> Empire emerged in the 16th and 17th centuries . The power of Kanem and its successors was based on control of the trans @-@ Saharan trade routes that passed through the region . These states , at least tacitly Muslim , never extended their control to the southern grasslands except to raid for slaves . In Kanem , about a third of the population were slaves . 
 French colonial expansion led to the creation of the <unk> Militaire des Pays et <unk> du Tchad in 1900 . By 1920 , France had secured full control of the colony and incorporated it as part of French Equatorial Africa . French rule in Chad was characterised by an absence of policies to unify the territory and sluggish modernisation compared to other French colonies . 
 The French primarily viewed the colony as an unimportant source of untrained labour and raw cotton ; France introduced large @-@ scale cotton production in 1929 . The colonial administration in Chad was critically understaffed and had to rely on the dregs of the French civil service . Only the Sara of the south was governed effectively ; French presence in the Islamic north and east was nominal . The educational system was affected by this neglect . 
 After World War II , France granted Chad the status of overseas territory and its inhabitants the right to elect representatives to the French National Assembly and a Chadian assembly . The largest political party was the Chadian Progressive Party ( <unk> ) , based in the southern half of the colony . Chad was granted independence on 11 August 1960 with the <unk> 's leader , a Sara people François Tombalbaye , as its first president . 
 Two years later , Tombalbaye banned opposition parties and established a one @-@ party system . Tombalbaye 's autocratic rule and insensitive mismanagement exacerbated interethnic tensions . In 1965 Muslims began a civil war . Tombalbaye was overthrown and killed in 1975 , but the insurgency continued . In 1979 the rebel factions conquered the capital , and all central authority in the country collapsed . Armed factions , many from the north 's rebellion , contended for power . 
 The disintegration of Chad caused the collapse of France 's position in the country . Libya moved to fill the power vacuum and became involved in Chad 's civil war . Libya 's adventure ended in disaster in 1987 ; the French @-@ supported president , Hissène Habré , evoked a united response from Chadians of a kind never seen before and forced the Libyan army off Chadian soil . 
 Habré consolidated his dictatorship through a power system that relied on corruption and violence with thousands of people estimated to have been killed under his rule . The president favoured his own <unk> ethnic group and discriminated against his former allies , the <unk> . His general , Idriss Déby , overthrew him in 1990 . Attempts to prosecute Habré led to his placement under house arrest in Senegal in 2005 ; in 2013 , Habré was formally charged with war crimes committed during his rule . In May 2016 , he was found guilty of human @-@ rights abuses , including rape , sexual slavery , and ordering the killing of 40 @,@ 000 people , and sentenced to life in prison . 
 Déby attempted to reconcile the rebel groups and reintroduced multiparty politics . Chadians approved a new constitution by referendum , and in 1996 , Déby easily won a competitive presidential election . He won a second term five years later . Oil exploitation began in Chad in 2003 , bringing with it hopes that Chad would at last have some chances of peace and prosperity . Instead , internal dissent worsened , and a new civil war broke out . Déby unilaterally modified the constitution to remove the two @-@ term limit on the presidency ; this caused an uproar among the civil society and opposition parties . 
 In 2006 Déby won a third mandate in elections that the opposition boycotted . Ethnic violence in eastern Chad has increased ; the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has warned that a genocide like that in Darfur may yet occur in Chad . In 2006 and in 2008 rebel forces have attempted to take the capital by force , but have on both occasions failed . An agreement for the restoration of harmony between Chad and Sudan , signed 15 January 2010 , marked the end of a five @-@ year war . The fix in relations led to the Chadian rebels from Sudan returning home , the opening of the border between the two countries after seven years of closure , and the deployment of a joint force to secure the border . In May 2013 , security forces in Chad foiled a coup against the President Idriss <unk> that had been in preparation for several months . 
 In 2016 , former ruler Hissène Habré was sentenced to life in prison in Senegal for crimes against humanity . 
 = = Geography , climate and environment = = 
 At 1 @,@ 284 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 496 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , Chad is the world 's 21st @-@ largest country . It is slightly smaller than Peru and slightly larger than South Africa . Chad is in north central Africa , lying between latitudes 7 ° and 24 ° N , and 13 ° and 24 ° E. 
 Chad is bounded to the north by Libya , to the east by Sudan , to the west by Niger , Nigeria and Cameroon , and to the south by the Central African Republic . The country 's capital is 1 @,@ 060 kilometres ( 660 mi ) from the nearest seaport , Douala , Cameroon . Because of this distance from the sea and the country 's largely desert climate , Chad is sometimes referred to as the " Dead Heart of Africa " . 
 The dominant physical structure is a wide basin bounded to the north and east by the Ennedi Plateau and Tibesti Mountains , which include Emi <unk> , a dormant volcano that reaches 3 @,@ 414 metres ( 11 @,@ 201 ft ) above sea level . Lake Chad , after which the country is named ( and which in turn takes its name from the <unk> word for " lake " ) , is the remains of an immense lake that occupied 330 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 130 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of the Chad Basin 7 @,@ 000 years ago . Although in the 21st century it covers only 17 @,@ 806 square kilometres ( 6 @,@ 875 sq mi ) , and its surface area is subject to heavy seasonal fluctuations , the lake is Africa 's second largest wetland . 
 The region 's tall grasses and extensive marshes make it favourable for birds , reptiles , and large mammals . Chad 's major rivers — the Chari , Logone and their tributaries — flow through the southern savannas from the southeast into Lake Chad . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Each year a tropical weather system known as the intertropical front crosses Chad from south to north , bringing a wet season that lasts from May to October in the south , and from June to September in the Sahel . Variations in local rainfall create three major geographical zones . The Sahara lies in the country 's northern third . Yearly precipitations throughout this belt are under 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) ; only the occasional spontaneous palm grove survives , and the only ones to do so are south of the Tropic of Cancer . 
 The Sahara gives way to a Sahelian belt in Chad 's centre ; precipitation there varies from 300 to 600 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 6 in ) per year . In the Sahel , a steppe of thorny bushes ( mostly acacias ) gradually gives way to the south to East <unk> savanna in Chad 's Sudanese zone . Yearly rainfall in this belt is over 900 mm ( 35 @.@ 4 in ) . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 Chad 's animal and plant life correspond to the three climatic zones . In the Saharan region , the only flora is the date @-@ palm groves of the oasis . Palms and acacia trees grow in the Sahelian region . The southern , or <unk> , zone consists of broad grasslands or prairies suitable for grazing . As of 2002 , there were at least 134 species of mammals , 509 species of birds ( 354 species of residents and 155 migrants ) , and over 1 @,@ 600 species of plants throughout the country . 
 Elephants , lions , buffalo , hippopotamuses , rhinoceroses , giraffes , antelopes , leopards , cheetahs , hyenas , and many species of snakes are found here , although most large carnivore populations have been drastically reduced since the early 20th century . Elephant poaching , particularly in the south of the country in areas such as Zakouma National Park , is a severe problem . The small group of surviving West African crocodiles in the Ennedi Plateau represents one of the last colonies known in the Sahara today . 
 Extensive deforestation has resulted in loss of trees such as acacias , baobab , dates and palm trees . This has also caused loss of natural habitat for wild animals ; one of the main reasons for this is also hunting and livestock farming by increasing human settlements . Animals like lions , leopards and rhino have been almost decimated . 
 Efforts have been made by the Food and Agricultural Organization to improve relations between farmers , agro @-@ pastoralists and pastoralists in the Zakouma National Park ( ZNP ) , <unk> @-@ Minia , and <unk> reserve in southeastern Chad to promote sustainable development . As part of the national conservation effort , more than 1 @.@ 2 million trees have been replanted to check the advancement of the desert , which incidentally also helps the local economy by way of financial return from acacia trees , which produce gum arabic , and also from fruit trees . 
 Poaching is a serious problem in the country , particularly of elephants for the profitable ivory industry and a threat to lives of rangers even in the national parks such as Zakouma . Elephants are often massacred in herds in and around the parks by organized poaching . The problem is worsened by the fact that the parks are understaffed and that a number of wardens have been murdered by poachers . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Chad 's national statistical agency projected the country 's 2015 population between 13 @,@ 630 @,@ 252 and 13 @,@ 679 @,@ 203 , with 13 @,@ 670 @,@ 084 as its medium projection ; based on the medium projection , 3 @,@ 212 @,@ 470 people lived in urban areas and 10 @,@ 457 @,@ 614 people lived in rural areas . The country 's population is young : an estimated 47 @.@ 3 % is under 15 . The birth rate is estimated at 42 @.@ 35 births per 1 @,@ 000 people , the mortality rate at 16 @.@ 69 . The life expectancy is 47 @.@ 2 years . 
 Chad 's population is unevenly distributed . Density is 0 @.@ 1 / km2 ( 0 @.@ 26 / sq mi ) in the Saharan Borkou @-@ Ennedi @-@ Tibesti Region but 52 @.@ 4 / km2 ( 136 / sq mi ) in the Logone Occidental Region . In the capital , it is even higher . About half of the nation 's population lives in the southern fifth of its territory , making this the most densely populated region . 
 Urban life is concentrated in the capital , whose population is mostly engaged in commerce . The other major towns are <unk> , Moundou , Abéché and <unk> , which are considerably smaller but growing rapidly in population and economic activity . Since 2003 , 230 @,@ 000 Sudanese refugees have fled to eastern Chad from war @-@ ridden Darfur . With the 172 @,@ 600 Chadians displaced by the civil war in the east , this has generated increased tensions among the region 's communities . 
 Polygamy is common , with 39 % of women living in such unions . This is sanctioned by law , which automatically permits polygamy unless spouses specify that this is unacceptable upon marriage . Although violence against women is prohibited , domestic violence is common . Female genital mutilation is also prohibited , but the practice is widespread and deeply rooted in tradition ; 45 % of Chadian women undergo the procedure , with the highest rates among Arabs , <unk> , and <unk> ( 90 % or more ) . Lower percentages were reported among the Sara ( 38 % ) and the <unk> ( 2 % ) . Women lack equal opportunities in education and training , making it difficult for them to compete for the relatively few formal @-@ sector jobs . Although property and inheritance laws based on the French code do not discriminate against women , local leaders adjudicate most inheritance cases in favour of men , according to traditional practice . 
 = = = Urbanization = = = 
 = = = Ethnic groups = = = 
 Chad has more than 200 distinct ethnic groups , which create diverse social structures . The colonial administration and independent governments have attempted to impose a national society , but for most Chadians the local or regional society remains the most important influence outside the immediate family . Nevertheless , Chad 's peoples may be classified according to the geographical region in which they live . 
 In the south live sedentary people such as the Sara , the nation 's main ethnic group , whose essential social unit is the lineage . In the Sahel sedentary peoples live side @-@ by @-@ side with nomadic ones , such as the Arabs , the country 's second major ethnic group . The north is inhabited by nomads , mostly <unk> . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 Chad 's official languages are Arabic and French , but over 100 languages and dialects are spoken . Due to the important role played by itinerant Arab traders and settled merchants in local communities , Chadian Arabic has become a lingua franca . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Chad is a religiously diverse country . The 1993 census found that 54 % of Chadians were Muslim ( of these , according to a Pew report 48 % professed to be Sunni , 21 % Shia , 4 % Ahmadi and 23 % just Muslim ) . Of the others , 20 % were Roman Catholic , 14 % Protestant , 10 % animist , while 3 % did not profess any religion . None of these religious traditions are monolithic . Animism includes a variety of ancestor and place @-@ oriented religions whose expression is highly specific . Islam is expressed in diverse ways ; for example , according to the Pew report mentioned earlier 55 % of Muslim Chadians belong to Sufi orders . Christianity arrived in Chad with the French and American missionaries ; as with Chadian Islam , it <unk> aspects of pre @-@ Christian religious beliefs . Muslims are largely concentrated in northern and eastern Chad , and animists and Christians live primarily in southern Chad and <unk> . The constitution provides for a secular state and guarantees religious freedom ; different religious communities generally co @-@ exist without problems . 
 The majority of Muslims in the country are adherents of a moderate branch of mystical Islam ( Sufism ) . Its most common expression is the <unk> , an order followed by the 35 % of Chadian Muslims which incorporates some local African religious elements . A small minority of the country 's Muslims hold more fundamentalist practices , which , in some cases , may be associated with Saudi @-@ oriented Salafi movements . 
 Roman Catholics represent the largest Christian denomination in the country . Most Protestants , including the Nigeria @-@ based " Winners ' Chapel " , are affiliated with various evangelical Christian groups . Members of the Bahá 'í and Jehovah 's Witnesses religious communities also are present in the country . Both faiths were introduced after independence in 1960 and therefore are considered to be " new " religions in the country . 
 Chad is home to foreign missionaries representing both Christian and Islamic groups . Itinerant Muslim preachers , primarily from Sudan , Saudi Arabia , and Pakistan , also visit . Saudi Arabian funding generally supports social and educational projects and extensive mosque construction . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Chad 's constitution provides for a strong executive branch headed by a president who dominates the political system . The president has the power to appoint the prime minister and the cabinet , and exercises considerable influence over appointments of judges , generals , provincial officials and heads of Chad 's para @-@ <unk> firms . In cases of grave and immediate threat , the president , in consultation with the National Assembly , may declare a state of emergency . The president is directly elected by popular vote for a five @-@ year term ; in 2005 constitutional term limits were removed , allowing a president to remain in power beyond the previous two @-@ term limit . Most of Déby 's key advisers are members of the <unk> ethnic group , although southern and opposition personalities are represented in government . 
 = = = Legal system = = = 
 Chad 's legal system is based on French civil law and Chadian customary law where the latter does not interfere with public order or constitutional guarantees of equality . Despite the constitution 's guarantee of judicial independence , the president names most key judicial officials . The legal system 's highest jurisdictions , the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Council , have become fully operational since 2000 . The Supreme Court is made up of a chief justice , named by the president , and 15 councillors , appointed for life by the president and the National Assembly . The Constitutional Court is headed by nine judges elected to nine @-@ year terms . It has the power to review legislation , treaties and international agreements prior to their adoption . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 The National Assembly makes legislation . The body consists of 155 members elected for four @-@ year terms who meet three times per year . The Assembly holds regular sessions twice a year , starting in March and October , and can hold special sessions when called by the prime minister . Deputies elect a National Assembly president every two years . The president must sign or reject newly passed laws within 15 days . The National Assembly must approve the prime minister 's plan of government and may force the prime minister to resign through a majority vote of no confidence . However , if the National Assembly rejects the executive branch 's programme twice in one year , the president may disband the Assembly and call for new legislative elections . In practice , the president exercises considerable influence over the National Assembly through his party , the Patriotic Salvation Movement ( MPS ) , which holds a large majority . 
 = = = Political parties = = = 
 Until the legalisation of opposition parties in 1992 , Déby 's MPS was the sole legal party in Chad . Since then , 78 registered political parties have become active . In 2005 , opposition parties and human rights organisations supported the boycott of the constitutional referendum that allowed Déby to stand for re @-@ election for a third term amid reports of widespread irregularities in voter registration and government censorship of independent media outlets during the campaign . Correspondents judged the 2006 presidential elections a mere formality , as the opposition deemed the polls a farce and boycotted them . 
 = = = Internal opposition and foreign relations = = = 
 Déby faces armed opposition from groups who are deeply divided by leadership clashes but united in their intention to overthrow him . These forces stormed the capital on 13 April 2006 , but were ultimately repelled . Chad 's greatest foreign influence is France , which maintains 1 @,@ 000 soldiers in the country . Déby relies on the French to help repel the rebels , and France gives the Chadian army logistical and intelligence support for fear of a complete collapse of regional stability . Nevertheless , Franco @-@ Chadian relations were soured by the granting of oil drilling rights to the American Exxon company in 1999 . 
 = = = Corruption = = = 
 Chad is listed as a failed state by the Fund for Peace ( <unk> ) . In 2007 Chad had the seventh highest score on the failed state index . Since then the trend has been upwards each year . Chad had the fourth highest score ( behind Sudan ) on the Failed State Index of 2012 and as of 2013 , is ranked fifth . 
 Corruption is rife at all levels ; Transparency International 's Corruption Perceptions Index for 2005 named Chad ( tied with Bangladesh ) as the most corrupt country in the world . Chad 's ranking on the index has improved only marginally in recent years . Since its first inclusion on the index in 2004 , Chad 's best score has been 2 / 10 for 2011 . Critics of President Déby have accused him of cronyism and tribalism . 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 Since 2012 Chad has been divided into 23 regions . The subdivision of Chad in regions came about in 2003 as part of the decentralisation process , when the government abolished the previous 14 prefectures . Each region is headed by a presidentially appointed governor . Prefects administer the 61 departments within the regions . The departments are divided into 200 sub @-@ prefectures , which are in turn composed of 446 cantons . 
 The cantons are scheduled to be replaced by <unk> rurales , but the legal and regulatory framework has not yet been completed . The constitution provides for decentralised government to compel local populations to play an active role in their own development . To this end , the constitution declares that each administrative subdivisions be governed by elected local assemblies , but no local elections have taken place , and communal elections scheduled for 2005 have been repeatedly postponed . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The army has over 30 @,@ 350 active personnel and 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 fit for military service . Military spending has fluctuated widely in recent history in response to local conditions , especially the 2005 @-@ 2010 civil war and instability in neighboring countries . In 2009 , while in civil war , Chad spent 4 @.@ 2 % of GDP on defense , which fell to 1 @.@ 6 % of GDP in 2011 before rising to 2 @.@ 0 % of GDP in 2013 , when Chad began its military intervention in Northern Mali , as it worked with France and other African nations to bring back Mali 's sovereignty over territory in the North . 
 = = = = Rebel groups = = = = 
 There have been numerous rebel groups in Chad throughout the last few decades . In 2007 , a peace treaty was signed that integrated United Front for Democratic Change or <unk> soldiers into the Chadian Army . The Movement for Justice and Democracy in Chad or <unk> also clashed with government forces in 2003 in an attempt to overthrow President Idriss Déby . In addition , there have been various conflicts with Khartoum 's Janjaweed rebels in Eastern Chad who killed civilians by use of helicopter gunships . Presently , the Union of Resistance Forces or <unk> are a rebel group that continues to battle with the government of Chad . In 2010 , the <unk> reportedly had a force estimating 6 @,@ 000 men and 300 vehicles . 
 = = = Law enforcement = = = 
 In Chad , the Gendarmerie Nationale serves as the national police force for the country . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The United Nations ' Human Development Index ranks Chad as the seventh poorest country in the world , with 80 % of the population living below the poverty line . The GDP ( Purchasing power parity ) per capita was estimated as US $ 1 @,@ 651 in 2009 . Chad is part of the Bank of Central African States , the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa ( <unk> ) and the Organization for the <unk> of Business Law in Africa ( <unk> ) . 
 Chad 's currency is the CFA franc . In the 1960s , the Mining industry of Chad produced sodium carbonate , or natron . There have also been reports of gold @-@ bearing quartz in the <unk> Prefecture . However , years of civil war have scared away foreign investors ; those who left Chad between 1979 and 1982 have only recently begun to regain confidence in the country 's future . In 2000 major direct foreign investment in the oil sector began , boosting the country 's economic prospects . 
 Over 80 % of Chad 's population relies on subsistence farming and livestock raising for its livelihood . The crops grown and the locations of herds are determined by the local climate . In the southernmost 10 % of the territory lies the nation 's most fertile cropland , with rich yields of sorghum and millet . In the Sahel only the hardier varieties of millet grow , and these with much lower yields than in the south . On the other hand , the Sahel is ideal pastureland for large herds of commercial cattle and for goats , sheep , donkeys and horses . The Sahara 's scattered oases support only some dates and legumes . Chad 's cities face serious difficulties of municipal infrastructure ; only 48 % of urban residents have access to potable water and only 2 % to basic sanitation . 
 Before the development of oil industry , cotton dominated industry and the labour market had accounted for approximately 80 % of export earnings . Cotton remains a primary export , although exact figures are not available . Rehabilitation of <unk> , a major cotton company weakened by a decline in world cotton prices , has been financed by France , the Netherlands , the European Union , and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) . The parastatal is now expected to be privatised . 
 If Chad can maintain a semblance of stability foreign investments will eventually return , but even 24 years after the last successful coup that brought President Idris <unk> to power , investors are still wary of investing in Chad . 
 = = = Humanitarian situation = = = 
 According to the United Nations , Chad has been affected by a humanitarian crisis since at least 2001 . As of 2008 , the country of Chad hosts over 280 @,@ 000 refugees from the Sudan 's Darfur region , over 55 @,@ 000 from the Central African Republic , as well as over 170 @,@ 000 internally displaced persons . 
 In February 2008 in the aftermath of the battle of N 'Djamena , UN Under @-@ Secretary @-@ General for Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes expressed " extreme concern " that the crisis would have a negative effect on the ability of humanitarians to deliver life @-@ saving assistance to half a million beneficiaries , most of whom – according to him – heavily rely on humanitarian aid for their survival . UN spokesperson Maurizio Giuliano stated to The Washington Post : " If we do not manage to provide aid at sufficient levels , the humanitarian crisis might become a humanitarian catastrophe " . In addition , organizations such as Save the Children have suspended activities due to killings of aid workers . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Civil war crippled the development of transport infrastructure ; in 1987 , Chad had only 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) of paved roads . Successive road rehabilitation projects improved the network to 550 kilometres ( 340 mi ) by 2004 . Nevertheless , the road network is limited ; roads are often unusable for several months of the year . With no railways of its own , Chad depends heavily on Cameroon 's rail system for the transport of Chadian exports and imports to and from the seaport of Douala . 
 = = = = Airports = = = = 
 An international airport serves the capital and provides regular nonstop flights to Paris and several African cities . 
 = = = = Railways = = = = 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , a railway system was in development near Lake Chad . In the 21st century , Chad and the China Civil Engineering Construction Corp agreed to a $ 7 billion contract to build additional railway infrastructure . Presently , there are rail links to Libya and Sudan . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 Chad 's energy sector has had years of mismanagement by the parastatal Chad Water and Electric Society ( STEE ) , which provides power for 15 % of the capital 's citizens and covers only 1 @.@ 5 % of the national population . Most Chadians burn biomass fuels such as wood and animal manure for power . 
 ExxonMobil leads a consortium of Chevron and Petronas that has invested $ 3 @.@ 7 billion to develop oil reserves estimated at one billion barrels in southern Chad . Oil production began in 2003 with the completion of a pipeline ( financed in part by the World Bank ) that links the southern oilfields to terminals on the Atlantic coast of Cameroon . As a condition of its assistance , the World Bank insisted that 80 % of oil revenues be spent on development projects . In January 2006 the World Bank suspended its loan programme when the Chadian government passed laws reducing this amount . On 14 July 2006 , the World Bank and Chad signed a memorandum of understanding under which the Government of Chad commits 70 % of its spending to priority poverty reduction programmes . 
 = = = Telecommunications = = = 
 The telecommunication system is basic and expensive , with fixed telephone services provided by the state telephone company <unk> . Only 14 @,@ 000 fixed telephone lines serve all of Chad , one of the lowest telephone density rates in the world . 
 Gateway Communications , a pan @-@ African wholesale connectivity and telecommunications provider also has a presence in Chad . In September 2013 , Chad 's Ministry for Posts and Information & Communication Technologies ( <unk> ) announced that the country will be seeking a partner for fiber optic technology . 
 = = = = Mobile phones = = = = 
 In September 2010 the penetration rate was estimated at 24 @.@ 3 % over a population estimate of 10 @.@ 7 million . 
 Chad is ranked last in the World Economic Forum 's Network Readiness Index ( NRI ) – an indicator for determining the development level of a country 's information and communication technologies . Chad ranked number 148 out of 148 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking , down from 142 in 2013 . 
 = = Media = = 
 Chad 's television audience is limited to N 'Djamena . The only television station is the state @-@ owned Télé Tchad . Radio has a far greater reach , with 13 private radio stations . Newspapers are limited in quantity and distribution , and circulation figures are small due to transportation costs , low literacy rates , and poverty . While the constitution defends liberty of expression , the government has regularly restricted this right , and at the end of 2006 began to enact a system of prior censorship on the media . 
 = = Education = = 
 Educators face considerable challenges due to the nation 's dispersed population and a certain degree of reluctance on the part of parents to send their children to school . Although attendance is compulsory , only 68 percent of boys attend primary school , and more than half of the population is illiterate . Higher education is provided at the University of N 'Djamena . At 33 percent , Chad has one of the lowest literacy rates of Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . 
 In 2013 , the U.S. Department of Labor 's Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor in Chad reported that school attendance of children aged 5 to 14 was as low as 39 % . This can also be related to the issue of child labor as the report also stated that 53 % of children aged 5 to 14 were working children , and that 30 % of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school . A more recent DOL report listed cattle herding as a major agricultural activity that employed underage children . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Because of its great variety of peoples and languages , Chad possesses a rich cultural heritage . The Chadian government has actively promoted Chadian culture and national traditions by opening the Chad National Museum and the Chad Cultural Centre . Six national holidays are observed throughout the year , and movable holidays include the Christian holiday of Easter Monday and the Muslim holidays of Eid ul @-@ Fitr , Eid ul @-@ Adha , and Eid Milad <unk> . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Chad includes a number of unusual instruments such as the kinde , a type of bow harp ; the <unk> , a long tin horn ; and the hu hu , a stringed instrument that uses <unk> as loudspeakers . Other instruments and their combinations are more linked to specific ethnic groups : the Sara prefer whistles , <unk> , harps and <unk> drums ; and the <unk> combine the sounds of drums with those of flute @-@ like instruments . 
 The music group Chari Jazz formed in 1964 and initiated Chad 's modern music scene . Later , more renowned groups such as African Melody and International <unk> attempted to mix modernity and tradition . Popular groups such as Tibesti have clung faster to their heritage by drawing on sai , a traditional style of music from southern Chad . The people of Chad have customarily disdained modern music . However , in 1995 greater interest has developed and fostered the distribution of CDs and audio cassettes featuring Chadian artists . Piracy and a lack of legal protections for artists ' rights remain problems to further development of the Chadian music industry . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Millet is the staple food throughout Chad . It is used to make balls of paste that are dipped in sauces . In the north this dish is known as <unk> ; in the south , as <unk> . Fish is popular , which is generally prepared and sold either as <unk> ( sun @-@ dried and lightly smoked <unk> and <unk> ) or as banda ( smoked large fish ) . <unk> is a popular sweet red tea extracted from hibiscus leaves . Alcoholic beverages , though absent in the north , are popular in the south , where people drink millet beer , known as <unk> @-@ <unk> when brewed from red millet , and as <unk> when from white millet . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 As in other Sahelian countries , literature in Chad has seen an economic , political and spiritual drought that has affected its best known writers . Chadian authors have been forced to write from exile or expatriate status and have generated literature dominated by themes of political oppression and historical discourse . Since 1962 , 20 Chadian authors have written some 60 works of fiction . Among the most internationally renowned writers are Joseph Brahim <unk> , Baba Moustapha , Antoine Bangui and <unk> <unk> . In 2003 Chad 's sole literary critic , Ahmat <unk> , published his Anthologie de la littérature <unk> to further knowledge of Chad 's literature internationally and among youth and to make up for Chad 's lack of publishing houses and promotional structure . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The development of a Chadian film industry was hampered by the devastations of civil war and from the lack of cinemas , of which there is only one in the whole country . The first Chadian feature film , the docudrama Bye Bye Africa , was made in 1999 by <unk> Saleh Haroun . His later film <unk> was critically acclaimed , and his <unk> won the Grand Special Jury Prize at the 63rd Venice International Film Festival . The 2010 feature film A Screaming Man won the Jury Prize at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival , making Haroun the first Chadian director to enter , as well as win , an award in the main Cannes competition . Issa Serge <unk> directed Chad 's two other films , <unk> and <unk> : <unk> City . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Football is Chad 's most popular sport . The country 's national team is closely followed during international competitions and Chadian footballers have played for French teams . Basketball and freestyle wrestling are widely practiced , the latter in a form in which the wrestlers put on traditional animal hides and cover themselves with dust . 
 = Albert Pujols = 
 José Alberto Pujols Alcántara ( born January 16 , 1980 ) , better known as Albert Pujols ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , is a Dominican American professional baseball first baseman for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He previously played for the St. Louis Cardinals , where he received three National League ( NL ) MVP awards ( 2005 , 2008 , 2009 ) and was a nine @-@ time MLB All @-@ Star ( 2001 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 ) . He was also an All @-@ Star with the Angels in 2015 . 
 Pujols was born in the Dominican Republic and moved to the United States in 1996 . After one season of college baseball , he was selected by the Cardinals in the 13th round of the 1999 MLB draft . As a rookie for the Cardinals in 2001 , he was unanimously voted the NL Rookie of the Year . Pujols played for the Cardinals for 11 seasons , contributing to two World Series championships in 2006 and 2011 . After the 2011 season , Pujols became a free agent and later signed a 10 @-@ year contract with the Angels . 
 Pujols is a highly regarded hitter who has shown a " combination of contact hitting ability , patience , and raw power " . He is a six @-@ time Silver Slugger who has twice led the NL in home runs , and he has also led the NL once each in batting average , doubles and RBI . He is significantly above @-@ average in career regular season batting average ( .312 ) , walk rate ( 12 @.@ 1 percent ) , and Isolated Power ( .217 ) . Pujols is considered a strong future candidate for the Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born on January 16 , 1980 , Pujols was raised in Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic , mostly by his grandmother America Pujols and 10 of his uncles and aunts . He was an only child . His father , Bienvenido Pujols , was a softball pitcher , but he was also an alcoholic . Albert often had to take his father home when his father got drunk following the games . Growing up , Pujols practiced baseball using limes for balls and a milk carton for a glove . Pujols , his father , and his grandmother immigrated to New York City in 1996 , where Albert witnessed a shooting at a grocery store . Partly because of the shooting , they moved to Independence , Missouri , two months later to join some relatives . 
 Pujols played baseball at Fort Osage High School in Independence and was named an All @-@ State athlete twice . As a senior , he was walked 55 times in protest because opposing coaches believed he was older than 18 , but he still hit eight home runs in 33 at bats . One of his home runs travelled 450 feet . After graduating from high school a semester early in December 1998 , he was given a baseball scholarship to Maple Woods Community College . Pujols hit a grand slam and turned an unassisted triple play in the first game of his only college season . Playing shortstop , he batted <unk> with 22 home runs as a freshman before deciding to enter the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft . 
 = = Professional baseball career = = 
 = = = Minor league career = = = 
 Few teams were interested in Pujols because of uncertainty about his age , which position he would play , and his build . Tampa Bay Rays scout Fernando <unk> recommended that his team sign Pujols , and quit his job when Tampa Bay failed to do so . Pujols was not drafted until the 13th round of the 1999 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Draft , when the St. Louis Cardinals selected him with the 402nd overall pick . Pujols initially turned down a $ 10 @,@ 000 bonus and spent the summer playing for the Hays Larks of the Jayhawk Collegiate League ( a summer league in the National Baseball Congress ) ; his total of 48 runs batted in ( RBIs ) with the team was tied for ninth with Tyler Wasserman in Larks ' history . When the Cardinals increased their bonus offer to $ 60 @,@ 000 , he signed . 
 Pujols began his minor league career in 2000 playing third base with the Peoria Chiefs of the single @-@ A Midwest League . He batted .324 with 128 hits , 32 doubles , six triples , 17 home runs , and 84 RBIs in 109 games . He finished second in the league in batting ( behind Ryan <unk> ) , tied for ninth in doubles ( with Andrew Beattie and Justin Leone ) , tied for fourth in triples ( with six other players ) , tied for sixth in home runs ( with Shawn McCorkle and Lance Burkhart ) , and sixth in RBIs . He was voted the league 's Most Valuable Player and named to the All @-@ Star team . Pujols also played 21 games with the Potomac Cannons in the high @-@ A Carolina League that year , batting .284 with 23 hits , eight doubles , one triple , two home runs , and 10 RBIs . He finished the season with the Memphis Redbirds in the AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , and after appearing in three regular season games with them , he batted .367 in the playoffs and was named the postseason Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) as the Redbirds won their first PCL title . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals ( 2001 – 2011 ) = = = 
 = = = = Early career ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 During spring training in 2001 , Mark McGwire told Cardinals manager Tony La Russa that if he did not put Pujols on the roster , " it might be one of the worst moves you make in your career . " La Russa later recounted the " myth " that Pujols only made the Opening Day roster in 2001 because Bobby Bonilla was injured . According to La Russa , he and the rest of Cardinals management were impressed enough by Pujols that they decided to promote him to the big league club even before Bonilla 's injury . Although the team did not need Pujols to fill any particular position , the Cardinals put him on their Opening Day roster , and he started all season at either third base , right field , left field , or first base . On Opening Day against the Colorado Rockies on April 2 , he got his first career hit , a single against pitcher Mike Hampton in an 8 – 0 loss . Four days later , he had three hits and three RBIs – including his first home run – against the Arizona Diamondbacks ' Armando Reynoso in a 12 – 9 win . Through 2015 , he was one of three players to hit 20 or more home runs in their rookie year before July , along with Wally Berger ( 1930 ) and Joc Pederson . 
 At midseason , Pujols became the first Cardinals ' rookie since Luis Arroyo in 1955 to make the All @-@ Star Game . He finished the season batting .329 ( sixth in the league ) with 194 hits ( fifth in the league ) , 47 doubles ( fifth in the league ) , 37 home runs , and 112 runs . His 37 home runs led the Cardinals , topping Jim Edmonds 's 30 and McGwire 's 29 . He was named the National League ( NL ) Silver Slugger Award winner for the third base position , and he finished fourth in NL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) voting , behind Barry Bonds , Sammy Sosa , and Luis Gonzalez . He was unanimously named the NL Rookie of the Year after setting an NL rookie record with 130 RBIs ( fifth in the league ) and becoming the fourth MLB rookie to hit .300 with 30 home runs , 100 runs , and 100 RBIs . 
 The Cardinals finished the 2001 season with a 93 – 61 record and advanced to the playoffs as a wild card team . The team won the NL wild card round and advanced to the NL Division Series ( NLDS ) . In Game 2 on October 10 , Pujols hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Diamondbacks pitcher Randy Johnson in a 4 – 1 victory . The Cardinals , however , were eliminated in five games , and Pujols had just two hits in 18 at @-@ bats . 
 After playing several positions in 2001 , Pujols spent most of 2002 in left field . He began the season batting cleanup but was moved in May to the third spot in the lineup , where he remained for the rest of his Cardinals career . Pujols hit his 30th home run and got his 100th RBI of the season in a 5 – 4 loss to the Cincinnati Reds in August , making him the sixth Cardinal to have back @-@ to @-@ back 30 @-@ home @-@ run seasons and the second Cardinal ( the other was Ray Jablonski ) to start his career with back @-@ to @-@ back 100 @-@ RBI seasons . The following month , Pujols hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run single against Pete Munro in a 9 – 3 victory over the Houston Astros that gave the Cardinals the NL Central title . Pujols finished the year batting .314 ( seventh in the NL ) with 185 hits ( tied for fourth in the NL ) , 40 doubles ( eighth in the NL ) , 34 home runs ( 10th in the NL ) , 118 runs scored ( second in the NL to Sosa 's 122 ) , and 127 RBIs ( second in the NL ) . He became the first player in major league history to hit over .300 with at least 30 home runs , 100 runs scored , and 100 RBIs in his first two seasons . Pujols finished second in MVP voting to Bonds , becoming the first Cardinal since Stan Musial to finish in the top four in MVP voting for consecutive seasons . At the end of the 2002 season , Chris <unk> of MLB.com called him " an outstanding hitter . " 
 Pujols 's contributions helped the Cardinals finish third in home runs and second in batting average and RBI ; the Cardinals ' pitching staff also finished fourth in ERA . The Cardinals again reached the playoffs , and Pujols had three hits and three RBIs in a three @-@ game sweep of the Diamondbacks in the 2002 NLDS . The team advanced to the 2002 NL Championship Series ( NLCS ) , but lost in five games to the San Francisco Giants . Pujols had five hits , one home run , and two RBIs in the series . 
 Five Cardinals were named to the All @-@ Star Game in 2003 , but Pujols led the NL in votes . It was the first of eight straight seasons that Pujols would reach the All @-@ Star Game . From July 12 to August 16 , Pujols had a 30 @-@ game hitting streak , tied for the second @-@ longest in Cardinals ' history with Musial and behind only Rogers Hornsby 's 33 @-@ game streak . On July 20 , Pujols hit his 100th career home run , a game @-@ winner in a 10 – 7 victory over the Dodgers . He became the fourth major leaguer to hit his 100th home run in his third season ( along with Ralph Kiner , Eddie Mathews , and Joe DiMaggio ) . Pujols hit his 114th home run on September 20 in a game against the Astros , which tied him with Kiner for most home runs by a player in his first three seasons . In 157 games , Pujols hit 43 home runs ( fourth in the league , behind Jim Thome , Richie <unk> , and Bonds ) and had 124 RBIs ( tied with <unk> for fourth and behind Preston Wilson , Gary Sheffield , and Thome ) . He became the youngest player since Tommy Davis in 1962 to win the NL batting title after batting .359 , and he led the league in runs ( 137 ) , hits ( 212 ) , and doubles ( 51 ) . Pujols joined Rogers Hornsby as the only players in Cardinals ' history to record more than 40 homers and 200 hits in the same season . Though his stellar play had Cardinals ' fans chanting " M @-@ V @-@ P ! " during home games as early as June , Pujols again finished second to Bonds in MVP voting . He won his second Silver Slugger Award in 2003 . He also won the Sporting News Player of the Year Award . Pujols 's contributions helped the Cardinals rank second in batting average and third in home runs in the NL ; however , the pitching staff posted a 4 @.@ 60 ERA , which was below the league average , and the Cardinals missed the playoffs . 
 = = = = New contract ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 After receiving many awards in his first three seasons , Pujols was rewarded monetarily for his accomplishments on February 20 , 2004 , when he signed a seven @-@ year , $ 100 million contract extension with a $ 16 million club option for 2011 with no @-@ trade provisions . He was moved to first base in 2004 after the Cardinals traded Tino Martinez in the offseason . On June 16 , he hit a walk @-@ off home run against Reds pitcher Mike Matthews in the 10th inning of a 4 – 3 victory . 
 Pujols 's highlights later in the season included a July game in which he hit five RBIs and three home runs and another in which he broke up a no @-@ hitter by Giants pitcher Dustin <unk> . During a September game against the Rockies , he earned his 500th RBI , joining DiMaggio and Ted Williams as the only players to have 500 RBIs in their first four seasons . He said he was confident there was going to be " a lot more " . Although Pujols was diagnosed with plantar fasciitis during the second half of the season , he finished the season with a .331 average ( fifth in the league ) , 196 hits ( fifth ) , 51 doubles ( second to Lyle Overbay 's 53 ) , 46 home runs ( tied with Adam Dunn for second behind Adrián Beltré 's 48 ) and 123 RBIs ( third , behind Vinny Castilla 's 131 and Scott Rolen 's 124 ) in 154 games . He also led the league in runs scored , with 133 . He finished third in MVP voting ( behind Bonds and Beltré ) , joining Musial as the only Cardinals to finish in the top five in voting for at least four years in a row . He won the Silver Slugger Award at first base , the third position he won the award at . Pujols , along with teammates Edmonds and Rolen , earned the nickname " MV3 " for their phenomenal seasons ; Pujols led the three in home runs and batting average . 
 The Cardinals won the NL Central , aided by the MV3 and pitcher Chris Carpenter , who won 15 games and had a 3 @.@ 46 ERA his first season with the team . In Game 4 of the NLDS against the Dodgers , Pujols hit a three @-@ run home run against Wilson Álvarez and had four RBIs as the Cardinals won 6 – 2 and took the series three games to one . In Game 6 of the NLCS , Pujols had three hits , scored three runs ( including the winning run ) , and hit a two @-@ run home run off Munro in a 12 @-@ inning , 6 – 4 victory . The Cardinals won the series in seven games , advancing to the World Series for the first time since 1987 . Pujols was named the NLCS MVP after batting .500 with four home runs and nine RBIs . He was one of three Cardinals to bat over .250 in the series against the Boston Red Sox ( after batting .333 ) as the Cardinals were swept by Boston in four games . 
 By 2005 , many baseball fans thought that Pujols was the best Cardinal since Musial . Pujols picked up his 100th RBI of the season on August 31 , joining Williams , DiMaggio , and Al Simmons as the only players with 100 RBIs in their first five seasons . Pujols hit his 200th career home run in a game against the Reds on September 30 , making him the third @-@ youngest major league player to reach that milestone ( behind Mel Ott and Eddie Mathews ) and the second @-@ fastest to reach it ( behind Kiner ) . In 161 games , Pujols batted .330 ( second to Derrek Lee 's .335 average ) with 195 hits ( fourth behind Lee , Miguel Cabrera , and Jimmy Rollins ) , 38 doubles , 41 home runs ( third , behind Andruw Jones 's 51 and Lee 's 46 ) , 117 RBIs ( tied with Burrell for second behind Jones 's 128 ) , and 129 runs scored ( first in the league ) . For the first time in his career , he won the NL MVP award as Bonds was limited to 14 games due to an injury . 
 Pujols returned to the playoffs as the Cardinals won the NL Central for the second year in a row . He had five hits in nine at @-@ bats with four runs scored and two RBIs in the NLDS as the Cardinals swept the Padres . In Game 5 of the NLCS against the Astros , with the Cardinals trailing by two runs and only one out from elimination in the ninth inning , Pujols hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Brad Lidge that landed on the train tracks in the back of Minute Maid Park . The Cardinals won 5 – 4 . MLB.com writer Matthew Leach later called it " one of the most famous playoff home runs in recent years . " Nevertheless , the Cardinals were eliminated in Game 6 by the Astros . Pujols batted .304 with two home runs and six RBIs in the series . 
 = = = = Continued success and first World Series ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Over two games in April 2006 , Pujols hit home runs in four consecutive plate appearances , making him the 20th player to accomplish the feat . Pujols maintained after the game that he was more concerned with winning than the numbers : " I don 't look at numbers " , he said . " I don 't know . I didn 't know anything about [ the record ] until you guys brought it up . Because that 's not me . I don 't get locked in on numbers . I don 't get locked in on anything like that . I get locked in on seeing the ball and helping my team out to win and hopefully doing some damage out there . " 
 Pujols had three hits and four RBIs , including his 1,000th career hit ( a home run against Jerome Williams ) , as the Cardinals beat the Cubs 9 – 3 on April 21 , 2006 . On June 4 , he was placed on the disabled list ( DL ) for the first time in his career with a strained right oblique that kept him out for three weeks . 
 On August 22 , Pujols hit a three @-@ run home run and a grand slam against John Maine in an 8 – 7 loss to the Mets . On September 28 , with the Cardinals trailing 2 – 1 to the Padres in the eighth inning , he hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against <unk> Meredith , helping the Cardinals win 4 – 2 and end a seven @-@ game losing streak . The win preserved the Cardinals ' 1 @.@ 5 game division lead ; La Russa said afterward that it was " the most huge of the huge ones he 's hit . " 
 Pujols finished the season with a .331 average ( third to Freddy Sanchez 's .344 and Cabrera 's .339 ) , 177 hits , 33 doubles , 49 home runs ( second to Ryan Howard 's 58 ) , 137 RBIs ( second to Howard 's 149 ) , and 119 runs scored ( tied with Matt Holliday , Hanley Ramírez , and Alfonso Soriano for fifth ) . Of his 49 home runs , 20 accounted for a game @-@ winning RBI , breaking Willie Mays ' single @-@ season record set in 1962 . He finished second to Howard in MVP voting and won the NL Gold Glove Award for first base . He won his first of four consecutive Fielding Bible Awards for the first base position . 
 Led by Pujols and Carpenter , the Cardinals won the NL Central and reached the playoffs for the third year in a row . In Game 1 of the NLDS against the Padres , he hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Jake Peavy as the Cardinals won 5 – 1 . He had a game @-@ winning RBI against David Wells and had three hits in Game 2 as the Cardinals won 2 – 0 . He batted .333 with a home run and an RBI in the series as the Cardinals defeated the Padres in four games . In Game 2 of the NLCS against the Mets , Pujols scored three runs as the Cardinals won 9 – 6 . He batted .318 with one home run and one RBI in the series as the Cardinals defeated the Mets in seven games . 
 In Game 1 of the World Series against the Detroit Tigers , he hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Justin Verlander as the Cardinals won 4 – 2 . In Game 5 , he made a sprawling , flip @-@ from @-@ his @-@ back play to rob Plácido Polanco of a hit as the Cardinals clinched the series giving Pujols his first career World Series ring . 
 Near the beginning of the 2007 season in an April 22 game against the Cubs , Pujols hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Ryan Dempster in the 10th inning of a 12 – 9 victory , tying Ken Boyer for second all @-@ time on the Cardinals ' home run list with his 255th . Pujols finished the season with 185 hits , 38 doubles and 103 RBIs ( a career @-@ low ) . He was among the league leaders in batting average ( .327 , sixth ) and home runs ( 32 , tied with Carlos Lee and Chris Young ) for tenth . He scored 99 runs , ending his streak of seasons with at least 30 home runs , a .300 average , 100 runs scored , and 100 RBIs at six . He finished ninth in MVP voting , the first year he had finished outside the top five in his career . 
 Pujols began 2008 by reaching base in 42 straight games , the longest streak to open a season since Derek Jeter reached base in the first 53 games of 1999 . On June 11 , he was placed on the DL with a strained left calf muscle . Although he was expected to miss three weeks , he was activated from the DL on June 26 . Pujols hit his 300th home run against Bob <unk> on July 4 in a 2 – 1 loss to the Cubs . He said after the game that to him it was " just another homer that goes out of the park . I 'm happy to do it in front of our fans — they were waiting for it . " 
 On September 11 , in a 3 – 2 loss to the Cubs , Pujols hit his 100th RBI of the season against Rich Harden , making him the third player in major league history to start his career with eight seasons of at least 100 RBIs ( along with Simmons and Williams ) . He regretted that the milestone came in a loss , saying , " I wish it would have come with a great win . It would have been more special . " In 148 games in 2008 , Pujols batted .357 ( second to Chipper Jones 's .364 average ) with 187 hits ( third , behind Reyes 's 204 and David Wright 's 189 ) , 44 doubles ( tied with Stephen Drew and Aramis Ramírez for fourth in the league behind Berkman and Nate <unk> 's 46 and Corey Hart 's 45 ) , 37 home runs ( tied with Ryan Braun and Ryan Ludwick for fourth in the league behind Howard 's 48 , Dunn 's 40 , and Delgado 's 38 ) , 116 RBIs ( fourth , behind Howard 's 146 , Wrights 124 , and Adrian Gonzalez 's 119 ) , and 100 runs scored . Pujols won his second NL MVP Award , and he won the Silver Slugger Award for the fourth time in his career . He was named The Sporting News Player of the Year for the second time in his career . For his work off the field , he was named the 2008 winner of the Roberto Clemente Award . He considered having Tommy John surgery after the season but underwent nerve transposition surgery on his right elbow instead to ease discomfort . 
 = = = = Later career and second World Series ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On April 25 , 2009 , Pujols picked up his 1,000th career RBI with a 441 @-@ foot grand slam against David Patton in an 8 – 2 victory over the Cubs . " I hit that ball as good as I can hit a ball " , he said after the game . On July 3 , he hit his 10th career grand slam against Weathers in a 7 – 4 victory over the Reds , breaking Musial 's record for most grand slams by a Cardinal . The grand slam was also his 350th career home run , making him the third @-@ fastest player to reach 350 home runs ( behind Alex Rodriguez and Ken Griffey , Jr . ) . He received the highest number of votes in NL history for the All @-@ Star Game that year . 
 Pujols had four hits , three runs scored , and five RBIs on August 4 , including a grand slam against Sean Green which tied the NL record for most grand slams in a season ( five ) , in a 10 @-@ inning , 12 – 7 victory over the Mets . In 160 games , Pujols batted .327 ( third , behind Ramírez 's .342 and Pablo Sandoval 's .330 ) with 186 hits ( sixth ) , 45 doubles ( second to Miguel Tejada 's 46 ) , 47 home runs ( first ) , 135 RBIs ( third behind Fielder and Howard 's 141 ) , and 124 runs scored ( first ) . He was unanimously named the NL MVP for the third time , tying Musial as the Cardinals ' leader in that category . For the fifth time in his career , he won the Silver Slugger Award . He won the Sporting News MLB Player of the Year award for the second consecutive year , joining Williams and Joe Morgan as the only players to win it in back @-@ to @-@ back years . For the fourth year in a row , he won the Fielding Bible Award for first base . 
 Aided by the midseason acquisition of Matt Holliday ( who replaced Ryan Ludwick as the cleanup hitter ) and the emergence of Adam Wainwright ( who led the NL in wins ) , the Cardinals returned to the playoffs after a two @-@ year hiatus . In the NLDS against the Dodgers , Pujols batted .300 with one RBI as the Cardinals were swept in three games . Following the postseason , Pujols had surgery to remove five bone spurs from his right elbow . The Cardinals called the surgery a " success " , and Dr. James Andrews decided that Pujols did not need Tommy John surgery at that time . 
 On June 29 , 2010 , in an 8 – 0 victory over the Diamondbacks , Pujols had five RBIs and hit two home runs against Dontrelle Willis for his 37th career multihomer game , which tied Musial 's franchise record for multihomer games . " It 's pretty special " , he said of tying Musial . " I 'm blessed to have the opportunity to be compared sometimes with him . " 
 On August 26 , he hit his 400th career home run against Jordan Zimmermann in a 13 @-@ inning , 11 – 10 loss to the Nationals . He became the third @-@ youngest player to reach the milestone ( behind Griffey , Jr. and Rodriguez ) , and he became the fourth @-@ quickest player by at bats to reach the milestone ( behind McGwire , Babe Ruth , Harmon Killebrew , and Thome ) . On September 11 , in a 12 @-@ inning 6 – 3 loss to Atlanta , Pujols had three RBIs and reached 100 RBIs for the 10th consecutive year with a two @-@ run double against Tommy Hanson . Only Simmons has a longer streak of 100 RBI seasons at the beginning of a career , with 11 . Pujols joined Jimmie Foxx , Lou Gehrig , and Rodriguez in having 10 consecutive seasons of 100 or more RBIs at any time in their career . Foxx and Rodriguez are the only two players besides Pujols to have 10 consecutive years of 30 home runs and 100 RBIs . The next day , in a 7 – 3 victory over the Braves , he passed Musial to be the all @-@ time Cardinals ' leader in multi @-@ home run games when he hit two home runs against Tim Hudson for the 38th time in a game . 
 In 159 games , Pujols batted .312 ( sixth ) with 183 hits ( fifth ) and 39 doubles ( tied for eighth with Marlon Byrd ) ; he led the league in runs scored ( 115 ) , home runs ( 42 ) , and RBIs ( 118 ) . He won his second Gold Glove Award for first base , and he won the NL First Base Silver Slugger Award for the sixth time . He finished second in the NL MVP voting to Joey <unk> , who said he was " shocked " that Pujols only got one first @-@ place vote . 
 Pujols and the Cardinals set a deadline for the start of 2011 spring training for contract extension negotiations but failed to agree on an extension . After Pujols struggled in his first 30 games of the season ( batting .231 ) , he batted .316 with 30 home runs in his final 117 games . Against the Cubs , he hit consecutive extra @-@ inning walk @-@ off home runs on June 4 and 5 for the first time since Albert Belle in 1995 . Carpenter noted after the game that Pujols 's slump earlier in the year was over : " He continues to do great things , there 's no doubt about it " , he said . " The things that he 's done the last few days have been just like the old Albert . " 
 On June 19 against the Royals , Wilson Betemit collided with Pujols , causing a small fracture in Pujols ' left wrist which kept Pujols inactive until July 5 . On July 30 , in a 9 – 2 victory over the Cubs , he got his 2,000th career hit against Carlos Mármol . He became the fifth Cardinal to reach 2 @,@ 000 hits and 12th quickest major leaguer by games to get to the milestone . In the Cardinals ' final game of the season , against the Astros on September 28 , he had the game @-@ winning RBI against Brett Myers in the 8 – 0 victory , helping the Cardinals overcome a 10 @.@ 5 game deficit to Atlanta to win the Wild Card . Pujols finished the season with 173 hits ( tied for ninth with Aramis Ramírez ) , 29 doubles ( a career @-@ low ) , and 105 runs scored ( tied for third with Justin Upton behind Ryan Braun 's 109 and Matt Kemp 's 115 ) . He saw his streak of seasons batting at least .300 with 30 home runs and 100 RBIs snapped when he hit 37 home runs ( third , behind Fielder 's 38 and Kemp 's 39 ) but batted .299 with 99 RBIs ( seventh ) ; however , only three other players in the major leagues matched him in those categories ( José Bautista , Fielder , and Kemp ) , causing Tyler Kepner of The New York Times to write , " Even when Pujols struggles , he excels . " He was fifth in MVP voting . 
 In Game 2 of the NLDS against the Phillies on October 2 , Pujols had a game @-@ winning RBI single against Cliff Lee in the 5 – 4 victory . He batted .350 with one RBI in the series as the Cardinals defeated the Phillies in 5 games . In Game 2 of the NLCS against the Brewers , he had four hits , three runs scored , one home run , and five RBIs in a 12 – 3 victory . He batted .478 with two home runs and nine RBIs in the series as the Cardinals defeated the Brewers in six games . 
 On October 22 , in Game 3 of the World Series , Pujols became the first player to get at least four hits , two home runs , and five RBIs in a World Series game in a 16 – 7 victory over the Rangers . Pujols had five hits , three home runs , four runs scored , and six RBIs in the game . He joined Babe Ruth and Reggie Jackson as the only players in baseball history to hit three home runs in a World Series game ( Pablo Sandoval would also accomplish the feat the following year ) , became the first player in series history to have hits in four consecutive innings , and tied records for most hits and most RBIs in a World Series game . He had one hit and no RBIs the other six games of the series but became a World Series champion for the second time as the Cardinals defeated the Rangers in seven games . After the season , he became a free agent for the first time in his career . 
 = = = Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Contract signing = = = = 
 Three teams were reported to be interested in Pujols during the offseason : the Cardinals , the Miami Marlins , and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . The Cardinals offered Pujols a 10 @-@ year , $ 210 million deal ( with $ 30 million deferred ) , but Pujols rejected it . His wife explained on a radio talk show that they were " insulted " and " confused " that the Cardinals had initially offered Pujols a five @-@ year deal . The Marlins reportedly offered Pujols a 10 @-@ year contract too , but on December 8 he signed a 10 @-@ year deal with the Angels worth around $ 254 million . The contract offered by the Marlins was reportedly around the value as that offered by the Angels . However , the Marlins ( who have a history of fire sales ) refused to include a no trade clause in the contract . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 Pujols did not perform very well to begin the 2012 season , batting .217 with no home runs and four RBIs in the month of April . Soon after the Angels called up top prospect Mike Trout and fired hitting coach Mickey Hatcher , Pujols 's numbers began to rise , as he batted .323 with 13 home runs from May 15 through the All @-@ Star Break . On July 31 , he hit two home runs against Derek Holland in a 6 – 2 victory over the Rangers . After the game , Holland observed that Pujols had ended his early @-@ season struggles : " He 's definitely turned it around , no doubt about it " , he said . " He is what he is . He had a slow start , but he 's picked it up . He 's a great hitter . He and Trout are doing a great job picking [ the Angels ] up . " On August 14 , Pujols had four RBI , including a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Ubaldo Jiménez in a 9 – 6 victory over the Cleveland Indians . In 153 games , Pujols batted .285 with 173 hits , 50 doubles ( second to Alex Gordon 's 51 ) , 30 home runs , 105 RBI ( 7th in AL ) , and 85 runs scored . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 On August 18 , 2013 , Pujols was ruled out for the remainder of the 2013 season after suffering a knee injury . Pujols had by far the worst season of his career in 2013 , failing to play at least 100 games for the first time in his career . Pujols also posted career worsts in hits , runs scored , doubles , home runs , RBI , walks , batting average , on base percentage , slugging percentage , and OPS . Overall in 99 games , Pujols batted .258 with 101 hits , 19 doubles , 17 home runs , 64 RBI , and 49 runs scored . 
 In August 2013 , former Cardinals player Jack Clark accused Pujols of using performance @-@ enhancing drugs on his radio show on WGNU in St. Louis . Clark served as the Cardinals ' hitting coach during the early part of Pujols ' tenure in St. Louis . On the morning of August 9 , Pujols issued a statement adamantly denying that he had ever taken PEDs . He denounced Clark 's allegations as " irresponsible and reckless " and threatened to sue Clark and WGNU over the allegations . Partly due to legal threats from Pujols , <unk> Enterprises , which owns WGNU 's weekday airtime under a time brokerage agreement , cut ties with Clark . On October 4 , 2013 , Pujols filed a defamation lawsuit against Clark . In response on October 14 , Clark challenged Pujols to both take polygraph tests to resolve who is telling the truth . However , on February 10 , 2014 , Clark apologized and retracted his accusations against Pujols , saying he had " no knowledge whatsoever " that Pujols ever used PEDs . " During a heated discussion on air , I misspoke " , Clark said . In return , Pujols dropped the suit . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 On April 22 , 2014 , Pujols hit his 499th and 500th home run of his career off of Taylor Jordan in a game versus the Washington Nationals at Nationals Park . Pujols became the 26th player ever to reach the 500 home run mark , as well as the third youngest to reach it . He also became the first player to hit career home runs 499 and 500 in the same game . Nationals Park is the same ballpark where he hit his 400th career home run in the 2010 season . Participating in the longest game of the year in MLB , and the longest in the history of Angel Stadium , Pujols ended a 19 @-@ inning , 6 : 31 contest against the Red Sox with a solo home run for a 5 – 4 final score . It was also his first walk @-@ off home run as an Angel and first since June 2011 . On September 6 , 2014 against the Minnesota Twins , Pujols collected his 2,500th career hit , a two @-@ run go @-@ ahead double off of Jared Burton in the 9th inning . He also passed the 1 @,@ 500 run mark in the same game . In the process , he became the fifth player in major league history with 2 @,@ 500 hits and 500 home runs while maintaining a .310 lifetime batting average ( the others are Babe Ruth , Jimmie Foxx , Ted Williams and Manny Ramirez ) . Pujols leads all active players in doubles , with 561 . 
 After the season , Pujols traveled to Japan to join a team of MLB All @-@ Stars playing against All @-@ Stars of Nippon Professional Baseball in the 2014 Major League Baseball Japan All @-@ Star Series . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 Before the 2015 season , Pujols was enjoying his first offseason in which he was not injured or recovering from injury while with the Angels . However , his offensive production was slow through the first month of the season . By the end of April , Pujols was batting .208 with 3 homers and nine RBIs in 86 plate appearances . While it was suggested that this was because of older age , or his recent poor health while with the Angels , it seemed to be simply due to bad luck . By May 2015 , Pujols offensive production had started to come around . Between May 28 , 2015 and June 22 , 2015 , Pujols batted .356 with 15 homers , 30 RBI 's and posted a 1 @.@ 326 OPS . At this time , Pujols was leading the American League in home runs with 23 , and was on pace to hit more than 50 . On July 6 , it was announced that Pujols was selected to the 2015 All Star Game , as a reserve for the American League , but due to an injury just days back with Tigers slugger Miguel Cabrera , he would instead start at first base . It was his 10th selection to the midsummer classic , and first as a member of the Angels . 
 On September 22 , 2015 , Pujols hit his <unk> career home run to pass Ramirez for sole possession of 14th place on the all @-@ time career home run leaderboard . On October 4 , 2015 , in the last game of the season , Pujols hit his 40th home run of the season , the seventh time he hit 40 home runs in a season throughout his career . This was the most times any active MLB player had reached the mark in as many times , only trailing Alex Rodriguez , who has done it eight times . 
 = = = = 2016 season = = = = 
 On April 25 , 2016 , Pujols hit his <unk> career home run , passing Reggie Jackson for 13th on the all @-@ time list . On April 30 , Pujols became the 85th player to make 10 @,@ 000 career plate appearances . On May 2 , Pujols became the 20th player all time to amass 5 @,@ 000 career total bases . On May 27 , Pujols hit his <unk> career home run , passing Rafael Palmeiro for 12th on the all @-@ time list . On June 25 , Pujols hit his 574th career home run , passing Harmon Killebrew for 11th all time . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Pujols 's swing has been praised for its consistency . " It 's the same swing every time " , former teammate Lance Berkman once said . " He has the ability to repeat his swing over and over and over , which leads to him being very consistent " , Cardinals ' video coordinator Chad Blair said . Sports Illustrated writer Daniel G. Habib described the swing as " quick " and " quiet . " Pujols uses a 32 @.@ 5 @-@ ounce bat against right @-@ handed pitchers , but he uses a 33 @-@ ounce bat against left @-@ handers to avoid trying to pull the ball when he swings . Defensively , Pujols has won two Gold Glove Awards since moving to first base in 2004 . He has credited his hitting ability partly to guessing what pitchers will do : 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pujols married his wife , Deidre , on January 1 , 2000 . They have five children : Isabella ( Deidre 's daughter from a previous relationship ) , Albert , Jr . , Sophia , Ezra , and Esther Grace . During the offseason , they live in St. Louis . Albert and his wife are supporters of people with Down syndrome , a condition Isabella was born with . In 2007 , Pujols became a U.S. citizen , scoring a perfect 100 on his citizenship test . 
 Pujols is close friends with third baseman Plácido Polanco , a former teammate with the Cardinals . Polanco has called Pujols his " closest friend in baseball " , and Pujols is the godfather to Polanco 's son , Ishmael . Pujols is also friends with Robinson Canó , who selected Mark Trumbo for the 2012 Home Run Derby after Pujols asked him to . 
 In 2009 , Pujols donated money to the Mike Coolbaugh Memorial Tournament , allowing the event to occur after a sponsor backed out . On August 28 , 2010 , Pujols and La Russa attended Glenn Beck 's Restoring Honor rally in Washington , D.C. , after being assured by Beck that the rally was not political . During the rally , Pujols was presented with a medal for his off @-@ the @-@ field efforts . 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 In 2006 , Pujols and the <unk> family opened Pujols 5 Westport Grill , a restaurant located in Westport Plaza of Maryland Heights , Missouri . A 10 @-@ foot , 1 @,@ 100 @-@ lb. statue of Pujols was dedicated on November 2 , 2011 , outside the restaurant . An anonymous donor commissioned sculptor Harry Weber to create the statue , which belongs to the Pujols Family Foundation . After Pujols signed with the Angels , the restaurant was renamed the St. Louis Sports Hall of Fame Grill . 
 In 2008 , Pujols teamed up with St. Louis Soccer United , a group looking to bring a Major League Soccer ( MLS ) franchise to the St. Louis area . However , the group 's bid for a franchise was unsuccessful , and a minor league soccer team was created instead . 
 = = = Christianity = = = 
 Pujols and his wife are Christians . He became a Christian on November 13 , 1998 , influenced in part by Deidre and his grandmother . One of his writings on his family 's foundation 's website states , " In the Pujols family , God is first . Everything else is a distant second . " He writes , 
 " My life 's goal is to bring glory to Jesus . My life is not mostly dedicated to the Lord , it is 100 % committed to Jesus Christ and His will . God has given me the ability to succeed in the game of baseball . But baseball is not the end ; baseball is the means by which my wife , Dee Dee , and I glorify God . Baseball is simply my platform to elevate Jesus Christ , my Lord and Savior . " 
 During his tenure with the Cardinals , Pujols and his family attended West County Community Church , a Southern Baptist church in Wildwood , Missouri . 
 = = = Pujols Family Foundation = = = 
 In 2005 , Albert and Deidre Pujols launched the Pujols Family Foundation , a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) non @-@ profit dedicated to their " commitment to faith , family and others . " The organization promotes awareness of Down syndrome and works to support those who have it and their families , aids the poor in the Dominican Republic , and supports people with disabilities and / or life @-@ threatening illnesses . Among other activities , the foundation hosts events for people with Down syndrome . The foundation gave the Down Syndrome Association of Greater St. Louis the resources to open an office and hire staff . In 2009 , the Albert Pujols Wellness Center for Adults with Down Syndrome opened in Chesterfield , Missouri ; Pujols was present at the opening on November 18 . 
 Pujols has taken several trips to the Dominican Republic , by taking supplies as well as a team of doctors and dentists to the poor who need medical care . The Pujols Family Foundation also holds an annual golf tournament to raise money to send dentists to the Dominican Republic . 
 = = Accomplishments = = 
 Through 2012 , Pujols ranked in the top 10 players in major league history in three statistical categories : slugging percentage ( fifth ) , on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ; sixth ) , and OPS + ( tied for ninth with Ty Cobb ) . At the end of the 2012 season , he led all active players in batting average ( .325 ) , slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , and OPS ( 1 @.@ 022 ) . Through 2012 , he ranked among the top 10 active players in doubles ( ninth ) , home runs ( fourth , behind Rodriguez , Thome , and Manny Ramirez ) , RBIs ( sixth ) , and runs scored ( ninth ) . Pujols has a .994 fielding percentage at first base ( through 2012 ) , and he set the major league single @-@ season record for assists with 185 in 2009 . 
 Pujols is in the top 10 in several Cardinals ' statistics . He is second to Musial in doubles ( 455 ) , home runs ( 445 ) , and RBIs ( 1 @,@ 329 ) . He is seventh in games ( 1 @,@ 705 ) , seventh in batting average ( .328 ) , third in runs scored ( 1 @,@ 291 , behind Musial and Lou Brock ) , and fourth in hits ( 2 @,@ 073 , behind Musial , Brock and Hornsby ) . He also is in the top 10 in several single @-@ season Cardinals ' records . His 137 runs scored in 2003 are tied for seventh with Tommy McCarthy , his 51 doubles in 2003 and 2004 are tied with Musial for sixth , he holds five of the top 10 Cardinals ' home run totals , and his 137 RBIs in 2006 are tied for seventh with Jim Bottomley , Johnny Mize , and Joe Torre . 
 Pujols has earned praise from many of his fellow players and coaches . In 2008 , he was named the most feared hitter in baseball in a poll of all 30 MLB managers . La Russa has called him " the best player I 've ever managed . " <unk> referred to him as " one of the greatest hitters of all time . " Larry Walker called him " a great hitter , " and Brendan Ryan said , " He 's the best there is . " Fernando Viña said , while Pujols was with the Cardinals , " He 's the face of the Cardinals . " 
 Pujols has said he does not play solely for the numbers . " I don 't play for numbers . I play first of all to glorify God and to accomplish in this game what everybody wants to accomplish , which is getting to the World Series and coming up with a win at the end . Those are the things that I really try to focus on and try to make sure that I do every day for the rest of my career . " 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 = Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych = 
 The Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych ( or Diptych with Calvary and Last Judgement ) consists of two small painted panels attributed to the Early Netherlandish artist Jan van Eyck , with areas finished by unidentified followers or members of his workshop . This diptych is one of the early Northern Renaissance oil on panel masterpieces , renowned for its unusually complex and highly detailed iconography , and for the technical skill evident in its completion . It was executed in a miniature format ; the panels are just 56 @.@ 5 cm ( 22 @.@ 2 in ) high by 19 @.@ 7 cm ( 7 @.@ 8 in ) wide . The diptych was probably commissioned for personal and private devotion . 
 The left @-@ hand wing depicts the Crucifixion . It shows Christ 's followers grieving in the foreground , soldiers and spectators milling about in the mid @-@ ground and a portrayal of three crucified bodies in the upper @-@ ground . The scene is framed against an azure sky with a view of Jerusalem in the distance . The right @-@ hand wing portrays scenes associated with the Last Judgement : a hellscape at its base , the resurrected awaiting judgement in the centre @-@ ground , and a representation of Christ in Majesty flanked by a Great Deësis of saints , apostles , clergy , virgins and nobility in the upper section . Portions of the work contain Greek , Latin and Hebrew inscriptions . The original gilt frames contain Biblical passages in Latin drawn from the books of Isaiah , Deuteronomy and Revelation . According to a date written in Russian on their reverse , the panels were transferred to canvas supports in 1867 . 
 The earliest surviving mention of the work appears in 1841 , when scholars believed the two panels were wings of a lost triptych . The Metropolitan Museum of Art acquired the diptych in 1933 . At that time , the work was attributed to Jan 's brother Hubert because key areas formally resembled pages of the Turin @-@ Milan Hours , which were then believed to be of Hubert 's hand . On the evidence of technique and the style of dress of the figures , the majority of scholars believe the panels are late works by Jan van Eyck , executed in the early 1430s and finished after his death . Other art historians hold that van Eyck painted the panels around the early 1420s and attribute the weaker passages to a younger van Eyck 's relative inexperience . 
 = = Format and technique = = 
 Along with Robert Campin and later Rogier van der Weyden , Van Eyck revolutionised the approach towards naturalism and realism in Northern European painting during the early to mid 15th century . He was the first to manipulate oils to give the close detailing that infused his figures with the high degree of realism and complexity of emotion seen in this diptych . He coupled this with a mastery of glaze to create luminous surfaces with a deep perspective — most noticeable in the upper portion of the Crucifixion panel — which had not been achieved before . 
 In the 1420s and 1430s , when oil and panel painting were still in their infancy , vertical formats were often used for depictions of the Last Judgement , because the narrow framing particularly suited a hierarchical presentation of heaven , earth and hell . By contrast , depictions of the Crucifixion were usually presented in a horizontal format . To fit such expansive and highly detailed representations onto two equally small and narrow wings , van Eyck was forced to make a number of innovations , redesigning many elements of the Crucifixion panel to match the vertical and condensed presentation of the Judgement narrative . The result is a panel with the crosses rising high into the sky , an unusually packed crowd scene in the mid @-@ ground , and the moving spectacle of the mourners in the foreground , all rendered in a continuous slope from bottom to top in the style of medieval tapestries . Art historian Otto Pächt says it " is the whole world in one painting , an Orbis <unk> " . 
 In the Crucifixion panel , van Eyck follows the early 14th @-@ century tradition of presenting the biblical episodes using a narrative technique . According to art historian Jeffrey Chipps Smith , the episodes appear as " simultaneous , not sequential " events . Van Eyck condenses key episodes from the gospels into a single composition , each placed so as to draw the viewer 's eye upward in a logical sequence . This device allowed van Eyck to create a greater illusion of depth with more complex and unusual spatial arrangements . In the Crucifixion panel , he uses different indicators to show the relative closeness of particular groupings of figures to Jesus . Given the size of the mourners in the foreground relative to the crucified figures , the soldiers and spectators gathered in the mid @-@ ground are far larger than a strict adherence to perspective would allow . In the Last Judgement the damned are placed in hell in the lower mid @-@ ground while the saints and angels are positioned higher in the upper foreground . Pächt writes of this panel that the scene is " assimilated into a single spatial cosmos " , with the archangel acting as a divider in the pictorial space between heaven and hell . 
 Art historians are unsure as to whether the panels were meant to be a diptych or a triptych . They may have formed the outer wings of a triptych , with a since @-@ lost panel representing the Adoration of the Magi at the centre , or , as the German art historian J.D. Passavant speculated in 1841 , the lost centre panel may have been a Nativity . It is now thought unlikely that a lost panel could be the postulated original companion to the outer wings ; such a coupling would have been very odd to painters of the 1420s and 1430s . It has also been proposed that a central piece was added later , or as Albert Châtelet writes , the central panel may have been stolen . Art historian Erwin Panofsky believed the Crucifixion and Last Judgement panels were intended as a diptych . He argued that it would have been unusual for mere outer wings to have been given the " sumptuous treatment " afforded these two panels . This approach is reminiscent of the medieval reliquaries . Others have observed that triptychs were usually much larger works intended for public display , and they tended towards gilded and heavily inscribed frames ; typically only the central panel would have been as lavishly decorated as these panels . Contemporary diptychs , in contrast , were usually produced for private devotion and were typically <unk> . There is no documentary evidence for an original central panel , however , and technical examination suggests the two works were intended as wings of a diptych , then an emerging format . Pächt believes there is not enough evidence to determine whether a third panel existed . 
 = = The diptych = = 
 = = = Crucifixion panel = = = 
 The Crucifixion panel comprises three horizontal planes , each representing different moments from the Passion . The upper third shows the crucifixion before a view of Jerusalem ; the lower two thirds detail the crowds and Jesus ' followers at Golgotha ( Place of the Skull ) . Located outside the city walls amongst rock tombs and gardens , in the first century Golgotha was Jerusalem 's place of execution , and the visible patches of hill highlight the area 's " stony , forbidding , and lifeless " nature . The atmosphere of bleakness is reinforced by the random figures in the upper ground that scramble for a better view . The gospels tell of Jesus ' followers and relatives , as well as his prosecutors and assorted spectators , attending the crucifixion at Golgotha . In van Eyck 's panel the former are represented in the foreground , while the latter , including High Priests and Temple Elders , are shown in the mid @-@ ground . 
 The centre foreground shows a group of five mourners , with three other figures set to the right and left . In the center group , John the Evangelist supports the Virgin Mary , surrounded by three women . Mary 's dramatic swoon in grief pushes her forward in the pictorial space , and according to Smith , places her " closest to the viewer 's presumed position " . Dressed in an enveloping blue robe that hides most of her face , she collapses and is caught by John , who supports her by her arms . Mary Magdalene kneels to the right , dressed in a white @-@ trimmed green robe and red sleeves . Raising her arms aloft , she <unk> her fingers in a distraught , agonised manner . She is the only figure from this group shown to look directly at Christ and serves as one of the key painterly devices to direct the viewer 's gaze upwards towards the crosses . The fourth and fifth mourners have been identified as prophesying <unk> , and stand to the far left and right of the centre group . The sibyl to the left faces the cross with her back to the viewer while the turbaned mourner on the right faces the group and is either the Erythraean or the Cumaean sibyl , both of whom are attributed in Christian tradition with warning the occupying Romans of the cult of redemption that would develop around Christ 's death and resurrection . She has an almost indifferent expression that has been interpreted both as satisfaction at seeing her prophesies realised , and as compassionate contemplation of the other women 's grief . 
 The mid @-@ ground shows a crowd scene above the group of mourners , separated by two soldiers who stand between the two groupings . The mourners from the foreground are reflected in the shield carried on the hip of the lance @-@ bearing Roman soldier who leans on the man to his right wearing a red turban . Smith believes this serves to highlight the mourners ' emotional and physical separation from the assorted figures gathered in the mid @-@ ground . Art historian Adam <unk> sees these two figures , positioned full @-@ length between the chief mourners and mid @-@ ground spectators , as a pictorial device that along with the Magdalene 's upward gaze draws viewers ' eyes upwards through the panel 's dramatic sequence . 
 Van Eyck 's depiction lays particular emphasis on the <unk> and indifference of the crowd witnessing Christ 's suffering . They comprise a mixture of Roman legionaries , judges and various hangers @-@ on arriving to witness the spectacle . A number are dressed in rich , brightly coloured clothes , a mixture of oriental and northern European styles , while several are mounted on horseback . Some openly jeer and taunt the condemned , others gape stupefied at " just another " execution , while others talk amongst themselves . The exception is the armoured centurion , seated on a white horse at the extreme right edge of the panel , who looks up at Christ , arms spread wide , head thrown back , at " the very moment of his illumination " in recognition of Christ 's divinity . The horsemen closely resemble both the Soldiers of Christ and Righteous Judges from the lower inner panels of van Eyck 's c . 1432 Ghent Altarpiece . Art historian Till @-@ Holger Borchert observes that these figures are given " greater dynamism by being seen in rear rather than profile view " , and that this vantage point draws the observer 's eye upwards towards the mid @-@ ground and the crucifixion . 
 Van Eyck extends the height of the crosses to an unrealistic degree to allow the crucifixion to dominate the upper third of the panel . Christ faces the viewer directly , while the crosses of the two thieves are set at angles to either side . The thieves are each bound with cords of rope rather than nails . The body of the thief to the right — the repentant thief mentioned in the Gospel of Luke — is lifeless . The " bad " thief to his left is dying twisted in pain , and according to art historian James W.H. Weale , depicted as " struggling desperately , but in vain " . Both men 's hands have turned black from a lack of blood flow . A placard prepared by Pilate or Roman soldiers placed above Jesus ' head reads " Jesus of Nazareth , King of the Jews " in Hebrew , Latin and Greek . 
 The panel captures the instant of Christ 's death , traditionally the moment after the breaking of the thieves ' legs ( although this is not depicted ) . Christ is naked except for a transparent veil , with some of his pubic hair visible . His hands and feet are nailed to the timber ; the blood from the nail holding his feet to the cross stains its wooden base . His arms strain under the weight of his upper body , and in his final agony , his jaw has fallen slack ; his mouth is open with his teeth exposed in the grimace of death . In the mid @-@ ground , at the base of the cross , Longinus , on horseback , wearing a fur @-@ trimmed hat and green tunic , guided by an assistant , stretches to pierce Jesus ' side with a lance , as deep @-@ red blood pours from the wound . To the right of Longinus , a mostly obscured <unk> holds high a sponge soaked with vinegar on the tip of a reed . 
 The first generation of Early Netherlandish painters did not usually pay much attention to landscape backgrounds . They were often included , showing strong influence from the Italian painters , but typically as minor elements of the composition , seen in the far distance and lacking any real observation of nature . This diptych , however , contains one of the most memorable landscape backgrounds in Northern 15th @-@ century art . The panoramic view of Jerusalem extends upwards in the distance to the mountainous peaked range in the background . The sky , which continues to the upper part of the right hand panel , is rendered in deep blues and lined with cumulus clouds . These clouds are similar to those in the Ghent Altarpiece and , as in that work , are included to give depth to and enliven the background <unk> . The sky seems to have just darkened , in keeping with the idea that the panel captures the moment of Jesus ' death . Faint cirrus clouds can be seen in the far high @-@ ground , with the presence of the sun is suggested by a shadow falling on the top left area of the panel . 
 = = = Last Judgement panel = = = 
 The right hand wing , as with the Crucifixion wing , is divided horizontally into three areas . Here they represent , from top to bottom heaven , earth and hell . Heaven contains a traditional Great Deësis with clergy and laity ; earth , in the mid @-@ ground , is dominated by the figures of Archangel Michael and a personification of Death ; while in the lower ground the damned fall into hell , where they are tortured and eaten by beasts . Describing the hell passage , art historian Bryson Burroughs writes that " the diabolical inventions of Bosch and Brueghel are children 's boggy lands compared to the horrors of the hell [ van Eyck ] has imagined . " 
 Pächt compares the scene to a medieval bestiary , comprising a " whole fauna of zoomorphic fiends " . Van Eyck 's hell is inhabited by demonic monsters whose only visible features are often " their glittering eyes and the white of their fangs " . The sinners fall head first into their torment , at the mercy of devils taking recognisable forms such as rats , snakes and pigs , as well as a bear and a donkey . <unk> , van Eyck shows kings and members of the clergy among those condemned to hell . 
 The earth is represented by the narrow area between heaven and hell . The passage shows the resurrection of the dead as the fires of the last day rage . The dead rise from their graves to the left and from the stormy sea to the right . The Archangel Michael stands on death 's shoulders , the largest figure in the painting , whose body and wings span the entire pictorial space . Michael wears jewel @-@ studded golden armour and has curly blond hair and multicoloured wings similar to those seen in the donor panel of van Eyck 's 1437 Dresden Triptych of the Virgin and Child . Michael appears , according to Smith , " like a giant on the earth , whose crust is revealed to be the wings of the skeletal figure of Death . The damned are excreted though Death 's bowels into the dark slime of hell . " The bat @-@ like death figure , with skull extruding up to earth and skeletal arms and legs reaching down into hell , is the protagonist of the narrative according to Pächt , but death is vanquished by the slim and youthful looking archangel standing between the horrors of hell and the promise of heaven . 
 The upper portion of the panel shows the second coming as recorded in Matthew 25 : 31 : " But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the holy angels with him , then he will sit on the throne of his glory . " Christ , who was naked , frail and almost lifeless in the Crucifixion panel , is now resurrected and triumphant in heaven . He is dressed in a long red mantle and is barefoot . His hands and feet are surrounded by circles of yellow light . The Holy Wounds are visible on his palms held open ; the puncture mark left by Longinus ' spear is visible on his side through the opening in his robe , as are the nail holes on his feet . 
 Christ is seated at the centre of a large array of angels , saints and holy elders . According to Pächt , in this scene in heaven that " all is sweetness , gentleness and order . " Mary and John the Baptist kneel in prayer to his immediate right and left . Both have halos and are rendered at a far larger scale than the surrounding figures , over whom they seem to tower . Mary holds her right hand at her breast , while her left is raised as if to ask for mercy for the smaller naked figures sheltered by her cloak , evoking the conventional pose of the Virgin of Mercy . A choir of virgins gather directly under Christ 's feet . They face outwards towards the viewer and sing Christ 's praise . 
 Headed by Saint Peter , the Apostles are dressed in white robes and sit on two facing benches set below Christ and to the right and left of the choir of virgins . Two angels attend to the groups gathered at each side of the benches . A further two angels are positioned immediately above Christ . They hold his cross and are dressed in white <unk> and <unk> , with the right hand angel wearing an outer blue <unk> vestment . They are flanked on either side by angels playing long wind instruments , probably trumpets . The two angels on either side of Christ bear the symbols of the crucifixion already represented on the left hand panel . The angel on the left holds a lance and crown of thorns , the angel on the right a sponge and nails . 
 Van Eyck was a central influence on Petrus Christus and the younger painter is thought to have studied the panels while they were still in van Eyck 's workshop . He made a much larger and adapted paraphrase of the panel in 1452 , as part of a monumental altarpiece , now in Berlin . Although there are significant differences between the two works , the influence of van Eyck on Christus ' work is most evident in the vertical , narrow format and in the central figure of Saint Michael , who also divides the scene between heaven and hell . 
 = = = Iconography = = = 
 Art historian John Ward highlights the rich and complex iconography and symbolic meaning van Eyck employed to bring attention to what he saw as the co @-@ existence of the spiritual and material worlds . In his paintings , iconographical features are typically subtly woven into the work , as " relatively small , in the background , or in the shadow [ details ] " . The significance of the imagery is often so densely and intricately layered that a work has to be viewed multiple times before even the most obvious meanings become apparent . According to Ward , the iconographical elements are commonly positioned " initially to overlook , and eventually to discover " . Writing about the Last Judgement panel , Burroughs notes that " each of its several scenes requires attention for itself alone . " According to Ward , van Eyck forces the viewer to search for the meaning in the iconography , creating a multi @-@ layered surface which rewards the attentive viewer with deeper understanding of both the painting and its symbols . Much of van Eyck 's iconography intends to convey the idea of " the promised passage from sin and death to salvation and rebirth " . 
 = = = Inscriptions = = = 
 Both the frames and pictorial areas of the diptych are heavily inscribed with lettering and phrases in Latin , Greek and Hebrew . Van Eyck 's early works display a predilection for inscriptions , which serve a dual purpose . They are decorative while also functioning in a manner similar to the commentaries often seen on the margins of medieval manuscripts which set in context the significance of the accompanying imagery . Diptychs were usually commissioned for private devotion , and van Eyck would have expected the viewer to contemplate text and imagery in unison . 
 In this work , the inscriptions are in Roman capitals or Gothic miniature , and in some places seem to contain misspellings , making interpretation difficult . Its gold @-@ lined frame and Latin inscriptions , with their subtle references to various passages in the two panels , indicate that the donor was wealthy and educated . The sides of each frame are lined with inscriptions from the Book of Isaiah ( 53 : 6 – 9 , 12 ) , Revelations ( 20 : 13 , 21 : 3 – 4 ) or the Book of Deuteronomy ( 32 : 23 – 24 ) . In the right hand panel , the wings of the figure of death contain Latin inscriptions on either side ; on the left are the words CHAOS <unk> ( " great chaos " ) , with <unk> <unk> ( " shadow of death " ) inscribed to the right . A warning from Matthew 25 : 41 is written on both sides of death 's head and wings , and extends from earth down into the hell section . It reads , <unk> vos <unk> in <unk> <unk> ( " Go , ye cursed , into everlasting fire " ) . In this way , van Eyck dramatically aligns the biblical extract in diagonal dual beams of light seemingly hurled from the heavens . Also in the section are letters reading ME <unk> . 
 In the mid @-@ ground , the Archangel Michael 's armour is heavily inscribed with esoteric and often difficult to source phrases . Letters on his breast plate read <unk> ( X ) while his jewel @-@ encrusted oval buckler displays the cross and is decorated with Greek script reading <unk> <unk> AGLA . The meaning of this phrase has not been conclusively identified ; some art historians believe it contains misspellings and has been misread . Friedländer transcribed the first word as <unk> while the final word AGLA is thought be taken from the first four letters of the Hebrew words for " Thou Art Mighty " , and thus may signify God ; the word also appears in a floor tile in the Ghent Altarpiece . In the upper portion , gilded inscriptions running vertically across the edges of Christ 's mantle read <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Come , ye blessed of my father " ) . 
 = = Attribution and dating = = 
 Over the years the panels have been attributed to both Jan and Hubert van Eyck as well as Petrus Christus . In 1841 , Passavant attributed the diptych jointly to Hubert and Jan van Eyck ; by 1853 , he had revised his opinion and gave attribution exclusively to Jan. Gustav Waagen , the first director of the Gemäldegalerie , Berlin , attributed them to Petrus Christus in the mid 19th @-@ century , based on the left hand panel 's similarity in composition to a 1452 Last Judgement signed by Christus now in Berlin . This view was rejected in 1887 , and they once more became associated with Jan. The panels came into the possession of the Hermitage Gallery in 1917 , credited to Jan. 
 Bryson Burroughs , writing for the Metropolitan at the time of their acquisition in 1933 , attributed the works to Hubert . Burroughs saw in the panels the hand of an expressive artist , " all nerves and sensibilities " , overcome with sympathy for the plight of the central figures in the panels , but who was nonetheless weak in drawing line . This profile , he believed , was incompatible with the aloof and impassive master craftsman Jan is known to have been . Yet Burroughs acknowledged there was " no certain documented proof for the attribution [ to Hubert ] . " He admitted his evidence was " limited , inevitably incomplete " , and thus " circumstantial and presumptive " . More recent scholarship tends to agree Jan painted the panels based on the evidence that they are stylistically closer to Jan than Hubert , who died in 1426 ; and that Jan , who travelled across the Alps to Italy that year , painted the mountain range . 
 The paintings have often been compared to the seven pages of the Turin @-@ Milan Hours illuminated manuscript attributed to the unidentified artist " Hand G " , generally thought to have been Jan van Eyck . The closeness is seen to lie both in the miniaturist technique and the particular painterly style . The similarity of a Turin drawing of the crucified Christ to the figure in the New York diptych has led some art historians to conclude they were , at least , painted near the same time , during the 1420s and early 1430s . Most believe both the drawing and diptych panel at least originated from a prototype designed by Jan van Eyck . Panofsky attributed the New York panels to " Hand G " . When the Turin @-@ Milan Hours miniatures were discovered they were at first believed to have been painted before the Duke of Berry 's death in 1416 , an idea that was quickly rejected with the date extended to sometime in the early 1430s . 
 Pächt writes of the diptych that it reflects the " personal style and unique scenic imagination " of " Hand G " ( whom he believed to be either Hubert or Jan ) . Until Hans Belting and Dagmar Eichberger 's 1983 Jan van Eyck als <unk> , academics tended to focus exclusively on the diptych 's dating and attribution , with little attention paid to its source influences and iconography . Borchert estimates a completion of c . 1440 , while Paul Durrieu suggests a dating as early as 1413 . In 1983 , Belting and Eichberger suggested a date of c . 1430 based on specific characteristics of the work : the " birds @-@ eye view " perspective and horizon , the densely packed figures and , especially , a pictorial narrative that moves logically across the areas of the image in the Crucifixion panel . Belting and Eichberger believe this style was employed during the early panel works , but was largely abandoned by the 1430s . 
 The 1430s dating is supported by the style of the underdrawing , which is consistent with known signed works by van Eyck from that time . In addition , the figures are dressed in clothes fashionable in the 1420s with the exception of one of the possible donors , tentatively identified as Margaret of Bavaria , who is depicted as the <unk> standing in the right foreground of the crucifixion panel and wears clothes in style in the early 1430s . 
 The upper portions of the Last Judgement panel are generally considered as the work of a weaker painter with a less individual style . It is thought that van Eyck left the panels unfinished with completed underdrawings , and the area was finished by workshop members or by followers after he died . Maryan Ainsworth of the Metropolitan takes a different view . She highlights the close relationship known to have existed between contemporary workshops in the Low Countries and France , and speculates that a French miniaturist or illuminator , perhaps from the workshop of the Bedford Master , travelled to Bruges to assist van Eyck on the right hand panel . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Nothing is known of the work 's provenance before the 1840s . Given the panels ' diminutive size — which is typical of early diptychs — it seems probable that the work was commissioned for private rather than public devotion . The notion of a well @-@ educated patron , with knowledge of and appreciation for the art of earlier centuries , is reinforced by both the classical language inscriptions and the abundant detail found across all areas of the panels . 
 Writing in 1841 in the journal <unk> , Passavant gave an account of how the panels were bought at auction from either a Spanish monastery or convent . The Russian diplomat Dmitry Tatishchev acquired the panels , possibly from a Spanish convent or monastery near Madrid or Burgos , while living in Spain between 1814 and 1821 . Tatishchev left his pictures to Tsar Nicholas I in 1845 , and they came into the possession of the Hermitage Gallery in Saint Petersburg in 1917 . 
 The panels were included in the Soviet sale of Hermitage paintings , which included another important van Eyck work , the 1434 – 1436 Annunciation . They were purchased by Charles Henschel of New York art dealer M. Knoedler & Company for $ 185 @,@ 000 , significantly less than the asking price of $ 600 @,@ 000 when the works were offered in 1931 . The panels were shipped from Saint Petersburg to the Matthiesen Gallery in Berlin before M. Knoedler & Company sold them on to the Metropolitan in New York that year . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Left panel = = = 
 = = = Right panel = = = 
 = Mac Pro = 
 The Mac Pro line is a series of Intel Xeon – based workstation and server computers manufactured by Apple Inc . The Mac Pro , in most configurations and in terms of speed and performance , is the most powerful computer that Apple offers . It is the high @-@ end model of the three desktop computers in the current Mac lineup , the other two being the iMac and Mac Mini . 
 The first @-@ generation Mac Pro has a rectangular tower case which outwardly resembles the last version of the Power Mac G5 , and has similar expansion capabilities . The first Mac Pro has dual Dual @-@ core Xeon <unk> processors . It was replaced by a dual Quad @-@ core Xeon <unk> model on April 4 , 2007 , and again on January 8 , 2008 by a dual Quad @-@ core Xeon <unk> model . The 2012 Mac Pro is largely based on a model that was announced on July 27 , 2010 . It features Nehalem / <unk> architecture Intel Xeon processors . These CPUs offer optionally twelve processing cores . The machine itself at its most evolved is able to accommodate up to four 2 TB hard disk drives or 512 GB solid state drives , as well as the ATI Radeon HD <unk> / <unk> GPU units , one per slot . 
 The second @-@ generation design of Mac Pro was announced at the 2013 Apple Worldwide Developers Conference ( WWDC ) opening keynote on June 10 , 2013 . Apple states that the new Mac Pro achieves twice the overall performance of the last model . The redesigned Mac Pro takes up less than one eighth the volume of immediately previous model , being shorter ( 9 @.@ 9 inches ( 25 cm ) ) , thinner ( 6 @.@ 6 inches ( 17 cm ) ) and less massive ( 11 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 kg ) ) . The machine supports one central processing unit ( CPU ) ( up to a 12 @-@ core Xeon E5 CPU ) , four 1866 MHz DDR3 slots , dual AMD <unk> D series GPUs ( up to <unk> with 6 GB <unk> each ) , and PCIe @-@ based flash storage . There is updated wireless communication and support for six displays . Reviews have been generally positive , with caveats . 
 = = 1st generation = = 
 Apple stated that an Intel @-@ based replacement for the PowerPC @-@ based Power Mac G5 machines had been expected for some time before the Mac Pro was formally announced on August 7 , 2006 at the annual Apple Worldwide Developers Conference ( WWDC ) . The iMac , Mac Mini , MacBook , and MacBook Pro had moved to an Intel @-@ based architecture starting in January 2006 , leaving the Power Mac G5 as the only machine in the Mac lineup still based on the PowerPC processor architecture Apple had used since 1993 . Apple had dropped the term " Power " from the other machines in their lineup , and started using " Pro " on their higher @-@ end laptop offerings . As such , the name " Mac Pro " was widely used before the machine was announced . The Mac Pro is in the Unix workstation market . Although the high @-@ end technical market has not traditionally been an area of strength for Apple , the company has been positioning itself as a leader in non @-@ linear digital editing for high @-@ definition video , which demands storage and memory far in excess of a general desktop machine . Additionally , the codecs used in these applications are generally processor intensive and highly <unk> , which Apple 's <unk> whitepaper describes as scaling almost linearly with additional processor cores . Apple 's previous machine aimed at this market , the Power Mac G5 , has up to two dual @-@ core processors ( marketed as " Quad @-@ Core " ) , but lacks the storage expansion capabilities of the newer design . 
 Original marketing materials for the Mac Pro generally referred to the middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line model with 2 × dual @-@ core 2 @.@ 66 GHz processors . Previously , Apple featured the base model with the words " starting at " or " from " when describing the pricing , but the online US Apple Store listed the " Mac Pro at $ 2499 " , the price for the mid @-@ range model . The system could be configured at US $ <unk> , much more comparable with the former base @-@ model dual @-@ core G5 at US $ 1999 , although offering considerably more processing power . Post revision , the default configurations for the Mac Pro includes one quad @-@ core Xeon 3500 at 2 @.@ 66 GHz or two quad @-@ core Xeon <unk> at 2 @.@ 26 GHz each . Like its predecessor , the Power Mac G5 , the pre @-@ 2013 Mac Pro was Apple 's only desktop with standard expansion slots for graphics adapters and other expansion cards . 
 Apple received criticism after an incremental upgrade to the Mac Pro line following the 2012 WWDC . The line received more default memory and increased processor speed but still used Intel 's older <unk> @-@ EP processors instead of the newer E5 series . The line also lacked then @-@ current technologies like SATA III , USB 3 , and Thunderbolt , the last of which had been added to every other Macintosh at that point . An email from Apple CEO Tim Cook promised a more significant update to the line in 2013 . Apple stopped shipping the first @-@ generation Mac Pro in Europe on March 1 , 2013 after an amendment to a safety regulation left the professional Mac non @-@ compliant . The last day to order was February 18 , 2013 . The first generation Mac Pro was removed from Apple 's online store following unveiling of the redesigned second generation Mac Pro at a media event on October 22 , 2013 . 
 = = = CPU = = = 
 The 2010 and later Mac Pro systems were available with one or two central processing units ( CPU ) with options giving four , six , eight , or twelve cores . As an example , the eight core standard configuration Mac Pro uses two Quad core × 8 Intel <unk> Xeon CPUs at 2 @.@ 4 GHz , but could be configured with two <unk> Core Intel Xeon <unk> CPUs at 2 @.@ 93 GHz . Since the CPUs are socketed , the CPUs can be removed and replaced with compatible 64 @-@ bit Intel Xeon CPUs . 
 = = = Memory = = = 
 The original Mac Pro 's main memory uses 667 MHz DDR2 ECC FB @-@ DIMMs ; the early 2008 model uses 800 MHz ECC DDR2 FB @-@ <unk> , the 2009 and onward Mac Pro use 1066 MHz DDR3 ECC DIMMs for the standard models , and 1333 MHz DDR3 ECC DIMMs for systems configured with 2 @.@ 66 GHz or faster CPUs . In the original and 2008 models , these modules are installed in pairs , one each on two riser cards . The cards have 4 DIMM slots each , allowing a total of 32 GB of memory ( 8 × 4 GB ) to be installed . Notably , due to its FB @-@ DIMM architecture , installing more RAM in the Mac Pro will improve its memory bandwidth , but may also increase its memory latency . With a simple installation of a single FB @-@ DIMM , the peak bandwidth is 8 GB / s , but this can increase to 16 GB / s by installing two FB @-@ DIMMs , one on each of the two buses , which is the default configuration from Apple . While electrically the FB @-@ DIMMs are standard , for pre @-@ 2009 Mac Pro models Apple specifies larger @-@ than @-@ normal heatsinks on the memory modules . Problems have been reported by users who have used third party RAM with normal size FB @-@ DIMM heatsinks . ( see notes below ) . 2009 and later Mac Pro computers do not require memory modules with heatsinks . 
 = = = Hard drives = = = 
 The Mac Pro had room for four internal 3 @.@ 5 " SATA @-@ 300 hard drives in four internal " bays " . The hard drives were mounted on individual trays ( also known as " sleds " ) by captive screws . A set of four drive trays was supplied with each machine . Adding hard drives to the system did not require cables to be attached as the drive was connected to the system simply by being inserted into the corresponding drive slot . A case lock on the back of the system locked the disks trays into their positions . The Mac Pro also supported Serial ATA solid @-@ state drives ( SSD ) in the 4 hard drive bays via an SSD @-@ to @-@ hard drive sled adapter ( mid @-@ 2010 models and later ) , and by third @-@ party solutions for earlier models ( e.g. , by an adapter / bracket which plugged into an unused PCIe slot ) . Various 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch SSD drive capacities and configurations were available as options . The Mac Pro was also available with an optional hardware RAID card . With the addition of a SAS controller card or SAS RAID controller card , SAS drives could be directly connected to the system 's SATA ports . Two optical drive bays were provided , each with a corresponding SATA port and an Ultra ATA / 100 port . The Mac Pro had one PATA port and could support two PATA devices in the optical drive bays . It had a total of six SATA ports – four were connected to the system 's drive bays , and two were not connected . The extra SATA ports could be put into service through the use of after @-@ market extender cables to connect internal optical drives , or to provide <unk> ports with the use of an <unk> bulkhead connector . However , the two extra SATA ports were unsupported and disabled under Boot Camp . A built @-@ to @-@ order Mac Pro could be configured with up to 8 TB of storage ( 4 × 2 TB disks ) or 2 TB ( 4 × 512 GB SSD ) . 
 = = = Expansion cards = = = 
 The 2008 model had two PCI Express ( PCIe ) 2 @.@ 0 expansion slots and two PCI Express 1 @.@ 1 slots , providing them with up to 300 W of power in total . The first slot was double wide and intended to hold the main video card , arranged with an empty area the width of a normal card beside it to leave room for the large coolers modern cards often use . In most machines , one slot would be blocked by the cooler . Instead of the tiny screws typically used to fasten the cards to the case , in the Mac Pro a single " bar " held the cards in place , which is itself held in place by two " captive " thumbscrews that can be loosened by hand without tools and will not fall out of the case . On the original Mac Pro introduced in August 2006 , the PCIe slots can be configured individually to give more bandwidth to devices that require it , with a total of 40 " lanes " , or 13 GB / s total throughput . When running Mac OS X , the Mac Pro did not support SLI or ATI CrossFire , limiting its ability to use the latest " high @-@ end gaming " video card products ; however , individuals have reported success with both CrossFire and SLI installations when running Windows XP , as SLI and CrossFire compatibility is largely a function of software . The bandwidth allocation of the PCIe slots can be configured via the Expansion Slot Utility included with Mac OS X only on the August 2006 Mac Pro . The Early @-@ 2008 and later Mac Pros had PCIe slots hardwired as follows : 
 = = = External connectivity = = = 
 For external connectivity , the Mac Pro included five USB 2 @.@ 0 ports , two FireWire 400 and two FireWire 800 ( Late 2006 until Early 2008 ) , respectively four FireWire 800 ( Early 2009 until Mid 2012 ) ports . Networking was supported with two built @-@ in Gigabit Ethernet ports . 802 @.@ 11 a / b / g / n Wi @-@ Fi support ( AirPort Extreme ) required an optional module in the Mid 2006 , Early 2008 and Early 2009 models , whereas in the 2010 model and later Wi @-@ Fi was standard . Bluetooth also required an optional module in the Mid 2006 model , but was standard in the Early 2008 and newer models . Displays were supported by one or ( optionally ) more PCIe graphics cards . More recent cards featured two Mini DisplayPort connectors and one dual @-@ link Digital Visual Interface ( DVI ) port , with various configurations of on @-@ card graphics memory available . Digital ( <unk> optical ) audio and analog 3 @.@ 5 mm stereo mini jacks for sound in and out were included , the latter becoming available on both the front and back of the case . Unlike other Mac computers , the Mac Pro did not include an infrared receiver ( required to use the Apple Remote ) . In Mac OS X Leopard , Front Row could be accessed on the Mac Pro ( and other Macs ) using the Command ( <unk> ) <unk> keystroke . 
 = = = Case = = = 
 From 2006 through 2012 , the exterior of the Mac Pro 's aluminum case was very similar to that of the Power Mac G5 , with the exception of an additional optical drive bay , and a new arrangement of I / O ports on both the front and the back . The G5 has the added feature of plastic covering that protects the internal hardware . You can also remove the exterior covering to display the interior , as the plastic will keep everything inside protected . . The case could be opened by operating a single lever on the back , which unlocked one of the two sides of the machine , as well as the drive bays . All of the expansion slots for memory , PCIe cards and drives could be accessed with the side panel removed and no tools were required for installation . The Xeon processors generated much less heat than the previous dual @-@ core <unk> , so the size of the internal cooling devices had been reduced significantly . This allowed the interior to be re @-@ arranged , leaving more room at the top of the case and doubling the number of internal drive bays . Less heat also meant less air to move out of the case for cooling during normal operations ; the Mac Pro was very quiet in normal operation , quieter than the much noisier Power Mac G5 , and proved difficult to measure using common sound pressure level meters . 
 = = = Operating systems = = = 
 The Mac Pro comes with EFI 1 @.@ 1 , a successor to Apple 's use of Open Firmware and the wider industry 's use of BIOS . 
 Apple 's Boot Camp provides BIOS backwards compatibility , allowing dual and triple boot configurations . These operating systems are <unk> on Intel x86 based Apple computers : 
 Mac OS X 10 @.@ 4 @.@ 7 and later 
 Microsoft Windows XP , Vista , and Windows 7 32 @-@ bit & 64 @-@ bit ( hardware drivers are included in Boot Camp ) 
 Other x86 operating systems such as Linux x86 , Solaris , and BSD 
 This is made possible by the presence of an x86 Intel architecture as provided by the CPU and the BIOS emulation which Apple has provided on top of EFI . Installing any additional operating system other than Windows is not supported directly by Apple . Though Apple 's Boot Camp drivers are only for Windows , it is often possible to achieve full or nearly full compatibility with another OS by using third @-@ party drivers . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Ars Technica reviewed the 2006 Mac Pro , rating it 9 out of 10 . 
 = = 2nd generation = = 
 Apple Senior Vice President of Marketing Phil Schiller presented a " sneak peek " of the completely redesigned Mac Pro during the 2013 Worldwide Developers Conference keynote . The video revealed an overhauled case design , a polished reflective aluminum cylinder built around a central thermal dissipation core and vented by a single fan , which pulls air from under the case , through the core , and out the top of the case . Apple states that the second generation Mac Pro achieves twice the performance of the last model . The model is assembled in Austin , Texas , on a highly automated line . Apple released the new Mac Pro on December 19 , 2013 . 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The redesigned Mac Pro occupies less than one eighth the volume of immediately previous model , being shorter ( 9 @.@ 9 inches ( 25 cm ) ) , thinner ( 6 @.@ 6 inches ( 17 cm ) ) and lighter ( 11 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 kg ) ) . It supports one central processing unit ( CPU ) ( up to a 12 @-@ core Xeon E5 CPU ) , four 1866 MHz DDR3 slots , dual AMD <unk> D series GPUs ( up to <unk> with 6 GB <unk> each ) , and PCIe @-@ based flash storage . There is a 3x <unk> antenna system for the unit 's 802.11ac WiFi networking interface , Bluetooth 4 @.@ 0 to facilitate close @-@ range wireless functions such as music transfer , keyboards , mice , tablets , speakers , security , cameras , and printers . The system can simultaneously support six Apple Thunderbolt Displays , or three 4K resolution computer monitors . 
 The second generation Mac Pro has a redesigned configuration of ports . It has a HDMI 1 @.@ 4 port , dual Gigabit Ethernet ports , six Thunderbolt 2 ports , four USB 3 ports , and combined digital Mini @-@ <unk> optical / analog 3 @.@ 5 mm stereo mini jack for sound out , as well as a dedicated headphones mini jack ( the two are distinctly selectable within the Sound System Preference panel , Output tab ) . There is no Sound in port ; the system has a low @-@ fidelity internal mono speaker . The Thunderbolt 2 ports support up to thirty @-@ six Thunderbolt devices ( six per port ) and can support up to three simultaneous 4K displays . This design requires two GPUs to support the seven display outputs ( HDMI and six Thunderbolt ) . The I / O panel is illuminated when the unit senses it has been moved to make it easier for the user to see the ports . Unlike the previous model , it has no FireWire 800 ports , dedicated digital audio in / out ports , a SuperDrive , DVI port , 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch drive bays for replaceable storage drives , or changeable internal PCIe slots . Instead , there are six Thunderbolt 2 ports to connect high @-@ speed external peripherals , including enclosures for internal PCIe cards . 
 Apple 's website mentions only RAM as user @-@ serviceable , though third party tear @-@ downs show nearly all components can be removed and replaced . A lock switch on the aluminum casing allows for easy access to the internals , as well as fitting a security lock with its own cable , and components are secured with standard screws . The flash storage and GPUs use proprietary connectors and are specially sized to fit into the enclosure . Unlike the rest of the Macintosh line the CPU is not soldered to the logic board and can be replaced with another LGA 2011 socket processor , including processor options not offered by Apple . The type of RAM modules that Apple supplies with the late @-@ 2013 Mac Pro are either ECC unbuffered ( <unk> ) on the up to 8 GB modules ( shown on each module as <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . The optional 16 GB modules are ECC registered ( RDIMM ) modules ( shown on each module as <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . The higher @-@ capacity 32 GB modules that some third @-@ party vendors offer are also RDIMM . The <unk> and RDIMM module types cannot be mixed . Apple publishes recommended configurations to use . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Reception of the new design has been generally positive , at times with caveats . The performance has been widely lauded , especially handling video tasks on the dual GPU units , with some reviewers noting the ability to apply dozens of filters to realtime 4K resolution video in Final Cut Pro X. Drive performance , connected via PCIe , is also widely mentioned as a strong point . Technical reviewers praised the OpenCL API under which the machine 's powerful twin GPUs and its multi @-@ core CPU can be treated as a single pool of computing power . However , in late 2013 through early 2014 , some reviewers have noted the lack of internal expandability , second CPU , serviceability , and questioned the then @-@ limited offerings via Thunderbolt 2 ports . 
 = = Mac Pro Server = = 
 On November 5 , 2010 , Apple introduced the Mac Pro Server , which officially replaced the <unk> line of Apple servers as of January 31 , 2011 . The Mac Pro Server includes an unlimited Mac OS X Server license and an Intel Xeon 2 @.@ 8 GHz Quad @-@ Core processor , with 8 GB of DDR3 RAM . In mid @-@ 2012 , the Mac Pro Server was upgraded to an Intel Xeon 3 @.@ 2 GHz Quad @-@ Core processor . The Mac Pro Server was discontinued on October 22 , 2013 , with the introduction of the second @-@ generation Mac Pro . However , the OS X Server software package can be purchased from the Mac App Store . 
 = 1976 UEFA Cup Final = 
 The 1976 UEFA Cup Final were association football matches played over two @-@ legs between Liverpool of England and Club Brugge of Belgium on 28 April 1976 and 19 May 1976 at Anfield , Liverpool and the Olympiastadion , Brugge . It was the final of the 1975 – 76 season of Europe 's secondary cup competition , the UEFA Cup . Liverpool were appearing in their second final ; they had won the competition in 1973 . Brugge were appearing in their first European final and were the first Belgian team to reach the final of a European competition . 
 Each club needed to progress through five rounds to reach the final . Matches were contested over two legs , with one at each team 's home ground . Liverpool 's ties varied from comfortable victories to close affairs . They beat Spanish team Real Sociedad 9 – 1 on aggregate in the second round , while they beat Spanish team Barcelona 2 – 1 in the semi @-@ finals . The majority of Brugge 's ties were close . Their biggest margin of victory was by two goals , which occurred in both the first and third round against Lyon of France and Italian team Roma , respectively . 
 Watched by a crowd of 50 @,@ 188 at Anfield , Brugge took a two @-@ goal lead in the first half of the first leg when Raoul Lambert and Julien Cools scored . Liverpool recovered in the second half ; three goals in seven minutes from Ray Kennedy , Jimmy Case , and Kevin Keegan secured a 3 – 2 victory in the first leg for Liverpool . A crowd of 29 @,@ 423 at the Olympiastadion saw Brugge take the lead in the 11th minute of the second leg . Liverpool equalised four minutes later when Keegan scored . The scores remained the same throughout the remainder of the match , resulting in a 1 – 1 draw . Thus , Liverpool won the final 4 – 3 on aggregate to secure their second UEFA Cup . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
