 Liverpool qualified for the UEFA Cup by finishing as runners @-@ up in the 1974 – 75 Football League . Their opponents in the first round were Scottish team Hibernian . Liverpool lost the first leg at Hibernian 's home stadium Easter Road 1 – 0 , but recovered in the second leg at their home ground , Anfield , winning 3 – 1 courtesy of a John Toshack hat @-@ trick . They thus won the round 3 – 2 on aggregate . For the second round Liverpool were drawn against Spanish team Real Sociedad ; they won the first game 3 – 1 in Spain . A 6 – 0 victory in the second leg meant Liverpool won the tie 9 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Liverpool 's opponents in the third round were Śląsk Wrocław of Poland . The first leg at Wrocław 's home ground the Stadion <unk> was won 2 – 1 by Liverpool courtesy of goals from Ray Kennedy and Toshack . A Jimmy Case hat @-@ trick in the second leg at Anfield secured a 3 – 0 victory for Liverpool , which meant they progressed to the quarter @-@ finals with a 5 – 1 aggregate victory . Liverpool 's next opponents were East German team Dynamo Dresden . The first leg in East Germany ended in a 0 – 0 draw , after Liverpool goalkeeper Ray Clemence saved a penalty from Peter Kotte . A 2 – 1 victory in the second leg courtesy of goals from Case and Kevin Keegan meant Liverpool progressed to the semi @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 Spanish team Barcelona were the opposition in the semi @-@ finals . The first leg was held at Barcelona 's home ground the Camp Nou . Liverpool won the match 1 – 0 , after Toshack scored in the 13th minute . The second leg at Anfield saw Liverpool go ahead in the 50th minute when Phil Thompson scored . Barcelona equalised a minute later but were unable to score again before the final whistle . The match ended 1 – 1 ; Liverpool progressed to their second UEFA Cup final courtesy of their 2 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 = = = Club Brugge = = = 
 Club Brugge gained entry to the UEFA Cup by finishing fourth in the 1974 – 75 Belgian First Division . Lyon of France were the opposition in the first round . The first leg , at Lyon 's home ground Stade de Gerland , ended in a 4 – 3 defeat for Brugge . They won the second leg at their home stadium , the Olympiastadion , 3 – 0 to secure their place in the next round courtesy of a 6 – 3 aggregate victory . 
 Their opponents in the second round were English team Ipswich Town . The first leg , at Ipswich 's home ground Portman Road , was won 3 – 0 by the English team . Brugge needed to score at least three goals to have any chance of staying in the competition . They won the second leg 4 – 0 , to win the tie 4 – 3 on aggregate and progress to the third round . 
 Roma were the opposition in the third round . Brugge won the first leg in Belgium 1 – 0 courtesy of a Julien Cools goal . Another 1 – 0 in the second leg at Roma 's home ground , the Stadio Olimpico meant Brugge progressed to the quarter @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 0 aggregate victory . Brugge were drawn against another Italian team , Milan in the quarter @-@ finals . They won the first leg 2 – 0 in Belgium thanks to goals from Ulrik le Fevre and Eduard Krieger . Brugge lost the second leg 2 – 1 , at Milan 's home ground the San Siro , but still qualified for the semi @-@ finals as a result of a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 Brugge 's opposition in the semi @-@ finals were German team Hamburg . The first leg , at Hamburg 's home ground the <unk> , ended in a 1 – 1 draw . This gave the advantage to Brugge , as they had an away goal . A 1 – 0 victory in the second leg in Belgium secured a 2 – 1 aggregate victory , which meant Brugge progressed to their first European final . 
 = = Background = = 
 Liverpool were appearing in their second UEFA Cup final . They had previously won the competition in 1973 when they beat Borussia Mönchengladbach 3 – 2 . Club Brugge were appearing in their first European final and were the first Belgian team to reach the final of a European competition . The furthest they had progressed in previous European competitions was the quarter @-@ finals of the 1970 – 71 European Cup Winners ' Cup , where they were beaten by eventual winners Chelsea of England . 
 Liverpool had won the 1975 – 76 Football League between the first and second legs of the UEFA Cup Final ; a 3 – 1 victory over Wolverhampton Wanderers on the final day of the league season ensured they became champions . As a result of their league success , Liverpool qualified for the 1976 – 77 European Cup as English champions . Brugge had won the 1975 – 76 Belgian First Division ; they won the competition by four points from second @-@ place Anderlecht . Their success meant that they would also be competing in next season 's European Cup as Belgian champions . 
 = = First leg = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Brugge started the match the better of the two sides and took the lead in the 5th minute . A headed back @-@ pass by Phil Neal fell short of Liverpool goalkeeper Ray Clemence allowing Brugge midfielder Raoul Lambert to take control of the ball and lob it over Clemence and into the Liverpool goal . Seven minutes later Brugge extended their lead when Julien Cools scored . The Belgians kept attacking , but the Liverpool defence of Emlyn Hughes and Tommy Smith were able to repel the Belgians until half @-@ time . 
 Liverpool manager Bob Paisley decided that a change to his team had to be made during the interval . Paisley decided to replace striker John Toshack with midfielder Jimmy Case . The change made a difference as Case 's runs down the right hand side of the pitch unsettled the Belgians . The full effect came in the 59th minute when Liverpool scored ; Steve Heighway passed to Ray Kennedy who scored from 20 yards ( 18 m ) . Liverpool leveled the score two minutes later ; a shot from Kennedy rebounded off the post to Case who scored from close range . 
 Three minutes later Liverpool were ahead ; Heighway was upended in the penalty area , and Kevin Keegan scored the subsequent penalty to give Liverpool a 3 – 2 lead . Liverpool had chances to increase their lead afterwards , but failed to do so ; Brugge failed to score further as well . The final score when the referee blew for full @-@ time was 3 – 2 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Second leg = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Liverpool entered the second leg with a one @-@ goal lead , although Brugge needed to score only one clear goal to win the competition by virtue of the away goals rule . The Belgians scored the goal they needed in the 11th minute . Liverpool defender Smith was adjudged to have handled the ball in the Liverpool penalty area and Brugge were awarded a penalty kick . Lambert converted the opportunity to give Brugge a 1 – 0 lead and level the aggregate tie at 3 – 3 . Responding to the setback , Liverpool equalised four minutes later . They were awarded a free @-@ kick outside the Brugge penalty area . Hughes rolled the ball to Keegan whose right @-@ footed shot went into the Brugge goal to level the scores at 1 – 1 and give Liverpool a 4 – 3 aggregate lead . The goal incidentally was the first Brugge had conceded at home in the UEFA Cup all season . 
 Brugge needed to score again to keep the tie alive , and pushed their players forward in search of an equaliser . This forced Liverpool to pull all their players , except Keegan , into defensive positions to try to preserve their lead . Despite this Liverpool had a chance to take the lead in the 34th minute . Smith 's volley from a Kennedy free @-@ kick went wide of the Brugge goal . Brugge 's pressure almost paid off five minutes into the second half . Ulrik le Fevre and Roger van <unk> combined to split the Liverpool defence , leaving Lambert with the ball . His subsequent shot beat Liverpool goalkeeper Clemence but hit the post . Brugge kept attacking in an effort to find the goal they needed ; their best chance came four minutes from the end . Brugge breached the Liverpool defence , but Cools ' shot was denied by a diving save from Clemence . No more goals were scored ; the final score was 1 – 1 . 
 The second @-@ leg draw meant Liverpool won the tie , 4 – 3 on aggregate , to win their second UEFA Cup after their first victory in 1973 . They also completed a League and UEFA Cup double for a second time . Liverpool manager Bob Paisley was delighted with players after their performance in the second leg : " The second half was the longest 45 minutes of my life . There was an awful lot of pride in this game because we came representing England . We did not let the country down and we are proud of our lads . " 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = Friday Night Lights ( TV series ) = 
 Friday Night Lights is an American drama television series about a high school football team in the fictional town of Dillon , Texas . It was developed by Peter Berg and executive produced by Brian Grazer , David Nevins , Sarah Aubrey , and Jason Katims , based on the 1990 nonfiction book by H. G. Bissinger , adapted as the 2004 film of the same name . The series ' primary setting , Dillon , is a small , close @-@ knit community in rural Texas . Team coach Eric Taylor ( Kyle Chandler ) and his family , Tami , Julie , and Grace are featured . The show uses this small town backdrop to address many issues facing contemporary American culture , including family values , school funding , racism , drugs , abortion , and lack of economic opportunities . 
 Produced by NBCUniversal , Friday Night Lights premiered on October 3 , 2006 and aired for two seasons on NBC . Although the show had garnered critical acclaim and passionate fans , the series suffered low ratings and was in danger of cancellation after the second season . To save the series , NBC struck a deal with DirecTV to co @-@ produce three more seasons ; each subsequent season premiered on DirecTV 's 101 Network , with NBC rebroadcasts a few months later . The series ended its run on The 101 Network on February 9 , 2011 after five seasons . 
 Though Friday Night Lights never garnered a sizable audience , it was a critical success , lauded for its realistic portrayal of Middle America and deep exploration of its central characters . The show appeared on a number of best lists and was awarded a Peabody Award , a Humanitas Prize , a Television Critics Association Award , and several technical Primetime Emmy Awards . At the 2011 Primetime Emmy Awards , the show was nominated for Outstanding Drama Series . Kyle Chandler and Connie Britton also scored multiple nominations for the Outstanding Lead Actor and Actress awards for a drama series . Executive producer Jason Katims was nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . Chandler and Katims each won the Emmy in 2011 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 Friday Night Lights was inspired by H.G. " Buzz " Bissinger 's non @-@ fiction book Friday Night Lights : A Town , a Team , and a Dream ( 1990 ) and the 2004 film based on it . The book , which explores the 1988 season of the Permian Panthers , a high school football team in Odessa , Texas , was a factual work of documentary journalism . The people featured were not renamed in the book . The Universal Pictures film , which stars Billy Bob Thornton and was directed by Peter Berg , Bissinger 's second cousin , based its characters on the residents of Odessa c . 1988 . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Once filming on the movie was completed , Berg began to explore adapting the story for television . Berg later said that he had regretted having to jettison many of the interpersonal topics from the book because of the time constraints of a feature film . Creating a TV series , particularly one based on fictional characters , allowed him to address many of those elements in @-@ depth . 
 He decided to set the series in a fictional town of Dillon , Texas , with some characteristics of Odessa . The football team was given the Panthers name . Berg deliberately carried elements from the film to the series , particularly for the pilot , which was closely related to the film . He cast Connie Britton as the wife of Head Coach Eric Taylor and Brad Leland as Buddy Garrity , a major businessman and football booster , in roles similar to those they played in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 Filming for the show 's pilot began in February 2006 in Austin , Texas . Berg said that he required filming the pilot and eventually the show in Texas as " a deal breaker " in order to agree to participate weekly in the project . The show features homages to its Texas heritage . In the pilot , Berg featured Texas Longhorns football coach Mack Brown as a Dillon booster and had a caller to the fictional Panther Radio compare Panthers ' coach Eric Taylor to Brown . The pilot referred to much of the surrounding area in its scenes . Football scenes were filmed at Pflugerville High School 's <unk> Stadium and at the <unk> Complex . The Dillon Panther football team and coaches ' uniforms were based on the uniforms of the Pflugerville Panthers . Some of the scenes were filmed at Texas School for the Deaf . 
 Berg 's observation of local high school students while preparing to film the movie inspired his development of some of the characters . For example , Jason Street , the character whose promising football career is ended by a spinal injury in the pilot , was inspired by a local event . David Edwards , a football player from San Antonio ’ s Madison High , was paralyzed during a November 2003 game . Berg was at the game when this accident occurred ; he was profoundly affected by Edwards ' injury and how it overturned his life . Berg set up a similar incident in the pilot . 
 = = = Performances = = = 
 While relying on a script each week , the producers decided at the outset to allow the cast leeway in what they said and did on the show . Their decisions could affect the delivery of their lines and the blocking of each scene . If the actors felt that something was untrue to their character or a mode of delivery didn 't work , they were free to change it , provided they still hit the vital plot points . 
 This freedom was complemented by filming without rehearsal and without extensive blocking . Camera operators were trained to follow the actors , rather than having the actors stand in one place with cameras fixed around them . The actors knew that the filming would work around them . Executive producer Jeffrey Reiner described this method as " no rehearsal , no blocking , just three cameras and we shoot . " 
 Working in this fashion profoundly influenced everyone involved with the show . Series star Kyle Chandler said : " When I look back at my life , I 'm going to say , ' Wow , [ executive producer ] Peter Berg really changed my life . ' " Executive producer and head writer Jason Katims echoed this sentiment , saying : " When I first came on [ the FNL ] set , I thought , it ’ s interesting – this is what I imagined filmmaking would be , before I saw what filmmaking was . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 All five seasons of Friday Night Lights were filmed in Austin and Pflugerville . With the show yielding roughly $ 33 million a year in revenue , other states courted the production company after the State of Texas failed to pay all of the rebates it had promised to the show 's producers . The Texas legislature authorized funding to match the offers of other states , and the production company preferred to stay near Austin , so the show remained in Texas . 
 Friday Night Lights is unusual for using actual locations rather than stage sets and sound stage . These factors together with reliance on filming hundreds of locals as extras , gives the series an authentic feel and look . 
 The producers used a documentary @-@ style filming technique . Three cameras were used for each shoot and entire scenes were shot in one take . In contrast , most productions film a scene from each angle and typically repeat the scene several times while readjusting lighting to accommodate each shot . The first takes usually made the final cut . By filming a scene all at once , the producers tried to create an environment for the actors that was more organic and allowed for the best performances . 
 The series borrowed the uniforms , cheerleaders , fans , and stadium of the Pflugerville Panthers . Producers shot Pflugerville games and used them as game footage in the series . University of Southern California football announcers Peter Arbogast and Paul McDonald provided off @-@ screen commentary during the football game sequences . The facilities , colors , and bobcat logos of Texas State University in San Marcos , Texas were used as the setting and creative inspiration for the fictional Texas Methodist University . The show features the fictional ' Herrmann Field , ' named for George Herrmann , the head coach of the Pflugerville Panthers . 
 Some scenes were filmed outside Texas . On June 20 , 2010 , scenes were filmed at Temple University , which was to portray the fictional Braemore College . An episode from Julie 's senior year in high school was filmed in the Boston area , at Boston College , Boston University , and Tufts University . 
 Some scenes at fictional Oklahoma Tech University were filmed at Gregory Gym at The University of Texas at Austin . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Initially targeted at the youth market , the show emphasized the football element . NBC teamed with social networking site Bebo to create a site that allowed students to upload video and photos , as well as create blogs about their local football teams . Students who participated were eligible for one of ten $ 5 @,@ 000 scholarships . NBC had negotiated with Bebo for network and series promotion on Bebo ’ s network of youth @-@ oriented sites including <unk> , <unk> , Tickle , Ringo , and <unk> . 
 To complement this promotion , NBC sent out “ School Spirit ” kits to 1 @,@ 000 high schools around the country . These kits included posters , pom @-@ poms , mini @-@ footballs , and disposable cameras , all bearing the show ’ s logo . The kits also contained copies of the show ’ s pilot episode on DVD . The network repeated this promotion for its second season promotion , when it teamed with <unk> to send out 1 @,@ 000 " Party Kits , " which contained advance copies of the Season 2 opener along with other promotional material . 
 NBC also paired with Toyota to create the " Hometown Sweepstakes " , in which students could earn cash grants of up to $ 50 @,@ 000 for their school ’ s athletic program . It was open to high school students ages 14 to 18 and was designed to draw people to the show ’ s official web site , where they could download AOL Instant Messenger icons , screensavers , and desktop wallpaper . Students who registered could also download free movie theater passes to special early screenings of the pilot episode . These movie theater screenings took place in 50 cities nationwide and ran until a week before the show premiered on NBC . 
 In the later part of the season , NBC chose to switch course and pursue the female demographic . The network designed a strategy based on the personal elements of the show , giving the show the tagline , " It ’ s about life " . NBC Marketing President Vince <unk> stressed that the goal was to ensure viewers that the show was family and relationships as well as athletics . The network ran 30 @-@ second spots in movie theaters that featured cast members and fans being interviewed about the show . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 As a show about the community of Dillon , Texas , Friday Night Lights has an ensemble cast . The show features Panthers ' football coach Eric Taylor ( Kyle Chandler ) , who strives to balance his work , family , status in a sometimes confrontational community , and his personal ambitions . His family – wife Tami Taylor ( Connie Britton ) , a guidance counselor turned principal at Dillon High , and teenage daughter Julie Taylor ( Aimee <unk> ) – are also central to the show . Coach Taylor and Tami are the only two characters to appear in every episode . 
 Outside of the Taylor family , the show explores the lives of the Dillon high school football players . In the pilot , Coach Taylor 's protege and star quarterback Jason Street ( Scott Porter ) , suffers a spinal injury that ends his football career . He faces life as a paraplegic . At first , Street struggles with these disabilities and the upturn of his life . Gradually , he copes with his new reality . Lyla Garrity ( Minka Kelly ) , his girlfriend , undergoes her own changes , making a transition from a Panthers cheerleader to a Christian youth leader . 
 Because of Street 's injury , sophomore Matt Saracen ( Zach Gilford ) , who is quiet and reserved , becomes the Panthers ' starting quarterback . He eventually dates the coach 's daughter , Julie . Viewers learn that Saracen 's father is serving as a soldier in Iraq , and Saracen is the sole caretaker for his grandmother Lorraine Saracen ( <unk> Stephens ) . Saracen receives little help , except from his best friend Landry Clarke ( Jesse <unk> ) and eventual live @-@ in nurse and love interest Carlotta Alonso ( Daniella Alonso ) . Star running back Brian " Smash " Williams ( Gaius Charles ) works to get a college football scholarship . Fullback Tim Riggins ( Taylor Kitsch ) struggles with alcoholism and complicated family problems . His brother Billy Riggins ( Derek Phillips ) , while not his legal guardian , serves as Tim 's caretaker . Tyra Collette ( Adrianne Palicki ) stars as a town vixen who wants to leave Dillon for a better life . Involved with Riggins , Tyra eventually develops a complicated relationship with Landry Clarke . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Season one = = = 
 Season one revolves around two main events : Coach Eric Taylor beginning as head coach and the injury and paralysis of star quarterback Jason Street in the first game of the season . Coach Taylor 's career depends on his ability to get the Dillon Panthers to the state championship , despite the loss of Street . If the team suffers a losing streak , he knows his family will no longer be welcome in Dillon . 
 His wife Tami Taylor begins work as a guidance counselor at the local high school . Over the course of the season , she becomes a support and a mentor to many of the students , and her position plays a pivotal role in the season finale . 
 Jason Street and Matt Saracen each struggle within extremely difficult conditions . Street must learn to live with his disability in a town that worships athletics . Saracen has to face new challenges as a lead athlete . As Street 's friendship with Herc , his rehab roommate and wheelchair rugby teammate , grows stronger , so do his will and independence . For the quiet Matt , who seldom plays football , his new role of QB1 calls for a different part of him . Motherless , he also cares for his grandmother while his father is fighting in Iraq . Matt falls in love with Coach Taylor 's daughter , Julie , who loathes Texas small town life and dislikes football . She falls for Matt and their relationship slowly blossoms over the season . 
 Also explored is the pressure on the cocky , driven Brian " Smash " Williams . Easily the most promising player on the Panthers ' roster , he works hard to achieve excellence and sees his future career as instrumental in gaining a better life for him and his family . Since his father was killed in a car accident , his mother Corrina has taken multiple jobs to keep the family afloat . Smash decides to take performance @-@ enhancing drugs to ensure he can gain a college football scholarship . 
 Tim Riggins is struggling with alcoholism and absentee parents , with few prospects beyond high school . He is portrayed as a loyal friend with a good heart . 
 Tyra Collette also comes from a broken home ; her mother suffers abusive relationships with men . Tyra begins the season as Riggins ’ girlfriend . Thanks to counselor Tami Taylor and Landry Clarke – the school math geek and Saracen ’ s best friend – Tyra starts to see hope that she might get out of Dillon and break the cycle of women in her family . 
 Meanwhile , Lyla Garrity undergoes significant changes . Faced with Jason 's injury , she begins seeing Riggins for some comfort . Jason begins growing closer to another woman . Lyla learns about her father 's many adulterous affairs and begins to establish her independence . 
 = = = Season two = = = 
 Season two begins with Coach Taylor living and working in Austin as an assistant coach at fictional TMU , while wife Tami remains in Dillon with daughter Julie and newborn baby Gracie . Tami is struggling with the demands of the new baby and Julie 's rebellious behavior . The Panthers ' new coach , Bill McGregor , creates friction between Smash and Matt by showing blatant favoritism to Smash , drives Tim so hard he passes out during practice from dehydration and is hospitalized , alienates assistant coach Jason Street by his condescending manner , and alienates Boosters president Buddy Garrity by barring him from team practices . When Smash and Matt actually come to blows on the field and a crucial game is won by Smash , Buddy engineers the firing of the new coach and persuades Taylor that both the team and his family are suffering in his absence . Taylor agrees to return . 
 Julie continues to act out . She ends her romantic relationship with Matt , whom she sees as turning into a replica of her father , and pursues an older man , " the Swede , " who works with her as a lifeguard at the local pool . When she finds the Swede has no interest in a serious relationship , she begins a friendship with a young teacher that her mother feels is inappropriate . Tami confronts the teacher at school , but some students overhear the conversation and spread rumors about Julie ; Julie is mortified and furious at her mother . 
 Meanwhile , Coach Taylor attempts to win games with the Panthers but faces a number of issues . 
 Tim is kicked off the team after missing a week of practice when he leaves on the spur of the moment to go with Jason Street to Mexico to look for a treatment for Jason 's paralysis . On returning to Dillon , Tim finds that a neighbor woman , with whom he had a brief affair , is now seeing his brother Billy and has all but moved into their house . Tim moves out but has trouble finding another place to live and ultimately returns . Coach Taylor allows him to rejoin the team after he shows up at practice and on his own initiative apologizes to everyone on the team for his lack of commitment . 
 Lyla Garrity becomes increasingly involved in an organization for young Christians . As part of a religious outreach program , she befriends a young convict , Santiago Herrera , who is released from juvenile detention shortly after they first meet . She gets him a job at her father Buddy 's car dealership . Buddy encourages Santiago to try out for football after noticing his superior speed and coordination . When Taylor expresses interest in the boy , it is discovered that his legal guardian has left town and he has no adult in his life . Buddy agrees to take legal responsibility for him . 
 Smash is courted by a number of college recruiters . He makes it clear his priority is a quick route to the NFL , leading to tension between him and his mother , who insists his priority should be getting an education . Smash accepts a scholarship to the prestigious TMU . However , Smash punches a white teenager who sexually harasses his sister when they 're at the movies . This turns into a blown @-@ out @-@ of @-@ proportion racial incident , and Smash is deemed someone who has " character issues . " His scholarship to TMU is revoked . He later commits to Whitmore University , a smaller historically black college that is more highly regarded for its academics than its athletic programs . The football coach at Whitmore has a strong relationship with Coach Taylor , and had been scouting Smash since he was in middle school . 
 Matt begins a relationship with a cheerleader before leaving her for his grandmother 's new live @-@ in nurse , Carlotta . 
 Additionally , the early season follows an arc where Landry kills and hides the body of a man who attempted to rape Tyra , leading to a romance between the two . Eventually , guilt builds within Landry and he confesses . Charges are not pressed , although tension between him and Tyra remains . 
 Jason Street impregnates a woman in what was supposed to be a one @-@ night stand at the end of season two . Jason pleads with the woman to keep the child and promises to take care of the two . 
 This season ends on a cliffhanger due to the Writers ' Strike . The show 's head writer and executive producer , Jason Katims , stated that this last episode was “ not in any way viewed as the season finale ... If we were leading to the end of the season [ under normal circumstances ] , we would have most likely brought the story around to the coach and his family again , ” and there would have been a strong football element as well , Katims said . Seven of the 22 episodes NBC ordered for Season 2 weren ’ t made . 
 = = = Season three = = = 
 The season began with Coach Taylor failing to lead the Panthers to another State championship the year before , creating new pressure for him . Quarterback Matt Saracen 's position is threatened by the arrival of freshman J.D. McCoy , an amazing natural talent who comes from a rich family with an overbearing father , Joe . Matt moves to wide receiver after Taylor names J.D. starting quarterback . Tyra starts dating a cowboy named Cash , leading to complications in her relationship with Landry . Tim and Lyla start dating . Tami Taylor becomes the principal of Dillon High School and fights with Buddy Garrity about the allocation of funds toward a Jumbotron . 
 Smash Williams , who injured his knee during the previous year 's playoffs , rediscovers his love for the game . Billy , Tim , Herc , and Jason decide to flip Buddy Garrity 's house for a profit . Matt and Julie reconcile and rekindle their romance . Smash gets a tryout with Texas A & M , and succeeds in winning a spot on their team . Lyla helps Tim pursue a college football scholarship . Tim initially puts off the recruiter and is concerned Lyla is trying to turn him into someone he 's not by encouraging him to pursue college , but he sees she 's looking out for his best interests . Buddy loses money , which is Lyla 's college fund , in a bad business deal and he retaliates by trashing the strip club , The Landing Strip . Lyla wants to attend Vanderbilt University and after Buddy loses the money , she considers going to San Antonio State University , the school that gives Tim a scholarship . Lyla moves in with Tim after she and her father have a fight . Billy Riggins gets engaged to Tyra 's older sister Mindy . Mindy is pregnant at the time of their engagement . Jason Street eventually finds a job at a sports agency in New York City , after visiting a former Panthers player who is now playing professionally , and moves to the northeast to be close to his girlfriend and newborn baby . 
 Matt is pushed back into his former football role in the playoffs . While Eric Taylor and Buddy Garrity were making a visit to a possible recruit who just moved into town , the coach learns of a plot to have him replaced as head coach of the Dillon Panthers . They learn that Joe McCoy wants Taylor replaced with Wade Aikman , J.D. ' s personal coach . After the school 's administration meets to decide who gets the coaching job , Aikman is offered the job at Dillon High School , while Taylor is offered the job of coaching at recently reopened East Dillon High School . Billy and Mindy 's wedding ends the season . 
 = = = Season four = = = 
 Season 4 kicks off with Eric Taylor struggling as the East Dillon High coach . The team , field and conditions are a complete change from the privileged and sparkling conditions at West Dillon . 
 As Coach begins putting together his new Lion team , he realizes he 's in for more than he bargained for . The players who try out are less than desirable , but Coach gets a lucky break with a couple of new faces . The first is Vince Howard , a student who has gotten in trouble with the law too many times . He is given one last chance if he plays football for the East Dillon Lions . Although he has no prior football experience , he has natural talent and becomes the team 's first star quarterback . The second break comes to the Lions when Buddy Garrity reveals to Eric that the address on file for the Panthers new prodigy running back , Luke Cafferty , is nothing more than a mailbox in front of an empty lot , and Luke is really zoned for East Dillon . Tami is faced with a struggle as the principal of West Dillon . A new character on the show , Becky , is introduced when Tim Riggins rents a trailer on her mother 's property . Although she is in love with Tim , she and Luke are both shopping at a convenience store and she allows Luke to drive her home . The two have sex and Becky becomes pregnant . Even though she is a student at East Dillon , she seeks out Tami 's help with the situation . Tami discusses all of the options with her and Becky decides to get an abortion . Her mother goes with her to the procedure . Parents find out about this and led by Luke 's mother , seek Mrs. Taylor 's dismissal as principal . When Tami refuses to apologize , as she followed procedure , she is put on leave . She decides to return to her role as a guidance counselor , but at East Dillon . 
 The football season is one focused on growth and reestablishing a sense of Lion pride . The culmination of their hard work is tested in their last game of the season as they play the Dillon Panthers led by J.D. McCoy . In an amazing show of perseverance , the East Dillon Lions defeat the Dillon Panthers , ruining the Panthers ' playoff chances . 
 In season four , Matt Saracen struggles with staying in Dillon and living as a townie . He turned down an art school in Chicago and is instead studying art at the local technical college . After returning from a hunting trip with Tim Riggins , he finds out that his father was killed in Iraq . The episode " The Son " shows Matt going through the five stages of grief as he comes to accept the death of his father , a man he claims to hate . This episode garnered much buzz online and resulted in a failed campaign for Zach Gilford to get an Emmy nomination in the guest actor category ; however , the episode did get an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series . After this emotionally charged episode , Matt abruptly moves to Chicago without saying goodbye to his girlfriend or best friend . He returns briefly in the finale and makes amends with both Julie and Landry , who ends up flying back to Chicago with Matt . 
 The character of Tim Riggins has developed over time from an unfocused and moody alcoholic to a young man of character and dependability . Sometimes that dependability is reflected in his uncanny ability to make the wrong choices for the right reasons , which usually involve his brother . Even though he has proven his ability to help others correct their misguided choices , unfortunately there is no one who does this for Tim . In this season , his irresponsible , headstrong , but lovable brother again entices Tim into another wrong choice by convincing Tim that the only way they can make any money is by transforming their newly opened garage into a chop shop . Just as they finally end this side business and Tim has enough for the down payment on a large amount of land he 's been dreaming about , the police show up to arrest him at the garage . The police officers recognize Tim as " number 33 " giving Tim no chance to deny that it 's his chop shop . True to his character , he makes the decision to take the rap and allows his brother to be with his new wife and child . The season ends as Tim walks toward the jail . 
 = = = Season five = = = 
 Season 5 , the final season , opens with summer wrapping up in Dillon : Billy Riggins joins Coach Taylor as a special teams coach for the East Dillon Lions . Tami is the new guidance counselor at East Dillon , where she is faced with the challenge of a particularly difficult student named <unk> . Landry is departing for Rice University , and Tim Riggins has three more months in jail . Becky experiences turmoil in her living situation and moves in with Billy and Mindy and develops a family of her own with them , while also developing a closer relationship with Luke . With Vince leading the Lions , along with Luke Cafferty , new recruit Hastings <unk> , and the rest of the team standing strong behind him , Eric Taylor has strong hopes for the team to go to state . But as Vince 's past comes back to haunt him , it seems that the team will have to deal with struggles off the field , as well as on . Vince 's troubles also cause his relationship with Jess to take a hit . Julie 's college experience is nothing like she imagined and after she experiences a difficulty situation involving her history TA , she is forced to take a good look at what she wants . Buddy Garrity becomes a father again when Buddy Jr . , who developed problems in California , is sent back to Dillon to get help from his father . He 's pleased when his son becomes a Lions football player . 
 Julie looks for support first from her parents , and then from her old boyfriend Matt Saracen , who is living in Chicago and attending art school . Julie drives up to spend some time with him , but leaves still confused about her future . Tim is up for parole , and with the help of Coach Taylor and Buddy Garrity , is approved for early release . Buddy gives him a job as a bartender at his bar . Tim is angry with his brother Billy and threatens to move to Alaska to work on a pipeline but Tyra Collette comes back for a visit to Dillon and tells him he needs to repair his relationship with Billy . After they spend the night together , she asks Tim to show her his land , and the episode closes with Tyra asking , " Alaska , Tim ? " to which Tim smiles a guilty smile . 
 In the last episode , East Dillon wins the state championship after Coach Taylor and Vince share a moment of respect for each other . Coach Taylor then moves with his wife to Philadelphia as she accepts the job as Dean of Admissions at a prestigious school , and the show ends showing them living happily . Tim and Tyra talk about their dreams and a potential future at his new home site . Julie is engaged to Matt and lives with him in Chicago . Vince is the quarterback of the " <unk> " of East / West Dillon , joined by Hastings , Buddy Jr . , and Tinker . Jess is living in Dallas , and helping to student coach a team and is following her dreams . Billy is expecting twins with Mindy . Luke Cafferty is seen with Becky at the bus depot departing for the Army . The second to the last scene is of Tim and Billy , taking a break while putting up the frame of Tim 's new house . They sit back , crack open a beer , and Billy toasts , " Texas Forever ? " to which Timmy responds emphatically , " Texas Forever " and they clink their beers . The series ends with Eric coaching a new high school team in Philadelphia ( in a noticeably smaller stadium than those in Texas ) . After practice , Eric recites the phrase : " Clear eyes , full hearts ... " After not getting the normal response of " Can 't lose , " he says , " We 'll deal with that later . " Tami then shows up and the two walk off the field as the lights turn off . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Although the series never had a high viewership , it was met with critical acclaim and has a strong fan @-@ base . On the review aggregator website Metacritic , the first season received a score of 78 out of 100 , based on 32 reviews . Virginia Heffernan wrote for The New York Times that " if the season is anything like the pilot , this new drama about high school football could be great – and not just television great , but great in the way of a poem or painting . " The Washington Post similarly praised the series as " extraordinary in just about every conceivable way . " Bill Simmons , a former columnist for ESPN Magazine implored readers of his column in the September 24 , 2007 issue to watch the show , calling it " the greatest sports @-@ related show ever made . " Positive reviews also came from USA Today , the San Francisco Chronicle , and international sources , with The Guardian 's Jonathan <unk> calling the pilot " beautifully shot " and the Metro awarding it 4 out of 5 stars . 
 Throughout its inaugural season , many online journalists heaped praise on the show . Matt Roush of TV Guide dedicated several of his " Roush Dispatch " columns to the show calling the last episodes of season one " terrifically entertaining " while Zap2it 's Amy Amatangelo asked her readers to " promise to watch [ the last 4 episodes of ] Friday Night Lights . " The show 's pilot did , however , receive negative reviews as well . The Philadelphia Inquirer 's review was particularly harsh , calling the show a " standard high school sports soap opera . " 
 Season two reviews were considerably less positive than for the first , with the Landry and Tyra murder plot being particularly panned by critics . The Los Angeles Times said that the show had lost its innocence , while The Boston Globe said the event was " out of sync with the real @-@ life tone of the show . " Others were more positive , though , with Variety saying " faith should be shown in showrunner / writer Jason Katims " while The New York Times said " to hold Friday Night Lights to a measure of realism would be to miss what are its essentially expressionistic pleasures . " 
 Time Out magazine 's Andrew Johnston included the series in his list of the ten best TV shows for both 2006 and 2007 , stating " Who 'd have thought a tribute to heartland values would turn out to be the most avant @-@ garde show on TV ? The music and random close @-@ ups said more than the dialogue in Peter Berg 's phenomenal football drama . " Time magazine 's James Poniewozik named it one of the Top 10 Returning Series of 2007 , ranking it at No. 4 . In 2007 , AOL ranked Friday Night Lights the fifth Best School Show of All Time . The same year , the show placed No. 71 on Entertainment Weekly 's " New TV Classics " list . In 2009 , Alan Sepinwall placed it in his " Best of the ' 00s in TV : Best Dramas " and wrote : " Few shows are as willing to so directly confront the emotions of its characters , aided by central performances — as one of TV ’ s most realistic and loving couples — from Chandler and Connie Britton . " The A.V. Club named it the 16th best TV series of the 2000s . In 2010 , Kristin Dos Santos of E ! Online ranked it number 4 on her list , " Top 20 TV Series of the Past 20 Years " . 
 Friday Night Lights 's final season was lauded by critics . Based on 10 reviews , the season obtained a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " and it was included on numerous best lists . Poniewozik ranked it No. 7 on his list of 2011 's Top 10 TV Series , saying , " The final season of this drama came down , as you would expect , to a final dramatic game . But the real action was always just as much in the stands " . He also ranked the final episode " Always " No. 1 on 2011 's Top 10 TV Episodes list . Paste also named it one of the 20 best TV shows of 2011 and Slant Magazine ranked Friday Night Lights No. 10 on its list of 2011 's 25 Best TV Shows , concluding " The show 's true concerns — obsession , class , family — were articulated beautifully as ever in the quiet , familiar relationships between a town and its team , and a coach and his wife " . The Salt Lake Tribune in its list of the Top 10 series of 2011 ranked Friday Night Lights No. 1 explaining " For five seasons , Friday Night Lights was both the simplest and most complex show on TV . It felt like real life , and real life is complicated . " TV Guide named the show among its Best TV Shows of 2011 praising the fact that " Friday Night Lights left its fans with the best portrait of a marriage ever on TV " . It was also included on The Huffington Post 's and E ! Online 's 2011 's Best TV Shows . 
 In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America ranked Friday Night Lights No. 22 in its of the " 101 Best Written TV Series of All Time " . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Friday Night Lights won a Peabody Award , three AFI awards , an Emmy Award for Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series , an ACE Eddie Award for editing , an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Directing , a Television Critics Association Award , and has earned multiple Writers Guild of America nominations . The show 's two leading actors , Kyle Chandler and Connie Britton , received Emmy nominations for their performances in 2010 , while executive producer Jason Katims won two Humanitas Prize awards for writing . 
 In 2011 , after concluding its run , the show was honored by four Emmy nominations and Kyle Chandler won the award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Jason Katims won for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for " Always " . 
 = = = Fan base = = = 
 Friday Night Lights enjoys what former NBC President Kevin Reilly called a " passionate and vocal [ fanbase ] " . This fan dedication has shown itself in everything from advertisers expressing their support for the show to news outlets getting massive amounts of support mail after running positive pieces about the show . 
 After some statements made by NBC 's Entertainment head Ben Silverman about the future of the show and the fact that everything seemed to point that Friday Night Lights wouldn 't return after the writers ' strike , fans put together several campaigns . Save FNL Campaign raised money to send footballs and contributions to charity foundations that were related to the show . The Save FNL Campaign raised a total of $ 15 @,@ 840 for 18 @,@ 750 footballs , $ 2061 for charity , and $ 924 worth of DVDs for troops stationed overseas . 
 = = Television ratings = = 
 = = = U.S. ratings = = = 
 Though it was critically acclaimed , Friday Night Lights never enjoyed high ratings . The first two seasons averaged roughly 6 million viewers each . Ratings dropped in subsequent seasons with the third season averaging 4 @.@ 6 million viewers , the fourth season with 3 @.@ 8 million , and fifth season with 3 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = = International ratings = = = 
 The show 's pilot , which aired on February 21 , 2007 on ITV4 , was watched by 26 @,@ 000 viewers in the UK . This was attributed to the program being aired opposite of the Barcelona – Liverpool football game in the first knockout round of the 2006 – 07 UEFA Champions League . 
 = = = DVR ratings = = = 
 On December 29 , 2006 Nielsen Media Research reported the results of having , for the first time , monitored viewers who use a Digital Video Recorder to record shows for later viewing . These ratings , called " live plus seven " , include all viewers who use a DVR to record the show and then watch it within a week of its initial airing . 
 According to the Nielsen numbers , DVR viewers increased Friday Night Lights ratings by 7 @.@ 5 % overall in December . When Nielsen monitored viewers again in April 2007 the increase went up to 17 % for the week ending on April 8 . 
 = = = Affluent viewers = = = 
 On March 5 , 2007 , Media Life Magazine reported that Friday Night Lights was one of the most popular shows among " affluent viewers " who had little experience playing football . This was determined using a report from Magna Global who in turn used analysis done by Nielsen Media Research . Affluence in the study was determined by yearly income . 
 In the study , Friday Night Lights tied for the 11th most watched show by affluent viewers . According to the study viewers of the show have a median household income of $ 65 @,@ 000 per year . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Online episodes = = = 
 Streaming videos , such as cast interviews and the full episode from the previous week , have been available on NBC.com since the series ’ inception . In December 2006 , NBC expanded this selection to include every episode of the season . The move to offer every episode was made for only a few select shows and represents a marketing push on NBC 's part . 
 In addition to the free ad @-@ support offerings , every episode of Friday Night Lights became available for download on the iTunes Store on February 10 , 2007 for $ 1 @.@ 99 per episode . As a special promotion , the pilot was initially offered as a free download . The series is also available on Netflix . 
 = = = Syndication = = = 
 ABC Family acquired syndication rights for the first four seasons and began airing reruns September 6 , 2010 , but it was pulled on October 18 , 2010 , due to low ratings . In July 2011 , it was announced that ESPN Classic had acquired the rights of all the five seasons of the show and started airing the series beginning on July 12 , 2011 . 
 In an attempt to bolster series ratings , NBC repositioned reruns of the show to air on its sister network Bravo , during the weeks leading up to the season one finale on NBC . These episodes aired on a schedule of one hour every Friday and three hours every Saturday . Bravo is known to have an audience that is upscale and largely female , which is in line with the new strategy of NBC 's then @-@ President Kevin Reilly ( now at FOX ) for selling the show . When questioned about this strategy , he admitted to having regrets about initially marketing the show incorrectly , saying : “ It ’ s been so clear to me that [ the marketing for ] the show ended up confusing people in terms of what [ the public thought ] it was supposed to be " . He said he felt the show is , at its core , a “ women 's show ” , and his wish is that the marketing had reflected that to a greater extent . 
 Once the 2006 – 2007 television season ended , NBC planned to air reruns throughout the summer in the hopes of gaining new viewers during the summer hiatus . Despite rising ratings for the reruns , NBC abruptly pulled them from the network 's schedule on June 24 , 2007 . NBC resumed airing reruns in late August / early September , timed to the Season 1 DVD release . 
 TeenNick acquired the rights in 2015 and began airing the series , in chronological order , on April 10 , 2015 with a week @-@ long event in which three episodes aired nightly . 
 = = = DirecTV = = = 
 During the 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike , NBC Universal 's decision to release the Season 2 DVD with only the 15 produced episodes and comments by NBC chief Ben Silverman led to speculation that the show would be canceled . 
 In March 2008 , it was confirmed that NBC had picked up the series for a third season , after a cost @-@ sharing partnership between NBC and DirecTV was struck . The agreement had first run episodes airing exclusively on DirecTV , and the episodes aired on NBC at a later date . Season 3 premiered exclusively on DirecTV channel 101 , with the episodes replaying on NBC beginning on January 16 , 2009 . In March 2009 , NBC announced it had renewed the series for two more seasons . 
 = = Home media releases = = 
 = = = DVD = = = 
 The first season was released on DVD in region 1 on August 28 , 2007 , and in region 2 on October 29 , 2007 . Special features include deleted scenes from several episodes and a featurette titled " Behind The Lights : Creating The First Season of Friday Night Lights " . 
 The second season was released on DVD in region 1 on April 22 , 2008 , and in region 2 on February 11 , 2013 . Special features include deleted scenes from several episodes , audio commentaries for " Last Days of Summer " , " Are You Ready for Friday Night " and " There Goes the Neighborhood " and a featurette titled " Friday Night Lights Cast & Producers at the Paley Festival in L.A. " . 
 The third season was released on DVD in region 1 on May 19 , 2009 , and in region 2 on March 25 , 2013 . Special features include deleted scenes from various episode and an audio commentary for " Tomorrow Blues " . 
 The fourth season was released on DVD in region 1 on August 17 , 2010 , and in region 2 on May 20 , 2013 . Special features include deleted scenes from various episodes , audio commentary for " East of Dillon " , and several behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes . 
 The fifth season was released on DVD in region 1 on April 5 , 2011 , and in region 2 on August 12 , 2013 . Special features include deleted scenes from several episodes , audio commentaries for " Don 't Go " and " Always " , a featurette titled " The Lights Go Out " , and a photo gallery . 
 A complete series box set containing all the episodes and material from the individual season sets was released in region 1 on October 4 , 2011 . 
 In March 2016 , it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the rights to the series in region 1 ; they will re @-@ release the first two seasons on DVD on September 6 , 2016 . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Two soundtracks with music featured on the show were released . The first , Friday Night Lights , was released in 2007 , and included music from The Killers , OutKast , and Explosions in the Sky , who had produced the score for the film . The second soundtrack , Friday Night Lights Vol . 2 , was released in 2010 , and included the main " Friday Night Lights Theme " by W. G. Walden . The score for both the film and television show , along with all background music and all instrumental music is performed by Explosions in the Sky . 
 = = Potential film sequel = = 
 In July 2011 , it was revealed that creator and executive producer Peter Berg was interested in continuing the series , as a feature film . In August 2011 , Berg said at a Television Critics Association panel that the Friday Night Lights film is in development . Berg was quoted as saying " We 're very serious about trying to do it " , adding that the script is currently being written . Universal Pictures and Imagine Television would produce the film , with Kyle Chandler and Connie Britton set to return . In May 2013 , executive producer Brian Grazer confirmed the continued development to make a film . In December 2013 , it was confirmed by Berg that a film would not be moving forward . 
 = Quantum of Solace = 
 Quantum of Solace ( 2008 ) is the 22nd James Bond film produced by Eon Productions , and is the direct sequel to the 2006 film Casino Royale . Directed by Marc Forster , it features Daniel Craig 's second performance as James Bond . In the film , Bond seeks revenge for the death of his lover , Vesper Lynd , and is assisted by Camille Montes ( Olga Kurylenko ) , who is plotting revenge for the murder of her family . The trail eventually leads them to wealthy businessman Dominic Greene ( Mathieu Amalric ) , a member of the Quantum organisation , who intends to stage a coup d 'état in Bolivia to seize control of that country 's water supply . 
 Producer Michael G. Wilson developed the film 's plot while Casino Royale was being shot . Neal Purvis , Robert Wade and Paul Haggis contributed to the script . Daniel Craig and Marc Forster had to write some sections themselves due to the Writers ' Strike , though they were not given the screenwriter credit in the final cut . The title was chosen from a 1959 short story in Ian Fleming 's For Your Eyes Only , though the film does not contain any elements of that story . Location filming took place in Mexico , Panama , Chile , Italy , Austria and Wales while interior sets were built and filmed at Pinewood Studios . Forster aimed to make a modern film that also featured classic cinema motifs : a vintage Douglas DC @-@ 3 was used for a flight sequence , and Dennis Gassner 's set designs are reminiscent of Ken Adam 's work on several early Bond films . Taking a course away from the usual Bond villains , Forster rejected any grotesque appearance for the character Dominic Greene to emphasise the hidden and secret nature of the film 's contemporary villains . 
 The film was also marked by its frequent depictions of violence , with a 2012 study by the University of Otago in New Zealand finding it to be the most violent film in the franchise . Whereas Dr. No featured 109 " trivial or severely violent " acts , Quantum of Solace had a count of 250 – the most depictions of violence in any Bond film . Quantum of Solace premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square on 29 October 2008 , gathering mixed reviews , which mainly praised Craig 's gritty performance and the film 's action sequences , but feeling that the film was not as impressive as its predecessor Casino Royale . As of November 2012 , it is the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing James Bond film , without adjusting for inflation , earning $ 586 million worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 James Bond is driving from Lake Garda to Siena , Italy , with the captured Mr. White ( Jesper Christensen ) in the boot of his car . After evading pursuers , Bond delivers White to M , who interrogates him regarding his organisation , Quantum . M 's bodyguard Craig Mitchell ( Glenn Foster ) , is a double agent ; he attacks M , enabling White to escape . Bond chases Mitchell and kills him . Bond and M return to London and search Mitchell 's flat , discovering that Mitchell had a contact in Haiti , Edmund Slate ( Neil Jackson ) . Bond learns that Slate is a hitman sent to kill Camille Montes ( Olga Kurylenko ) at the behest of her lover , environmentalist entrepreneur Dominic Greene ( Mathieu Amalric ) . Observing her subsequent meeting with Greene , Bond learns that Greene is helping exiled Bolivian General Medrano ( Joaquin <unk> ) — who murdered Camille 's family — to overthrow his government and become the new president , in exchange for a seemingly barren piece of desert . 
 After rescuing Camille from Medrano , Bond follows Greene to a performance of Tosca in Bregenz , Austria . Meanwhile , the head of the CIA 's South American section , Gregg Beam ( David Harbour ) , strikes a non @-@ interference deal with Greene for access to putative stocks of Bolivian oil . Bond infiltrates Quantum 's meeting at the opera , identifying members of Quantum 's executive board , and a gunfight ensues . A Special Branch bodyguard working for Quantum member Guy Haines ( Paul Ritter ) , is killed after he fights with Bond . M assumes that Bond killed him , and has Bond 's passports and credit cards revoked . Bond heads to Italy and convinces his old ally René Mathis ( Giancarlo Giannini ) to accompany him to Bolivia . They are greeted by Strawberry Fields ( Gemma Arterton ) , a consular employee who demands that Bond return to the UK immediately . Bond seduces her and they attend a fundraising party Greene holds that night . At the party , Bond again rescues Camille from Greene . Leaving , Bond and Camille are pulled over by Bolivian police working for Medrano . They had earlier attacked Mathis and put him in the boot of Bond 's car to frame Bond . In the ensuing struggle , Mathis is killed . 
 The following day , Bond and Camille survey Quantum 's intended land acquisition by air ; their plane is shot down by a Bolivian fighter aircraft . They skydive into a sinkhole , and discover that Quantum is damming Bolivia 's supply of fresh water to create a monopoly . Back in La Paz , Bond meets M and learns that Quantum murdered Fields by drowning her in crude oil . Bond meets CIA Agent Felix Leiter ( Jeffrey Wright ) , who discloses that Greene and Medrano will meet in the Atacama Desert to finalise their agreement . Warned by Leiter , he evades the CIA 's Special Activities Division when they attempt to kill him . 
 At an eco hotel in the desert , Greene tells Medrano that now he controls the majority of Bolivia 's water supply , Medrano must accept a new contract that makes Greene Planet Bolivia 's sole water utility company at significantly higher rates . Bond infiltrates the hotel , kills the Chief of Police ( Fernando Guillén Cuervo ) for betraying Mathis , and confronts Greene . Meanwhile , Camille kills Medrano , avenging the murders of her family . The struggle leaves the hotel destroyed by fire . Bond captures Greene and interrogates him about Quantum , leaving him stranded in the desert with only a can of engine oil . 
 Bond travels to Kazan , Russia , where he finds Vesper Lynd 's former lover , Yusef Kabira ( Simon Kassianides ) , a member of Quantum who seduces women with valuable connections , and who is indirectly responsible for her death . Bond tells Kabira 's latest target , Corrine <unk> ( Stana Katic ) , a Canadian Intelligence agent , of his true intentions , thus sparing her Vesper 's fate . He allows MI6 to arrest Kabira . Outside , M tells Bond that Greene was found dead in the middle of the desert , shot twice and with engine oil in his stomach . M tells Bond that she needs him back ; he responds that he never left . Walking away , he drops Vesper 's necklace in the snow . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniel Craig as James Bond . Craig 's physical training for his reprise of the role placed extra effort into running and boxing , to spare him the injuries he sustained on his stunts in the first film . Craig felt he was fitter , being less bulky than in the first film . He also practised <unk> and stunt driving . Craig felt Casino Royale was [ physically ] " a walk in the park " compared to Quantum of Solace , which required a different performance from him because Quantum of Solace is a revenge film , not a love story like Casino Royale . While filming in Pinewood , he suffered a gash when kicked in his face , which required eight stitches , and a fingertip was sliced off . He laughed these off , noting they did not delay filming , and joked his finger wound would enable him to have a criminal career ( though it had grown back when he made this comment ) . He also had minor plastic surgery on his face . The actor advised Paul Haggis on the script and helped choose Marc Forster as the director . 
 Olga Kurylenko as Camille Montes , a Bolivian agent with her own vendetta regarding Greene and Medrano . Forster chose her because out of the 400 women who auditioned , she seemed the least nervous . When she read the script , she was glad she had no love scene with Craig ; she felt it would have distracted viewers from her performance . Kurylenko spent three weeks training to fight with weapons , and she learnt a form of indoor skydiving known as body flying . Kurylenko said she had to do " training non @-@ stop from the morning to the evening " for the action scenes , overcoming her fears with the help of Craig and the stunt team . She was given a DVD box set of Bond films , since the franchise was not easily available to watch in her native Ukraine . Kurylenko found Michelle Yeoh in Tomorrow Never Dies inspiring " because she did the fight scenes by herself . " The producers had intended to cast a South American actress in the role . Kurylenko trained with a dialect coach to perform with a Spanish accent . She said that the accent was easy for her because she has " a lot of hispanic friends , from Latin America and Spain , and it 's an accent I 've always heard " . When reflecting on her experience as a Bond girl , she stated she was proudest of overcoming her fears in performing stunts . 
 Mathieu Amalric as Dominic Greene , the main villain . He is a leading member of Quantum posing as a businessman working in reforestation and charity funding for environmental science . In the 2015 Bond film Spectre , he is revealed to be a member of the crime syndicate SPECTRE , which Quantum is a subsidiary of . Amalric acknowledged taking the role was an easy decision because , " It 's impossible to say to your kids that ' I could have been in a Bond film but I refused . ' " Amalric wanted to wear make @-@ up for the role , but Forster explained that he wanted Greene not to look grotesque , but to symbolise the hidden evils in society . Amalric modelled his performance on " the smile of Tony Blair [ and ] the craziness of Sarkozy , " the latter of whom he called " the worst villain we [ the French ] have ever had ... he walks around thinking he 's in a Bond film . " He later claimed this was not criticism of either politician , but rather an example of how a politician relies on performance instead of a genuine policy to win power . " Sarkozy , is just a better actor than [ his presidential opponent ] Ségolène Royal — that 's all , " he explained . Amalric and Forster reconceived the character , who was supposed to have a " special skill " in the script , to someone who uses pure animal instinct when fighting Bond in the climax . Bruno Ganz was also considered for the part , but Forster decided Amalric gave the character a " pitiful " quality . 
 Gemma Arterton as MI6 agent Strawberry Fields , who works at the British consulate in Bolivia . Fields , who is merely an office worker as described by M , takes herself seriously and tries to overpower Bond when the pair meet . She is later seduced by Bond , infiltrates Greene 's fund raiser party with him and ends up paying the ultimate price . Forster found Arterton a witty actress and selected her from a reported 1 @,@ 500 candidates . One of the casting directors asked her to audition for the role , having seen her portray Rosaline in Love 's Labour 's Lost at the Globe Theatre . Arterton said Fields was " not so frolicsome " as other Bond girls , but is instead " fresh and young , not ... a femme fatale . " Arterton described Fields as a homage to the 1960s Bond girls , comparing her red wig to that of Diana Rigg , who played Tracy Bond in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . Rigg , alongside Honor Blackman , is one of her favourite Bond girls . Arterton had to film her character 's death scene first day on the set , where she was completely covered head to toe in non @-@ toxic black paint . Although she found the experience unpleasant , she believes the scene will be an iconic part of the film . The character 's first name , which is a reference to the Beatles song " Strawberry Fields Forever " , is never actually uttered on screen ; when Bond asks her for her name , she replies , " Just Fields . " Robert A. <unk> suggests that this is a conscious effort to portray a woman " whose character attributes are neither undermined nor compromised " by her name , even though her name may have sexual overtones reminiscent of earlier Bond girls . 
 Giancarlo Giannini as René Mathis , Bond 's ally who was mistakenly believed to be a traitor in Casino Royale . Having been acquitted , he chooses to aid Bond again in his quest to find out who betrayed him . 
 Jeffrey Wright as Felix Leiter , Bond 's ally at the CIA . Early script drafts gave Leiter a larger role , but his screentime was restricted by on @-@ set rewrites . 
 Judi Dench as M. Forster felt Dench was underused in the previous films and wanted to make her part bigger , having her interact with Bond more because she is " the only woman Bond doesn 't see in a sexual context , " which Forster finds interesting . 
 Anatole Taubman as Elvis , Greene 's second @-@ in @-@ command . Taubman wanted to make Elvis " as colourful , as edgy and as interesting as possible " , with one of his suggestions being the bowl cut . Amalric and Taubman improvised a backstory for Elvis : he is Dominic 's cousin and once lived on the streets before being inducted into Quantum . He called Elvis " a bit of a goofball . He thinks he 's all that but he 's not really . ... He 's not a comic guy . He definitely takes himself very serious , but maybe by his taking himself too serious he may become friendly . " 
 David Harbour as Gregg Beam , the CIA section chief for South America and a contact of Felix Leiter . 
 Joaquín <unk> as General Medrano , the exiled general whom Greene is helping to get back into power , in return for support of his organisation . He murdered Camille 's entire family when she was a young girl . 
 Fernando Guillén Cuervo as Carlos , the Colonel of Bolivian Police , the chief of all police forces , and the contact of René Mathis in Bolivia . 
 Jesper Christensen as Mr. White , whom Bond captured after he stole the money won at Casino Royale in Montenegro . 
 Rory Kinnear as Bill Tanner , M 's aide . 
 Paul Ritter as Guy Haines 
 Tim Pigott @-@ Smith as the British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs . 
 Neil Jackson as Edmund Slate , a henchman who fights Bond in Haiti . 
 Simon Kassianides as Yusef , a member of Quantum who seduces female agents and manipulates them into giving away classified information . He is indirectly responsible for Vesper Lynd 's death . 
 Stana Katic as Corrine <unk> , a Canadian agent and Yusef 's latest target . 
 Glenn Foster as Craig Mitchell , M 's bodyguard and a double agent . 
 Oona Chaplin as Perla de las Dunas ' receptionist , a woman saved by Camille Montes in one of the last sequences . 
 Lucrezia Lante della Rovere as Gemma , Mathis ' girlfriend . 
 Elizabeth Arciniega as Mr. White 's girlfriend . 
 Marc Forster asked his friends and fellow directors Guillermo del Toro and Alfonso Cuarón to appear in cameos . Cuarón appears as a Bolivian helicopter pilot , while del Toro provides several other voices . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 " If you remember in Chinatown , if you control the water you control the whole development of the country . I think it 's true . Right now it appears to be oil , but there 's a lot of other resources that we don 't think about too much but are all essential , and they 're very limited and every country needs it . Because every country knows that raising the standard of living ( and populations are getting bigger ) is the way we 're all going . " 
 In July 2006 , as Casino Royale entered post @-@ production , Eon Productions announced that the next film would be based on an original idea by producer Michael G. Wilson . It was decided beforehand the film would be a direct sequel , to exploit Bond 's emotions following Vesper 's death in the previous film . Just as Casino Royale 's theme was terrorism , the sequel focuses on environmentalism . The film was confirmed for a 2 May 2008 release date , with Craig reprising the lead role . Roger Michell , who directed Craig in Enduring Love and The Mother , was in negotiations to direct , but opted out because there was no script . Sony Entertainment vice @-@ chairman Jeff Blake admitted a production schedule of 18 months was a very short window , and the release date was pushed back to late 2008 . Neal Purvis and Robert Wade completed their draft of the script by April 2007 , and Paul Haggis , who polished the Casino Royale script , began his rewrite the next month . 
 In June 2007 , Marc Forster was confirmed as director . He was surprised that he was approached for the job , stating he was not a big Bond film fan through the years , and that he would not have accepted the project had he not seen Casino Royale prior to making his decision : he felt Bond had been humanised in that film , arguing since travelling the world had become less exotic since the series ' advent , it made sense to focus more on Bond as a character . Born in Germany and raised in Switzerland , Forster was the first Bond director not to come from the British Commonwealth of Nations , although he noted Bond 's mother is Swiss , making him somewhat appropriate to handle the British icon . The director collaborated strongly with Barbara Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson , noting they only blocked two very expensive ideas he had . The director found Casino Royale 's 144 @-@ minute running time too long , and wanted his follow @-@ up to be " tight and fast ... like a bullet . " 
 " Because Bond plays it real , I thought the political circumstances should be real too , even though Bond shouldn 't be a political film . I thought the more political I make it , the more real it feels , not just with Bolivia and what 's happening in Haiti , but with all these corporations like Shell and Chevron saying they 're green because it 's so fashionable to be green . During the Cold War , everything was very clear , the good guys and the bad guys . Today there 's much overlapping of good and bad . It isn 't as morally distinct , because we all have both elements in us . " 
 Haggis , Forster and Wilson rewrote the story from scratch . Haggis said he completed his script two hours before the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike officially began . Forster noted a running theme in his films were emotionally repressed protagonists , and the theme of the picture would be Bond learning to trust after feeling betrayed by Vesper . Forster said he created the Camille character as a strong female counterpart to Bond rather than a casual love interest : she openly shows emotions similar to those which Bond experiences but is unable to express . Haggis located his draft 's climax in the Swiss Alps , but Forster wanted the action sequences to be based around the four classical elements of earth , water , air and fire . The decision to homage Goldfinger in Fields 's death came about as Forster wanted to show oil had replaced gold as the most precious material . The producers rejected Haggis 's idea that Vesper Lynd had a child , because " Bond was an orphan ... Once he finds the kid , Bond can 't just leave the kid . " The water supply issue in Bolivia was the main theme of the film , with a story based on the Cochabamba Water Revolt . 
 Michael G. Wilson decided on the film 's title Quantum of Solace only " a few days " before its announcement on 24 January 2008 . It was the name of a short story in Ian Fleming 's anthology For Your Eyes Only ( 1960 ) . The film is related to the title in one of its thematic elements : " when the ' Quantum of Solace ' drops to zero , humanity and consideration of one human for another is gone . " Daniel Craig admitted , " I was unsure at first . Bond is looking for his quantum of solace and that 's what he wants , he wants his closure . Ian Fleming says that if you don 't have a quantum of solace in your relationship then the relationship is over . It 's that spark of niceness in a relationship that if you don 't have you might as well give up . " He said that " Bond doesn 't have that because his girlfriend [ Vesper Lynd ] has been killed , " and therefore , " [ Bond is ] looking for revenge ... to make himself happy with the world again . " Afterwards , Quantum was made the name of the organisation introduced in Casino Royale . Craig noted the letter Q itself looks rather odd . Near the end of the film , the Camille Montes character and Bond have a discussion about their individual quests to avenge the deaths of their loved ones . Montes asks Bond to " let me know what it feels like " when he succeeds , the implication of the title being that it will be a small amount of solace compared to his despair . Bond 's lack of emotion when he does exact revenge shows this to be the case . 
 According to a December 2011 interview with Craig , " We had the bare bones of a script and then there was a writers ' strike and there was nothing we could do . We couldn 't employ a writer to finish it . I say to myself , ' Never again ' , but who knows ? There was me trying to rewrite scenes — and a writer I am not . " He said that he and Forster " were the ones allowed to do it . The rules were that you couldn 't employ anyone as a writer , but the actor and director could work on scenes together . We were stuffed . We got away with it , but only just . It was never meant to be as much of a sequel as it was , but it ended up being a sequel , starting where the last one finished . " 
 During filming , after the strike ended , Forster read a spec script by Joshua Zetumer , which he liked , and hired him to reshape scenes for the later parts of the shoot , which the director was still unsatisfied with . Forster had the actors rehearse their scenes , as he liked to film scenes continually . Zetumer rewrote dialogue depending on the actors ' ideas each day . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Quantum of Solace was shot in six countries . Second unit filming began in Italy at the Palio di Siena horse race on 16 August 2007 , although at that point Forster was unsure how it would fit into the film . Some scenes were filmed also in <unk> and <unk> , two small distinctive towns in Basilicata in southern Italy . Other places used for location shooting were Madrid in August 2007 ; Baja California , Mexico in early 2008 , for shots of the aerial battle ; <unk> , <unk> sul Garda and <unk> in Italy during March , and at Talamone during the end of April . The main unit began on 3 January 2008 at Pinewood Studios . The 007 Stage was used for the fight in the art gallery , and an MI6 safehouse hidden within the city 's cisterns , while other stages housed Bond 's Bolivian hotel suite , and the MI6 headquarters . Interior and exterior airport scenes were filmed at Farnborough Airfield and the snowy closing scenes were filmed at the Bruneval Barracks in Aldershot . 
 Shooting in Panama City began on 7 February 2008 at Howard Air Force Base . The country doubled for Haiti and Bolivia , with the National Institute of Culture of Panama standing in for a hotel in the latter country . A sequence requiring several hundred extras was also shot at nearby Colón . Shooting in Panama was also carried out at Fort Sherman , a former US military base on the Colón coast . Forster was disappointed he could only shoot the boat chase in that harbour , as he had a more spectacular vision for the scene . Officials in the country worked with the locals to " minimise inconvenience " for the cast and crew , and in return hoped the city 's exposure in the film would increase tourism . The crew was going to move to Cusco , Peru for ten days of filming on 2 March , but the location was cancelled for budget reasons . Twelve days of filming in Chile began on 24 March at Antofagasta . There was shooting in <unk> , the Paranal Observatory , and other locations in the Atacama Desert . Forster chose the desert and the observatory 's ESO Hotel to represent Bond 's rigid emotions , and being on the verge of committing a vengeful act as he confronts Greene in the film 's climax . 
 While filming in Sierra Gorda , Chile , the local mayor , Carlos Lopez , staged a protest because he was angry at the filmmakers ' portrayal of the Antofagasta region as part of Bolivia . He was arrested , detained briefly , and put on trial two days later . Eon dismissed his claim that they needed his permission to film in the area . Michael G. Wilson also explained Bolivia was appropriate to the plot , because of the country 's history of water problems , and was surprised the two countries disliked each other a century after the War of the Pacific . In a poll by Chilean daily newspaper La Segunda , 75 % of its readers disagreed with Lopez 's actions , due to the negative image they felt it presented of Chile , and the controversy 's potential to put off productions looking to film in the country in the future . 
 From 4 – 12 April the main unit shot on Sienese rooftops . Shooting on the real rooftops turned out to be less expensive than building them at Pinewood . The next four weeks were scheduled for filming the car chase at Lake Garda and Carrara . On 19 April , an Aston Martin employee driving a DBS to the set crashed into the lake . He survived , and was fined £ 400 for reckless driving . Another accident occurred on 21 April , and two days later , two stuntmen were seriously injured , with one , Greek stuntman Aris Comninos , having to be put in intensive care . Filming of the scenes was temporarily halted so that Italian police could investigate the causes of the accidents . Stunt co @-@ ordinator Gary Powell said the accidents were a testament to the realism of the action . Rumours of a " curse " spread among tabloid media , something which deeply offended Craig , who disliked that they compared Comninos ' accident to something like his minor finger injury later on the shoot ( also part of the " curse " ) . Comninos recovered safely from his injury . 
 Filming took place at the floating opera stage at Bregenz , Austria , from 28 April – 9 May 2008 . The sequence , where Bond stalks the villains during a performance of Tosca , required 1 @,@ 500 extras . The production used a large model of an eye , which Forster felt fitted in the Bond style , and the opera itself has parallels to the film . A short driving sequence was filmed at the nearby Feldkirch , Vorarlberg . The crew returned to Italy from 13 – 17 May to shoot a ( planned ) car crash at the marble quarry in Carrara , and a recreation of the Palio di Siena at the Piazza del Campo in Siena . 1 @,@ 000 extras were hired for a scene where Bond emerges from the Fonte Gaia . Originally , he would have emerged from the city 's cisterns at Siena Cathedral , but this was thought disrespectful . By June the crew returned to Pinewood for four weeks , where new sets ( including the interior of the hotel in the climax ) were built . The wrap party was held on 21 June . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Production designer Peter Lamont , a crew member on 18 previous Bond films , retired after Casino Royale . Forster hired Dennis Gassner in his stead , having admired his work on The Truman Show and the films of the Coen brothers . Craig said the film would have " a touch of Ken Adam , " while Michael G. Wilson also called Gassner 's designs " a postmodern look at modernism . " Forster said he felt the early Bond films ' design " were ahead of their time , " and enjoyed the clashing of an older style with his own because it created a unique look unto itself . Gassner wanted his sets to emphasise Craig 's " great angular , textured face and wonderful blue eyes , " and totally redesigned the MI6 headquarters because he felt Judi Dench " was a bit tired in the last film , so I thought , let 's bring her into a new world . " 
 Louise Frogley replaced Lindy Hemming as costume designer , though Hemming remained as supervisor . Hemming hired Brioni for Bond 's suits since her tenure on the series began with 1995 's GoldenEye , but Lindsay Pugh , another supervisor , explained their suits were " too relaxed . " Tom Ford was hired to tailor " sharper " suits for Craig . Pugh said the costumes aimed towards the 1960s feel , especially for Bond and Fields . Prada provided the dresses for both Bond girls . Jasper Conran designed Camille 's ginger bandeau , bronze skirt and gold fish necklace , while Chrome Hearts designed gothic jewellery for Amalric 's character , which the actor liked enough to keep after filming . Sophie Harley , who created Vesper Lynd 's earrings and Algerian <unk> necklace in Casino Royale , was called upon to create another version of the necklace . 
 The film returns to the traditional gun barrel opening shot , which was altered into part of the story for Casino Royale where it was moved to the beginning of the title sequence . In this film the gun barrel sequence was moved to the end of the movie , which Wilson explained was done for a surprise , and to signify the conclusion of the story begun in the previous film . The opening credits sequence was created by MK12 . Having worked on Forster 's Stranger than Fiction and The Kite Runner , MK12 spontaneously began developing the sequence early on in production , and had a good idea of its appearance which meant it did not have to be redone when the title singer was changed . MK12 selected various twilight colours to represent Bond 's mood and focused on a dot motif based on the gunbarrel shot . MK12 also worked on scenes with graphical user interface , including the electronic table MI6 use , and the Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti title cards . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Quantum of Solace was the last in Ford Motor 's three @-@ film deal that began with 2002 's Die Another Day . Although Ford sold over 90 % of the Aston Martin company in 2007 , the Aston Martin DBS V12 returned for the film 's car chase around Lake Garda ; Dan Bradley was hired as second unit director because of his work on the second and third Bourne films , so the film would continue the gritty action style begun in Casino Royale . He had intended to use Ford <unk> for the opening chase , but it was replaced by the Alfa Romeo 159 . After location filming in Italy , further close @-@ ups of Craig , the cars and the truck were shot at Pinewood against a blue screen . Originally three Alfa Romeos were in the sequence : but Forster felt the scene was running too long and re @-@ edited the scene so it only looked like two Romeos were chasing Bond . Six Aston Martins were destroyed during filming , and one of them was purchased by a fan . 
 Fourteen cameras were used to film the Palio di Siena footage , which was later edited into the main sequence . Aerial shots using helicopters were banned , and the crew were also forbidden from showing any violence " involving either people or animals . " To shoot the foot chase in Siena in April 2008 four camera cranes were built in the town , and a cable camera was also used . Framestore worked on the Siena chase , duplicating the 1 @,@ 000 extras during principal photography to match shots of the 40 @,@ 000 strong audience at the real Palio , removing wires that held Craig and the stuntmen in the rooftop segment of the chase , and digital expansion of the floor and skylight in the art gallery Bond and Mitchell fall into . The art gallery fight was intended to be simple , but during filming Craig 's stunt double accidentally fell from the construction scaffolding . Forster preferred the idea of Bond hanging from ropes reaching for his gun to kill Mitchell , rather than having both men run out of the building to continue their chase as specified in the script , and the number of effects shots increased . 
 To film the aerial dogfight , a " Snakehead " camera was built and placed on the nose and tail of a Piper <unk> 700 . <unk> , who provided the software used to design the camera , stated " pilots for the first time can fly as aggressively as they dare without sacrificing the drama of the shot . " The camera could turn 360 degrees and was shaped like a periscope . The crew also mounted <unk> on helicopters , and placed cameras with 1600 mm lenses underground , to cover the action . Forster wanted to film the plane fight as a homage to Alfred Hitchcock 's North by Northwest , and chose planes like the Douglas DC @-@ 3 to suit that . 
 The free @-@ fall scene involved its own set of challenges , Craig disliked the idea of " being hung by wires and blown by a large fan in front of a green screen " but actual sky diving coverage has serious drawbacks . It 's not only difficult , dangerous and time @-@ consuming , but nearly always results in problematic head @-@ replacements for close @-@ ups . Stunt co @-@ ordinator Gary Powell and VFX Designer Kevin Tod Haug , presented the idea of filming the scene in a large vertical wind tunnel in Bedford to do this sequence as practically as possible . While a great solution for the actors ' performances the technique presented enormous VFX challenges : relighting shots captured in a tall white tube to match the sky over the Bolivian desert , and the impossibility of filming medium to wide shots of the actors . An array of eight <unk> Origin cameras ( supported by seven HD cameras and a 35mm hand @-@ held camera , all running in sync ) was used to create a virtual camera with which to shoot the actors floating in the simulator . Ged Wright and his team at Double Negative developed a method to use the data from these cameras that allowed these real performances to be placed in a synthetic environment as seen by a synthetic camera . During the shooting in the wind tunnel Craig and Kurylenko wore wind @-@ resistant contact lenses that enabled them to open their eyes as they fell . For safety and comfort , they only shot for 30 seconds at a time . Forster wished he had more time to work on the free @-@ fall scene . 
 The Moving Picture Company created the climactic hotel sequence . The fire effects were supervised by Chris Corbould , and post @-@ production MPC had to enhance the sequence by making the smoke look closer to the actors , so it would look more dangerous . A full @-@ scale replica of the building 's exterior was used for the exploding part Bond and Camille escape from . The boat chase was another scene that required very little CGI . Machine FX worked on replacing a few shots of visible stuntmen with a digital version of Craig 's head , and recreated the boats Bond jumps over on his motorcycle to make it look more dangerous . Crowd creation was done for the Tosca scene by Machine FX , to make the performance look like it had sold out . Forster edited the opera scene to resemble The Man Who Knew Too Much . In total , there are 900 + visual effects shots in Quantum of Solace . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 David Arnold , who composed the scores for the previous four Bond films , returned for Quantum of Solace . He said that Forster likes to work very closely with his composers and that , in comparison to the accelerated schedule he was tied to on Casino Royale , the intention was to spend a long time scoring the film to " really work it out . " He also said he would be " taking a different approach " with the score . Arnold composed the music based on impressions from reading the script , and Forster edited those into the film . As with Casino Royale , Arnold kept use of the " James Bond Theme " to a minimum . Arnold collaborated with Kieran Hebden for " Crawl , End Crawl , " a remix of the score played during the end credits . 
 Jack White of The White Stripes and Alicia Keys collaborated on " Another Way to Die , " the first Bond music duet . They had wanted to work together for two years beforehand . The song was recorded in Nashville , Tennessee ; White played the drums while Keys performed on the piano . The Memphis Horns also contributed to the track . White 's favourite Bond theme is John Barry 's instrumental piece for On Her Majesty 's Secret Service , and he watched various opening credit sequences from the series for inspiration while mixing the track . Mark Ronson and Amy Winehouse had recorded a demo track for the film , but Ronson explained Winehouse 's well @-@ publicised legal issues in the preceding weeks made her " not ready to record any music " at that time . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square on 29 October 2008 . Princes William and Harry attended , and proceeds from the screening were donated to the charities Help for Heroes and the Royal British Legion . The film was originally scheduled to be released in the UK and North America on 7 November ; however , Eon pushed forward the British date to 31 October during filming , while the American date was pushed back in August to 14 November , after Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince had been moved to 2009 , thereby allowing the distributors to market the film over the autumn blockbuster Thanksgiving holiday weekend . In Australia , the film was moved a week to 19 November , after 20th Century Fox chose to release Australia on Quantum of Solace 's original date of 26 November . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Returning product placement partners from Casino Royale included Ford , Heineken , Smirnoff , Omega SA , Virgin Atlantic and Sony Ericsson . A reported £ 50 million was earned in product placement , which tops the Bond films ' record of £ 44 million for Die Another Day . The 2009 Ford Ka is driven by Camille in the film . Avon created a fragrance called Bond Girl 007 with Gemma Arterton as the " face " of the product . Coca @-@ Cola became a promotional partner , rebranding Coke Zero as " Coke Zero Zero 7 . " A tie @-@ in advert featured the orchestral element of " Another Way to Die . " In the film , Coca @-@ Cola was briefly seen being served at Dominic Greene 's party . Sony held a competition , " Mission for a Million , " enabling registered players to use their products to complete certain tasks . Each completed " mission " gives consumers a chance to win $ 1 million and a trip to a top secret location . 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 Corgi International Limited made 5 @-@ inch action figures and gadgets ( such as a voice @-@ activated briefcase ) , as well as its traditional die @-@ cast toy vehicles . It also created 7 @-@ inch figures of characters from the previous films . Scalextric released four racing sets to coincide with the film . Activision released its first James Bond game , also titled Quantum of Solace , which is based on both Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace . It is the first Bond game to feature Craig 's likeness and the first seventh generation console game in the series . Swatch designed a series of wrist watches , each of them inspired by a Bond villain . 
 Though the screenplay did not get made into a novel despite its original storyline , Penguin Books published a compilation of Fleming 's short stories entitled Quantum of Solace : The Complete James Bond Short Stories , with a UK release date of 29 May 2008 and a North American release date of 26 August 2008 . The book combines the contents of Fleming 's two short story collections , For Your Eyes Only — including the original " Quantum of Solace " short story — and Octopussy and The Living Daylights . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Quantum of Solace was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray by MGM via 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in Australia , the UK and North America from 18 to 24 March 2009 . At the DVD sales chart the film opened at No. 3 , grossing $ 21 @,@ 894 @,@ 957 from <unk> DVD units sold . As of 1 November 2009 , 2 @,@ 643 @,@ 250 DVD units were sold , generating $ 44 @,@ 110 @,@ 750 in sales revenue . These figures do not include Blu @-@ ray sales or DVD rentals . The DVDs were released in both a standard one @-@ disc set and a deluxe two @-@ disc special edition . There are no audio commentaries or deleted scenes on these editions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Upon its opening in the UK , the film grossed £ 4 @.@ 9 million ( $ 8 million ) , breaking the record for the largest Friday opening ( 31 October 2008 ) in the UK . The film then broke the UK opening weekend record , taking £ 15 @.@ 5 million ( $ 25 million ) in its first weekend , surpassing the previous record of £ 14 @.@ 9 million held by Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . It earned a further £ 14 million in France and Sweden — where it opened on the same day . The weekend gross of the equivalent of $ 10 @.@ 6 million in France was a record for the series , surpassing what Casino Royale made in five days by 16 % . The $ 2 @.@ 7 million gross in Sweden was the fourth @-@ highest opening for a film there . 
 The following week , the film was playing in sixty countries . It grossed the equivalent of $ 39 @.@ 3 million in the UK , $ 16 @.@ 5 million in France and $ 7 @.@ 7 million in Germany on 7 November 2008 . The film broke records in Switzerland , Finland , United Arab Emirates , Nigeria , Romania and Slovenia . Its Chinese and Indian openings were the second largest ever for foreign @-@ language films . 
 The film grossed $ 27 million on its opening day in 3 @,@ 451 cinemas in Canada and the United States , where it was the number one film for the weekend , with $ 67 @.@ 5 million and $ 19 @,@ 568 average per cinema . It was the highest @-@ grossing opening weekend Bond film in the US , and tied with The Incredibles for the biggest November opening outside of the Harry Potter series . The film earned a B- from CinemaScore 's audience surveys . From the 31 October British opening through to the 14 November US opening weekend , the film had grossed a total $ 319 @,@ 128 @,@ 882 worldwide . As of 10 February 2010 , it had grossed the equivalent of $ 417 @,@ 722 @,@ 300 in countries other than Canada and the US , where it grossed $ 168 @,@ 368 @,@ 427 , to give a total of $ 586 @,@ 090 @,@ 727 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reviews for Quantum of Solace have been mixed . Of the 280 reviews listed on Rotten Tomatoes , 65 % are positive , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 1 / 10 . Metacritic calculated a score of 58 out of 100 from 38 reviews , indicating a " mixed or average " response . Critics generally preferred Casino Royale , but continued to praise Craig 's depiction of Bond , and agree that the film is still an enjoyable addition to the series . The action sequences and pacing were praised , but criticism grew over the realism and serious but gritty feel that the film carried over . 
 Roger Moore , the third actor to play Bond in the films , said that Craig was a " damn good Bond but the film as a whole , there was a bit too much flash cutting [ and ] it was just like a commercial of the action . There didn 't seem to be any geography and you were wondering what the hell was going on . " Kim Newman of Empire gave it 4 / 5 , remarking it was not " bigger and better than Casino Royale , [ which is ] perhaps a smart move in that there 's still a sense at the finish that Bond 's mission has barely begun . " However , he expressed nostalgia for the more humorous Bond films . The Sunday Times review noted that " following Casino Royale was never going to be easy , but the director Marc Forster has brought the brand 's successful relaunch crashing back to earth – with a yawn " ; the screenplay " is at times incomprehensible " and the casting " is a mess . " The review concludes that " Bond has been stripped of his iconic status . He no longer represents anything particularly British , or even modern . In place of glamour , we get a spurious grit ; instead of style , we get product placement ; in place of fantasy , we get a redundant and silly realism . " The Guardian gave a more positive review , rating it as 3 / 5 stars , and was particularly fond of Craig 's performance , saying he " made the part his own , every inch the coolly ruthless agent @-@ killer , nursing a broken heart and coldly suppressed rage " and calling the film " a crash @-@ bang Bond , high on action , low on quips , long on location glamour , short on product placement " ; it concludes " Quantum of Solace isn 't as good as Casino Royale : the smart elegance of Craig 's Bond debut has been toned down in favour of conventional action . But the man himself powers this movie ; he carries the film : it 's an <unk> difficult task for an actor . Craig measures up . " 
 Screen Daily says , " Notices will focus — rightly — on Craig 's magnetism as the steely , sexy , murderous MI6 agent , but two other factors weigh in and freshen up proceedings : Forster 's new technical team , led by cinematographer Roberto Schaefer and production designer Dennis Gassner . And the ongoing shift of M , as played by Judi Dench , to front and centre : the Bond girls fade into insignificance as she becomes his moral counterpoint and theirs is the only real relationship on screen . " The review continues , " Bond is , as has been previously noted , practically the Martin Scorsese of the BAFTAs : 22 films later , with grosses probably close to the GDP of one of the small nations it depicts , it 's still waiting for that Alexander Korda award . The best Casino Royale could achieve was a gong for sound . Will this be the year that changes its fortunes ? " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , who praised the previous film , disliked Quantum of Solace . He wrote that the plot was mediocre , characters weak and that Bond lacked his usual personality , despite his praise for Craig 's interpretation of the role . Throughout his review , he emphasised that " James Bond is not an action hero . " Kate Muir wrote in The Times that " The Bond franchise is 50 years old this year , and the <unk> mess of Quantum of Solace may be considered its mid @-@ life crisis " , before she went on to praise the film 's successor Skyfall as a " resurrection " . Some writers criticised the choice of Quantum of Solace as a title . " Yes , it 's a bad title , " wrote Marni Weisz , the editor of Famous , a Canadian film publication distributed in cinemas in that country , in an editorial entitled " At least it 's not Octopussy . " 
 Not all the reviews were as critical . Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph , in a reflective review of the film in 2013 , was positive . He praised the film 's shorter runtime , claiming that many other Bond films run out of steam before the end , and included Casino Royale in this category . Describing the film as having a " rock @-@ solid dramatic idea and the intelligence to run with it " , he gave the film four stars out of five . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was nominated for Best Original Score , Best Original Song , Visual Effects , Film and Sound Editing at the 2008 Satellite Awards , winning Best Song . It was nominated for Best Action Movie at the 2009 Critics ' Choice Awards , and at the Empire Awards , which is voted for by the public , it was shortlisted for Best Actor , Best Actress , Best Newcomer , Best Thriller and Best Soundtrack . It was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Action / Adventure / Thriller Film , while Kurylenko and Dench were both nominated for the Best Supporting Actress award . An editorial by The Times also listed the film 's pre @-@ titles sequence as the tenth @-@ greatest car chase in film history . 
 = All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues = 
 " All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues " is the eleventh episode of the American drama series first season of Lost . The episode was directed by Stephen Williams and written by Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach . It first aired on December 8 , 2004 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . In the episode , flashbacks reveal Jack Shephard being responsible for his father 's dismissal from a hospital after performing surgery while drunk . In the present , Jack and a team go searching for two fellow plane crash survivors after they are kidnapped by somebody who was not listed in the passenger manifest . 
 The flashbacks were inspired by Grillo @-@ Marxuach 's background as the son of a doctor , and the episode in general went through several changes in the writing stage , one of them being the creation of two new characters who help look for the missing survivors , who were then scrapped in favor of including regular character Boone Carlyle . " All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues " was watched by 18 @.@ 88 million Americans and was met with positive reviews from critics , with several reviewers commending the scene in which Jack saves Charlie Pace . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) operates on a woman who flatlines , and despite his attempts to revive her , his father Christian Shephard ( John Terry ) forces him to stop and call the time of death . It is later revealed that it was actually Christian 's operation ; Jack was called in by a nurse after it becomes apparent that his father was performing the surgery under the influence of alcohol . Christian attempts to cover this up by making Jack sign a form detailing the surgery , albeit with his inebriation omitted from the report , stating that the hospital will revoke his medical license if alcohol is mentioned . 
 However , sometime later Jack learns the patient 's husband is suing the hospital . Jack and Christian then attend a board meeting discussing what went wrong during the operation . The board reveals that the deceased woman was pregnant , which was unknown by Jack . Horrified , he confesses to the board that Christian was operating under the influence during the surgery , which impaired his judgment that led to the chain of events causing the woman 's death . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 On Day 16 , October 7 , 2004 , back at the caves , the camp has learned from Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) that one survivor , Ethan Rom ( William Mapother ) , is not listed in the passenger manifest . Furthermore , Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) and Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) are missing . Jack and John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) run through the jungle to find three distinct footprints , indicating that Ethan took Charlie and Claire . Locke decides to go back to gather a hunting party , but Jack continues alone . Locke returns with Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) and finds Jack . After they find a knuckle bandage left by Charlie as a clue , the party find two separate trails . Locke takes Boone in one direction , while Jack and Kate take the other . 
 It soon turns out that Jack and Kate are following the correct trail when they find more of Charlie 's knuckle bandages . When it starts raining , Jack believes he hears Claire screaming . Jack tumbles down an embankment to find Ethan , who warns Jack he will kill one of his captives if he does not stop following Ethan . A fistfight ensues , but Ethan gains the upper hand and subdues Jack . When he regains consciousness , Jack continues on , eventually finding Charlie , who has been hanged by Ethan . Kate cuts him down , and Jack furiously performs CPR — despite Kate 's pleas that he is dead . Jack does not give up and brings Charlie back to life . 
 Back at the caves at nightfall , Jack learns from Charlie that " they " only wanted Claire all along . In the meantime , Boone and Locke are still looking through the jungle . Boone decides to go back to the caves . As Locke throws him a flashlight , Boone drops it , and it lands on a metal surface embedded in the ground . Curious , the two proceed to remove the mud over it to find out what it is . 
 = = Production = = 
 " All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues " was written by Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach . Throughout the writing process , the episode went through several changes . The working title for the episode was " What It Takes " ; however , the writers deemed the title " lame . " In writing Jack 's flashback scenes , Grillo @-@ Marxuach drew his inspiration on his own background as the son of a doctor . Two new minor characters , named Arthur and Sullivan , were originally created to accompany Locke . The idea was later scrapped in favor of including series regular Boone Carlyle ; this development would serve as a genesis for the character 's upcoming death in a later episode , " Do No Harm " . The idea behind the metal surface , which would be known as the hatch for the rest of the season , came when the producers were storyboarding the season . The hatch 's discovery was to be introduced earlier into the episode , but was moved to the end to give the episode a cliffhanger . 
 With Jack and Kate 's journey , in the original outline they were to come under a dart attack by the Others , the island 's native inhabitants , however it was cut because executive producer Damon Lindelof deemed the attack too " cheesy . " Grillo @-@ Marxuach described the " hysterical CPR " as " the biggest cliché in the book , " but added " the nine people who were writing for the show decided , maybe we earned that . It gave us the emotional payoff for the episode . " 
 The fight scene between Jack and Ethan was performed by the actors themselves . The two were given the freedom to set up how their characters would fight each other . However , stunt coordinator Michael Vendrell wanted Ethan to be " as feral as possible ; no school of combat , karate , kung @-@ fu . " Before filming the scene where Jack finds Charlie , episode director Stephen Williams scouted for a suitable location and found " what looked like a cathedral , " because of the layout of trees behind where Charlie was hung . Monaghan had to be harnessed to a cable for roughly four to five hours . The actor described the scene ; " they put me in the tree and I just hung there . I just hung limp . I tried to fall asleep , I tried to relax . When everything was going on , when they cut me down from the tree , when [ Matthew Fox ] was trying to revive me , when [ Evangeline Lilly ] was crying , I really didn 't hear any of it . I just was in a semi @-@ meditative state ; however close that I could get with someone smacking me in the chest . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues " received a 6 @.@ 8 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . The episode was watched by 18 @.@ 88 million viewers , the sixth largest audience in American television the week it aired . It was also an improvement of over 1 @.@ 7 million over the previous episode , " Raised by Another " . In the United Kingdom , the episode was seen by 3 @.@ 76 million viewers . It was the second highest @-@ rated series to air on Channel 4 for the week . 
 Critical reactions of the episode were positive . Chris Carabott of IGN rated the episode 9 out of 10 , calling it " a swift return to form " with " plenty of striking and emotional moments " that made it one of the better episodes of the first season . Carabott commented on the flashbacks ; " We don 't necessarily learn anything new about Jack from a personality standpoint , " but Fox did " an exceptional job of conveying Jack 's heartbreak as he reveals that his father operated on a woman while under the influence of alcohol . " He enjoyed Jack and Ethan 's encounter , calling it " chilling . " Carabott also praised the scene where Jack tries to save Charlie ; " I remember believing that they had killed off Charlie on my initial viewing and even though I knew the outcome this time , it was still a hard scene to watch , " adding " after Jack finally manages to resuscitate him , you have to feel for Charlie because you know that he 's disappointed in himself for letting Claire down . " Another IGN article ranked " All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues " the 33rd best Lost episode . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of the Los Angeles Times rated the episode the 79th of all Lost episodes ( apart from the series finale ) , described the episode as " thrilling , " but opined that the show since " has done similar things much better . " Whitney Pastorek of Entertainment Weekly did not care for Jack 's flashbacks , but commended the scene in which Jack saved Charlie , stating " even though I knew he was going to go back to the CPR and save Charlie 's life , I started crying . This is how you identify good TV : When you know what 's going to happen and you still get swept up in it all . " 
 = Józef Piłsudski = 
 Józef Klemens Piłsudski ( Polish : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 5 December 1867 – 12 May 1935 ) was a Polish statesman ; Chief of State ( 1918 – 22 ) , " First Marshal of Poland " ( from 1920 ) , and de facto leader ( 1926 – 35 ) of the Second Polish Republic , Minister of Military Affairs . From mid @-@ World War I he had a major influence in Poland 's politics , and was an important figure on the European political scene . He was the person most responsible for the creation of the Second Republic of Poland in 1918 , 123 years after it had been taken over by Russia , Austria and Prussia . Under Piłsudski , Poland recovered Vilnius from newly born independent state of Lithuania following Żeligowski 's Mutiny but was unable to incorporate most of Lithuania into the newly resurrected Polish State . 
 Describing himself as a descendant of the culture and traditions of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , Piłsudski believed in a multicultural Poland - a home of nations , recognizing numerous ethnic and religious nationalities and finally existing in strong historical alliance with independent states of Lithuania and Ukraine . His main opponent Roman Dmowski by contrast called for an independent state of Poland narrowed to the lands of historical Crown and founded mainly on ethnically Polish demos and Roman Catholic identity . 
 Early in his political career , Piłsudski became a leader of the Polish Socialist Party . Concluding that Poland 's independence would have to be won by force of arms , he created the Polish Legions . In 1914 he anticipated the outbreak of a European war , the Russian Empire 's defeat by the Central Powers , and the Central Powers ' defeat by the western powers . When World War I broke out , he and his Legions fought under Austrian army control against Russia . In 1917 , with Russia faring badly in the war , he withdrew his support from the Central Powers and was arrested by the Germans . 
 From November 1918 , when Poland regained independence , until 1922 Piłsudski was Poland 's Chief of State . In 1919 – 21 he commanded Poland 's forces in six border wars that shaped the nation of Poland . His forces seemed almost defeated in the Polish @-@ Soviet War when they fought the battle for Warsaw in August 1920 . In the " miracle on the Vistula , " they routed five Russian armies and saved Poland . In 1923 , with the government dominated by his opponents , particularly the National Democrats , he withdrew from active politics . Three years later , he returned to power with the May 1926 coup d 'état , and became the strong man ( in practice a military dictator ) of Poland . From then until his death in 1935 , he concerned himself primarily with military and foreign affairs . 
 Piłsudski pursued , with varying degrees of intensity , two complementary strategies , intended to enhance Poland 's security : " <unk> " , which aimed at breaking up , successively , the Imperial Russia and later the Soviet Union into their constituent nations ; and the creation of an " <unk> " federation , comprising Poland and other independent states located in the geographical space between the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea and geopolitically placed between Germany and Russia . The <unk> main purpose was to guarantee a lasting balance of power in Central Europe and to secure the existence of its nations against both western and eastern imperialisms . 
 Between 1945 and 1989 , Piłsudski 's person and his record were one of the multiple topics forbidden by the Polish communist regime . Wandycz characterizes him as " an ardent Polish patriot who on occasion would castigate the Poles for their stupidity , cowardice , or servility . He called himself a Polish Lithuanian , and was stubborn and reserved , loath to show his emotions . " Today , although some aspects of his rule remain controversial , Piłsudski 's memory is held in high esteem in Poland . Together with his opponent Roman Dmowski he is regarded as a father of the modern Polish nation . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Józef was born on 5 December 1867 to the medieval noble family Piłsudski , at their manor named <unk> near the <unk> village ( now <unk> , <unk> district municipality , Lithuania ) , on the territory of the former Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , occupied by the Russian Empire since 1795 . The estate was part of the dowry brought by his mother , a member of the wealthy Billewicz family . The Piłsudski 's family although <unk> , cherished Polish patriotic traditions and has been characterized either as Polish or as Polonized @-@ Lithuanian . Józef was the second son born to the family . 
 Józef , when he attended the Russian gymnasium at Wilno ( now Vilnius , Lithuania ) , was not an especially diligent student . One of the younger Polish students at this gymnasium was the future Russian communist leader Feliks <unk> , who later would become Piłsudski 's arch @-@ enemy . Along with his brothers Adam , Bronisław and Jan , Józef was introduced by his mother Maria , née Billewicz , to Polish history and literature , which were suppressed by the Russian authorities . His father , likewise named Józef , had fought in the January 1863 Uprising against Russian rule of Poland . 
 The family resented the Russian government 's Russification policies . Young Józef profoundly disliked having to attend Russian Orthodox Church service and left school with an aversion not only for the Russian Tsar and the Russian Empire , but for the culture , which he knew well . 
 In 1885 Piłsudski started medical studies at Kharkov University , where he became involved with <unk> Volya , part of the Russian <unk> revolutionary movement . In 1886 he was suspended for participating in student demonstrations . He was rejected by the University of Dorpat ( Tartu , Estonia ) , whose authorities had been informed of his political affiliation . On 22 March 1887 he was arrested by Tsarist authorities on a charge of plotting with Vilnius socialists to assassinate Tsar Alexander III . In fact , Piłsudski 's main connection to the plot was his elder brother Bronisław 's involvement in it . Bronisław Piłsudski was sentenced to fifteen years ' hard labor ( <unk> ) in eastern Siberia . 
 Józef received a milder sentence : five years ' exile in Siberia , first at <unk> on the Lena River , then at <unk> . While being transported in a prisoners ' convoy to Siberia , Piłsudski was held for several weeks at a prison in Irkutsk . There he took part in what the authorities viewed as a revolt : after one of the inmates had insulted a guard and refused to apologize , he and other political prisoners were beaten by the guards for their defiance ; Piłsudski lost two teeth and took part in a subsequent hunger strike until the authorities reinstated political prisoners ' privileges that had been suspended after the incident . For his involvement , he was sentenced in 1888 to six months ' imprisonment . He had to spend the first night of his incarceration in 40 @-@ degree @-@ below @-@ zero Siberian cold ; this led to an illness that nearly killed him and to health problems that would plague him throughout life . 
 During his years of exile in Siberia , Piłsudski met many <unk> , including Bronisław <unk> , who had almost become a leader of the January 1863 Uprising . He was allowed to work in an occupation of his own choosing , and earned his living tutoring local children in mathematics and foreign languages ( he knew French , German and Lithuanian in addition to Russian and his native Polish ; he would later learn English ) . Local officials decided that as a Polish noble he was not entitled to the 10 @-@ ruble pension received by most other exiles . 
 In 1892 Piłsudski returned from exile and settled in <unk> Manor near <unk> ( now in <unk> district ) . In 1893 he joined the Polish Socialist Party ( PPS ) and helped organize its Lithuanian branch . Initially he sided with the Socialists ' more radical wing , but despite the socialist movement 's ostensible internationalism he remained a Polish nationalist . In 1894 , as its chief editor , he began publishing an underground socialist newspaper , Robotnik ( The Worker ) ; he would also be one of its chief writers , and , initially , a typesetter . In 1895 he became a PPS leader , and took the position that doctrinal issues were of minor importance and that socialist ideology should be merged with nationalist ideology , since that combination offered the greatest chance of restoring Polish independence . 
 On 15 July 1899 , while an underground organizer , Piłsudski married a fellow socialist organizer , Maria <unk> , née <unk> . According to his chief biographer , Wacław <unk> , the marriage was less romantic than pragmatic in nature . Both were very involved in the socialist and independence movement . The printing press of " Robotnik " was in their apartment first in Wilno , then in Łódź . Having a pretext of regular family life made their accommodation safer from suspicion . The Russian law also protected the wife from prosecution for the illegal activities of the husband . The marriage deteriorated when , several years later , Piłsudski began an affair with a younger socialist , Aleksandra <unk> . Maria died in 1921 , and in October that year Piłsudski married Aleksandra . By then the couple had two little daughters , Wanda and Jadwiga . 
 In February 1900 , after Russian authorities found Robotnik 's underground printing press in Łódź , Piłsudski was imprisoned at the Warsaw Citadel . But , after feigning mental illness in May 1901 , he managed to escape from a mental hospital at Saint Petersburg with the help of a Polish physician , Władysław Mazurkiewicz , and others , fleeing to Galicia , then part of Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 At the time , when almost all parties in Russian Poland and Lithuania took a conciliatory position toward the Russian Empire and aimed at negotiating within it a limited autonomy for Poland , Piłsudski 's PPS was the only political force that was prepared to fight the Empire for Polish independence and to resort to violence in order to achieve that goal . 
 On the outbreak of the Russo @-@ Japanese War ( 1904 – 1905 ) , in the summer of 1904 , Piłsudski traveled to Tokyo , Japan , where he tried unsuccessfully to obtain that country 's assistance for an uprising in Poland . He offered to supply Japan with intelligence in support of its war with Russia and proposed the creation of a Polish Legion from Poles , conscripted into the Russian Army , who had been captured by Japan . He also suggested a " Promethean " project directed at breaking up the Russian Empire — a goal that he later continued to pursue . Meeting with Yamagata Aritomo , he suggested that starting a guerrilla war in Poland would distract Russia , and asked that Japan supply him with weapons . Although Japanese diplomat Hayashi Tadasu favored the plan , the Japanese government , including Yamagata were more skeptical . 
 Piłsudski 's arch @-@ rival Roman Dmowski , also traveled to Japan , where he argued against Piłsudski 's plan , endeavoring to discourage the Japanese government from supporting at this time a Polish revolution which Dmowski felt would be doomed to failure . Dmowski , himself a Polish patriot , would remain Piłsudski 's political arch @-@ enemy to the end of Piłsudski 's life . In the end , the Japanese offered Piłsudski much less than he had hoped for ; he received Japan 's help in purchasing weapons and ammunition for the PPS and its combat organisation , while the Japanese declined the Legion proposal . 
 In the fall of 1904 Piłsudski formed a paramilitary unit ( the Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party , or <unk> ) aiming to create an armed resistance movement against the Russian authorities . The PPS organized an increasing numbers of demonstrations , mainly in Warsaw ; on 28 October 1904 , Russian Cossack cavalry attacked a demonstration , and in reprisal , during a demonstration on 13 November Piłsudski 's paramilitary opened fire on Russian police and military . Initially concentrating their attention on spies and informers , in March 1905 the paramilitary began using bombs to assassinate selected Russian police officers . 
 During the 1905 Russian Revolution , Piłsudski played a leading role in events in Congress Poland . In early 1905 he ordered the PPS to launch a general strike there ; it involved some 400 @,@ 000 workers and lasted two months until it was broken by the Russian authorities . In June 1905 , Piłsudski sent paramilitary aid to an uprising in Łódź . During the " June Days " , as the Łódź uprising came to be known , armed clashes broke out between Piłsudski 's paramilitaries and gunmen loyal to Dmowski and his National Democrats . On 22 December 1905 , Piłsudski called for all Polish workers to rise up ; the call went largely unheeded . 
 Unlike the National Democrats , Piłsudski instructed the PPS to boycott the elections to the First Duma . This decision , and his resolve to try to win Polish independence through uprisings , caused tensions within the PPS , and in November 1906 the party fractured over Piłsudski 's leadership . His faction came to be called the " Old Faction " or " Revolutionary Faction " ( " <unk> " or " <unk> <unk> " ) , while their opponents were known as the " Young Faction " , " Moderate Faction " or " Left Wing " ( " <unk> " , " <unk> <unk> " , " <unk> " ) . The " Young " sympathized with the Social Democrats of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania and believed that priority should be given to co @-@ operation with Russian revolutionaries in toppling the Tsarist regime and creating a socialist utopia that would facilitate negotiations for independence . 
 Piłsudski and his supporters in the Revolutionary Faction continued to plot a revolution against Tsarist Russia that would secure Polish independence . By 1909 his faction would again be the majority in the PPS , and Piłsudski would remain one of the most important PPS leaders up to the outbreak of the First World War . 
 Piłsudski anticipated a coming European war and the need to organize the nucleus of a future Polish Army which could help win Poland 's independence from the three empires that had partitioned her out of political existence in the late 18th century . In 1906 Piłsudski , with the connivance of Austrian authorities , founded a military school in Kraków for the training of paramilitary units . In 1906 alone , the 800 @-@ strong paramilitaries , operating in five @-@ man teams in Congress Poland , killed 336 Russian officials ; in subsequent years , the number of their casualties declined , while the paramilitaries ' numbers increased to some 2 @,@ 000 in 1908 . 
 The paramilitaries also held up Russian currency transports leaving Polish territories . On the night of 26 / 27 September 1908 , they robbed a Russian mail train carrying tax revenues from Warsaw to Saint Petersburg . Piłsudski , who took part in this <unk> raid near Vilnius , used the funds thus " expropriated " to finance his secret military organization . The take from that single raid ( 200 @,@ 812 rubles ) was a fortune for the time and equaled the paramilitaries ' entire takes of the two preceding years . 
 In 1908 Piłsudski transformed his paramilitary units into an " Association for Active Struggle " ( Związek Walki <unk> , or <unk> ) , headed by three of his associates , Władysław Sikorski , Marian <unk> and Kazimierz Sosnkowski . One of the <unk> 's main purposes was to train officers and noncommissioned officers for a future Polish Army . 
 In 1910 two legal paramilitary organizations were created in the Austrian zone of Poland – one in Lwów ( now Lviv , Ukraine ) and one in Kraków – to conduct training in military science . With the permission of the Austrian authorities , Piłsudski founded a series of " sporting clubs " , then the Riflemen 's Association , which served as cover to train a Polish military force . In 1912 Piłsudski ( using the nom de guerre , " Mieczysław " ) became commander @-@ in @-@ chief of a Riflemen 's Association ( Związek Strzelecki ) that grew by 1914 to 12 @,@ 000 men . In 1914 , Piłsudski declared that " Only the sword now carries any weight in the balance for the destiny of a nation . " 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At a meeting in Paris in 1914 , Piłsudski presciently declared that in the impending war , for Poland to regain independence , Russia must be beaten by the Central Powers ( the Austro @-@ Hungarian and German Empires ) , and the latter powers must in their turn be beaten by France , Britain and the United States . By contrast , Roman Dmowski , Piłsudski 's rival , believed that the best way to achieve a unified and independent Poland was to support the Triple Entente against the Central Powers . 
 At the outbreak of World War I , on 3 August in Kraków , Piłsudski formed a small cadre military unit , the First Cadre Company , from members of the Riflemen 's Association and Polish Rifle Squads . That same day , a cavalry unit under Władysław Belina @-@ <unk> was sent to reconnoitre across the Russian border , even before the official declaration of war between Austria @-@ Hungary and Russia , which ensued on 6 August . 
 Piłsudski 's strategy was to send his forces north across the border into Russian Poland , into an area which the Russian Army had evacuated , in the hope of breaking through to Warsaw and sparking a national uprising . Using his limited forces , in those early days he backed his orders with the sanction of a fictitious " National Government in Warsaw " , and bent and stretched Austrian orders to the utmost , taking initiatives , moving forward and establishing Polish institutions in liberated towns , while the Austrians saw his forces as good only for scouting or for supporting main Austrian formations . On 12 August 1914 Piłsudski 's forces took the town of Kielce , of Kielce Governorate , but Piłsudski found the populace less supportive than he had expected . 
 Soon afterward he officially established the Polish Legions , taking personal command of their First Brigade , which he would lead successfully into several victorious battles . He also secretly informed the British government in the fall of 1914 that his Legions would never fight France or Britain , only Russia . 
 Piłsudski decreed that Legions ' personnel were to be addressed by the French @-@ Revolution @-@ inspired " Citizen " ( <unk> ) , and he himself was referred to as " the Commandant " ( " <unk> " ) . Piłsudski enjoyed extreme respect and loyalty from his men which would remain for years to come . The Polish Legions fought against Russia at the side of the Central Powers until 1917 . 
 Soon after forming the Legions , also in 1914 , Piłsudski set up another organization , the Polish Military Organisation ( Polska Organizacja Wojskowa ) , which served as a precursor Polish intelligence agency and was designed to perform espionage and sabotage missions . 
 In mid @-@ 1916 , after the Battle of Kostiuchnówka ( 4 – 6 July 1916 ) , in which the Polish Legions delayed a Russian offensive at a cost of over 2 @,@ 000 casualties , Piłsudski demanded that the Central Powers issue a guarantee of independence for Poland . He backed this demand with his own proffered resignation and that of many of the Legions ' officers . On 5 November 1916 the Central Powers proclaimed the " independence " of Poland , hoping to increase the number of Polish troops that could be sent to the eastern front against Russia , thereby relieving German forces to bolster the western front . 
 Piłsudski agreed to serve in the Regency Kingdom of Poland created by the Central Powers , and acted as minister of war in the newly formed Polish Regency government ; as such he was responsible for the Polnische Wehrmacht . After the Russian Revolution in early 1917 , and in view of the worsening situation of the Central Powers , Piłsudski took an increasingly uncompromising stance , insisting that his men no longer be treated as " German colonial troops " and only be used to fight Russia . Anticipating the Central Powers ' defeat in the war , he did not wish to be allied with the losing side . In the aftermath of a July 1917 " Oath Crisis " when Piłsudski forbade Polish soldiers to swear an oath of loyalty to the Central Powers , he was arrested and imprisoned at Magdeburg ; the Polish units were disbanded , and the men were incorporated into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army , while the Polish Military Organization began attacking German targets . Piłsudski 's arrest greatly enhanced his reputation among Poles , many of whom began to see him as the most determined Polish leader , willing to take on all the partitioning powers . 
 On 8 November 1918 , three days before the Armistice , Piłsudski and his colleague , Colonel Kazimierz Sosnkowski , were released by the Germans from Magdeburg and soon — like Vladimir Lenin before them — placed on a private train , bound for their national capital , as the collapsing Germans hoped that Piłsudski would create a force friendly to them . 
 = = = Rebuilding Poland = = = 
 On 11 November 1918 , in Warsaw , Piłsudski was appointed Commander in Chief of Polish forces by the Regency Council and was entrusted with creating a national government for the newly independent country . On that very day ( which would become Poland 's Independence Day ) , he proclaimed an independent Polish state . 
 That week , too , Piłsudski also negotiated the evacuation of the German garrison from Warsaw and of other German troops from the " Ober Ost " authority . Over 55 @,@ 000 Germans would peacefully depart Poland , leaving their weapons to the Poles . In coming months , over 400 @,@ 000 total would depart Polish territories . 
 On 14 November 1918 Piłsudski was asked to provisionally supervise the running of the country . On 22 November he officially received , from the new government of Jędrzej Moraczewski , the title of Provisional Chief of State ( Naczelnik <unk> ) of renascent Poland . 
 Various Polish military organizations and provisional governments ( the Regency Council in Warsaw ; Ignacy Daszyński 's government in Lublin ; and the Polish Liquidation Committee in Kraków ) bowed to Piłsudski , who set about forming a new coalition government . It was predominantly socialist and introduced many reforms long proclaimed as necessary by the Polish Socialist Party , such as the eight @-@ hour day , free school education , and women 's suffrage . This was necessary to avoid major unrest . 
 However , Piłsudski believed that as head of state he must be above partisan politics . The day after his arrival in Warsaw , he met with old colleagues from underground days , who addressed him socialist @-@ style as " Comrade " ( " <unk> " ) and asked his support for their revolutionary policies ; he refused it and answered : " Comrades , I took the red streetcar of socialism to the stop called Independence , and that 's where I got off . You may keep on to the final stop if you wish , but from now on let 's address each other as ' Mister ' [ rather than continue using the socialist term of address , ' Comrade ' ] ! " He declined to support any one party and did not form any political organization of his own ; instead , he advocated creating a coalition government . He also set about organizing a Polish army out of Polish veterans of the German , Russian and Austrian armies . 
 In the days immediately after World War I , Piłsudski attempted to build a government in a shattered country . Much of former Russian Poland had been destroyed in the war , and systematic looting by the Germans had reduced the region 's wealth by at least 10 % . A British diplomat who visited Warsaw in January 1919 reported : " I have nowhere seen anything like the evidences of extreme poverty and wretchedness that meet one 's eye at almost every turn " . 
 In addition , the country had to unify the disparate systems of law , economics , and administration in the former German , Austrian and Russian sectors of Poland . There were nine legal systems , five currencies , 66 types of rail systems ( with 165 models of locomotives ) , which all had to be consolidated on an expedited basis . 
 Wacław <unk> , in Piłsudski : A Life for Poland , describes Piłsudski as very deliberate in his decision @-@ making . He collected all available pertinent information , then took his time weighing it before arriving at a final decision . Piłsudski drove himself hard , working all day and all night . He maintained a spartan lifestyle , eating plain meals alone at an inexpensive restaurant . Though Piłsudski was popular with much of the Polish public , his reputation as a loner ( the result of many years ' underground work ) , as a man who distrusted almost everyone , led to strained relations with other Polish politicians . 
 Piłsudski and the first Polish government were distrusted in the West because Piłsudski had cooperated with the Central Powers in 1914 – 17 and because the governments of Daszyński and Jędrzej Moraczewski were primarily socialist . It was not until January 1919 , when the world @-@ famous pianist and composer Ignacy Paderewski became prime minister and foreign minister of a new government , that it was recognized in the West . 
 That still left two separate governments claiming to be Poland 's legitimate government : Piłsudski 's in Warsaw , and Dmowski 's in Paris . To ensure that Poland have a single government and to avert civil war , Paderewski met with Dmowski and Piłsudski and persuaded them to join forces , with Piłsudski acting as Provisional Chief of State and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief while Dmowski and Paderewski represented Poland at the Paris Peace Conference . Articles 87 – 93 of the Versailles Treaty and the Little Treaty of Versailles , signed on 28 June 1919 , formally established Poland as an independent and sovereign state in the international arena . 
 Piłsudski often clashed with Dmowski , at variance with the latter 's vision of the Poles as the dominant nationality in renascent Poland , and irked by Dmowski 's attempt to send the Blue Army to Poland through Danzig , Germany ( now Gdańsk , Poland ) . On 5 January 1919 , some of Dmowski 's supporters ( Marian <unk> @-@ Żegota and Eustachy Sapieha ) attempted a coup against Piłsudski and Prime Minister Moraczewski , but failed . 
 On 20 February 1919 Piłsudski declared that he would return his powers to the newly elected Polish parliament ( Sejm ) . However , the Sejm reinstated his office in the Little Constitution of 1919 . The word " Provisional " was struck from his title , and Piłsudski would hold the office until 9 December 1922 , when Gabriel Narutowicz was elected the first president of Poland . 
 Piłsudski 's major foreign @-@ policy initiative at this time was a proposed federation ( to be called " Międzymorze " , Polish for " Between @-@ Seas " , and also known from the Latin as " Intermarum " , stretching from the Baltic to the Black Sea ) of Poland with the independent Baltic states and Belarus and Ukraine , somewhat in emulation of the pre @-@ partition Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . 
 Piłsudski 's plan met with opposition from most of the prospective member states — who refused to relinquish any of their hard @-@ won independence — as well as from the Allied powers , for whom it would be too bold a change to the existing balance @-@ of @-@ power structure . According to historian George Sanford , around 1920 Piłsudski came to realize the infeasibility of this version of his Intermarum project . 
 Instead of a <unk> and East @-@ European alliance , there soon appeared a series of border conflicts , including the Polish @-@ Ukrainian War ( 1918 – 19 ) , the Polish @-@ Lithuanian War ( 1920 , culminating in Żeligowski 's Mutiny ) , Polish @-@ Czechoslovak border conflicts ( beginning in 1918 ) , and most notably the Polish @-@ Soviet War ( 1919 – 21 ) . Winston Churchill commented : " The war of giants has ended , the wars of the pygmies begun . " 
 = = = Polish @-@ Soviet War = = = 
 In the aftermath of World War I , there was unrest on all Polish borders . Regarding Poland 's future frontiers , Piłsudski said , " All that we can gain in the west depends on the Entente — on the extent to which it may wish to squeeze Germany " , while in the east " there are doors that open and close , and it depends on who forces them open and how far . " In 1918 in the east , Polish forces clashed with Ukrainian forces in the Polish @-@ Ukrainian War , and Piłsudski 's first orders as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Polish Army , on 12 November 1918 , were to provide support for the Polish struggle in Lviv . 
 Piłsudski was aware that the Bolsheviks were no friends of independent Poland , and that war with them was inevitable . He viewed their advance west as a major problem , but also considered the Bolsheviks less dangerous for Poland than their Russian Civil War opponents . These " White Russians " — representatives of the old Russian Empire — were willing to accept only limited independence for Poland , probably within borders similar to those of the former Congress Poland , and clearly objected to Polish control of Ukraine , which was crucial for Piłsudski 's Intermarum project . 
 This was in contrast to the Bolsheviks , who proclaimed the partitions of Poland null and void . Piłsudski thus speculated that Poland would be better off with the Bolsheviks , alienated from the Western powers , than with a restored Russian Empire . By ignoring the strong pressures from the Entente Cordiale to join the attack on Vladimir Lenin 's struggling Soviet government , Piłsudski probably saved the Bolshevik government in the summer and fall of 1919 . 
 In the wake of the Russian westward offensive of 1918 – 1919 and of a series of escalating battles which resulted in the Poles advancing eastward , on 21 April 1920 , Marshal Piłsudski ( as his rank had been since March 1920 ) signed a military alliance ( the Treaty of Warsaw ) with Ukrainian leader Symon Petliura to conduct joint operations against Soviet Russia . The goal of the Polish @-@ Ukrainian treaty was to establish an independent Ukraine and independent Poland in alliance , resembling that once existing within Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth In return , Petliura gave up Ukrainian claims to western lands of Galicia being a historical part of the Crown of Poland , for which he was denounced by Ukrainian nationalist leaders . 
 The Polish and Ukrainian armies , under Piłsudski 's command , launched the a successful offensive against the Russian forces in Ukraine . On 7 May 1920 , with remarkably little fighting , they captured Kiev . 
 The Bolshevik leadership framed the Polish actions as an invasion ; in response , thousands of officers and deserters joined the army , and thousands of civilians volunteered for war work . The Soviets launched a counter @-@ offensive from Belarus and counter @-@ attacked in Ukraine , advancing into Poland in a drive toward Germany to encourage the German Communist Party in its struggle to take power . Soviet confidence soared . The Soviets announced their plans to invade western Europe ; Soviet communist theoretician Nikolai Bukharin , writing in Pravda , hoped for the resources to carry the campaign beyond Warsaw " straight to London and Paris " . Soviet commander Mikhail Tukhachevsky 's order of the day for 2 July 1920 , read : " To the West ! Over the corpse of White Poland lies the road to worldwide conflagration . March upon Vilnius , Minsk , Warsaw ! " and " onward to Berlin over the corpse of Poland ! " 
 On 1 July 1920 , in view of the rapidly advancing Soviet offensive , Poland 's parliament , the Sejm , formed a Council for Defense of the Nation . It was chaired by Piłsudski and was to provide expeditious decision @-@ making and temporarily supplant the fractious Sejm . The National Democrats , however , contended that the string of Bolshevik victories had been Piłsudski 's fault and demanded that he resign ; some even accused him of treason . Their 19 July failure to carry a vote of no @-@ confidence in the council led to Roman Dmowski 's withdrawal from it . On 12 August Piłsudski tendered his resignation to Prime Minister Wincenty Witos , offering to be the scapegoat if the military solution failed , but Witos refused to accept his resignation . The Entente pressured Poland to surrender and enter into negotiations with the Bolsheviks . Piłsudski , however , was a staunch advocate of continuing the fight . As Norman Davies noted , at that time , especially abroad , " Piłsudski had nothing of his later prestige . As a pre @-@ war revolutionary he led his party to splits and quarrels ; as a general in World War I he led his legions to internment and disbanding ; as a marshal of the Polish Army he led it to Kiev and Vilnius , both now lost to Poles . He left the Polish Socialist Party and his Austro @-@ German allies ; refused to ally himself with Entente . In France and England he was considered a treasonous ally who leads Poland into destruction ; in Russia he was seen as a false servant of the allies , who will lead imperialism to ruin . All – from Lenin to Lloyd George , from Pravda to Morning Star – considered him a military and political failure . In August 1920 all were in agreement that his catastrophic career will be crowned with the fall of Warsaw . " 
 Yet over the next few weeks , Poland 's risky , unconventional strategy at the August 1920 Battle of Warsaw halted the Soviet advance . The Polish plan was developed by Piłsudski and others , including Tadeusz Rozwadowski . Later , some supporters of Piłsudski would seek to portray him as the sole author of the Polish strategy , while opponents would seek to minimize his role . In the West for a long time a myth persisted that it was General Maxime Weygand of the French Military Mission to Poland who had saved Poland ; modern scholars , however , are in agreement that Weygand 's role was minimal at best . 
 Piłsudski 's plan called for Polish forces to withdraw across the Vistula River and defend the bridgeheads at Warsaw and on the Wieprz River , while some 25 % of available divisions concentrated to the south for a strategic counter @-@ offensive . The plan next required two armies under General Józef Haller , facing Soviet frontal attack on Warsaw from the east , to hold their entrenched positions at all costs . At the same time , an army under General Władysław Sikorski was to strike north from outside Warsaw , cutting off Soviet forces that sought to envelope the Polish capital from that direction . The most important role , however , was assigned to a relatively small , approximately 20 @,@ 000 @-@ man , newly assembled " Reserve Army " ( also known as the " Strike Group " , " Grupa <unk> " ) , comprising the most determined , battle @-@ hardened Polish units and commanded personally by Piłsudski . Their task was to spearhead a lightning northward offensive , from the Vistula @-@ Wieprz triangle south of Warsaw , through a weak spot identified by Polish intelligence between the Soviet Western and Southwestern Fronts . That offensive would separate the Soviet Western Front from its reserves and disorganize its movements . Eventually , the gap between Sikorski 's army and the " Strike Group " would close near the East Prussian border , bringing about the destruction of the encircled Soviet forces . 
 At the time Piłsudski 's plan was strongly criticized , and only the desperate situation of the Polish forces persuaded other commanders to go along with it . Though based on reliable intelligence , including decrypted Soviet radio communications , the plan was termed " amateurish " by high @-@ ranking army officers and military experts who were quick to point out Piłsudski 's lack of formal military education . When a copy of the plan fell into Soviet hands , Western Front commander Mikhail Tukhachevsky thought it a ruse and disregarded it . Days later , the Soviets paid dearly for this when , during the Battle of Warsaw , the overconfident Red Army suffered one of its greatest defeats ever . 
 A National Democrat Sejm deputy , Stanisław Stroński , coined the phrase , " Miracle at the Vistula " ( " Cud nad Wisłą " ) , to express his disapproval of Piłsudski 's " Ukrainian adventure " . Stroński 's phrase was adopted as praise for Piłsudski by some patriotically or piously minded Poles , who were unaware of Stroński 's ironic intent . A junior member of the French military mission , Charles de Gaulle , would later adopt some lessons from the Polish @-@ Soviet War as well as from Piłsudski 's career . 
 In February 1921 Piłsudski visited Paris , where in negotiations with French president Alexandre Millerand he laid the foundations for the Franco @-@ Polish Military Alliance that would be signed later that year . The Treaty of Riga , which ended the Polish @-@ Soviet War in March 1921 , partitioned Belarus and Ukraine between Poland and Russia . Piłsudski called the treaty an " act of cowardice " . The treaty , and Piłsudski @-@ approved General Lucjan Żeligowski 's capture of Vilnius from the Lithuanians , marked an end to this incarnation of Piłsudski 's federalist Intermarum plan . 
 On 25 September 1921 , when Piłsudski visited Lwów ( now Lviv ) for the opening of the first Eastern Trade Fair ( <unk> <unk> ) , he was the target of an unsuccessful assassination attempt by Stepan Fedak , acting on behalf of Ukrainian @-@ independence organizations , including the Ukrainian Military Organization . 
 = = = Retirement and coup = = = 
 After the Polish Constitution of March 1921 severely limited the powers of the presidency ( intentionally , to prevent a President Piłsudski from waging war ) , Piłsudski declined to run for the office . On 9 December 1922 the Polish National Assembly elected Gabriel Narutowicz of Polish People 's Party " <unk> " ; his election , opposed by the right @-@ wing parties , caused public unrest . On 14 December at the Belweder Palace , Piłsudski officially transferred his powers as Chief of State to his friend Narutowicz ; the Naczelnik was replaced by the President . 
 Two days later , on 16 December 1922 , Narutowicz was shot dead by a right @-@ wing painter and art critic , <unk> <unk> , who had originally wanted to kill Piłsudski but had changed his target , influenced by National @-@ Democrat anti @-@ Narutowicz propaganda . 
 For Piłsudski this was a major shock , shaking his belief that Poland could function as a democracy and making him favor government by a strong hand . He became Chief of the General Staff and , together with Minister of Military Affairs Władysław Sikorski , managed to stabilize the situation , quelling unrest with a brief state of emergency . 
 Stanisław Wojciechowski of Polish People 's Party " Piast " ( PSL Piast ) , another of Piłsudski 's old colleagues , was elected the new president , and Wincenty Witos , also of PSL Piast , became prime minister . But the new government — pursuant to the <unk> Pact , an alliance among the centrist PSL Piast and the right @-@ wing Popular National Union and Christian Democrat parties — contained right @-@ wing enemies of Piłsudski , people whom he held morally responsible for Narutowicz 's death and with whom he found it impossible to work . On 30 May 1923 , Piłsudski resigned as Chief of the General Staff . 
 After General Stanisław <unk> proposed that the military should be more closely supervised by civilian authorities , Piłsudski criticized this as an attempt to politicize the army , and on 28 June he resigned his last political appointment . The same day , the Sejm 's left @-@ wing deputies voted a resolution thanking him for his past work . Piłsudski went into retirement in <unk> , outside Warsaw , at his country manor , " <unk> " , which had been presented to him by his former soldiers . There he settled down to supporting his family by writing a series of political and military memoirs , including Rok 1920 ( The Year 1920 ) . 
 Meanwhile , Poland 's economy was in shambles . Hyperinflation fueled public unrest , and the government was unable to find a quick solution to the mounting unemployment and economic crisis . Piłsudski 's allies and supporters repeatedly asked him to return to politics , and he began to create a new power base , centered around former members of the Polish Legions and the Polish Military Organization as well as some left @-@ wing and intelligentsia parties . In 1925 , after several governments had resigned in short order and the political scene was becoming increasingly chaotic , Piłsudski became more and more critical of the government , eventually issuing statements demanding the resignation of the Witos cabinet . 
 When the <unk> @-@ Piast coalition , which Piłsudski had strongly criticized , formed a new government , on 12 – 14 May 1926 , Piłsudski returned to power in a coup d 'état ( the May Coup ) , supported by the Polish Socialist Party , Liberation , the Peasant Party , and even the Polish Communist Party . Piłsudski had hoped for a bloodless coup , but the government had refused to back down ; 215 soldiers and 164 civilians had been killed , and over 900 persons had been wounded . 
 On 31 May the Sejm elected Piłsudski president of the Republic . Piłsudski , however , aware of the presidency 's limited powers , refused the office . Another of his old friends , Ignacy Mościcki , was elected in his stead . Mościcki then appointed Piłsudski as Minister of Military Affairs ( defence minister ) a post he would hold for the rest of his life in 11 successive governments , two of which he headed himself from 1926 to 1928 and for a brief period in 1930 . He also served as General Inspector of the Armed Forces , and Chairman of The War Council . 
 = = = After the coup = = = 
 Piłsudski had no plans for major reforms ; he quickly distanced himself from the most radical of his left @-@ wing supporters , declaring that his coup was to be a " revolution without revolutionary consequences " . His goals were to stabilize the country , reduce the influence of political parties , which he blamed for corruption and inefficiency , and strengthen the army . His role in the Polish government over the subsequent years has been called a dictatorship by some sources , or a " quasi @-@ dictatorship " . 
 = = = = Internal politics = = = = 
 In internal politics , Piłsudski 's coup entailed sweeping limitations on parliamentary government , as his Sanation regime ( 1926 – 1939 ) — at times employing authoritarian methods — sought to " restore public life to moral health " . From 1928 the Sanation authorities were represented in the sphere of practical politics by the Non @-@ partisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government ( BBWR ) . Popular support and an effective propaganda apparatus allowed Piłsudski to maintain his authoritarian powers , which could not be overruled by the president , who was appointed by Piłsudski , nor by the Sejm . The powers of the Sejm were curtailed by constitutional amendments introduced soon after the coup , on 2 August 1926 . From 1926 to 1930 , Piłsudski relied chiefly on propaganda to weaken the influence of opposition leaders . 
 The culmination of his dictatorial and <unk> policies came in the 1930s with the imprisonment and trial of certain political opponents ( the Brest trials ) on the eve of the 1930 legislative elections , and with the 1934 establishment of a prison for political prisoners at <unk> <unk> ( today <unk> ) , where some prisoners were brutally mistreated . After the BBWR 's 1930 victory , Piłsudski left most internal matters in the hands of his " colonels " , while he himself concentrated on military and foreign affairs . He came under considerable criticism for his treatment of political opponents , and their 1930 arrest and imprisonment was internationally condemned and damaged Poland 's reputation . 
 Piłsudski became increasingly disillusioned with democracy in Poland . His intemperate public utterances — he called the Sejm a " prostitute " – and his sending ninety armed officers into the Sejm building in response to an impending vote of no @-@ confidence , caused concern in contemporary and modern @-@ day observers who have seen his actions as setting precedents for authoritarian responses to political challenges . 
 One of Piłsudski 's main goals was to transform the parliamentary system into a presidential system ; however , he opposed the introduction of totalitarianism . The adoption of a new Polish constitution in April 1935 , tailored by Piłsudski 's supporters to his specifications — providing for a strong presidency — came too late for Piłsudski to seek that office ; but the April Constitution would serve Poland up to the outbreak of World War II and would carry its Government in Exile through to the end of the war and beyond . 
 Nonetheless , Piłsudski 's government depended more on his charismatic authority than on rational @-@ legal authority . None of his followers could claim to be his legitimate heir , and after his death the Sanation structure would quickly fracture , returning Poland to the pre @-@ Piłsudski era of parliamentary political contention . 
 Piłsudski 's regime began a period of national stabilization and of improvement in the situation of ethnic minorities , which formed about a third of the Second Republic 's population . Piłsudski replaced the National Democrats ' " ethnic @-@ assimilation " with a " state @-@ assimilation " policy : citizens were judged not by their ethnicity but by their loyalty to the state . Widely recognized for his opposition to the National Democrats antisemitic policies , he extended his policy of " state @-@ assimilation " to Polish Jews . The years 1926 – 35 , and Piłsudski himself , were favorably viewed by many Polish Jews whose situation improved especially under Piłsudski @-@ appointed Prime Minister Kazimierz Bartel . Many Jews saw Piłsudski as their only hope for restraining antisemitic currents in Poland and for maintaining public order ; he was seen as a guarantor of stability and a friend of the Jewish people , who voted for him and actively participated in his political bloc . Piłsudski 's death in 1935 brought a deterioration in the quality of life of Poland 's Jews . 
 During the 1930s , a combination of developments , from the Great Depression to the vicious spiral of <unk> terrorist attacks and government <unk> , caused government relations with the national minorities to deteriorate . Unrest among national minorities was also related to foreign policy . Troubles followed repressions in largely Ukrainian @-@ populated eastern Galicia , where nearly 1 @,@ 800 persons were arrested . Tension also arose between the government and Poland 's German minority , particularly in Upper Silesia . The government did not yield to calls for antisemitic measures ; but the Jews ( 8 @.@ 6 % of Poland 's population ) grew discontented for economic reasons that were connected with the depression . Overall , by the end of Piłsudski 's life , his government 's relations with national minorities were increasingly problematic . 
 In the military sphere , Piłsudski , who had shown himself an accomplished military strategist in engineering the " Miracle at the Vistula " , has been criticized by some for subsequently concentrating on personnel management and allegedly neglecting modernization of military strategy and equipment . His experiences in the Polish @-@ Soviet War ( 1919 – 21 ) may have led him to overestimate the importance of cavalry and to neglect the development of armored and air forces . Others , however , contend that , particularly from the late 1920s , he did support the development of these military branches . The limitations on Poland 's military modernization in this period may have been less doctrinal than financial . 
 = = = = Foreign policy = = = = 
 Under Piłsudski , Poland maintained good relations with neighboring Romania , Hungary and Latvia . Relations were strained with Czechoslovakia , however , and were still worse with Lithuania . Relations with Weimar Germany and the Soviet Union varied over time , but during Piłsudski 's tenure could for the most part be described as neutral . 
 Piłsudski 's Promethean program , designed to weaken the Russian Empire and its successor state , the Soviet Union , by supporting nationalist independence movements of major non @-@ Russian peoples dwelling in Russia and the Soviet Union , was coordinated from 1927 to the 1939 outbreak of World War II in Europe by the military intelligence officer , Edmund <unk> . In the Interbellum , the <unk> movement yielded few tangible results . 
 Piłsudski sought to maintain his country 's independence in the international arena . Assisted by his protégé , Foreign Minister Józef Beck , he sought support for Poland in alliances with western powers such as France and the United Kingdom , and with friendly , if less powerful , neighbors such as Romania and Hungary . 
 A supporter of the Franco @-@ Polish Military Alliance and the Polish @-@ Romanian Alliance ( part of the Little Entente ) , Piłsudski was disappointed by the French and British policy of appeasement evident in those countries ' signing of the Locarno Treaties . Piłsudski therefore aimed also to maintain good relations with the Soviet Union and Germany ; hence Poland signed non @-@ aggression pacts with both its powerful neighbors : the 1932 Soviet @-@ Polish Non @-@ Aggression Pact , and the 1934 German @-@ Polish Non @-@ Aggression Pact . The two treaties were meant to strengthen Poland 's position in the eyes of its allies and neighbors . 
 Piłsudski himself was acutely aware of the shakiness of the pacts , and commented : " Having these pacts , we are straddling two stools . This cannot last long . We have to know from which stool we will tumble first , and when that will be . " Critics of the two non @-@ aggression pacts have accused Piłsudski of underestimating Hitler 's aggressiveness and of giving Germany time to rearm ; and of allowing Stalin to eliminate opposition — primarily in Ukraine — that had been supported by Piłsudski 's Promethean program . 
 After Adolf Hitler came to power in January 1933 , Piłsudski is rumored to have proposed to France a preventive war against Germany . It has been argued that Piłsudski may have been sounding out France regarding possible joint military action against Germany . Lack of French interest may have been a reason why Poland signed the German @-@ Polish Non @-@ Aggression Pact of January 1934 . Little evidence has , however , been found in French or Polish diplomatic archives that such a proposal for preventive war was ever actually advanced . 
 Hitler repeatedly suggested a German @-@ Polish alliance against the Soviet Union , but Piłsudski declined , instead seeking precious time to prepare for potential war with Germany or with the Soviet Union . Just before his death , Piłsudski told Józef Beck that it must be Poland 's policy to maintain neutral relations with Germany and keep up the Polish alliance with France , and to improve relations with the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 By 1935 , unbeknownst to the public , Piłsudski had for several years been in declining health . On 12 May 1935 , he died of liver cancer at Warsaw 's Belweder Palace . The celebration of his life began spontaneously within half an hour of the announcement of his death . It was led by military personnel — former Legionnaires , members of the Polish Military Organization , veterans of the wars of 1919 – 21 — and by his political collaborators from his service as Chief of State and , later , Prime Minister and Inspector @-@ General . 
 The Polish Communist Party immediately attacked Piłsudski as a fascist and capitalist , though fascists themselves did not see him as one of them . Other opponents of the Sanation regime , however , were more civil ; socialists ( such as Ignacy Daszyński and Tomasz Arciszewski ) and Christian Democrats ( represented by Ignacy Paderewski , Stanisław Wojciechowski and Władysław Grabski ) expressed condolences . The peasant parties split in their reactions ( Wincenty Witos voicing criticism of Piłsudski , but Maciej Rataj and Stanisław <unk> being supportive ) , while Roman Dmowski 's National Democrats expressed a toned @-@ down criticism . 
 Condolences were expressed by Polish Catholic clergy — by Poland 's Primate August <unk> — as well as by Pope Pius XI , who called himself a " personal friend " of the Marshal . Notable appreciation for Piłsudski was expressed by Poland 's ethnic and religious minorities . Eastern Orthodox , Greek Orthodox , Protestant , Judaic and Islamic organizations expressed condolences , praising Piłsudski for his policies of religious tolerance . His death was a shock to members of the Jewish minority , who even years after remembered him as a very good man who protected Jews . 
 Mainstream organizations of ethnic minorities similarly expressed their support for his policies of ethnic tolerance , though he was criticized by , in addition to the Polish communists , by the Jewish Labour Bund , and by Ukrainian , German and Lithuanian extremists . 
 On the international scene , Pope Pius XI held a special ceremony 18 May in the Holy See , a commemoration was conducted at League of Nations Geneva headquarters , and dozens of messages of condolence arrived in Poland from heads of state across the world , including Germany 's Adolf Hitler , the Soviet Union 's Joseph Stalin , Italy 's Benito Mussolini and King Victor Emmanuel III , France 's Albert Lebrun and Pierre @-@ Étienne <unk> , Austria 's Wilhelm <unk> , Japan 's Emperor Hirohito , and Britain 's King George V. 
 Ceremonies , masses and an enormous funeral were held ; a funeral train toured Poland . A series of postcards , stamps and postmarks was also released . In 1937 , after a two @-@ year display at St. Leonard 's Crypt in Kraków 's Wawel Cathedral , Piłsudski 's body was laid to rest in the Cathedral 's Crypt under the Silver Bells , except for his brain , which he had willed for study to Stefan Batory University , and his heart , which was interred in his mother 's grave at Vilnius ' Rasos Cemetery , where it remains . The 1937 relocation of his remains , made by his long @-@ standing adversary Adam Sapieha , then Archbishop of Krakow , incited widespread protests that included calls for Sapieha 's removal . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 13 May 1935 , in accordance with Piłsudski 's last wishes , Edward Rydz @-@ Śmigły was named by Poland 's president and government to be Inspector @-@ General of the Polish Armed Forces , and on 10 November 1936 , he was elevated to Marshal of Poland . Rydz was now one of the most powerful people in Poland , the " second man in the state after the President " . While many saw Rydz @-@ Śmigły as a successor to Piłsudski , he never became as influential . 
 As the Polish government became increasingly authoritarian and conservative , the Rydz @-@ Śmigły faction was opposed by that of the more moderate Ignacy Mościcki , who remained President . After 1938 Rydz @-@ Śmigły reconciled with the President , but the ruling group remained divided into the " President 's Men " , mostly civilians ( the " Castle Group " , after the President 's official residence , Warsaw 's Royal Castle ) , and the " Marshal 's Men " ( " Piłsudski 's Colonels " ) , professional military officers and old comrades @-@ in @-@ arms of Piłsudski 's . After the German invasion of Poland in 1939 , some of this political division would survive within the Polish government in exile . 
 Piłsudski had given Poland something akin to what Henryk Sienkiewicz 's <unk> <unk> had mused about : a Polish Oliver Cromwell . As such , the Marshal had inevitably drawn both intense loyalty and intense vilification . 
 In 1935 , at Piłsudski 's funeral , President Mościcki eulogized the Marshal : " He was the king of our hearts and the sovereign of our will . During a half @-@ century of his life 's travails , he captured heart after heart , soul after soul , until he had drawn the whole of Poland within the purple of his royal spirit ... He gave Poland freedom , boundaries , power and respect . " 
 After World War II , little of Piłsudski 's thought influenced the policies of the Polish People 's Republic , a de facto satellite of the Soviet Union . In particular , Poland was in no position to resume Piłsudski 's effort to build an Intermarum federation of Poland and some of its neighbors ; and a " Promethean " endeavor to " break up the Russian state into its main constituents and emancipate the countries that have been forcibly incorporated into that empire . " 
 For a decade after World War II , Piłsudski was either ignored or condemned by Poland 's communist government , along with the entire interwar Second Polish Republic . This began to change , however , particularly after de @-@ Stalinization and the Polish October ( 1956 ) , and historiography in Poland gradually moved away from a purely negative view of Piłsudski toward a more balanced and neutral assessment . 
 After the fall of communism and the 1991 disintegration of the Soviet Union , Piłsudski once again came to be publicly acknowledged as a Polish national hero . On the sixtieth anniversary of his death , on 12 May 1995 , Poland 's Sejm adopted a resolution : " Józef Piłsudski will remain , in our nation 's memory , the founder of its independence and the victorious leader who fended off a foreign assault that threatened the whole of Europe and its civilization . Józef Piłsudski served his country well and has entered our history forever . " 
 While some of Piłsudski 's political moves remain controversial — particularly the May 1926 Coup d 'état , the Brest trials ( 1931 – 32 ) , the 1934 establishment of the <unk> <unk> detention camp , and successive Polish governments ' failure to formulate consistent , constructive policies toward the national minorities — Piłsudski continues to be viewed by most Poles as a providential figure in the country 's 20th @-@ century history . 
 Piłsudski has lent his name to several military units , including the 1st Legions Infantry Division and armored train No. 51 ( " I <unk> " — " the First Marshal " ) . 
 Also named for Piłsudski have been Piłsudski 's Mound , one of four man @-@ made mounds in Kraków ; the Józef Piłsudski Institute of America , a New York City research center and museum on the modern history of Poland ; the Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education in Warsaw ; a passenger ship , MS Piłsudski ; a gunboat , ORP <unk> Piłsudski ; and a racehorse , <unk> . Virtually every Polish city has its " Piłsudski Street " . ( There are , by contrast , few if any streets named after Piłsudski 's National @-@ Democrat arch @-@ rival , Roman Dmowski , even in Dmowski 's old Greater @-@ Poland political stronghold ) . There are statues of Piłsudski in many Polish cities ; the highest density of such statuary memorials is found in Warsaw , which has three in little more than a mile between the Belweder Palace , Piłsudski 's residence , and Piłsudski Square . 
 He was the subject of paintings by renowned artists such as Jacek Malczewski ( 1916 ) and Wojciech Kossak ( leaning on his sword , 1928 ; and astride his horse , <unk> , 1928 ) , as well as of numerous caricatures and photos . 
 Piłsudski has been a character in numerous works of fiction , such as the 1922 novel Generał <unk> ( General <unk> ) by Juliusz Kaden @-@ <unk> and the 2007 novel Ice ( <unk> ) by Jacek <unk> . Poland 's National Library lists over 500 publications related to Piłsudski ; the U.S. Library of Congress , over 300 . Piłsudski 's life was the subject of a 2001 Polish television documentary , <unk> Piłsudski , directed by Andrzej <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Plans are being considered to turn Piłsudski 's official residence , the Belweder Palace , which currently houses a small exhibit about him , into a full @-@ fledged museum devoted to his memory . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Descendants = = 
 Both daughters of Marshal Piłsudski returned to Poland in 1990 , after the fall of the Communist system . Jadwiga <unk> 's daughter Joanna <unk> returned to Poland in 1979 . She married a Polish " Solidarity " activist Janusz <unk> in a political prison in 1983 . Both were very involved in the Polish struggle against communism between 1979 and 1989 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 Order of the White Eagle ( 1921 ) 
 Order of Virtuti Militari , classes I , II , and V 
 Cross of Independence with Swords ( 6 November 1930 ) 
 Order of Polonia Restituta , Class I and II 
 Cross of Valour ( four times ) 
 Gold Cross of Merit ( Poland ) ( four times , including in 1931 ) 
 Merit Forces Central Lithuania 
 Cross on Silesian Ribbon of Merit and valor 
 Mark officers " Parasol " ( 1912 ) 
 Badge " for faithful service " ( 1916 ) 
 Scouting Cross ( 1920 ) 
 " Gold trade union " Chief Fire Brigades Union [ 78 ] 
 Cross <unk> ( 1929 ) [ 79 ] 
 Badge " Józef Piłsudski Polish Legion Commander " ( 1916 ) [ 80 ] 
 Commemorative Badge of former prisoners from the years 1914 – 1921 Ideological ( 1928 ) [ 81 ] 
 = = = Foreign = = = 
 Order of the Blue Mantle ( Afghanistan ) 
 Order of the Iron Crown , Class III ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Leopold ( Belgium ) 
 Order of Saint Alexander with sword ( Bulgaria ) 
 Order of the Southern Cross Class I ( Brazil ) 
 Czechoslovak War Cross 1918 
 Order of the Cross of the Eagle , Class I ( Estonia , 1930 ) 
 Cross of Liberty , class I ( grades I and III ) ( Estonia , 1922 and 1925 ) 
 Order of the White Rose of Finland , Class I 
 Grand Croix of the Legion of Honour , No. <unk> ( continuous numbering ) and the Médaille militaire ( France ) 
 Order of Military Merit ( Spain ) 
 Order of the Rising Sun , Class I ( Japan ) 
 Order of the Karađorđe 's Star ( Yugoslavia ) 
 Order of <unk> , Class I ( Latvia ) 
 Sovereign Military Order of St. John of Jerusalem , Class IV 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Tower and Sword – Portugal 
 Order of Carol I , class I and the Order of Michael the Brave , Classes I , II and III ( Romania ) 
 Grand Cross of Merit ( Hungary ) [ 100 ] 
 Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus , Class I of Military Order of Savoy , First Class ( Italy ) 
 = = = Honorary doctorates = = = 
 Jagiellonian University ( 28 April 1920 ) [ 102 ] 
 Adam Mickiewicz University ( 11 November 1933 ) 
 University of Warsaw ( 2 May 1921 ) [ 103 ] 
 Stefan Batory University in Vilnius ( September 1921 ) 
 = Crazy Eddie = 
 Crazy Eddie was an American retail business that sold electronic goods . The company did business in several forms . The first , and what would eventually become the most famous / infamous of the three , was a chain of retail shops located New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , and Pennsylvania , which also sold by telephone . The second was a venture that began as a retail shop but was eventually reorganized as an internet and telephone business . The third and most recent was an online and buy @-@ by @-@ telephone store . As of 2015 , none of the three Crazy Eddie ventures is conducting business . 
 Crazy Eddie was started during 1971 in Brooklyn , New York by businessmen Eddie Antar and Sam M. Antar as ERS Electronics , named after Eddie , his cousin and partner Ronnie Gindi , and Eddie 's father Sam . The chain became important throughout the Tri @-@ State Region as much for its prices as for its memorable radio and television commercials , featuring a frenetic , " crazy " character played by radio announcer Jerry Carroll ( who copied most of his act from early television @-@ commercial actor , used car and electronics salesman Earl " Madman " Muntz ) . At its maximum , Crazy Eddie had 43 stores in the chain , and earned more than $ 300 million in sales . 
 Carroll 's commercials ended invariably with the tag @-@ line " Crazy Eddie 's prices are insane ! " which , despite the chain 's relatively limited geographical reach , became well @-@ known during the early 1970s . 
 During February 1987 , the U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey commenced a federal grand jury investigation into the warranty billing practices of Crazy Eddie . During September of that year , the United States Securities and Exchange Commission initiated an investigation into alleged violations of federal securities laws by certain Crazy Eddie officers and employees . Eddie Antar was eventually charged with a series of crimes . 
 Unable to sustain his fraudulent business practices , co @-@ founder Eddie Antar cashed in millions of dollars ' worth of stock and resigned from the company during December 1986 . Crazy Eddie 's board of directors lost control of the company during November 1987 after a proxy battle with a group directed by Elias Zinn and Victor Palmieri , known as the Oppenheimer @-@ Palmieri Group . The entire Antar family was immediately eliminated from the business . The new owners quickly discovered the true extent of the Antar family 's fraud , but were unable to stop Crazy Eddie 's decreasing fortunes . During 1989 , the company declared bankruptcy and was liquidated . Crazy Eddie became a symbol for corporate fraud in its time , but has since been outdone by the Enron , <unk> and Bernie Madoff accounting scandals . 
 Antar fled to Israel during February 1990 , but was returned to the United States during January 1993 for trial . His 1993 conviction on fraud charges was overturned , but he eventually pleaded guilty during 1996 . During 1997 , Antar was sentenced to eight years in prison and paid large fines . He was released from prison during 1999 . 
 = = Beginnings = = 
 Eddie Antar ’ s grandparents , Murad and Tera Antar , who were Syrian Jews , relocated to Brooklyn , New York from Aleppo , Syria . Murad and Tera worked in their market stalls alongside Arabs , including Egyptians , other Syrians , as well as Turks . Eddie 's father Sam Antar was a retailer , and it was no surprise to the family that Eddie also became a retailer . 
 The predecessor to Crazy Eddie was a consumer electronics shop called Sight And Sound . It was a property of ERS Electronics , a company owned by Sam M. Antar , his son Eddie Antar , and Eddie 's cousin Ronnie Gindi . Sight And Sound , located on Kings Highway in Brooklyn , began operation during 1969 and offered electronics at regular prices . Due to his aggressive sales techniques , Eddie quickly became known as " Crazy Eddie . " Despite his technique , or perhaps because of it , within 18 months the shop ( as well as Eddie and Ronnie ) was nearly bankrupt . 
 Eddie Antar bought out Gindi 's one @-@ third ownership stake of Sight And Sound , and Sam M. Antar retained his one @-@ third stake but left the day @-@ to @-@ day operations to Eddie . During 1971 , the Sight And Sound store on Kings Highway was renamed Crazy Eddie . Eddie continued his sales tactics with the renamed Crazy Eddie shop , but this time was successful . Eventually , Eddie closed that location and relocated the business to a bigger shop , just a few blocks from Sight And Sound 's old location . During 1973 , Antar opened the second Crazy Eddie location in Syosset , New York . A third followed during 1975 , located in Manhattan . That year , Antar established a corporate main office in Brooklyn , New York . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 An essential part of Crazy Eddie 's success was its advertising campaign , which started almost by accident . 
 Antar had bought some commercial time on New York radio station WPIX @-@ FM , and one night during 1972 a live commercial was being done by DJ " Dr. Jerry " Carroll , who ended it by reading the shop 's slogan , " his prices are insane " , in this manner : " Crazy Eddie , his prices are IN @-@ SA @-@ A @-@ A @-@ A @-@ A @-@ <unk> ! " Antar telephoned and told Carroll to say the line the same way every time , and thus a working relationship was begun . 
 Beginning during 1975 , Carroll began television advertisement . For most of the next fifteen years Carroll performed commercials in the same frenetic manner he had for radio . One of his more memorable promotions was for Crazy Eddie 's annual " Christmas in August " sale , where he would dress in a Santa suit and do the commercial while stagehands threw fake snowballs at him . Carroll also had a trademark look in each commercial , wearing a blue suit with a lighter blue turtleneck shirt in almost all of his appearances ( even during later years ) . Carroll even appeared in a Spanish @-@ language Crazy Eddie advertisement , although he did not have a speaking role ; instead , his appearance consisted of him holding a radio to his ear as he walked behind the commercial 's spokesman , stopping only to wave at the camera several times . 
 During the 1980s , more than 7 @,@ 500 unique radio and television ads were broadcast in the Tri @-@ State Region . Carroll 's acting became so identified with the company that many people thought he was actually Crazy Eddie ; Crazy Eddie even made a commercial to this effect with Carroll as a Superman @-@ styled superhero named Crazy Eddie . Warner Communications , the parent company of the distributor of the Superman movie series , found the commercial to be problematic and sued the chain trying to stop it . At the time , Warner also was the parent company of the Atari video game company , and its largest customer for systems and games was Crazy Eddie . Therefore , in retaliation for the lawsuit , Eddie Antar said that if Warner was going to sue for the commercial , he would stop selling Atari products in his stores . The suit was eventually settled . 
 The commercials were so memorable that HBO 's news parody series Not Necessarily The News created a parody television commercial featuring a caricature of Oliver North ( from the then @-@ infamous Iran @-@ Contra affair ) , known as " Crazy Ollie " , selling used weapons at bargain prices . An early <unk> commercial parody appeared on NBC 's Saturday Night Live on January 22 , 1977 in the Dan Aykroyd creation , " Crazy Ernie . " Carroll and the commercials became significant culturally during 1980s , with the commercials sometimes appearing in the background of contemporary motion pictures . An example is the frightening first sight of a television set with a typical Jerry Carroll commercial on screen by Daryl Hannah 's mermaid character in Ron Howard 's 1984 comedy Splash . 
 Crazy Eddie also was known to have in @-@ store appearances by notable rock acts , including all four members of Queen in their Manhattan location on Tuesday , July 27 , 1982 ( prior to their performance that evening at Madison Square Garden ) . 
 = = Fraud = = 
 Almost from the beginning , Crazy Eddie 's management was engaged in various forms of fraud . The Antars deliberately falsified their books to reduce ( or eliminate ) their taxable income . They also paid employees off the books , and regularly skimmed thousands of dollars ( in cash ) earned at the shops . For every $ 5 Crazy Eddie reported as income , $ 1 was taken by the Antars . During 1979 , the Antars began depositing much of this money - hundreds of thousands of dollars - in Israeli bank accounts . The Antar family skimmed an estimated $ 3 million to $ 4 million ( US ) per year at the height of their fraud . In one offshore bank account , the family deposited more than $ 6 million between 1980 and 1983 . 
 By 1983 , it was becoming more and more difficult to hide the millions of illicit dollars . The Antars decided that the way to cover up their growing fraud was to make the company public . In preparation , Eddie Antar initiated a scheme during 1979 to skim less each year . Since more income was actually being reported , this had the effect of showing drastically increasing profit margins . While the company 's actual profits ( taking into account skimmed profits ) from 1980 to 1983 increased approximately 13 % , reported profits increased nearly 171 % . 
 Despite the misgivings of people closely associated with Crazy Eddie , the company held its initial public offering on September 13 , 1984 ( symbol : <unk> ) . Shares of the company sold initially for $ 8 . By early 1986 , Crazy Eddie stock was trading at more than $ 75 per share ( split adjusted ) . 
 Eddie recruited his cousin , Sam E. Antar ( known as Sammy ) , to assist the company with its fraud . Sammy earned a degree in accounting during 1980 , and served his apprenticeship with Penn and Horowitz , Crazy Eddie 's auditor . During 1986 , he was named chief financial officer of the company . Sammy was informed that there was a $ 3 million deficit from the previous year 's inventory fraud that needed to be hidden . Additionally , he was instructed to find ways to show a 10 % growth in sales . 
 One of Sammy 's major schemes was a money laundering operation later known as the Panama Pump — money that the Antars had deposited in Israeli banks was transferred to bank accounts in Panama . These accounts , opened using false names , then drafted payments to Crazy Eddie . This money was largely used to inflate same @-@ store sales totals for the company . 
 As a public company , Eddie , Sammy , and others engaged in increasing amounts of inventory fraud to increase reported profits and inflate the value of Crazy Eddie stock . For the fiscal year ended March 1 , 1985 , Crazy Eddie falsified inventories by $ 3 million . The next fiscal year , that amount increased to between $ 10 and $ 12 million . 
 = = = Collapse = = = 
 Only months after Crazy Eddie 's IPO , Eddie Antar started arguing with his wife and former high school sweetheart , Debbie . He began having an affair with another woman , also named Debbie . They were caught by Eddie 's wife and sister on New Year 's Eve 1984 . Crazy Eddie 's troubles began almost immediately afterward ; the scam had relied extensively on family members helping keep the appearance that it was an immensely successful company . 
 By 1987 , Sammy 's goal was no longer to show greater profitability , but rather to disguise previous frauds . During fiscal year 1987 , they falsified inventories between $ 22 @.@ 5 and $ 28 million . In addition , Crazy Eddie booked $ 20 million in phony debit memos or charge backs to vendors that reduced accounts payable . 
 As the company 's fraud became more difficult to disguise , the public perception of Crazy Eddie as a commercial success began to change . By October 1986 , the company 's stock value had decreased to $ 17 @.@ 50 per share . During December , Eddie Antar announced his resignation as president and CEO . During April 1987 , it was announced that Eddie had in fact retained his role as president but had dismissed , among others , his father Sam M. Antar . But by then Eddie had already cashed out his share of Crazy Eddie stock , worth between $ 25 million and $ 30 million . 
 By the spring of 1987 , the company 's stock cost less than $ 10 a share . Additionally , earnings decreased 20 % from the previous year . The franchise did show a 34 % sales increase , but this was mainly the result of 13 new store openings . During May 1987 , Eddie began proceedings to make the company private again . 
 Before that could happen , Houston @-@ based businessman Elias Zinn and management consultant Victor Palmieri initiated a hostile takeover . With Palmieri 's backing , Zinn purchased $ 17 @.@ 5 million worth of Crazy Eddie stock , which represented 7 @.@ 5 % of the outstanding shares . Once rumors of a takeover started , financial analysts began to examine more closely Crazy Eddie 's financial situation . What they discovered was that while most stockholders of the company had lost money since 1984 , Eddie Antar had sold 6 @.@ 5 million shares worth $ 74 million . A flurry of stockholder lawsuits were filed against the Antar family . 
 Eddie and Sammy briefly attempted to counter @-@ offer Zinn 's takeover , but Zinn quickly topped their funds . The Antars ' bid was ended , and Zinn became the new owner of Crazy Eddie on November 6 , 1987 . He immediately dismissed the rest of the Antar family from any important jobs . When Palmieri 's financial analysts completed their preliminary audit a few weeks after the takeover , they estimated that Crazy Eddie 's inventory was short by $ 40 to $ 50 million . The final figure was $ 80 million . 
 By June 1988 , Crazy Eddie 's suppliers were demanding the liquidation of the company , so they could recover money owed to them ; during 1989 they got their wish . The closing of Crazy Eddie began during March 1989 , as the company shuttered 17 of its 43 stores . On June 6 , 1989 Crazy Eddie was served with a petition by five of its creditors , who had not been paid a total of $ 860 @,@ 000 they were owed , which sought to have the company forced into bankruptcy . The company originally planned to fight the petition and file for dismissal , but 15 days later Crazy Eddie voluntarily filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . Company president and CEO Peter <unk> cited problems created by the creditors ' position ( which he termed " ill @-@ advised " ) , but said business would be conducted as usual at the remaining 26 stores and that Crazy Eddie was still a strong franchise . The company vowed to stay in business but despite <unk> 's assertions Crazy Eddie continued to falter . By the autumn of 1989 , sales were continuing to decrease and stores were unable to keep items stocked due to lack of supplier interest in the company . Faced with these facts , Crazy Eddie management decided that the chain was not worth saving . Soon after Crazy Eddie began going @-@ out @-@ of @-@ business sales , but store supply remained minimal even when leftover merchandise from stores that had shuttered was sent to others that were still in operation . By the end of 1989 the remaining 26 Crazy Eddie locations closed and the chain ceased to exist . During a period of three years Crazy Eddie had gone from one of the most lucrative retailers in the United States and trading at $ 75 per share to bankruptcy and liquidation . 
 = = = Legal battles = = = 
 In the meantime , a longtime Crazy Eddie associate named Arnie Spindler , who quit the company after Eddie Antar dismissed his father Sam , brothers Allen and Mitchell and others after a family dispute , had provided investigators with information concerning Crazy Eddie 's fraudulent business practices . Spindler implicated Eddie and Sammy , but stated the rest of the family was innocent . Regardless , the SEC served subpoenas to the entire Antar family . 
 Based on information gathered during its investigation , the SEC charged Eddie Antar with securities fraud and illegal insider trading on September 6 , 1989 . During January 1990 , a Federal district judge ordered Antar to repatriate more than $ 50 million he had transferred illegally to Israel . He was also ordered to appear in court to explain what had happened with the money . When he failed to appear , an arrest warrant was issued . Eddie surrendered to U.S. Marshals a week later , but was released and ordered to appear at a second hearing . When he failed to appear at that hearing , a second arrest warrant was issued and his assets were frozen . 
 Eddie Antar fled to Israel using a fake passport and the alias David Jacob Levi Cohen , and purchased a townhouse in the city of Yavne . After Eddie left the country , Sammy offered to testify for Federal prosecutors in exchange for immunity . Sammy pleaded guilty to three felonies . However , he avoided jail time for his testimony , and was instead sentenced to six months of house arrest , 1 @,@ 200 hours of community service , three years of probation , and was given more than $ 10 @,@ 000 in fines . As of 2009 , Sammy was an adviser for government agencies and businesses investigating fraud . 
 Eddie Antar was arrested near Tel Aviv during June 1992 . While being held in Israel , Eddie was charged with Federal racketeering conspiracy . He was extradited to the United States during January 1993 , and pleaded not guilty to the charges brought against him . Eddie Antar 's fraud trial began during June , and was prosecuted jointly by U.S. Attorneys Paul Weissman and Michael Chertoff . On July 20 , 1993 , Eddie Antar was found guilty of 17 counts of fraud . His brother , Mitchell , was found guilty of three counts , and acquitted on two . 
 During April 1994 , Eddie Antar was sentenced to 12 ½ years in prison for racketeering and stock fraud . Antar 's lawyers immediately filed an appeal , citing what they believed was bias on the part of the presiding judge . During April 1995 , the verdicts against Eddie and Mitchell were overturned by a Federal appeals panel . Chertoff , calling Eddie " the Darth Vader of capitalism , " vowed to begin a new trial . 
 Antar eventually pleaded guilty to Federal fraud charges during May 1996 . During February 1997 , he was sentenced to eight years in prison . He was ordered to pay more than $ 150 million in fines , in addition to the more than $ 1 billion in judgments against him , resulting from various civil suits . Efforts to recover additional money from the Antar family on behalf of defrauded stockholders were finally completed during 2012 . 
 = = Revival attempts = = 
 Soon after the chain closed during 1989 a New Jersey @-@ based investment group led by Alex <unk> bought the rights to the Crazy Eddie trademark and announced during January 1990 that it had purchased the leases on Crazy Eddie 's Brooklyn flagship store and another in East Brunswick , New Jersey . The intent of <unk> 's group was to reopen the chain , but nothing ever came of the attempt . 
 During 1998 , the grandchildren of Eddie , Allen , and Mitchell Antar revived the Crazy Eddie electronics chain with a shop in Wayne , New Jersey , and as an online internet venture , <unk> The revived company retained the slogan " his prices are insane " and re @-@ hired Jerry Carroll , who by this time had founded his own advertisement agency , as spokesman . Despite plans to expand the chain to a potential 10 stores , the new Crazy Eddie did not expand beyond the Wayne store and during 1999 the only shop of the revived chain closed . 
 Eddie Antar returned to the company during 2001 , which by this time had been doing business solely as an internet and buy @-@ by @-@ telephone business for more than a year . He reinitiated the website as crazyeddie.com and once again hired Jerry Carroll to do its advertising . By 2004 crazyeddie.com had disappeared again , and after a brief attempt to revive the online retailer during 2005 Crazy Eddie ceased to exist once again . The Crazy Eddie trademark and associated intellectual property were then acquired by Texas @-@ based company Trident Growth Fund . During July 2006 , Trident attempted to auction the brand and the domain name crazyeddie.com on eBay , with limited success . The auction ended without the reserve price being met , the highest bid being $ 30 @,@ 100 ( US ) . 
 On March 3 , 2009 , it was announced that Brooklyn @-@ based businessman Jack Gemal had bought the rights to the Crazy Eddie name and quickly began a new online Crazy Eddie venture at <unk> Gemal was also reported to be scouting retail space for new Crazy Eddie retail locations , stating that he wanted to open 50 locations during the next two years . This online venture performed business in the same manner as Crazy Eddie 's other online stores , selling appliances and other electronics through the internet . However , Gemal was never able to find the retail space he sought to <unk> the Crazy Eddie store chain and during 2012 the online business ceased to exist . A placeholder page currently occupies <unk> 
 = Super Smash Bros. Melee = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee is a crossover action game developed by HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo for the GameCube video game console . It is the second game in the Super Smash Bros. series , following the first game . It was released in Japan in November 2001 , with other territories later . 
 The game features characters from Nintendo video game franchises such as Mario , The Legend of Zelda , Star Fox , and Pokémon . Melee includes all playable characters from the first game in the series on the Nintendo 64 and also adds new characters from franchises such as Fire Emblem , of which no games had been released outside Japan at the time . The stages and gameplay modes make references to , or take their designs from , popular games released by Nintendo . Melee 's gameplay system offers an unorthodox approach to the fighting game genre with a counter that measures damage with percentages , rather than the health bar seen in most fighting games . It builds on the first game by adding new gameplay features and playable characters . Following the popularity of its multiplayer gameplay , Melee has been featured in many competitive gaming tournaments , and is still one of the most popular fighting games for competitive play . 
 The game received critical praise , as well as awards and acknowledgements from gaming publications . It achieved strong sales upon release , and is the GameCube 's best @-@ selling game , with more than 7 million copies sold by March 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessor , Super Smash Bros. Melee differs from traditional fighting games as the objective is to force their opponents beyond the boundaries of the stage . Most attacks inflict damage and can , if enough damage is dealt , knock back the enemy . Each character 's health is measured by a meter that represents the damage received as a percentage . The higher the percentage value , the farther the player gets knocked back , and the easier they are to knock off the stage . Unlike other games of the same genre , in which moves are entered by button @-@ input combinations , most moves in Super Smash Bros. Melee can be accessed via one @-@ button presses and a joystick direction . 
 During battles , items related to Nintendo games or merchandise fall onto the game field . These items have purposes ranging from inflicting damage on the opponent to restoring health to the player . Additionally , most stages have a theme relating to a Nintendo franchise or a specific Nintendo game and are interactive to the player . Although the stages are rendered in three dimensions , players can only move on a two @-@ dimensional plane . Not all stages are available immediately ; some stages must be " unlocked " by achieving particular requirements . Some stages feature moving elements and platforms and hazards that harm players , while others lack these elements . 
 = = = Single @-@ player = = = 
 Single @-@ player mode provides the player with a variety of side @-@ scrolling fighting challenges . The applicable modes range from the " Classic mode " , which involves the player battling against opponents in multiple acts until he or she reaches the boss character , to the " Home Run Contest " , which is a minigame involving the player trying to launch a sandbag as far as possible with a Home Run Bat . Some of these modes are personalized for the character ; for example , the " Target Test " sets out a specialized area for a character in which they aim to destroy ten targets in the least amount of time they can . These areas may include references to that particular character 's past and legacy . The " Board the Platforms " minigame from the prequel was not included in Melee . Melee introduced " Adventure mode " , which takes the player to several predefined universes of characters in the Nintendo franchise . " All @-@ Star mode " is an unlockable feature of Melee , requiring the player to defeat every character in the game while having only three health supplements between battles . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In the multiplayer mode , up to four players or computer @-@ controlled characters may fight , either in a free @-@ for @-@ all or in teams . The Central processing unit ( CPU ) characters ' Artificial intelligence ( AI ) difficulty is ranked from one to nine in ascending order of difficulty . Individual players can also be handicapped ; the higher the handicap , the stronger the player . There are five ways in which the victor can be determined , depending on the game type . The most common multiplayer modes are “ Time mode ” , where the player or team with the most KOs and least falls wins after a predetermined amount of time , and " Stock mode " , a battle in which the last player or team with lives remaining wins . This can be changed to less conventional modes like " Coin mode " , which rewards the richest player as the victor . Players must collect coins created by hitting enemies and try not to lose them by falling off the stage ; harder hits release higher quantities of coins . Other options are available , updating from Super Smash Bros. , such as determining the number and type of items that appear during the battle . 
 = = = Trophies = = = 
 Trophies ( known as " Figures " in the Japanese version ) of various Nintendo characters and objects can be collected throughout the game . These trophies include action figures of playable characters , accessories , and items associated with them as well as series and characters not otherwise playable in the game . The trophies range from the well @-@ known to the obscure , and even characters or elements that were only released in Japan . Some of the trophies include a description of the particular subject and detail the year and the game in which the subject first appeared . Super Smash Bros. had a similar system of plush dolls ; however , it only included the 12 playable characters . One trophy is exclusive to the Japanese version of the game . 
 = = Playable characters = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee features 25 ( 26 if Zelda and Sheik are considered different ) characters , 13 more than its predecessor . Fourteen are available initially , while the other characters require the completion of specific tasks to become available . Every character featured in the game is derived from a popular Nintendo franchise . All characters have a symbol that appears behind their damage meter during a fight ; this symbol represents what series they belong to , such as a Triforce symbol behind Link 's damage meter and a Poké Ball behind Pokémon species . Some characters represent popular franchises while others were less @-@ known at the time of the release ; Marth and Roy represent the Fire Emblem series , which had never been released outside Japan at the time . The characters ' appearance in Super Smash Bros. Melee led to a rise in the popularity of the series . References are made throughout the game to the relationship between characters of the same universe ; in one of the events from " Event mode " , Mario must defeat his enemy Bowser to rescue Princess Peach . Furthermore , each character has recognizable moves from their original series , such as Samus 's firearms from the Metroid series and Link 's arsenal of weapons . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 HAL Laboratory developed Super Smash Bros. Melee , with Masahiro Sakurai as the head of production . The game was one of the first games released on the GameCube and highlighted the advancement in graphics from the Nintendo 64 . The developers wanted to pay homage to the debut of the GameCube by making an opening FMV sequence that would attract people 's attention to the graphics . HAL worked with three separate graphic houses in Tokyo to make the opening sequence . On their official website , the developers posted screen shots and information highlighting and explaining the attention to physics and detail in the game , with references to changes from its predecessor . The game was in development for 13 months , and Sakurai called his lifestyle during this period " destructive " with no holidays and short weekends . Unlike the experimental first Super Smash Bros. , he felt great pressure to deliver a quality sequel , claiming it was the " biggest project I had ever led up to that point " . Despite the painful development cycle , Sakurai proudly called it " the sharpest game in the series ... it just felt really good to play " , even compared to its successor , Super Smash Bros. Brawl . 
 On the game 's official Japanese website , the developers explain reasons for making particular characters playable and explain why some characters were not available as playable characters upon release . Initially , the development team wanted to replace Ness with Lucas , the main character of Mother 3 , but retained Ness in consideration of delays . The game 's creators later included Lucas in the game 's sequel , Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Video game developer Hideo Kojima originally requested the inclusion of Solid Snake to Sakurai , but the game was too far into development . As with Lucas , development time allowed for his inclusion in Brawl . Marth and Roy were initially intended to be playable exclusively in the Japanese version of Super Smash Bros. Melee . However , they received favorable attention during the game 's North American localization , leading to the decision for the developers to include them in the Western version . Additionally , Sakurai stated that the development team had suggested characters from four other games to represent the Famicom or NES era until the developers decided that the Ice Climbers would be in the game . The developers have noted characters that have very similar moves to each other on the website ; such characters have been referred to as " clones " in the media . 
 Nintendo presented the game at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2001 as a playable demonstration . The next major exposition of the game came in August 2001 at Spaceworld , when Nintendo displayed a playable demo that updated from the previous demo displayed at E3 . Nintendo offered a playable tournament of the games for fans in which a GameCube and Super Smash Bros. Melee were prizes for the winner . Before the game 's release , the Japanese official website included weekly updates , including screenshots and character profiles . Nintendo followed this trend with Super Smash Bros. Brawl , in which there were daily updates by the game 's developer , Masahiro Sakurai . Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu reported that Nintendo advertised the game in between showings of the Pokemon the First Movie across movie theaters in Japan . In January 2003 , Super Smash Bros Melee became part of the Player 's Choice , a marketing label used by Nintendo to promote video games that have sold more than a million copies . In August 2005 , Nintendo bundled the game with the Nintendo GameCube for $ 99 @.@ 99 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee features both new and re @-@ arranged music from many of Nintendo 's popular gaming franchises . In 2002 , Enterbrain released a soundtrack in Japan titled <unk> Smash Brothers DX Orchestra Concert . The same soundtrack was released in 2003 as " Smashing ... Live ! " as a bonus for subscribing to Nintendo Power magazine in North America , and also as a free gift in an issue of the British Official Nintendo Magazine . The soundtrack does not include music taken directly from the game , but features many live orchestral arrangements performed by the New Japan Philharmonic . The game contains a number of unlockable tracks that can be obtained after making certain in @-@ game accomplishments . On the same website , the developers have posted discussions about the game 's music and voice acting between Masahiro Sakurai and the game 's composers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee received critical acclaim from reviewers , most of whom credited Melee 's expansion of gameplay features from Super Smash Bros. Focusing on the additional features , GameSpy commented that " Melee really scores big in the ' we 've added tons of great extra stuff ' department " . Reviewers compared the game favorably to Super Smash Bros. IGN 's Fran Mirabella III stated that it was " in an entirely different league than the N64 version " ; GameSpot 's Miguel Lopez praised the game for offering a more advanced " classic @-@ mode " compared to its predecessor , while detailing the Adventure Mode as " really a hit @-@ or @-@ miss experience " . Despite a mixed response to the single @-@ player modes , many reviewers expressed the game 's multiplayer mode as a strong component of the game . In their review of the game , GameSpy stated that " you 'll have a pretty hard time finding a more enjoyable multiplayer experience on any other console " . 
 Melee 's visuals garnered a positive reaction . GameSpot lauded the game 's character and background models , stating that " the character models are pleasantly full @-@ bodied , and the quality of their textures is amazing " . IGN 's Fran Mirabella III praised the game 's use of physics , animation and graphics , although his colleague Matt Casamassina thought that " some of the backgrounds lack the visual polish endowed upon the characters " when giving a second opinion about the game . 
 Critics praised the game 's orchestrated soundtrack ; while GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin commented that " it all sounds brilliant " . GameSpy praised the music for its nostalgic effect , with soundtracks ranging from multiple Nintendo series . 
 Reviewers have welcomed the simplistic controls , but its " hyper @-@ responsiveness " , with the characters easily dashing and precise movements being difficult to perform , was expressed as a serious flaw of the game by GameSpot . With a milder criticism of controls , Bryn Williams of GameSpy commented that " movement and navigation seems slightly too sensitive " . The basis of Melee 's gameplay system is the battles between Nintendo characters , which has been suggested as being overly hectic ; N @-@ Europe questioned whether the gameplay is " too Frantic ? " , even though they enjoyed the variety of modes on offer . Similarly , Nintendo Spin 's Clark Nielsen stated that " Melee was too fast for its own good " , and " skill was more about just being able to wrap your head around what was happening as opposed to really getting into the combat " . In regards to the pace of the game , Edge commented that it even made gameplay features such as " blocking " redundant , as the player is not given enough time to react to an attack . 
 Despite the new features added to the game , some reviews criticized Melee for a lack of originality and for being too similar to its predecessor , Super Smash Bros. Caleb Hale from GameCritics.com noted that while it was " every bit as good as its Nintendo 64 predecessor " he also felt " the game doesn 't expand much past that point " . On a similar note , Edge stated that " it 's not evolution ; it 's reproduction " , in reference to a perceived lack of innovation . The nostalgic nature of the game received a positive reaction , as well as the accompanying stages and items that allude to past Nintendo games . Gaming journalists have welcomed the roster of 25 Nintendo characters , as well as the trophy system , which Nintendo Spin labeled as " a great addition to this game " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 When released in Japan , it became the fastest selling GameCube game with 358 @,@ 525 units sold in the week ending November 25 , 2001 . This success continued as the game sold more than a million units only two months after its release , making it the first GameCube title to reach a million copies . The game also sold well in North America , where it sold 250 @,@ 000 @-@ copies in nine days . In the United States , Super Smash Bros. Melee was the 19th best @-@ selling video game in 2001 according to the NPD Group , and approximately 4 @.@ 06 million units have been sold in the country as of December 27 , 2007 . With a software @-@ to @-@ hardware ratio of 3 : 4 at one time , some have attributed the increasing sales of the Nintendo GameCube near the launch date to Melee . As of March 10 , 2008 , Super Smash Bros. Melee is the best @-@ selling GameCube game , with more than seven million copies sold worldwide . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Several publications have acknowledged Super Smash Bros. Melee in competitions and awards . In their " Best of 2001 " awards , GameSpy chose it as Best Fighting GameCube Game , IGN 's reader choice chose it as Game of the Year , Electronic Gaming Monthly chose it as Best Multiplayer and Best GameCube Game , and GameSpot chose it as the Best GameCube Game and tenth best game of the year . 
 GameFAQs placed it sixth in a poll of the 100 best games ever and was in the final four of the " Best . Game . Ever . " contest . In the 200th issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly , the editors selected Melee as the 92nd most influential game in their " Top 200 Games of Their Time " list , defining Melee as " Billions of things to unlock , plus Yoshi pummeling Pikachu with a bat " . In a similar competition , Nintendo Power named Super Smash Bros. Melee the 16th best game ever to appear on a Nintendo console , and selected it as the 2001 " Game of the Year " . IGN named it the third best GameCube game of all @-@ time in 2007 as a part of a feature reflecting on the GameCube 's long lifespan , citing it as " the grand stage of fighters , much like Mario Kart is for racing fans " . GameSpy chose it as fourth in a similar list , citing that it had " better graphics , better music , more characters , more gameplay modes , more secrets to discover " in comparison to its predecessor . The game was ranked 58th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's " 100 Greatest Nintendo Games Ever " feature . 
 = = Professional competition = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee is a widely played competitive video game and has been featured in several high @-@ profile tournaments . It is considered to be the most viable game in the series for competition . From 2004 to 2007 , Major League Gaming sponsored Melee on its Pro Circuit . Although dropping Melee from its 2007 Pro Circuit , MLG still sponsored a number of tournaments as part of the Underground Smash Series . Melee was also included in the Evolution Championship Series ( Evo ) in 2007 , a fighting game tournament held in Las Vegas and was hosted at Evo 2013 after a charity vote to decide the final game to be featured in its tournament lineup . Due to the large turnout and popularity that year , Evo again included Melee at their 2014 and 2015 events . In 2014 Melee was played at MLG Anaheim . Evo 2015 is currently one of the largest Melee tournaments with 1 @,@ 869 entrants and breaking 200 @,@ 000 live viewers . 
 Ken Hoang , considered to be the game 's best player from 2003 to 2006 , has won over $ 50 @,@ 000 from Smash tournaments . Several professional Melee players including Christopher " <unk> " McKenzie , Isai Alvarado , and Ken were seen in the 2005 " I 'm a Professional Gamer " episode of the MTV reality series True Life . The competitive Smash community was featured in a 2013 crowd @-@ funded documentary called The Smash Brothers . The film detailed the history of the professional scene and profiled seven prominent Melee players including Hoang , <unk> , Jason " <unk> " Zimmerman , Isai , PC Chris , <unk> , and Evo 2013 champion , Joseph " <unk> " Marquez . Commentary footage from a Melee tournament is the origin of the <unk> combo internet meme . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 At the pre @-@ E3 conference of 2005 , Nintendo announced Melee 's sequel , 2008 's Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Nintendo 's president , Satoru Iwata requested Masahiro Sakurai to be the director of the game after the conference . The game retains some of the gameplay features of its predecessors while having major gameplay additions , such as a more substantial single @-@ player mode and online play via the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . Taking advantage of the Wii 's variety of controller options , the game allows the use of the Wii Remote , Nunchuk , GameCube controller , and the Classic Controller . Like Melee , the game makes references to games and franchises , including those that debuted after the release of Melee ; for example , Link , Zelda , and Ganondorf 's character designs are taken from The Legend of Zelda : Twilight Princess and a Nintendogs puppy is present as an Assist Trophy ( a new item that summons computer @-@ controlled characters from different games to briefly participate in the fight ) . Select stages and music from Melee are included in the sequel . In addition to Super Smash Bros. Brawl , a sequel to that game , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS , was released for the Nintendo 3DS on October 3 , 2014 , and the console counterpart to that game , Super Smash Bros. for Wii U , was released on November 21 , 2014 . 
 = Thinis = 
 Thinis or This ( Egyptian : <unk> ) was the capital city of the first dynasties of ancient Egypt . Thinis is , as yet , undiscovered but well attested to by ancient writers , including the classical historian Manetho , who cites it as the centre of the Thinite Confederacy , a tribal confederation whose leader , Menes ( or Narmer ) , united Egypt and was its first pharaoh . Thinis began a steep decline in importance from Dynasty III , when the capital was relocated to Memphis . Its location on the border of the competing Heracleopolitan and Theban dynasties of the First Intermediate Period , and its proximity to certain oases of possible military importance , ensured Thinis some continued significance in the Old and New Kingdoms . This was a brief respite and Thinis eventually lost its position as a regional administrative centre by the Roman period . 
 Due to its ancient heritage , Thinis remained a significant religious centre , housing the tomb and mummy of the regional deity . In ancient Egyptian religious cosmology , as seen ( for example ) in the Book of the Dead , Thinis played a role as a mythical place in heaven . 
 Although the precise location of Thinis is unknown , mainstream Egyptological consensus places it in the vicinity of ancient Abydos and modern Girga . 
 = = Name and location = = 
 The name Thinis is derived from Manetho 's use of the adjective Thinite to describe the pharaoh Menes . Although the corresponding Thinis does not appear in Greek , it is demanded by the Egyptian original and is the more popular name among Egyptologists . This is also suggested . 
 In correcting a passage of <unk> ( b . 490 BCE ) , Jörgen <unk> amended <unk> όνομα to <unk> δε οι όνομα . Maspero ( 1903 ) found that this revealed the name Thinis and also , from the same passage , a key geographic indicator : <unk> ( English : on the river ) . Maspero used this additional detail to support the theory , which included among its followers Jean @-@ François Champollion and Nestor L <unk> , locating Thinis at modern @-@ day Girga or a neighbouring town , possibly El @-@ Birba . Other proposals for Thinis ' location have lost favour at the expense of the Girga @-@ Birba theory : Auguste Mariette , founder director of the Egyptian Museum , suggested Kom el @-@ Sultan ; A. Schmidt , El @-@ <unk> ; and Heinrich Karl <unk> , Johannes <unk> and others supported El @-@ Tineh , near <unk> . Mainstream Egyptological consensus continues to locate Thinis at or near to either Girga , or El @-@ Birba ( where an inscribed statue fragment mentioning Thinis is said to have been found ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ dynastic and Early Dynastic periods = = = 
 Although the archaeological site of Thinis has never been located , evidence of population concentration in the Abydos @-@ Thinis region dates from the fourth millennium BCE . Thinis is also cited as the earliest royal burial @-@ site in Egypt . 
 At an early point , the city of Abydos resigned its political rank to Thinis , and although Abydos would continue to enjoy supreme religious importance , its history and functions cannot be understood without reference to Thinis . The role of Thinis as centre of the Thinite Confederacy ( or Dynasty 0 ) and into the Early Dynastic Period ( specifically Dynasty I and Dynasty II ) is taken from Manetho , and , according to Wilkinson ( 2000 ) , seems to be confirmed by Dynasty I and late Dynasty II royal tombs at Abydos , the principal regional necropolis . 
 = = = Old Kingdom = = = 
 Such importance seems to have been short @-@ lived : certainly , the national political role of Thinis ended at the beginning of Dynasty III ( c . 2686 BCE ) , when Memphis became the chief religious and political centre . Nonetheless , Thinis retained its regional significance : during Dynasty V , it was the probable seat of the " Overseer of Upper Egypt " , an administrative official with responsibility for the Nile Valley south of the Delta , and throughout antiquity it was the eponymous capital of nome VIII of Upper Egypt and seat of its nomarch . 
 During the wars of the First Intermediate Period ( c . 2181 – c . 2055 BCE ) , Ankhtifi , nomarch of Hierakonpolis , demanded recognition of his suzerainty from the " overseer of Upper Egypt " at Thinis , and although the city walls , cited in Ankhtifi 's autobiography , seem to have left Ankhtifi capable of only a show of force , he appears to have purchased Thinis ' neutrality with grain . 
 Following Ankhtifi 's death , Thinis was the northernmost nome to fall under the sway of Intef II , pharaoh of the Theban Dynasty XI ( c . 2118 – c . 2069 BCE ) . Progress north by the Theban armies was halted by <unk> III , pharaoh of the Heracleopolitan Dynasty IX , in a battle at Thinis itself that is recorded in the Teaching for King <unk> , and , throughout Intef II 's later years , his war against the <unk> and their allies , the nomarchs of Assyut , was waged in the land between Thinis and Assyut . 
 As Thebes began to take the upper hand , Mentuhotep II ( c . 2061 – c . 2010 BCE ) , on his campaign of reunification , brought Thinis , which had been in revolt , possibly at Heracleopolitan instigation and certainly with the support of an army under the command of the nomarch of Assyut , firmly under his control . 
 During the Second Intermediate Period ( c. eighteenth century BCE ) , Thinis may have experienced resurgent autonomy : Ryholt ( 1997 ) proposes that the Abydos dynasty of kings might better be called the " Thinite Dynasty " and that , in any event , their royal seat was likely at Thinis , already a nome capital . 
 = = = New Kingdom and Late Period = = = 
 The city 's steady decline appears to have halted briefly during Dynasty XVIII ( c . 1550 – c . 1292 BCE ) , when Thinis enjoyed renewed prominence , based on its geographical connection to various oases of possible military importance . Certainly , the office of mayor of Thinis was occupied by several notable New Kingdom figures : <unk> , who participated in the construction of an obelisk for Hatshepsut and was himself subject of an exemplary block statue ; the herald Intef , an indispensable member of the royal household and the travelling @-@ companion of Thutmose III ; and Min , tutor to the prince Amenhotep III . 
 Nonetheless , Thinis had declined to a settlement of little significance by the historic period . The misleading reference on a seventh @-@ century BCE Assyrian stele to " <unk> , king of Thinis " is nothing more than a reflection of Assyrian " ignorance of the subtlety of the Egyptian political hierarchy " . 
 Certainly , by the Roman period , Thinis had been supplanted as capital of its nome by Ptolemais , perhaps even as early as that city 's foundation by Ptolemy I. 
 = = Religion = = 
 As each nome was home to the tomb and mummy of its dead nome @-@ god , so at Thinis was the temple and last resting @-@ place of Anhur , whose epithets included " bull of Thinis " , worshipped after his death as <unk> @-@ <unk> , and who , as nome @-@ god , was placed at the head of the local ennead . 
 The high priest of the temple of Anhur at Thinis was called the first prophet , or chief of seers , a title that Maspero ( 1903 ) suggests is a reflection of Thinis ' decline in status as a city . 
 One such chief of seers , <unk> , who died in the reign of Merneptah ( c . 1213 – c . 1203 BCE ) , broke with the tradition of his New Kingdom predecessors , who were buried at Abydos , and was laid to rest at Thinis itself . 
 The lion @-@ goddess Mehit was also worshipped at Thinis , and the restoration of her temple there during Merneptah 's reign was probably overseen by <unk> . 
 There is evidence that succession to the office of chief of seers of Anhur at Thinis was familial : in the <unk> period , one Hagi succeeded his elder brother , also called Hagi , and their father to the post ; and , in the New Kingdom , <unk> was succeeded in the priestly office by his son , Hori . 
 In ancient Egyptian religious cosmology , Thinis played a role as a mythical place in heaven . In particular , as set out in the Book of the Dead , its eschatological significance can be seen in certain rituals : when the god Osiris triumphs , " joy goeth its round in Thinis " , a reference to the celestial Thinis , rather than the earthly city . 
 = Ed Blake = 
 Edward James Blake ( December 23 , 1925 – April 15 , 2009 ) was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played four seasons with the Cincinnati Reds and the Kansas City Athletics . In eight career games , Blake pitched 8 ⅔ innings and had an 8 @.@ 31 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 After graduating high school in East St. Louis , Blake played in the farm system of the nearby St. Louis Cardinals before enlisting in the army . He returned to baseball after being wounded in the military service , pitching in the minors for five years before making his major league debut for the Cincinnati Reds . He pitched for them on and off for three years , then spent the next six years pitching for the Toronto Maple Leafs . His last major league appearance was a stint with the Athletics in 1957 , and two years later his professional baseball career ended . After retirement he became a plumber , and died in 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in St. Louis , Missouri to Edward and Katherine Blake , he attended Central Catholic High School in East St. Louis , where he was a baseball teammate of Hank Bauer , and graduated in 1943 . Blake pitched batting practice for the St. Louis Cardinals during the 1943 World Series after his high school graduation , in what he considered to be the highlight of his professional career . He signed with the Cardinals in 1944 and spent the season with three different minor league teams : the Columbus Red Birds of the American Association , the Allentown Cardinals of the Interstate League and the Mobile Bears of the Southern Association . 
 = = Military service and 1940s career = = 
 After the 1944 season ended , Blake enlisted in the Army and fought with the 40th Infantry Division in the Pacific Theater of Operations . While in the Philippines , Blake was wounded , and was out of action for nine months as he recovered . As the 1946 season began , he rejoined the Cardinals , now fully recovered , and spent the season with the Columbus Cardinals . Blake started the season losing his first three starts , but then won 13 straight and finished the season with a 16 wins , eight losses , and a 3 @.@ 51 earned run average . In February 1947 , Blake was among a group of 92 Cardinals players invited to a dinner for Cardinals minor leaguers , where accusations in regards to Cardinals players being paid poorly were brought up and discussed . He spent the following season playing for both Columbus teams , playing 29 games in total and finishing the season with a combined 4 @.@ 46 ERA . Before the 1948 season began , Blake was promoted to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League . He had a 7 – 6 record and a 3 @.@ 88 ERA in 34 games , seven of them starts . In 1949 , Blake spent most of the season playing for Rochester . On August 9 , 1949 he was traded by the Cardinals to the Cincinnati Reds in exchange for Mike Schultz , ending his career with the Cardinals . Blake finished the season with the Syracuse Chiefs and finished the season with a combined 5 – 4 record and a 4 @.@ 78 ERA . 
 = = Minor leagues and Reds career = = 
 Blake began the 1950 season with Syracuse Chiefs and spent most of the season as a starting pitcher instead of a reliever . He started in 23 games and finished the season with a 12 – 8 record and an ERA of 3 @.@ 51 . In 1951 , Blake was considered to have a small chance to make the major league roster . Nonetheless , Blake got his first taste of the major leagues that season . He made his major league debut on May 1 , 1951 against the Philadelphia Phillies . Blake played three games during his time on the Reds in 1951 , and finished two of those games . He pitched four innings , allowing five runs and three home runs , finishing the season with an ERA of 11 @.@ 25 . While on the Reds in 1951 , he was part of a Reds " bullpen union " led by Jim Blackburn , which drew up a series of humorous requests including a smoking lounge and sandwiches between double headers . He spent most of the 1951 season with the Columbus Red Birds , playing in 27 games for them . In 27 pitching appearances , 23 of them starts , Blake went 7 – 15 with a 5 @.@ 91 ERA . Despite the record , Blake led the Red Birds in innings pitched and finished tied for second in wins , though he did also lead the team , which went 53 – 101 , in losses . 
 Blake spent most of 1952 with the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association , but he also pitched a few games for the Reds during the 1952 Cincinnati Reds season . He pitched in two games for the Reds in 1952 , coming in to finish both games for the Reds . He pitched three shutout innings , allowing three hits in these two games . During his time with the Brewers , he pitched in 21 games . He started 19 of the 21 games , won ten and lost three , and had a 3 @.@ 96 ERA . As the 1953 season began , Blake again had a stint with Cincinnati , but spent most of the season with the Indianapolis Indians . He pitched in one game for the Reds on April 17 , 1953 against the Milwaukee Brewers , allowing two earned runs on a hit and a walk without getting a batter out . During his time with the Indianapolis Indians , he pitched in 29 games , and was the workhorse of the Indians ' squad . He finished the season with a 14 – 7 record , a 3 @.@ 76 ERA , and 208 innings pitched , and led the team in wins , innings pitched , and starting appearances . 
 = = Maple Leafs and Athletics career = = 
 The 1953 season marked Blake 's last appearance with the Reds . On February 1 , 1954 , Blake was purchased from the Reds by the Toronto Maple Leafs , an unaffiliated team of the American Association . He played for the Maple Leafs for a total of six seasons , where he had some of his best professional career seasons . In 1954 , he teamed with Connie Johnson to lead the Maple Leafs to a 97 @-@ 57 record . He finished the 1954 season with a 15 – 9 record , a 3 @.@ 92 ERA , 30 games started , and 209 innings pitched , leading the team in the latter two categories . The following season , he combined with Johnson and Jack <unk> to help Toronto win 94 games . On July 10 , Blake was the first pitcher in the International League to win 13 games when he beat the Columbus squad 7 – 4 . He finished the season with 17 wins , 13 losses , and a 3 @.@ 94 ERA . In 1956 , Blake was a member of the " big three " for the Maple Leafs , along with Don Johnson and International League Most Valuable Player Lynn <unk> . The three combined for 750 innings pitched and 57 complete games while often working on two days ' rest . He finished the season with 17 wins , 11 losses , and a 2 @.@ 61 ERA . He also led the team in shutouts with six . 
 Blake was drafted at the end of the 1956 season by the Kansas City Athletics in the rule 5 draft . The day after being drafted , the Athletics planned to include him in an eight @-@ player deal with the Detroit Tigers involving Virgil Trucks and others , but his inclusion in the trade was vetoed by Commissioner Ford Frick , claiming his inclusion was " against the spirit of the draft . " Blake was replaced in the trade by former Toronto teammate Jack <unk> . While he spent most of the 1957 season with Toronto , he had one final major league stint with the Athletics , pitching in two games in April . His 1957 stint in Toronto was not as successful as previous seasons , as he finished with eight wins , nine losses , and a 5 @.@ 54 ERA . He spent five weeks of the 1958 season unable to play due to injury . Despite this , he was still able to pitch in 23 games , winning nine and bringing his ERA down to 3 @.@ 54 . In 1959 , Blake split time between Toronto and the Houston Buffs , winning three games and losing ten in his final professional season of baseball . 
 = = Personal and later life = = 
 After his playing career ended , Blake went on to become a plumber . He spent nearly 50 years in the plumbing business and was formerly the president of Plumbers Local 360 . Blake was married to his wife , Carol Jean , for 47 years before her death . With Carol , he had a son , Ed , and a daughter , Peggy . His son , also named Ed Blake , was a former pitcher who played in the Baltimore Orioles ' farm system from 1970 to 1973 , playing for the AA affiliate Asheville Orioles at the peak of his career . His grandson , Ed Blake III , has continued in the footsteps of his father and grandfather as a pitcher in high school . Blake died in Swansea , Illinois at the age of 83 after a long illness , and is interred at Mount Carmel Cemetery in Belleville , Illinois . 
 = Bristol Parkway railway station = 
 Bristol Parkway railway station , on the South Wales Main Line , is in the Stoke Gifford area in the northern suburbs of the Bristol conurbation . It is 112 miles ( 180 km ) from London Paddington . Its three @-@ letter station code is <unk> . The station was opened in 1972 by British Rail , and was the first in a new generation of park and ride stations . It is the third @-@ most heavily used station in the West of England , after Bristol Temple Meads and Bath Spa . There are three platforms , and a well @-@ equipped waiting area . The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who provide most of the trains at the station , with CrossCountry providing the rest . 
 The line is not electrified , but will be by 2016 as part of the planned modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . A new platform will also be built , allowing increased services from London . 
 = = Description = = 
 Bristol Parkway is located in the unitary authority of South Gloucestershire , in the Stoke Gifford area of the Bristol conurbation . The immediate surrounding area is mostly residential , with farmland to the south east . The main road access is from the west , with the station situated close to the M4 , M5 and M32 motorways , the latter being the Bristol " Parkway " from which the station takes its name , as well as the A4174 Avon Ring Road . The station is on the South Wales Main Line from London to Swansea , 111 miles 68 chains ( 180 @.@ 01 km ) from the eastern terminus at London Paddington . It is also on the Cross Country Route from Bristol Temple Meads to York . Just to the west of the station is Stoke Gifford Junction , where the Henbury Loop Line to Avonmouth Docks and Cross Country Route to Bristol Temple Meads diverge from the line to South Wales . To the east is a Network Rail maintenance training centre . The next station north along the Cross Country Route is Yate , the next station south is Filton Abbey Wood . The next station east along the South Wales Main Line is Swindon , the next station west is Patchway , however there is only one train per day calling at both Bristol Parkway and Patchway . 
 The station is on an east / west alignment , with the main station building and car park to the north of the line . There is a goods yard adjacent to the station to the south , with two loops for trains to pass . The station has three platforms , numbered 2 , 3 and 4 . Platform 2 is to the south of the two main running lines , and serves westbound trains towards Wales and Bristol Temple Meads . Platforms 3 and 4 share an island to the north of the two main running lines , with a further two running lines between platform 4 and the car park . Platform 3 serves mainly inter @-@ city trains towards London and Birmingham New Street , while platform 4 is usually reserved for local services . There is a metal wall on platform 2 , fencing off the goods yard . An enclosed footbridge provides access to the platforms , approximately a third of the way along platforms 2 and 3 ( from west to east ) , and at the west end of platform 4 . Platforms 2 and 3 are opposite each other , while platform 4 is offset from platform 3 , starting at the footbridge and extending further to the east . Platform 2 is 257 metres ( 281 yd ) long , platform 3 is 255 metres ( 279 yd ) and platform 4 is 278 metres ( 304 yd ) . Platforms 3 and 4 are signalled for bidirectional running , while platform 2 is unidirectional . The footbridge can be accessed by both stairs and lifts . 
 The station building , a sweeping metal construction opened in 2001 , contains a booking office , waiting rooms , payphones , cash machines , shops , toilets and a café overlooking the tracks . There are waiting rooms on each platform , as well as vending machines and LED displays giving next train information . Ticket barriers are in use at the station . The pay @-@ and @-@ display car park , run by <unk> , has 1 @,@ 810 spaces . 
 Bristol Parkway was the first of a new generation of park and ride railway stations , and a large number of passengers use it for that purpose . Over the decade 2002 – 2012 , the number of passengers starting or ending a journey at Bristol Parkway grew by 1 million passengers per year to 2 @.@ 25 million , with a further 740 @,@ 000 passengers changing trains there , giving an annual footfall of just under 3 million passengers and making it the 216th busiest station in the country and the third busiest in the West of England ( after Bristol Temple Meads and Bath Spa ) as of the 2011 / 12 financial year . In the 2006 / 07 financial year , over 100 @,@ 000 passengers used Parkway to travel to or from Bristol Temple Meads , and a further 500 @,@ 000 used it to travel to or from London Paddington . 
 The line through Bristol Parkway has a <unk> of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) on platforms 2 and 3 ( 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) westbound on platform 3 ) , and 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) on platform 4 . The loading gauge is W8 , and the line handles over 20 million train tonnes per year . It is not electrified , though it is planned that it will be electrified by 2016 as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who operate most rail services from the station . As of the December 2013 timetable , the basic Great Western Railway weekday service consists of two trains per hour each way between London Paddington and Cardiff Central ( with one extended to Swansea ) , one terminating service to and from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and one service each way between Westbury and Gloucester via Bristol Temple Meads ( with one train every two hours extended to Great Malvern and Weymouth ) . 
 CrossCountry also operate trains from Bristol Parkway – as of the December 2013 timetable , the basic weekday service consists of one hourly train each way between Bristol Temple Meads and Manchester Piccadilly , and one hourly train each way between Plymouth , Bristol and Edinburgh Waverley via Leeds & Newcastle Central . Both these services run via Birmingham New Street . 
 Great Western Railway services between London and Wales are formed of High Speed Train ( HST ) sets , while other GWR services use a mix of Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . CrossCountry services are usually formed of Class 220 and 221 Voyager diesel @-@ electric multiple units , with some services between Scotland and the South West employing HST sets . 
 The standard journey time to London Paddington is 90 minutes , to Cardiff Central 40 minutes , to Birmingham New Street 75 minutes , and to Bristol Temple Meads 12 minutes . 
 Bristol Parkway is served by several bus routes linking it with the rest of Bristol and South Gloucestershire . These include 
 3B ( City centre to Aztec West ) 
 X5 ( UWE to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare ) 
 18 ( Emersons Green to Henbury ) 
 <unk> ( Kingswood to Southmead Hospital 
 19 ( Bath to Cribbs Causeway ) 
 73 ( City Centre to Cribbs Causeway ) 
 <unk> ( City Centre to Aztec West ) 
 77 ( Thornbury to City Centre ) 
 81 ( <unk> Green to Yate ) 
 82 ( Southmead Hospital to Wotton @-@ under @-@ Edge ) 
 501 ( Parkway Station – Avonmouth ) 
 502 ( Parkway Station to Shirehampton ) 
 625 ( Southmead Hospital to Severn Beach ) 
 These routes are operated by First Bristol , First Somerset and Avon , Wessex Bus and Severnside Transport . 
 = = History = = 
 The line through Bristol Parkway was originally opened in 1903 as part of the Great Western Railway 's " Badminton Line " from Wootton Bassett to Patchway , a short @-@ cut for trains from London to South Wales , avoiding Bath and Chippenham . The station was built on the site of the Stoke Gifford marshalling yard , which closed on 4 October 1971 , having become surplus to requirements with the cessation of <unk> freight trains . The station 's development was seen as a response to the potential growth of housing and commercial developments in north Bristol , with proximity to the M4 and M5 motorway interchange at Almondsbury also important . The name " Parkway " came from proximity to the M32 motorway , known as the Bristol Parkway , although the term Parkway has since been applied to park and ride stations throughout the United Kingdom . When the station was built it was outside the developed urban area , but the growth of housing and commercial development in adjoining areas of the North Fringe has brought it within the conurbation , with many large office complexes opened nearby . 
 The station , owned by British Rail , opened on 1 May 1972 . Services were operated by the Western Region until British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , after which Parkway was served by the InterCity and Regional Railways divisions . The original structures , built by Stone & Co. of Bristol , were basic – two island platforms connected by an open metal footbridge , with a wood and brick building containing the booking facilities and waiting rooms . Platform 1 ( the modern platform 3 ) , on the north side of the tracks , was for trains towards London and Birmingham , and platform 2 was for trains towards Wales and Bristol Temple Meads . The station opened with a 600 @-@ space car park and a fastest journey to London of 95 minutes , which was subsequently reduced to 75 minutes with the introduction of the new High Speed Trains in the mid @-@ 70s . Platform canopies were added in 1973 , along with a cover for the footbridge . Further minor improvements were implemented over the next thirty years , including a new booking office and small extensions to the car park . 
 Following the privatisation of British Rail in 1997 , services at Bristol Parkway were franchised to several different train operating companies . South Wales Main Line services were provided by Great Western Trains , which was later rebranded as First Great Western ; services from Bristol to Birmingham and the north were operated by Virgin CrossCountry ; and local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was in turn succeeded in 2001 by Wessex Trains , a subsidiary of National Express . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , which was later rebranded as Great Western Railway . Virgin CrossCountry services were taken over by Arriva CrossCountry in 2007 . 
 In the early 2000s , the Royal Mail began construction of the West of England Post Office Rail Depot just to the east of the station , taking over some of the station car park to provide a platform and warehouse for postal trains . The 12 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m2 ) building opened in 2002 , with the Royal Mail stating it would save 250 @,@ 000 miles ( 400 @,@ 000 km ) of lorry journeys per year on local roads . However , the depot closed only two years later in 2004 , when the Post Office ceased to use the rail network . Royal Mail offered the terminal for use by freight companies , but there were no takers . In 2008 it was reopened as a Network Rail maintenance training centre in a £ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 project which saw the construction of a mezzanine floor , a welding workshop and a 4 @,@ 000 square feet ( 370 m2 ) extension . 
 In 2000 , work began on a complete redevelopment of the station building . It opened on 1 July 2001 , and featured lifts and generally enhanced facilities . Local roads were enhanced to help speed passengers ' journeys to and from the station , and a new multi @-@ storey car park was built to replace the spaces lost to the Royal Mail facility . A dedicated bus interchange was opened in 2003 . In 2006 , construction started on a new platform face on the north side of platform 1 , to ease congestion for trains toward Birmingham and London . The new platform , platform 4 , was opened on 9 May 2007 by rail minister Tom Harris MP . As part of the reconstruction , the waiting room at the east end of platform 1 was demolished , and replaced with an extended waiting area and customer help desk . Platform 1 was subsequently redesignated platform 3 . The work cost £ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and was funded by Network Rail , with First Great Western contributing £ 100 @,@ 000 towards the new waiting room and help desk . 
 Despite the large car park , the increase in passenger numbers at Parkway in recent years has led to problems with on @-@ street parking , leading to the commissioning of a new 200 @-@ space car park 500 metres ( 550 yd ) east of the station . It opened in Spring 2011 , but was used by only 139 motorists in its first three months , and as of August 2012 was averaging only 10 motorists per day . It is expected that traffic will increase when a new bus link is opened to transfer drivers from the car park to the station . A new multi @-@ storey car park on the station site with 710 spaces was opened on 5 September 2014 by Baroness Kramer , Minister of State for Transport . Construction of the car park , which began in mid @-@ 2013 , caused a short @-@ term lack of spaces for commuters . The car park cost £ 13 million and was funded jointly by Network Rail and the Department for Transport under the Station Commercial Projects Fund . 
 Improved cycle facilities , including a bike hire scheme , were provided in the late 2000s . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . The CrossCountry franchise is also due to expire in 2019 . 
 The South Wales Main Line from London to Cardiff is due to be electrified by 2016 , as is the line to Bristol Temple Meads . However , the lines to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Birmingham will not be electrified , so local and CrossCountry services will still be provided by diesel trains , with " Sprinter " units on local services to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . The electrification scheme also includes the four @-@ tracking of Filton Bank , which will allow more services between Parkway and Bristol Temple Meads , and separate fast inter @-@ city services from local stopping services . New Intercity Express Trains will be introduced , and will be maintained at the Filton Triangle depot just west of Bristol Parkway . There will be a new platform at Parkway for westbound trains to allow new services to run from London Paddington to Bristol Temple Meads , calling only at Bristol Parkway , shaving 20 minutes off the journey time . The area will also be <unk> . 
 Bristol Parkway is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . The scheme could see the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line to passengers , with the possibility of services from Bristol Temple Meads to Bristol Parkway via Clifton Down and Henbury . 
 = R1 – RG1 ( Rodalies de Catalunya ) = 
 The R1 is a line of Rodalies de Catalunya 's Barcelona commuter rail service , operated by Renfe <unk> . It runs northwards from the Barcelona area to the southern limits of the province of Girona , passing through the coastal <unk> region . Since 2014 , some services have been extended further north towards Portbou , near the French border . These services are designated RG1 and are considered part of the Girona commuter rail service . According to 2008 data , the line 's annual ridership is 39 @.@ 6 million , the highest on any line of the Barcelona commuter rail service , with an average weekday ridership of 102 @,@ 214 . 
 R1 – RG1 trains primarily run on the Barcelona – Mataró – Maçanet @-@ Massanes railway , the first railway line in the Iberian Peninsula . They use the Meridiana Tunnel in Barcelona , where they share tracks with Rodalies de Catalunya 's Barcelona commuter rail service lines R3 and R4 , as well as regional rail line R12 , calling at Sants , Plaça de Catalunya and Arc de Triomf stations . R1 services use Molins de Rei as their southernmost terminus and Maçanet @-@ Massanes as their northernmost one . On the other hand , no RG1 services run south of L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat , or north of Portbou . 
 Together with lines R2 , R3 , and R4 , the R1 ( then simply numbered line 1 ) started services in 1989 as one of the first lines of the <unk> commuter rail system for Barcelona , known as Rodalies Barcelona . Originally , R1 services had two southern termini , L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and Barcelona – El Prat Airport stations . In 2005 , all trains terminating at the airport moved their southern terminus to Molins de Rei . In the long @-@ term future , it is projected that the R1 will take over the southern section of line R2 , creating a major north – south axis that will extend along the coast of the Barcelona metropolitan area . 
 = = History = = 
 The current line scheme of the R1 started operating on 28 May 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 05 @-@ 28 ) , after the dismantling of the former route of the Barcelona – Mataró – Maçanet @-@ Massanes railway through the Barcelona neighborhood of Poblenou . Earlier , all the commuter rail services coming from Mataró used the route through Poblenou , terminating at Estació de les Rodalies , a terminus station that was located adjacent to the still existing Estació de França . All services coming from Mataró were then rerouted through the <unk> rail complex and the Meridiana Tunnel to access Barcelona , terminating at L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat or Barcelona – El Prat Airport stations , depending on the station of origin . The services coming from Mataró terminated at the airport , whilst the services coming from north of Mataró terminated at L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat . Since the new through line scheme offered more stops within Barcelona and better connections with the city 's metro system , the line 's ridership doubled . Throughout 1989 , this new line scheme was incorporated as part of line 1 of Rodalies Barcelona ( predecessor of the R1 ) , the <unk> commuter rail system for the Barcelona area , created in the same year . 
 On 4 December 2005 , the services between Mataró and the airport were suspended due to the construction works of the Madrid – Barcelona high @-@ speed rail line in Barcelona 's southern access , leaving the airport without any direct trains to Barcelona . These services moved their southern terminus from the airport to Molins de Rei , originating the line 's current termini . The R1 also started operating as a shuttle line between the airport and El Prat de Llobregat railway station until 22 July 2006 , when line R10 was created , providing a direct rail link between the airport and central Barcelona anew . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Like the rest of Rodalies de Catalunya lines , the R1 – RG1 runs on the Iberian gauge mainline railway system , which is owned by <unk> , an agency of the Spanish government . All of the railway lines carrying Rodalies de Catalunya services are electrified at 3 @,@ 000 volts ( V ) direct current ( DC ) using overhead lines . The R1 – RG1 operates on a total line length of 181 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 112 @.@ 6 mi ) , which is entirely double @-@ track , excepting for the single @-@ track section between Arenys de Mar and Maçanet @-@ Massanes stations . The trains on the line call at up to 48 stations , using the following railway lines , in order from south to north : 
 The entire length of the Barcelona – Mataró – Maçanet @-@ Massanes railway is solely used by the R1 – RG1 , though the rest of the infrastructure it uses is shared with other services . South of L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat , it shares tracks with Rodalies de Catalunya 's Barcelona commuter rail service line R4 . Between L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and Arc de Triomf stations , R1 and RG1 trains share tracks with commuter rail lines R3 and R4 , and regional rail line R12 , using the Meridiana Tunnel through central Barcelona . After Arc de Triomf , they branch off to El <unk> @-@ <unk> railway station , running on exclusive tracks from this point on to Maçanet @-@ Massanes . North of Maçanet @-@ Massanes , the R1 – RG1 shares tracks with regional line R11 and freight services . 
 In May 2015 , <unk> announced that the R1 – RG1 would be the first Rodalies de Catalunya line to feature the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) signaling and security system . ERTMS Level 2 will be installed on the 56 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 35 mi ) section between L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and Mataró , increasing capacity and reliability parameters . 
 = = Operation = = 
 There are no end @-@ to @-@ end services between Molins de Rei and Portbou stations on the R1 – RG1 , which means only partial services operate on the line . The services commencing or terminating at Molins de Rei do not usually run north of Mataró or Arenys de Mar. On the other hand , most services commencing or terminating at L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat run north of Arenys de Mar , using Calella , Blanes , Maçanet @-@ Massanes , Figueres or Portbou stations as their northern terminus , in order from south to north . Furthermore , since 31 January 2009 , there have been no limited services , so that the entirety of R1 and RG1 trains call at all stations . Previously , some R1 trains had operated limited services , skipping <unk> , <unk> Nord , and Cabrera de Mar @-@ <unk> de Mar stations . The first trains run about 5 : 00 in the morning , with the latest arriving at about 1 : 00 at night . 
 The designation of the services operating on the line depends on the route they operate . The services between Molins de Rei and Maçanet @-@ Massanes are designated R1 in coordination with the rest of Barcelona commuter rail service lines , whilst the services between L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and other stations located further north of Maçanet @-@ Massanes are designated RG1 ( the letter ' G ' stands for Girona ) to indicate that they are part of the Girona commuter rail service . RG1 services began operating on 20 March 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 03 @-@ 20 ) after former R1 services between L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and Maçanet @-@ Massanes were extended northwards to Figueres . Since 20 June 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 06 @-@ 20 ) , some of these services have been extended further north to Portbou . 
 As of July 2015 , the service routes operating on the R1 – RG1 are as follows : 
 The line 's activity gathers on the section between L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat and Mataró , where a peak @-@ time frequency of 6 minutes has been offered since 26 June 2011 , that is the highest on any line of the Rodalies de Catalunya system . The service frequency reduces as the line moves away from Barcelona , especially on the section north of Maçanet @-@ Massanes , where only RG1 services operate on weekdays , and which is already served by regional rail line R11 . Moreover , the R1 does not operate south of L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat on weekends , when this section is solely served by Barcelona commuter rail service line R4 . 
 As of July 2015 , the approximate service frequencies on the R1 – RG1 are as follows : 
 The trains used on the R1 – RG1 are <unk> — specifically , the 463 , 464 and 465 Series , which consist of three , four and five cars per set , respectively — and 447 Series electrical multiple units ( EMU ) . <unk> trains have been running on the line since July 2006 , initially only operating services between Molins de Rei and Calella . On average , these trains operate a total of 216 services on the line every day on weekdays . 
 = = Future = = 
 The 2008 – 2015 Rail Infrastructure Master Plan for the Barcelona Commuter Rail Service , developed by the Spanish Ministry of Public Works and Transport , plans to establish a " coast @-@ to @-@ coast " and " inland @-@ to @-@ inland " line scheme . According to this project , the current R1 will be extended southwards from Barcelona Sants to Sant <unk> de <unk> stations , via Vilanova i la Geltrú , taking over the southern section of the present line R2 . The R1 will become the " coast @-@ to @-@ coast " line , creating a new major south – north axis along the coast of the Barcelona metropolitan area . R1 trains will continue to use the Meridiana Tunnel in central Barcelona with the new line scheme , which is currently not possible due to the configuration of the southern rail accesses to Barcelona Sants . A long @-@ term project with an uncertain completion date , the new configuration would require multi @-@ million euro investments since it is associated with the construction of a new underground route in L 'Hospitalet de Llobregat for the Rodalies de Catalunya lines running through the city as well as the new rail link for Barcelona – El Prat Airport . 
 As stated in the master plan , the proposed peak @-@ time service frequencies for the future R1 would be as follows : 
 = = List of stations = = 
 The following table lists the name of each station served by line R1 – RG1 in order from south to north ; the station 's service pattern offered by R1 and / or RG1 trains ; the transfers to other Rodalies de Catalunya lines , including both commuter and regional rail services ; remarkable transfers to other transport systems ; the municipality in which each station is located ; and the fare zone ( s ) each station belongs to according to the <unk> del Transport <unk> ( ATM <unk> de Barcelona ) and the <unk> Territorial de la <unk> de l <unk> de Girona ( ATM <unk> de Girona ) fare @-@ integrated public transport systems , as well as Rodalies de Catalunya 's own fare zone system for Barcelona commuter rail service lines . 
 = Han Sai Por = 
 Han Sai Por ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Hán <unk> <unk> ; born 19 July 1943 ) is a Singaporean sculptor . A graduate of the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts ( NAFA ) , East Ham College of Art , Wolverhampton College of Art ( now the School of Art and Design of the University of Wolverhampton ) and Lincoln University , New Zealand , she worked as a teacher and later as a part @-@ time lecturer at NAFA , the LASALLE @-@ SIA College of the Arts , and the National Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological University , before becoming a full @-@ time artist in 1997 . 
 Han has participated in exhibitions locally and abroad , including events in China , Denmark , Japan , Malaysia , New Zealand and South Korea . Her first solo exhibition , entitled Four Dimensions , was held at the National Museum Art Gallery in 1993 . Her sculptures can be found around the world , in Osaka and <unk> , Kagawa Prefecture , in Japan ; Kuala Lumpur and Sarawak in Malaysia ; and Washington , D.C. In Singapore , sculptures commissioned from her can be seen at Capital Tower , the Defence Science Organisation National Laboratories , the Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay , the National Museum of Singapore , Revenue House , Singapore Changi Airport Terminal 3 , Suntec City Mall , and Woodlands Regional Library . In 2001 , Han was the founding President of the Sculpture Society ( Singapore ) and remains its Honorary President . She was the first artist in residence at the Society 's Sculpture Pavilion at Fort Canning Park in 2009 , where she worked on sculptures made from the trunks of tembusu trees . 
 Han is probably best known for her stone sculptures with organic forms , examples of which include Growth ( 1985 ) , Spirit of Nature ( 1988 ) , Object C ( 1992 ) and Seeds ( 2006 ) . The last work , presently located in the grounds of the National Museum , consists of two large kernels carved from sandstone excavated from Fort Canning Hill during the Museum 's redevelopment . However , her oeuvre is broad , and includes Four Dimensions ( 1993 ) , a collection of geometrical structures ; and 20 Tonnes ( 2002 ) , also installed at the Museum , which consists of a row of six ridged monolithic blocks with a smaller block at either end , all hewn from a single granite rock . 
 For her contributions to art , Han was conferred the Cultural Medallion for Art in 1995 . She was also the winner of the sculpture and painting section at the 11th <unk> – India organized by the Lalit Kala Akademi ( National Academy of Art of India ) in 2005 , and the Outstanding City Sculpture Award in China the following year . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Han Sai Por was born on 19 July 1943 in Singapore during the Japanese occupation . She was one of six children of a poor couple , and her family were squatters living in Changi in a house made of cardboard boxes and coconut leaves . Nonetheless , Han had a happy childhood , and went to a nearby beach to make figurine animals out of sand . This experience helped her to appreciate nature and instilled in her a sense of adventure and exploration . At ten years of age , Han was introduced to Michelangelo 's sculptures through a book given to her by her mother . 
 Han was educated at <unk> Eng High School ( now <unk> Secondary School ) and subsequently at the Singapore Teachers ' Training College between 1965 and 1968 . While working as a teacher , she attended part @-@ time courses at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts ( NAFA ) from 1975 to 1977 . Having saved some money , she went to the United Kingdom where she studied fine art at the East Ham College of Art ( 1979 – 1980 ) and the Wolverhampton College of Art ( 1980 – 1983 ) , receiving a B.A. ( Hons . ) in Fine Art from the latter . She worked as a cook , hotel maid , waitress and street artist to support herself . 
 Han returned to Singapore in 1983 and was one of the two pioneer teachers appointed to the new Arts Elective Programme at the Nanyang Girls ' High School . In 1987 , to support her personal artistic endeavours , Han also began to teach part @-@ time at NAFA , the LASALLE @-@ SIA College of the Arts ( both 1987 – 1993 ) , and the National Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological University ( 1994 – 1996 ) . Subsequently , she pursued further studies in landscape architecture at Lincoln University in Lincoln , Canterbury , in New Zealand . 
 = = Artistic career = = 
 Han has participated in exhibitions locally and abroad , including events in China , Denmark , Japan , Malaysia , New Zealand and South Korea . Over 24 hours between New Year 's Eve 1989 and New Year 's Day 1990 , she took part in The Time Show organized by The Artists Village , which has been described as " definitely a high point in the history of art in Singapore when an exceptionally wide spectrum of artists expressing in an equally wide range of mediums participated in a single art event " . Han 's first solo exhibition was Four Dimensions at the National Museum Art Gallery from 18 to 28 February 1993 . Other solo shows she has given in Singapore are Rainforest ( Plastique Kinetic Worms , 1999 ) and 20 Tonnes – Physical Consequences ( Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts <unk> , 2002 ) . 
 Han became a full @-@ time sculptor in 1997 . Her works can be found around the world : Childhood Dream ( 1992 ) at the <unk> @-@ cho Town Hall Garden on the island of <unk> in Kagawa Prefecture , Japan ; Pisces ( 1993 ) at the <unk> Hoshi @-@ no <unk> Centre Park in Osaka , Japan ; Spirit of Nature III ( 1990 ) at the Kuching Waterfront Development in Sarawak , Malaysia ; Towards Peace ( 1987 ) in the Kuala Lumpur Lake Gardens , Malaysia ; and Cactus , Tropical Leaves ( both 1994 ) and The Wave of Life at the Embassy of Singapore in Washington , D.C. In Singapore , sculptures commissioned from her can be seen at Capital Tower ( <unk> Pearls I , 1999 ) , the Defence Science Organisation National Laboratories ( Tropical Brain Forest , 2003 ) , the Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay ( Seed Series , 1998 ) , the National Museum of Singapore ( 20 Tonnes , 2002 ; and Seeds , 2006 ) , One Marina Boulevard ( Progressive Flows , 2004 ) , Orchard MRT Station ( Goddess of Happiness , 1985 ) , Revenue House ( Spring , 1996 ) , Singapore Changi Airport Terminal 3 ( Flora Inspiration , 2007 ) , Singapore Changi Airport VIP Complex ( Singapore – A Garden City , 2004 ) , Suntec City Mall ( Chinese Zodiac <unk> , 1995 ) , UOB Plaza ( Two Figures , 1993 ) , and Woodlands Regional Library ( Rain Forest ) . 
 In 2001 , Han was the founding President of the Sculpture Society ( Singapore ) , and remains its Honorary President . In May 2009 , she was the first artist in residence at the Society 's Sculpture Pavilion at Fort Canning Park where she worked on sculptures made from the trunks of tembusu trees . The project , sponsored by the Asia Pacific Breweries Foundation Inspire Programme , was intended to provide sculptors and installation artists with studio space and a chance to interact with the public in a park environment . Han was a member of the Fourth Singapore Note and Coin Advisory Committee between 1 July 2008 and 30 June 2011 , where her duties included advising the Monetary Authority of Singapore on designs for new currency . 
 In 2005 , with the assistance of the National Arts Council ( NAC ) and the Jurong Town Corporation ( JTC ) , she relocated from Seletar Air Base to <unk> @ Wessex , a walk @-@ up apartment in Wessex Estate which had been converted by JTC from an army camp into an artists ' village . 
 = = Art = = 
 Han is probably best known for her stone sculptures with organic forms ; she sees her sculpture has having " a force or inner life inside struggling to get out " . Having a preference for granite and marble , she has said : " Stone is one of my favourite materials . In the erosion of rock by wind and water are found original , vital qualities which express the significance of life . " Han often purchases stone using her own resources from quarries in China , Italy , Japan , Malaysia and Singapore . The cost of just the material for solo exhibition pieces can be up to S $ 20 @,@ 000 . Nonetheless , she is motivated by the encouragement , recognition and acknowledgement her art she receives from others . Examples of Han 's sculptures of this genre include Growth ( 1985 ) , a set of five pear @-@ shaped forms in white marble ; Spirit of Nature ( 1988 ) , three black granite ovoid and spheroid forms ; Object C ( 1992 ) , a pale grey granite object resembling a canoe ; and Seeds ( 2006 ) , large kernels carved from sandstone excavated from Fort Canning Hill during the National Museum 's redevelopment . Art historian and critic T.K. Sabapathy has commented that Han is concerned with the uneasy relation between men and nature in the modern era , and has expressed a desire for people to realize that " [ we ] are part of nature and not apart from nature " . In addition , he has said : 
 Her sculptures appear to embody forces whose origins are to be found in the very beginnings of the art of sculpture . What we have here , especially in the works carved out of stone , is sculpture in its embryonic form . Her works are made up of compact , entirely solid mass of material which she shapes but does not perforate or open up . They are the outcome of a single @-@ minded concentration on mass and volume . This approach leads to the creation of what can be described as kernel sculpture . The works have the strength and durability of primal or elementary forms . They retain the presence and weight of the monolith , and appeal to us with their provocative simplicity . In all these respects Han reasserts the fundamental qualities of sculpture , namely , a sensation of volume and material , tactile quality and <unk> . ... [ Her works ] radiate energy and materiality which , together , appear to be continually forming and re @-@ forming into new and surprising configurations ; essential to them is the indivisible or continuous single surface . These works beckon us to enter into realms that are stable , tranquil and sublime . Han gives her fellow man an affirmative , uplifting view of life . 
 Beyond Han 's sculptures which embrace organic forms , she has also designed geometric pieces . Four Dimensions ( 1993 ) was made up of ten geometrical structures , including single objects ( such as Tetrahedron – Tetrahedron <unk> ) and opened @-@ up planes ( Cubic Triangle ) connected with each other through the use of angles , and light and shadow . Han said : " My works are based on the concept of mathematical logic . The idea is to show how each step is based on the previous one so that the geometrical forms progress in logical sequence ... The fourth dimension is abstract . It cannot be seen or touched . It contains the feelings and talents of Mankind . We wish to possess this space and to open it up for all people to share . " Sabapathy was somewhat critical of these works , saying that they dealt only with techniques and fabrication and did not " disclose fresh insights into space and its articulation " . He expressed the hope that Han would stay the course and deepen her investigation beyond form into an exploration of light , colour and materials to " create environments in which form , space and time can be seen to be related in ever @-@ changing yet intelligent systems " . 
 20 Tonnes , first exhibited in 2002 in the atrium of the MICA Building ( formerly the Old Hill Street Police Station ) and now permanently installed in front of the National Museum , consists of a row of six ridged monolithic granite blocks with a smaller block at either end , all hewn from a single rock . Han called the work " an explanation of nature 's physical reaction when it is impacted by force , gravity and energy " , and commented : " When I am working on stone , the immediate context is physical , the force of hammering , chiseling and drilling hard stone creates heat and energy . The reaction of the particles causes sparks and waves of sound . The appearance of the stone is the result , the consequent physical reaction . Understanding the character of nature through the physical context has become part of my sculpture . " 
 According to art curator Tay Swee Lin , Han 's sculptures " exude smooth , sensual lines that are quietly engaging and tactile " , and her art " is a testimony of beauty with meditative quietness belying a resilience and strength that stone and metal encompass . The artist 's personal relationship with her art is one that is complete – her sculptures are crafted by hand from start to finish ; painstakingly carved , sanded and polished . ... In land scarce Singapore , Han 's work encapsulates the appreciation and understanding of the delicate balance of nature that exists in an urban environment . " 
 In the catalogue accompanying her Four Dimensions exhibition , Han said : " Postmodernism accepts the facts that art does not follow any rigid man @-@ made rules . If the artist says , ' this is art ' then it is art , provided only that the artist can demonstrate a valuable idea or concept . Art needs man to judge and decide whether it is indeed art . " 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 In 1988 , Han won the Best Entry Award from the Singapore National Theatre Trust for her participation in a show entitled Basics at the National Museum Art Gallery . She was awarded a scholarship for the Portland Sculpture Park on the Isle of Portland in Dorset , England , by the Arts Council of Great Britain and the National Arts Council ( NAC ) in 1990 . Together with the installation artist S. Chandrasekaran , she helped to transform an old limestone quarry into a sculpture park , creating a work called Flow through the Rocks . In 1993 she received sponsorship from the Singapore International Foundation to attend the International Painting and Sculpture Symposium in Gulbarga ( <unk> ) in Karnataka , India , and served on the NAC 's Arts Resource Panel between 1993 and 1994 . 
 In 1995 , Han was conferred the Cultural Medallion for Art by the Minister for Communications , Information and the Arts . In her award citation , she was described as " a consummate carver " with " arduous and physically demanding relationships with materials " who had " always been passionate and emphatic about sculpture " . She was also a finalist for the Women Inspire Awards 2002 , and the winner of the sculpture and painting section at the 11th <unk> – India organized by the Lalit Kala Akademi ( National Academy of Art of India ) in 2005 for her Bud , Leaf and Seed Series . The following year , she won the Outstanding City Sculpture Award in China . 
 In September 2008 , Han was one of seven Cultural Medallion winners to receive an $ 80 @,@ 000 grant from the NAC 's CM Grant programme to fund a project involving site @-@ specific installations based on Singapore flora . 
 = = Major exhibitions = = 
 Some of the information in the table above was obtained from Han Sai Por , Women in the Arts , Singapore ( <unk> ) , 2000 , archived from the original on 14 June 2009 , retrieved 12 June 2009 . 
 = = Works = = 
 Han , Sai Por ( 1993 ) , Four Dimensions : A Sculptural Installation , Singapore : Sheen 's Gallery , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Han , Sai Por ( 2002 ) , Sculpture , Singapore : Art @-@ 2 Gallery , OCLC <unk> . 
 Han , Sai Por ( 2005 ) , Han Sai Por , Singapore : National Arts Council , OCLC <unk> . 
 = Provisional Legislature of Oregon = 
 The Provisional Legislature of Oregon was the single @-@ chamber legislative body of the Provisional Government of Oregon . It served the Oregon Country of the Pacific Northwest of North America from 1843 until early 1849 at a time when no country had sovereignty over the region . This democratically elected legislature became the Oregon Territorial Legislature when the territorial authorities arrived after the creation of the Oregon Territory by the United States in 1848 . The body was first termed the Legislative Committee and later renamed the House of Representatives . Over the course of its six @-@ year history the legislature passed laws , including taxation and liquor regulation , and created an army to deal with conflicts with Native Americans . 
 Many of the legislators would become prominent figures during the territorial years of Oregon . At first the body was a small committee of nine people , but the group was altered when the Organic Laws of Oregon were revised in 1845 with the legislative branch of the Provisional Government becoming the Oregon House of Representatives with a minimum of 13 members . Once the government was dissolved in 1849 , all the laws remained in effect , except for the one that authorized the minting of coins . Territorial Governor Joseph Lane nullified that law , because it was in conflict with Article I , Section 8 of the United States Constitution , giving Congress the sole right to coin money , thus ending production of the Beaver Coins . 
 = = Background = = 
 On May 2 , 1843 , by a vote of 52 to 50 , the European American settlers of the Oregon Country ( mainly those from the Willamette Valley ) , created a provisional government at Champoeg . In May and June , a nine @-@ person committee met in Oregon City and drafted the Organic Laws of Oregon as a pseudo @-@ constitution that was subsequently ratified on July 5 , 1843 . This document created the government and authorized a provisional legislature of nine people . 
 = = 1843 = = 
 On May 16 , the nine @-@ person committee of James A. O 'Neil , Robert Moore , William H. Gray , William P. Dougherty , David Hill , Robert <unk> , Thomas J. Hubbard , Robert Newell , and Alanson Beers met for three days to draft laws . The group met again for two days starting on June 16 , with George LeBreton serving as the recorder and Moore as the chairman for both sets of meetings . The laws drafted became the Organic Laws of Oregon and were ratified on July 5 . Committees on land claims , appropriations , military , the judiciary , and districting were also formed at that meeting . 
 The organic laws were based on the laws of Iowa Territory . The document outlined the legislative branch and its powers , vested in a unicameral or single body . At that time the title of the legislature was the Legislative Committee and it consisted of nine elected representatives apportioned by population to the four established districts ( which later became counties ) . The Organic Laws required the legislature to meet in June and December of each year . 
 = = 1844 = = 
 The first meeting of the 1844 legislature took place June 18 at the home of Felix Hathaway in Oregon City . This session lasted until June 27 , and another session was held from December 16 to 21 at the residence of John E. Long , also in Oregon City . At the December meeting , Executive Committee members Peter G. Stewart and Osborne Russell presented a message to the group regarding the opposing claims of the United States and Great Britain . 
 Among the laws passed during the 1844 session was the " Lash Law " , which banned Blacks from living in the territory with violators subject to 20 – 39 lashes across the back every six months , until the person left the region . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 Members of the legislature and the districts they represented ( McCarver served as the speaker of the body with John E. Long as the recorder ) : 
 = = 1845 = = 
 The 1845 legislature met three different times , under two different structures . First , from June 24 to July 5 , 1845 , the legislature met in Oregon City , first at the home of John E. Long and then the home of Theophilus R. Magruder , with Morton M. McCarver serving as the speaker of the group . After this , the Organic Laws were replaced with the Organic Act of 1845 , which altered the legislature in several ways . First the number of representatives was increased to include a minimum of 13 and a maximum of 61 . Second , the name was changed to the House of Representatives . All members of the body were to be elected by popular vote with vacancies filled using special elections . The body also received new powers to impeach any civil official by a 3 / <unk> vote , apportion the legislators among the districts , create post offices , levy taxes , declare war , organize and call out the militia , create lower courts , pass laws concerning the general welfare of the region , regulate trade with the Native Americans , regulate liquor sale and manufacture , and regulate the police power of the government , among other powers . Meetings continued to be in June and December . 
 With these changes , a special session of the legislature met August 5 until August 20 in Oregon City . On August 11 , 1845 at the introduction of Jesse Applegate the body passed a law against dueling within a half hour that Governor Abernethy also signed within 30 minutes of the bill 's introduction . A new legislature met beginning on December 2 , with Robert Newell serving as the speaker of the body through December 10 and Henry A. G. Lee assuming the post until the conclusion of the session on December 19 . Polk District was created during the session , with the bill passed on December 19 . John E. Long served as the recorder and Theophilus R. Magruder as the sergeant at arms for the group . The same people who served in the summer session also served in the December session . 
 These sessions of the legislature designated Oregon City as the official capital and introduced income and property taxes that replaced an 1843 subscription program used to finance the government 's activities . Other business included a ban on hard liquor , the incorporation of Oregon City , approval for the Barlow Road around Mount Hood , incorporation of the Multnomah Circulating Library , and incorporation of the Oregon Institute . At the meetings John E. Long served as the recorder , Frederick <unk> as the clerk , a Mr. Shaw as the sergeant at arms , and two people as chaplains . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 Members of the legislature and the districts they represented : 
 = = 1846 = = 
 After hearing the news that the United States had informed Britain it would be ending its obligations under the Treaty of 1818 and looking for a division of the Oregon Country , the legislature scaled back its agenda . One piece of legislation passed was a pilotage law that set standards and licensed boat pilots at the mouth of the Columbia River . The 1846 legislature met in the home of Henry Montgomery Knighton in Oregon City from December 1 through 19 , with Asa Lovejoy serving as the speaker and leader . Noah Huber served as a clerk and Knighton as sergeant at arms . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 Members of the legislature and the districts they represented : 
 = = 1847 = = 
 In 1847 the legislature met from December 7 to 28 at the Methodist Church in Oregon City . On the second day of this meeting at Main and Seventh streets , news of the Whitman massacre , which occurred on November 29 , 1847 , was delivered to the legislature by Governor Abernethy . This event would dominate the remainder of the session as the Provisional Government worked with the Hudson 's Bay Company to send an army east to Walla Walla . Forty @-@ two men under the command of Henry A. G. Lee were sent immediately to The Dalles in what was the beginning of the Cayuse War . A large force under the command of Cornelius Gilliam was then organized and sent to punish those responsible for the massacre . On December 23 , the group created Benton District out of the southern section of Polk District , naming the new district for Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton . In the legislature , Robert Newell was chosen as the speaker of the group with Calvin W. Cook as clerk . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 Members of the legislature and the districts they represented : 
 = = Final sessions = = 
 The Provisional Legislature met for two sessions in late 1848 and early 1849 . The first session , from December 5 to December 13 , never formally organized as so many of the representatives had traveled south for the California Gold Rush . Beginning on February 5 , a session was organized that conducted the final business of the Provisional Government . The session lasted until February 16 . During this session a law forbidding the sale of firearms and supplies to Native Americans was repealed , and a law was passed to authorize the minting of gold coins . The law concerning the coins allowed for the creation of the Beaver Coins , which had a higher gold content than United States minted coins . Less than a month later , when the new territorial governor Joseph Lane arrived , however , he rescinded the law as unconstitutional and the coins were collected and removed from circulation . For the legislative session Ralph Wilcox was chosen as speaker , but he resigned from the post . Stephen Meek served as the doorkeeper , William G. T ’ Vault as a clerk , and William Holmes as sergeant at arms . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 Members of the legislature and the districts they represented : 
 = = Oregon Territory = = 
 On June 15 , 1846 , the Oregon Treaty was signed with Great Britain , which settled the dispute over sovereignty of the Oregon Country . On August 13 , 1848 the United States Congress created the Oregon Territory out of the land between California and the 49th parallel ( this served as the border with Britain 's North American colonies ) and west of the Rocky Mountains . A new bicameral territorial legislature was created with an upper chamber Council and lower chamber House . These bodies met for the first time on July 16 , 1849 , with some members of the provisional legislature continuing into the new government , including David Hill , Asa Lovejoy , Samuel Parker , and Absalom J. <unk> . Upon statehood in 1859 , the territorial legislature would be transformed into the Oregon Legislative Assembly . 
 = Brazilian ironclad Tamandaré = 
 The Brazilian ironclad Tamandaré was an armored gunboat built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the mid @-@ 1860s . She bombarded the Paraguayan fortifications blocking access up the Paraná and Paraguay Rivers as well as bombarding Paraguayan positions in support of the Brazilian Army . The ship participated in the Passagem de Humaitá in February 1868 and was badly damaged . After Tamandaré was repaired she provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war , aside from bombarding <unk> capital of Asunción once . The ship was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla after the war . Tamandaré was decommissioned in 1879 and scrapped afterwards . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Tamandaré was designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for a small , simple , shallow @-@ draft armored ship capable of withstanding heavy fire . She was one of three armored gunboats , together with Barroso and Rio de Janeiro , built to the same general plan , although each ship varied significantly in size and armament . The ship is best characterized as a central battery design because the casemate did not extend the length of the ship . A bronze ram , 1 @.@ 4 meters ( 4 ft 7 in ) long , was fitted . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . For sea passages the ship 's freeboard could be increased to 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 ft 7 in ) by use of removable bulwarks 1 @.@ 1 meters ( 3 ft 7 in ) high . On riverine operations , the bulkwarks , and the ship 's masts , were usually removed . 
 The ship measured 51 @.@ 36 meters ( 168 ft 6 in ) long overall , with a beam of 9 @.@ 19 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) and had a mean draft of 2 @.@ 44 meters ( 8 ft 0 in ) . Tamandaré normally displaced 754 metric tons ( 742 long tons ) and 845 metric tons ( 832 long tons ) at deep load . Her crew numbered 120 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Tamandaré had a single John Penn & Sons 2 @-@ cylinder steam engine taken from the British @-@ built wooden gunboat Tietê and proved unreliable in service . The engine , which drove a single 2 @-@ bladed propeller , was powered by two tubular boilers that produced a total of 273 indicated horsepower ( 204 kW ) which gave the ship a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . The ship 's funnel was mounted directly in front of her casemate . Tamandaré carried enough coal for six days ' steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Tamandaré mounted one 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader , three 68 @-@ pounder and two 12 @-@ pounder smoothbore guns in her casemate . To minimize the possibility of shells or splinters entering the casemate through the gunports they were as small as possible , allowing only a 24 ° -arc of fire for each gun . The rectangular , 9 @-@ metre ( 29 ft 6 in ) casemate had two gun ports on each side as well as the front and rear . 
 The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed a nominal 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The exact type of 12 @-@ pounder gun is not known . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of Tamandaré was made from three layers of wood , each 203 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The ship had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 1 @.@ 52 meters ( 5 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters ( 4 in ) covering the machinery and magazines , 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) elsewhere . The curved deck , as well as the roof of the casemate , was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . The casemate was protected by 102 millimeters of armor on all four sides , backed by 609 millimeters ( 24 @.@ 0 in ) of wood capped with a 102 mm layer of peroba hardwood . 
 = = Service = = 
 Tamandaré was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 31 May 1865 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 21 June 1865 , completed on 16 September and cost £ 40 @,@ 506 . The ship arrived at Corrientes on 16 March 1866 ; the next day she sailed for the confluence of the Paraná and Paraguay Rivers to begin operations against the Paraguayans . On 26 March she bombarded the defenses of Itapirú and sank one Paraguayan boat ( <unk> ) . During her bombardment on the following day , a shell entered one of her gun ports , despite the chain curtain that protected it , and killed 14 men , including her captain , Lieutenant Mariz e Barros , and wounded 20 . The ship bombarded Curuzu Fort , downstream of Curupaity , on 1 September in company with the ironclads Rio de Janeiro , Brasil , Lima Barros , Barroso , and the monitor Bahia . Between 24 and 29 December Barroso , Tamandaré , Brasil , and 11 gunboats bombarded Curuzu Fort again . 
 On 8 January 1867 Tamandaré , Bahia and Colombo bombarded Paraguayan fortifications at Curupaity . The Brazilians broke through the river defenses at Curupaity during daylight on 15 August 1867 with Barroso , <unk> , and eight other ironclads . The ships were hit 256 times , but not seriously damaged , and only suffered 10 killed and 22 wounded . Tamandaré 's engines broke down while she was in front of the guns and she had to be towed to safety by the ironclad Silvado . They were quickly repaired and Tamandaré bombarded Paraguayan artillery batteries at Timbó that commanded the Paraguay River north of Humaitá the next day . The Paraguayans repeated the operation again on 9 September with much the same result . On 26 September the <unk> moved a large @-@ caliber gun below Humaitá and bombarded the Brazilian squadron , but it was silenced by gunfire from Tamandaré and Bahia . 
 On 19 February 1868 six Brazilian ironclads , including Tamandaré , sailed past Humaitá at night . Three Pará @-@ class river monitors , Rio Grande , Alagoas and Pará , were lashed to the larger ironclads in case any engines were disabled by the Paraguayan guns . Barroso led with Rio Grande , followed by Bahia with Alagoas and Tamandaré with Pará . Both Tamandaré , which had taken an estimated 120 hits , and Pará had to be beached after passing the fortress to prevent them from sinking . Tamandaré was under repair at São José do Cerrito until mid @-@ March . On 25 November the ship bombarded the <unk> capital of Asunción . Tamandaré and Alagoas destroyed the artillery batteries at Timbó on 23 March 1869 . The ship was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla , based in Ladário , after the war . Tamandaré was decommissioned on 18 April 1879 and scrapped afterwards . 
 = Independence Day ( 1996 film ) = 
 Independence Day ( sometimes styled as ID4 ) is a 1996 American epic , science fiction film . Directed and co @-@ written by Roland Emmerich , it is now considered a significant turning point in the history of the Hollywood blockbuster . The film focuses on disparate groups of people who converge in the Nevada desert in the aftermath of a calamitous attack by an ostensibly powerful extraterrestrial race from an unknown origin . Along with the rest of the human population , they launch a last @-@ ditch counterattack on July 4 – the same date as the Independence Day in the United States . 
 While promoting Stargate in Europe , Emmerich came up with the idea for the film when fielding a question about his own belief in the existence of alien life . He and Devlin decided to incorporate a large @-@ scale attack having noticed that aliens in most invasion films travel long distances in outer space only to remain hidden when reaching Earth . Shooting began in July 1995 in New York City , and the film was officially completed on June 20 , 1996 . 
 The film was scheduled for release on July 3 , 1996 , but began showing on July 2 ( the same day the film 's story begins ) in many theaters the result of a high level of anticipation among moviegoers . The film grossed over $ 817 @.@ 4 million worldwide , becoming the highest @-@ grossing film of 1996 , and briefly , the second highest @-@ grossing film worldwide of all time behind 1993 's Jurassic Park . As of June 2016 , it ranks 55th among the highest @-@ grossing films worldwide , and was at the forefront of the large @-@ scale disaster film and sci @-@ fi resurgence of the mid @-@ 1990s . The film received positive reviews upon its release , with critics praising its groundbreaking special effects , musical score , patriotic theme , and acting , which focused primarily on the performances of Smith and Goldblum . Others criticized its storyline and character development . It won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound Mixing . A sequel , Independence Day : Resurgence , was released on June 24 , 2016 . 
